this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
310
SUPREME COURT CASES
(1976) 2 Supreme Court Cases 310
(Before A. N. Ray, C.J. and H. R. Khanna, K. K. Mathew, M. H. Beg,
V. R. Krishna Iyer, A. C. Gupta and S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, JJ.)
STATE OF KERALA AND ANOTHER
Appellants
Versus
N. M. THOMAS AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 1160 of 1974+, decided on September 19, 1975
Constitution of India - Articles 16(1) and (4) and 14 - Nature of Article 16
in relation to Article 14 - Specifically, nature of clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 -
Whether Article 16 (1) permits preferences to scheduled castes, scheduled tribes
and weaker sections on the basis of rule of reasonable classification or whether
Article 16(4) is an exception to Articles 16(1) and (2) and delimits the extent
to
which the guarantee under Article 16(1) can be curtailed - Whether Article 16(4)
thereby exhausts the equality of opportunity which can be made available to mem-
bers of backward classes of citizens
Constitution of India - Articles 16, 14, 46 and 335 - Promotion -
Constitutionality under Article 16(1) and (2) of Rule 13AA of the Kerala State
and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 granting exemption to members of scheduled
castes and tribes for a specified period from special and departmental tests in the
matter of promotion - Validity of orders granting such exemption and extending
the exemption - Effect of Article 46 - Regard to Article 335 - Preference to
scheduled castes and tribes if violates Article 16(2) - "Caste" - Meaning of -
Whether the rule and orders can otherwise be supported on ground of partial or
conditional reservation nnder Article 16(4)
Under the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 special and
departmental tests were to be passed for promotion. Rule 13A however provided
for temporary exemption to all from such tests and permitted promotion till then.
Impugned Rule 13AA however empowered the State Government to further exempt
for a specified period members of the scheduled castes and tribes already in service
from passing the tests. Pursuant thereto the Government passed the impugned
order, P-2, granting exemption for two years. On the expiry of that period on
January 12, 1974 another order was passed granting further exemption for a period
to cover holding of two tests by the Public Service Commission.
The respondent, an L.D.C., had passed the qualifying test on November 2,
1971. After that date about 51 vacancies in the post of U.D.C. arose but by
virtue of Rule 13AA and the orders, 34 posts were filled up by scheduled caste
members who did not possess the required qualifications and only 17 were given
to qualified persons. The promotions were on the basis of seniority-cum-merit
and all those promoted, including those who had not passed the qualifying test,
were nevertheless senior to the respondent.
The scheduled castes and scheduled tribes constituted 10% of the State's
population. Their share in the gazetted service of the State was 2%, namely 184
out of 8,780. Their share in the non-gazetted appointments was only 7%, namely
11,437 out of 1,62,784.
The respondent succeeded before the High Court in impugning Rule 13AA
and the orders and promotions made in pursuance thereof as being violative of
Article 16(1) and (2). Hence the appeal by the State. The State seeks support
from Article 16(1).
+From the Judgment and Order dated April 19, 1974 of the Kerala High Court in
Original Petition No. 1656 of 1972.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS
311
Per Ray, C.J.
(a) Articles 14, 15 and 16 form part of a string of constitutionally guaranteed
rights. These rights supplement each other. Article 16 which ensures to all citizens
equality of opportunity in matters relating to employment is an incident of gua-
rantee of equality contained in Article 14. Article 16(1) gives effect to Article 14.
Both Articles 14 and 16(1) permit reasonable classification having a nexus to the
objects to be achieved. Under Article 16 there can be a reasonable classification
of the employees in matters relating to employment or appointment.
(Para 21)
Discrimination is the essence of classification. Equality is violated if it rests
on unreasonable basis. The concept of equality has an inherent limitation arising
from the very nature of the constitutional guarantee. Those who are similarly
circumstanced are entitled to an equal treatment. Equality is amongst equals.
Classification is, therefore, to be founded on substantial differences which distinguish
persons grouped together from those left out of the groups and such differential
attributes must bear a just and rational relation to the object sought to be
achieved.
(Para 24)
Equality under Article 16 could not have a different content from equality
under Article 14. Equality of opportunity for unequals can only mean aggravation
of inequality. Equality of opportunity admits discrimination with reason and prohi-
Gits discrimination without reason. Discrimination with reasons means rational
classification for differential treatment having nexus to the constitutionally permis-
sible object. Preferential representation for the backward classes in services with
due regard to administrative efficiency is permissible object and backward classes
are a rational classification recognised by our Constitution. Therefore, differential
treatment in standards of selection are within the concept of equality.
(Para 44)
Article 16(1) is affirmative whereas Article 14 is negative in language.
Article 16(4) indicates one of the methods of achieving equality embodied in Article
16(1). Article 16(1) using the expression "equality" makes it relatable to all
matters of employment from appointment through promotion and termination to
payment of pension and gratuity. Article 16(1) permits classification on the
basis of object and purpose of law or State action except classification involving
the discrimination prohibited by Article 16(2).
(Para 46)
The categories of classification for purposes of promotion can never be closed
on the contention that they are all members of the same cadre in service. (Para 25)
C. A. Rajendran V. Union of India, (1968) I SCR 721 AIR 1968 SC 507 (1968) 2 LLJ 407,
relied on.
There is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who complains
of discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who are alleged
to have been favoured. There is no denial of equality if members are of separate
independent class. Article 16(1) does not bar a reasonable classification of employees
or reasonable tests for their selection. The equality of opportunity takes within
its fold all stages of service from initial appointment to its termination including
promotion but it does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection
and promotion, applicable to all members of a classified group. (Paras 27, 28 and
34)
This equality of opportunity need not be confused with absolute equality.
Article 16(1) does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection
to any employment or appointment to any office. Article 16(1) and (2) give effect
to equality before law guaranteed by Article 14 and to the prohibition of discrimi-
nation guaranteed by Article 15(1). Promotion to selection post is covered by
Article 16(1) and (2).
(Para 28)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
312
SUPREME COURT CASES
State of Mysore V. V. P. Narasing Rao, (1968) i SCR 407: AIR 1968 SC 348: (1968)
2
LLJ
120 All India Station Masters and Assistant Station Masters Association V. G. M., Central
Railway, (1960) 3 SCR 311: AIR 1960 SC 384 and Ganga Ram V. Union of India, (1970) i
The power to make reservation, which is conferred on the State, under Article
16(4) can be exercised by the State in a proper case not only by providing for
reservation of appointments but also by providing for reservation of selection posts.
In providing for reservation of appointments or posts under Article 16(4) the
State has to take into consideration the claims of the backward classes consistently
with the maintenance of the efficiency of administration. It would be unwise
and impermissible to make any reservation at the cost of efficiency- of adminis-
tration.
(Para 29)
G. M., Southern Railway V. Rangachari, (1962) 2 SCR 586: AIR 1962 SC 36, referred to.
As far as Article 16(4) and Article 16(1) are concerned, Article 16(4) clarifies
and explains that classification on the basis of backwardness does not fall within
Article 16(2) and is legitimate for the purpose of Article 16(1). A rule giving
preference to an under-represented backward community is valid and will not contra-
vene Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2). Article 16(4) removes any doubt in this
respect.
(Para 37)
So the rule of equality within Articles 14 and 16(1) will not be violated by
a
rule which will ensure equality of representation in the services for unrepresented
classes after satisfying the basic needs of efficiency of administration (Para 37)
(b) The present case is not one of reservation of posts by promotion nor
does it create separate avenues of promotion.
(Paras 29 and 30)
Govind Dattatray Kelkar V. Chief Controller of Imports, (1967) 2 SCR 29: AIR 1967 SC 839
(1967) I LLJ 691 ; Roshan Lal Tandon V. Union of India, (1968) i SCR 185 AIR 1967 SC
Seniority-cum-merit means that given the minimum necessary merit requisite
for efficiency of administration, the senior though the less meritorious shall have
priority. This will not violate Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2).
(Para 38)
A rule which provides that given the necessary requisite merit, a member of
the backward class shall get priority to ensure adequate representation will not
similarly violate Article 14 or Article 16(1) and (2). The relevant touchstone of
validity is to find out whether the rule of preference secures adequate representa-
tion for the unrepresented backward community or goes beyond it.
(Para 38)
The classification of employees belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes for allowing them an extended period of two years for passing the special
tests for promotion is a just and reasonable classification having rational nexus
to the object of providing equal opportunity for all citizens in matters relating
to employment or appointment to public office. Granting of temporary exemp-
tions from special tests to the personnel belonging to scheduled castes and sche-
duled tribes by executive orders has been an integral feature of the service condi-
tions in Kerala from its very inception on November 1, 1956. That was the pattern
in Travancore-Cochin State. What was achieved by the government orders is now
given a statutory basis by Rule 13AA.
(Para 39)
In fact, the Constitution makes a classification of scheduled castes and sche-
duled tribes in numerous provisions and gives a mandate to the State to accord
special or favoured treatment to them. Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are
not a caste within the ordinary meaning of caste. Scheduled castes and tribes
are descriptive of backwardness. It is the aim of our Constitution to bring them
up from handicapped position to improvement. No court can come to a finding
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS
313
that any caste or any tribe is scheduled caste or scheduled tribe. Scheduled caste
is a caste as notified under Article 366(25). A notification is issued by the President
under Article 341 as a result of an elaborate enquiry.
(Paras
40,
43
and
45)
Bhaiyalal V. Harikishan Singh, (1965) 2 SCR 877: AIR 1965 SC 1557, referred to.
Rule 13AA and the orders are meant to implement not only the direction
under Article 335 but also the directive principle under Article 46.
(Para 42)
In sum, if members of scheduled castes and tribes, who are said by the Supreme
Court to be backward classes, can maintain minimum necessary requirement of
administrative efficiency not only representation but also preference may be given
to them to enforce equality and to eliminate inequality. Articles 15(4) and 16(4)
bring out the position of backward classes to merit equality. Special provisions
are made for the advancement of backward classes and reservations of appoint-
ments and posts for them to secure adequate representation. These provisions
will bring out the content of equality guaranteed by Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1).
The basic concept of equality is equality of opportunity for appointment. Prefe-
rential treatment for members of backward classes with due regard to adminis-
trative efficiency alone can mean equality of opportunity for all citizens. (Para 44)
Per Mathew, J.
Article 16(1) provides for equality of opportunity for all citizens in the matter
of employment and there can be no doubt that the equality of opportunity is an
individual right. The concept of equality of opportunity is an aspect of the more
comprehensive notion of equality.
(Para 52)
Because men are actually born different one has to resort to some sort
of proportionate equality in many spheres to achieve justice. The principle of
proportional equality is attained only when equals are treated equally and un-
equals unequally. The principle of proportional equality involves an appeal to
some criterion in terms of which differential treatment is justified. If there is no
significant respect in which persons concerned are distinguishable, differential treat-
ment would be unjustified.
(Paras 53 and 54)
Article 16(1) is only a part of a comprehensive scheme to ensure equality
in all spheres. It is an instance of the application of the larger concept of equality
under the law embodied in Articles 14 and 15. Article 16(1) permits of classi-
fication just as Article 14 does. But, by the classification, there can be no discri-
mination on the ground only of race, caste and other factors mentioned in Article
16(2). The word 'caste' in Article 16(2) does not include 'scheduled caste'.
Article 366 (24) shows that it is by virtue of the notification of the President that
the scheduled castes come into being. Though the members of the scheduled
castes are drawn from castes, races or tribes, they attain a new status by virtue
of the Presidential notification. Moreover, though the members of tribe might
be included in scheduled castes, tribes as such is not mentioned in Article
16(2).
(Paras 81 and 82)
Article 16(1) and Article 16(2) do not prohibit the prescription of a reason-
able qualification for appointment or for promotion. Any provision as to quali-
fication for employment or appointment to an office reasonably fixed and applicable
to all would be consistent with the doctrine of equality of opportunity under
Article 16(1).
(Para 84)
S. G. Jaisinghani V. Union of India, (1967) 2 SCR 703: AIR 1967 SC 1427 : 65 ITR 34 ; State
of Mysore V. P. Narasing Rao, (1968) 1 SCR 407, 410: AIR 1968 SC 349 (1968) 2 LLJ
120; C A. Rajendran V. Union of India, (1968) I SCR 721, 729 : AIR 1968 SC 507 (1968)
LIJ 407 and G. M., Southern Railway V. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36: (1962) 2 SCR 586,
referred to
Though complete identity of equality of opportunity is impossible in this
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
314
SUPREME COURT CASES
world, measures compensatory in character and which are calculated to mitigate
surmountable obstacles to ensure equality of opportunity can never incur the wrath
of Article 16(1). The notion of equality of opportunity is a notion that a limited
good shall in fact be allocated on the grounds which do not a priori exclude any
section of those that desire it. A priori exclusion means exclusion on grounds other
than those appropriate or rational for the good (posts) in question. The notion
requires not merely that there should be no exclusion from access on grounds
other than those appropriate or rational for the good in question, but the grounds
considered appropriate for the good should themselves be such that people from
all sections of society have an equal chance of satisfying them. (Paras 57, 58 and 59)
To give X and Y equality of opportunity involves regarding their conditions,
where curable, as themselves part of what is done to X and Y and not part of X
and Y themselves. Their identity for this purpose does not include their curable
environment, which is itself unequal and a contributor of inequality.
(Para
62)
The accent in Article 14 is on the injunction that the State shall not deny
to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws, that
is, on the negative character of the duty of the State. The emphasis in Article
16(1) is on the mandatory aspect, namely, that there shall be equality of oppor-
tunity for all citizens in matter's relating to employment or appointment to any
office under the State implying thereby that affirmative action by Government
would be consistent with the article if it is calculated achieve it.
(Para 66)
Today, the political theory which acknowledges the obligation of Govern-
ment under Part IV of the Constitution to provide jobs, medical care, old age
pension, etc., extends to human rights and imposes an affirmative obligation to
promote equality and liberty. The force of the idea of a State with obligation
to help the weaker sections of its members seems to have increasing influence in
constitutional law.
(Para 67)
There is no reason why the Supreme Court should not also require the State
to adopt a standard of proportional equality which takes account of the differing
conditions and circumstances of a class of citizens whenever those conditions and
circumstances stand in the way of their equal access to the enjoyment of basic
rights or claims.
(Para 73)
Griffin V. Illinois, 351 US 12; Douglas V. California, 372 US 353 and Harper V. Virginia Board
of Elections, 383 US 663, referred to.
It would follow that if we want to give equality of opportunity for employment
to the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, we will have to
take note of their social, educational and economic environment. Not only is
the directive principle embodied in Article 46 binding on the law-maker as ordinarily
understood but it should equally inform and illuminate the approach of the Court
when it makes a decision as the Court also is 'State' within the meaning of Article 12
and makes law even though "interstitially from the molar to molecular". (Para 64)
Willians on "The Idea of Equality" in Justice and Equality, Ed. Hugo A. Baden, p. 116 and
The guarantee of equality before the law or the equal opportunity in matters
of employment is a guarantee of something more than what is required by formal
equality. It implies differential treatment of persons who are unequal.
(Para
66)
The concept of equality of opportunity in matters of employment is wide
enough to include within it compensatory measure to put the members of the
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes on par with the members of other com-
munities which would enable them to get their share of representation in public
services.
(Para 74)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS
315
Whether there is equality of opportunity can be guaged only by the equality
attained in the result. Formal equality of opportunity simply enables people with
more education and intelligence to capture all the posts and to win over the less
fortunate in education and talent even when the competition is fair. Equality
of result is the test of equality of opportunity.
(Para 75)
If equality of opportunity guaranteed under Article 16(1) means effective
material equality, then Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1). It is
only an emphatic way of putting the extent to which equality of opportunity could
be carried viz., even upto the point of making reservation.
(Para 78)
The State can adopt any measure which would ensure the adequate repre-
sentation in public service of the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes and justify it as a compensatory measure to ensure equality of opportunity
provided the measure does not dispense with the acquisition of the minimum basic
qualification necessary for the efficiency of administration. Candidates for office
should possess those qualities that go to make up an effective use of the
office.
(Paras 55 and 79)
If reservation is necessary either at the initial stage or at the stage of promotion
or at both to ensure for the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes equality of opportunity in the matter of employment, there is no reason
why that is not permissible under Article 16(1) as that alone might put them
on a parity with the forward communities in the matter of achieving the result
which equality of opportunity would produce.
(Para 75)
It does not matter in the least whether the benefit of Rule 13AA is confined
only to those members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in service at
the time and that it is not extended to all members of the backward classes. The
law-maker should have liberty to strike the evil where it is felt most.
(Para 80)
In sum, the classification made in Rule 13AA has a reasonable nexus with
the purpose of the law, namely, to enable the members of scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes to get their due share of promotion to the higher grade in the
service without impairing the efficiency of administration. Rule 13AA is not intended
to give permanent exemption to the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes from passing the test but only reasonable time to enable them to do so.
The power to grant exemption under the rule, like every other power, is liable
to be abused. If the power is abused and the members of the scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes are given favoured treatment to the extent not warranted
by their legitimate claim, the courts are not rendered helpless. That the power
is liable to be abused is no reason to hold that the rule itself, viz., Rule 13AA
is bad.
(Para 88)
S. G. Jaisinghani V. Union of India, (1967) 2 SCR 703: AIR 1967 SC 1427 65 ITR 34
All India Station Masters and Assistant Station Masters Association V. G. M., Central Railway,
(1060) 2 SCR 311 AIR 1960 SC 384 and State of J. K. V. Triloki Nath Khosa, (1974) I
The ultimate reason for the demand of equality for the members of backward
classes is a moral perspective which affirms the intrinsic value of all human
beings and call for a society which provides these conditions of life which men
need for development of their varying capacities. It is an assertion of human
equality in the sense that it manifests an equal concern for the well being of
all men.
(Para 89)
Per Beg, J.
(a) In the present case one has necessarily to consider whether the manner in
which scheduled caste and scheduled tribe government employees are treated by
the rules and orders under consideration falls within Article 16(4) of the Constitu-
tion. Strictly speaking, the view that the ambit of the special protection of "equality
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
316
SUPREME COURT CASES
of opportunity in matters relating to public service". which can be made available
to members of backward classes of citizens, is exhausted by Article 16(4) of the
Constitution, seems inescapable.
(Paras 91 and 92)
Article 16 is a facet of the grand principles embraced by Article 14. While
Article 16(1) sets out the positive aspect of equality of opportunity in matters relating
to employment by the State, Article 16(2) negatively prohibits discrimination on
the grounds given in Article 16(2) in the area covered by Article 16(1) of the
Constitution. If scheduled castes do not fall within the ambit of Article 16(2),
but as a "backward class" of citizens, escape the direct prohibition it is because
the provisions of Article 16(4) make such an escape possible for them. They
could also avoid the necessary consequences of the positive mandate of Article 16(1)
if they come within the only exception contained in Article 16(4) of the Constitu-
tion. I respectfully concur with my learned brother Khanna, J. and Gupta, J.
that it would be dangerous to extend the limits of protection against the operation
of the principle of equality of opportunity in this field beyond its express constitu-
tional authorisation by Article 16(4). This also follows from the maxim "expressio
unius est exclusio alterius".
(Paras 92 and 94
When citizens are already employed in a particular grade, as government
servants, considerations relating to the sources from which they are drawn lose
much of their importance. They then belong to a class for the purposes of
promotion. Neither as members of this single class nor for purposes of the
equality of opportunity which is to be afforded to this class does the fact that
some of them are also members of an economically and socially backward class
continue to be material, or, strictly speaking, even relevant. Their entry into the
same relevant class as others must be deemed to indicate that they no longer suffer
from the handicaps of a backward class.
(Para 93)
It is true that the principle of reasonable classification may still claim recogni-
tion or be relevant for working out the exact significance of "equality of opportunity"
even within Article 16(1) in some aspect of context other than the one indicated
by Article 16(4). But, in view of Article 16(4), that aspect of context must
be different from one aimed at realizing the objects of Articles 46 and 335 in
the sphere of government service. The specified and express mode of realization
of these objects contained in Article 16(4), must exclude the possibility of other
methods which could be implied and read into Article 16(1) for securing them in
this field.
(Para 94)
Article 16(4) was designed to reconcile the conflicting pulls of Article 16(1),
representing the dynamics of justice, conceived of as equality in conditions under
which candidates actually compete for posts in government service, and of
Articles 46 and 335, embodying the duties of the State to promote the interests
of the economically, educationally, and socially backward so as to release them
from the clutches of social injustice. These encroachments on the field of Article 16(1)
can only be permitted to the extent they are warranted by Article 16(4). To
read broader concepts of social justice and equality into Article 16(1) itself may
stultify this provision itself and make Article 16(4) otiose.
(Para 95)
(b) On facts, passing of a written test earlier than another employee could not
be the sole factor to consider the deciding upon a claim to superiority or to
preference on grounds of merit and efficiency for promotion as a government
servant. An employee from a scheduled caste has also to be "otherwise qualified"
before he is given an opportunity to work with others similarly promoted tem-
porarily. The only difference is that, whereas the others get only two years from
the introduction of the new test within which to qualify according to the newly
introduced test, an employee of a scheduled caste or a scheduled tribe, similarly
placed, gets two more years under the second proviso. The impugned Rule 13AA,
however, gives power to the Government to specify a longer period of exemption
if it considers this to be necessary.
(Paras 97 and 98)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS
317
The result of the Rules 13A and 13AA and orders is not a kind of reserva-
tion. If a reservation of posts under Article 16(4) for employees of backward
classes could include complete reservation of higher posts to which they could
be promoted, about which there could be no doubt now, there is no reason why it
cannot be partial or for a part of the duration of service and hedged round with
the condition that a temporary promotion would operate as a complete and con-
firmed promotion only if the temporary promotee satisfies some tests within a
given time. If the impugned rules and orders could be viewed as an implementation
of a policy of qualified or partial or conditional reservation, in this form, which
could satisfy the requirements of substantial equality in keeping with Article 335,
and meet the demands of equity and justice looked at from the broader point
of view of Article 46 of the Constitution, they could also be justified under
Article 16(4) of the Constitution.
(Paras 99 and 100)
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179 (1965) 2 LI.J 560 and
M. R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp 1 SCR 439: AIR 1963 SC 649, referred to.
Also the only ground given by the High Court for refusing to give the
benefits of impugned rules and orders to the backward class government servants,
that they fall outside the purview of Article 16(4), was substantiated. It was for
the respondent-petitioner to discharge the burden of establishing a constitutionally
unwarranted discrimination against him. His petition ought to have been dismissed
on the ground that he had failed to discharge this initial burden.
(Para 102)
Per Krishna Iyer, J.
(a) Equal justice is an aspect of social justice, the salvation of the very
weak and downtrodden, and the methodology for levelling them up to a real,
not formal, equality being the accent.
(Para 117)
Re-distributive justice to harijan humanity insists on effective reforms, designed
to produce equal partnership of the erstwhile 'lowliest and the lost', by State
action, informed by short-run and long-run sociologically potent perspective planning
and implementation. An uneven socio-economic landscape hardly gives the joy
of equal opportunity and development or draw forth their best from manpower
resources now wallowing in low visibility areas of discontented life. (Para
119)
A reading of the Constitution shows : (i) The Constitution itself demarcates
harijans from others, (ii) This is based on the stark backwardness of this bottom
layer of the community, (iii) The differentiation has been made to cover specifically
the area of appointments to posts under the State, (iv) The twin objects, blended
into one, are the claims of harijans to be considered in such posts and the main-
tenance of administrative efficiency, and (v) The State has been obligated to promote
the economic interests of harijans and like backward classes, Articles 46 and 335
being a testament and Articles 14 to 16 being the tool-kit. To blink at this
panchsheel is to be unjust to the Constitution.
(Para 129)
After the Fundamental Rights case Artiele 46 has to be given emphatic expression
while interpreting Article 16(1) and (2). Indeed, Article 335 is more specific
and cannot be brushed aside or truncated in the operational ambit vis-a-vis Article 16(1)
and (2) without hubristic aberration.
(Para 134)
As to Article 16(2) scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are no castes in the
Hindu fold but an amalgam of castes, races, groups, tribes, communities or parts
thereof found on investigation to be the lowliest and in need of massive State
aid and notified as such by the President. To confuse this backwardmost social
composition with castes is to commit a constitutional error, misled by a compendious
appellation. So that, to protect harijans is not to prejudice any caste but to promote
citizen solidarity. Article 16(2) is out of the way and to extend protective dis-
crimination to this mixed bag of tribes, races, groups, communities and non-castes
outside the four-fold Hindu division is not to compromise with the acceleration
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
318
SUPREME COURT CASES
of castelessness enshrined in the sub-article. The discerning sense of the Indian
Corpus Juris has generally regarded scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, not
as caste but as a large backward group deserving of societal compassion. (Para
135)
AIR 1951 SC 226, referred to.
Article 16(4) serves not as an exception but as an emphatic statement, one
mode of reconciling the claims of backward people and the opportunity for free
competition the forward sections are ordinarily entitled to. True, it may be loosely
said that Article 16(4) is an exception but, closely examined, it is an illustration
of constitutionally sanctified classification. Public services have been a fascination
for Indians even in British days, being a symbol of State power and so a special
article has been devoted to it. Article 16(4) need not be a saving clause but
put in due to the over-anxiety of the draftsman to make matters clear beyond
possibility of doubt.
(Para 136)
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680, 700: AIR 1964 SC 179: (1965) 2 LLJ 560
and C. I. T. V. Shaw Wallace and Co., 59 IA 206 : AIR 1932 PC 138, referred to.
Article 16(1) and (4) are concordant. The Supreme Court has viewed Article
16(4) as an exception to Article 16(1). Classification based on desparate backwardness
does not render Article 16(4) redundant. Reservation confers pro tanto monopoly,
but classification grants under Article 16(1) ordinarily a lesser order of advantage.
The former is more rigid, the latter more flexible, although they may overlap
sometimes. Article 16(4) covers all backward classes; but to earn the benefit
of grouping under Article 16(1) based on Articles 46 and 335, the twin considera-
tions of terrible backwardness of the type harijans endure and maintenance of
administrative efficiency must be satisfied.
(Para 137)
It is platitudinous constitutional law that Articles 14 to 16 are common code
of guaranteed equality. the first laying down the broad doctrine, the other two
applying it to sensitive areas historically important and politically polemical in
a climate of communalism and jobbery.
(Para 139)
Now Article 16 applies to appointments on promotion. Also no administrative
calamities result if test qualifications are not acquired for a time by some hands.
As for the bearing of 'tests' on basic efficiency, everything depends on the circum-
stances of a case and the post.
(Para 140)
In a spacious sense, 'equal opportunity' for members of a hierarchical society
makes sense only if a strategy by which the underprivileged have environmental
facilities for developing their full human potential. This consummation is accomplished
only when the utterly depressed groups can claim a fair share in public life
and economic activity. including employment under the State, or when a classless
and casteless society blossoms as a result of positive State action. To help the
lagging social segments, by special case, is a step towards and not against a larger
and stabler equality.
(Para 141)
relied on.
The genius of Articles 14 to 16 consists not in literal equality but in progressive
elimination of pronounced inequality. Indeed, to treat sharply dissimilar persons
equally is subtle injustice. Equal opportunity is a hope, not a menace.
(Para
142)
If Article 14 admits of reasonable classification, so does Article 16(1) and
the Supreme Court has held so. In the present case, the economic advancement
and promotion of the claims of the grossly underrepresented and pathetically neglected
classes, otherwise described as scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, consistently
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS
319
with the maintenance of administrative efficiency, is the object, constitutionally
sanctioned by Articles 46 and 335 and reasonably accommodated in Article 16(1).
The differentia, so loudly obtrusive, is the dismal social milieu of harijan. Certainly
this has a rational relation to the object set out above.
(Para 143)
If a court is convinced that the purpose of a measure being a suspect classifica-
tion is truly benign, that is, that the measure represents an effort to use the
classification as part of a programme designed to achieve an equal position in
society for all tribes and groups and communities, then it may be justified in
permitting the State to choose the means for doing so, so long as the means
chosen are reasonably related to achieving that end.
(Para 145)
The social disparity must be so grim and substantial as to serve as a foundation
for benign discrimination. If we search for such a class, we cannot find any
large segment other than the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. Any other
caste, securing exemption from Article 16(1) and (2), by exerting political pressure
or other influence, will run the high risk of unconstitutional discrimination. If
the real basis of classification is caste, masked as backward class, the Court must
strike at such communal manipulation. Secondly, the Constitution recognizes the
claims of only harijans (Article 335) and not of every backward class. The profile
of Article 46 is more or less the same. So, we may readily hold that casteism
cannot come back by the back door and, except in exceptionally rare cases, no
class other than harijans can jump the gauntlet of 'equal opportunity' guarantee.
Their only hope is in Article 16(4).
(Para 143)
Schlesinger V Ballard, 419 US 42 L Ed 2d 610, referred to.
Relaxation of 'tests' qualification at the floor level of clerical posts (lower
or upper division) is a part of this multiform strategy to establish broader, though
seemingly 'differential' equality.
(Para 147)
(b) A break-up of Rule 13AA of the Rules certainly gives power to Govern-
ment to extend the time to harijan officials of 'subordinate services' for passing tests
prescribed for occupying promotional posts. But it does not for ever exempt hands
but only waive for a specified, presumably, short term. Nor does it relax the
minimal qualifications held necessary for these posts from the point of view of
basic administrative efficiency. The subsidiary need of passing certain new tests,
for which all employees get some period (from the time of their introduction)
is relaxed for a longer period in the case of harijan hands under Rule 13A and
still more under Rule 13AA. The vires of the rule must be tested on the basis
that it is a limited concession to a weaker group. To relax on basic qualifications
is to compromise with minimum administrative efficiency; to relent. for a time,
on additional test qualifications is to take a calculated but controlled risk, assured
of a basic standard of performance to encourage the possession of higher excellence
is to upgrade the efficiency status of the public servant and, eventually, of the
department. This is the sense and essence of the situation arising in the present
case. viewed from the angle of administrative requirements or fair employment
criteria.
(Paras 109 and 110)
Rule 13AA was not a 'reservation' under Article 16(4) and yet the favoured
treatment to harijan clerks was valid, being based on reasonable classification under
a constitutionally recognised differentia which had a relation to the legitimate
and of promoting the advancement of this handicapped class, subject to administrative
efficiency.
(Para 115)
Per Fazal Ali, J.
Article 16(1) provides for equality of opportunity for all citizens in the services
under the State. The doctrine contained in Article 16 is a hard and reeling
reality, a concrete and constructive concept and not a rigid rule or an empty
formula. Article 16 is merely an incident of Article 14, Article 14 being the
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
320
SUPREME COURT CASES
genus is of universal application whereas Article 16 is the species and seeks
to
obtain equality of opportunity in the services under the State.
(Para 158)
Three principles are clear
(i) That Article 16 is merely an incident of Article 14 and both these
articles form a part of the common system seeking to achieve the same end.
(ii) Article 16 applies to all classes of appointment including promotions
and selection posts, and
(iii) Article 16 permits a valid classification.
(Paras 171, 175 and 176)
V. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, (1967) 2 SCR 29: AIR 1967 SC 839 (1967) 2
LLJ 691 S. G. Faisinghani V. Union of India, (1967) 2 SCR 703 : AIR 1967 SC 1427 65
ITR 34; G. M., Southern Railway V. Rangachari, (1962) 2 SCR 586 AIR 1962 SC 36 and
C. A. Rajendran V. Union of India, (1968) 1 SCR 721: AIR 1968 SC 507 (1968) 2 LLJ
407, relied on.
What Article 14 or Article 16 forbid is hostile discrimination and not reasonable
classification. In other words, the idea of classification is implicit in the concept
of equality because equality means equality to all and not merely to the advanced
and educated sections of the society.
(Para 158)
The only manner in which the objective of equality as contemplated by the
founding fathers of our Constitution and as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 can
be achieved is to boost up the backward classes by giving them concessions, relaxa-
tions, facilities, removing handicaps, and making suitable reservations so that the
weaker sections of the people may compete with the more advanced and in due
course of time all may become equals and backwardness is banished for ever.
This can happen only when we achieve complete economic and social
freedom.
(Para 158)
Clause (1) of Article 16 clearly provides for equality of opportunity to all
citizens in the services under the State. It is important to note that the Constitu-
tion uses the words "equality of opportunity for all citizens". This inherently implies
that the opportunity must be given not only to a particular section of the society
or a particular class of citizens who may be advanced or- otherwise more
affluent but to all classes of citizens. This, therefore, can be achieved by
making a reasonable classification so that every class of citizens is duly represented
in the services which will enable equality of opportunity to all citizens. The classifica-
tion, however, must be a reasonable one and must fulfil the following conditions
(i) It must have a rational basis
(ii) It must have a close nexus with the object sought to be achieved
(iii) It should not select any person for hostile discrimination at the cost
of others.
(Para 180)
The directive principles enshrined in our Constitution contain a clear mandate
to achieve equality and social justice. In fact the directive principles constitute
the stairs to climb the high edifice of a socialistic State and the fundamental
rights are the means through which one can reach the top of the edifice.
(Para 158)
In re The Kerala Education Bill, 1957, 1959 SCR 995: AIR 1958 SC 956 Mohd Hanif
Quareshi V. State of Bihar, 1959 SCR 629: AIR 1958 SC 731 I. C. Golak Nath V. State of
Punjab. (1967) 2 SCR 762: AIR 1967 SC 1643 Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging V.
225, relied on.
A combined reading of Article 46 and clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS
321
clearly shows that the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes must
be presumed to be backward classes of citizens, particularly when the Constitution
gives the example of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes as being the
weaker sections of the society.
(Para 167)
Therefore the members of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes have
been given a special status in the Constitution and they constitute a class by
thenselves. They do not fall within the purview of Article 16(2) of the Constitu-
tion which prohibits discrimination between the members of the same caste. If,
therefore. the members of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes are not
castes, then it is open to the State to make reasonable classification in order to
advance or lift these classes so that they may be able to be properly represented
in the services under the State. This can undoubtedly be done under Article 16(1)
of the Constitution.
(Para 169)
Clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution cannot be read in isolation but
has to be read as part and parcel of Article 16(1) and (2). Clause (4) of Article 16
is not an exception to Article 14 in the sense that whatever classification can be
made can be done only through clause (4) of Article 16. Clause (4) of Article 16,
however, is an explanation containing an exhaustive and exclusive provision regard-
ing reservation which is one of the forms of classification. Thus clause (4) of
Article 16 deals exclusively with reservation and not other forms of classification
which can be made under Article 16(1) itself. Since clause (4) is a special pro-
vision regarding reservation. it can safely be held that it overrides Article 16(1)
to that extent and no reservation can be made under Article 16(1). It is true
that there are some authorities of the Supreme Court that clause (4) is an exception
to Article 16(1) but with due respect I am not in a position to subscribe to this
view.
(Para 184)
Hence Article 16(4) is not a proviso to Article 16(1) but this clause covers
the whole field of Article 16.
(Para 187)
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680: AIR 1964 SC 179 (1965) 2 LLJ 560 and
G. M., Southern Railway V. Rangachari, (1962) 2 SCR 586: AIR 1962 SC 36, relied on.
The promotees who were members of the scheduled castes and tribes are
admittedly senior to respondent No. 1 and have gained more experience. Further
the rule does not grant complete exemption to the promotees from passing the
test it only provides for grant of extension of time to enable them to clear
the test. In these circumstances it cannot be held that the State's action in
incorporating Rule 13AA in any way violates the mandate contained in Aricle 335.
In these circumstances, therefore, the concession given in Rule 13AA amounts
to a reasonable classification which can be made under Article 16(1) of the Constitu-
tion and does not amount to the selection of the respondent No. 1 for hostile
discrimination so as to be violative of Article 16(1) of the Constitution of
India.
(Para 181)
If the promotees do not belong to a caste as contemplated by Article 16(2)
then they do not fall within the mischief of Article 16(2) at all. Thus the case
of the promotees squarely falls within the four corners of Article 16(1) and can
be justified as based on reasonable classification. In this particular case the classifica-
tion made by the Government by virtue of Rule 13AA is fully justified by Article 16
of the Constitution.
(Paras 182 and 183)
The rule and order do not violate Article 16(4).
(Paras 188 to 193)
Rule 13AA of the rules is a valid piece of statutory provision which is fully
justified under Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India and does not fall within
the purview of Article 16(4).
(Para 196)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
322
SUPREME COURT CASES
Per Khanna, J. (dissenting)
Article 14 of the Constitution enshrines the principle of equality before the
law. Article 16 represents one facet of the guarantee of equality. Articles 14,
15 and 16 underline the importance which the framers of our Constitution attached
to ensuring equality of treatment. Such equality has special significance in the
matter of public employment. It was with a view to prevent any discrimination
in that field that an express provision was made to guarantee equality of opportunity
for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State.
(Para 204)
Yet Article 16(4) permits reservation of posts. The reservation of seats for
the members of the backward classes was not, however, to be at the cost of
efficiency. This fact was brought out in Article 335. In view of that it is not
permissible to waive the requirement of minimum educational qualification and
other standards essential for the maintenance of efficiency of service. (Para 205)
G M., Southern Railway V. Rangachari, (1962) 2 SCR 586: AIR 1962 SC 36 and T. Devadasan
V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680: AIR 1964 SC 179: (1965) 2 LLJ 560, relied on.
The liberal approach that may sometimes have been adopted in upholding
classification under Article 14 would in the very nature of things be not apt in
the context of Article 16 keeping in view the object underlying it. Article 14 covers a
very wide, and general field of equality before the law and the equal protection
of the laws. It is, therefore, permissible to cover within its ambit manifold classifica-
tions as long as they are reasonable and have a rational connection with the object
thereof. As against that, Article 16 operates in the limited area of equality of
opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to
an office under the State. Carving out classes of citizens for favoured treatment
in matters of public employment, except in cases for which there is an express
provision contained in clause (4) of Article 16, would in the very nature of
things run counter to the concept underlying clause (1) of Article 16.
(Para 215)
If it was permissible to accord favoured treatment to members of backward
classes under clause (1) of Article 16, there would have been no necessity of
inserting clause (4) in Article 16. Clause (4) in Article 16 in such an event
would have to be treated as wholly superfluous and redundant.
(Para 216)
State of Madras V. Champakam Dorairajan, 1951 SCR 525: AIR 1951 SC 226 and M. Balaji
V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp 1 SCR 439: AIR 1963 SC 649, relied on.
As to whether to extend the above principle of classification so as to allow
preferential treatment to employees on the ground that they are members of the
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, the provision of preferential treatment for
members of backward classes, including scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, is
that contained in clause (4) of Article 16 which permits reservation of posts for
them. There is no scope for spelling out such preferential treatment from the
language of clause (1) of Article 16 because the language of that clause does not
warrant any preference to any citizen against another citizen.
(Para 207)
But for clause (4) it would not have been permissible to make any reserva-
tion of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens.
(Para 208)
All India Station Masters aud Assistant Station Masters Association V. G. M., Central Railway,
(1960) 2 SCR 311 AIR 1960 SC 384 S. G. Faisinghani V. Union of India, (1967) 2 SCR
703: AIR 1967 SC 1427 65 ITR 34 and State of I & K V. Triloki Nath Khosa, (1974) 1
A classification based upon the consideration that an employee belongs to
a particular section of the population with a view to accord preferential treatment
for promotion is clear violation of equality of opportunity enshrined in clause (1)
of Article 16. In no case has the Court ever accepted and upheld under Article 16(1)
classification and differential treatment for the purpose of promotion among em-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS
323
ployees who possessing the same educational qualifications were initially appointed
as in the present case to the same category of posts, viz., that of lower division
clerk. The Court should avoid in the absence of compelling reason a course
that has the effect of unsettling a constitutional position, which has been settled
over a long term of years by a series of decisions.
(Paras 208 and 214)
Equality of opportunity in matters of employment could be predicated between
persons who were either seeking the same employment or had obtained the same
employment. The essential object of various rules dealing with appointment to
posts under the State and promotion to higher posts is to ensure efficiency of
service. Classification upheld under clause (1) of Article 16 subserved and in
no case militated against the attainment of that object. Exemption granted to a
class of employees, even though for a limited period, from passing the departmental
tests which have been prescribed for the purpose of promotion would obviously
be subversive of the object to ensure efficiency of service. To promote employees
even though they have not passed the efficiency test can hardly be consistent with
the desideratum of ensuring efficiency in administration.
(Para 208)
That the exemption was only for a limited period would not lend constitutionality
to the impugned rule and orders. It has an obvious element of discrimination.
If the passing of departmental tests is an essential condition of promotion, it
would plainly be invidious to insist upon compliance with that condition in the
case of one set of employees and not to do so in the case of other.
(Para 209)
Preferential and favoured treatment for some citizens in the matter of employ-
ment or appointment to any office under the State would be antithesis of the
principle of equality of opportunity. Equality of opportunity in matters of employ-
ment guaranteed by clause (1) of Article 16 is intended to be real and effective.
It is not something abstract or illusory. It is a command to be obeyed, not one
to be defied or circumvented. To countenance classification for the purpose of
according preferential treatment to persons not sought to be recruited from different
sources and in cases not covered by clause (4) of Article 16 would have the
effect of eroding, if not destroying altogether, the valued principle of equality
of opportunity enshrined in clause (1) of Article 16.
(Para 210)
Departmental tests are prescribed to ensure standards of efficiency for the
employees. To promote 34 out of 51 persons although they have not passed
the departmental tests and at the same time not to promote those who have passed
the departmental tests can hardly be conducive to efficiency. There does not,
therefore, appear to be any infirmity in the finding of the High Court that the
impugned promotions are also violative of Article 335 of the Constitution. (Para 220)
The method which has been adopted by the appellants is constitutionally
impermissible under clause (1) of Article 16. Apart from the fact that the acceptance
of the appellants' contention would result in undermining the principle of equality
of opportunity enshrined in clause (1) of Article 16, it would also in effect entail
overruling of the view which has so far been held by this Court in the cases
of Champakam, Rangachari and Devadasan. There is no sufficient ground to warrant
such a course. The State has ample power to make provision for safeguarding
the interest of backward classes under clause (4) of Article 16. Inaction on the
part of the State under clause (4) of Article 16 cannot justify strained construction
of clause (1) of Article 16. Moreover the ideals of supremacy of merit, the
efficiency of services and the absence of discrimination in sphere of public employ-
ment would be the obvious casualties if we once countenance inroads to be made
into that valued principle beyond those warranted by clause (4) of Article 16. (Para 221)
Per Gupta, J. (dissenting)
Whether Article 16(1) should be read in the light of Articles 46 and 335
neither Article 46 and Article 335 mention Article 16(1), nor Article 16(1) refers
to either of them. All the three articles coexist in the Constitution and ought to
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
324
SUPREME COURT CASES
be harmoniously construed, but that is not the same thing as suggesting that even
where the scope and ambit of one part is clear, it should be abridged, extended or
amended to prove the affinity with another part. Each limb of the body has
its own function, and to try to make one of them do the work of another is
both unnecessary and unwise this might throw the entire system out of
gear.
(Para 224)
Article 16(1) which is an instance of the application of the general rule of
equality with special reference to opportunity for appointment under the State
also does not require absolute equality as such. What is guaranteed is the equality
of opportunity and nothing more. Article 16(1) speaks of equality of opportunity
not opportunity to achieve equality. Article 16(1) or (2) does not prohibit the
prescription of reasonable rnles for selection to any employment or appointment
to any office.
(Paras 228 and 230)
V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179: (1965) 2 LLJ 560; G. M.,
Southern Railway V. Rangachari, (1962) 2 SCR 586: AIR 1962 SC 36 and Sham Sander V.
Union of India, (1969) 1 SCR 312: AIR 1969 SC 212, referred to.
Article 16(1) in clear terms insists on equality of opportunity for all employees
of the same class and this requirement cannot be dispensed with because of
anything in Article 46 or Article 335 which do not in any way qualify the
guarantee in Article 16(1). The article of course permits classification, but only
such classification as is reasonable, and the test of reasonableness, having regard
to the object of the article, must be whether the proposed classification helps in
achieving this object. Judging by this test, it is not possible to hold the sub-
division of lower division clerks into two categories, those who belong to the
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and those who do not, as reasonable. Such
classification is not relevant to the object of the article and, therefore not reason-
able.
(Paras 229 and 230)
Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes no doubt constitute a well-defined class,
but a classification valid for one purpose may not be so for another, in the
context of Article 16(1) the sub-class made by Rule 13AA within the same class
of employees amounts to discrimination only on grounds of race and caste which
is forbidden by clause (2) of Article 16.
(Para 231)
State of Rajasthan V. Thakur Pratap Singh, (1961) 1 SCR 222: AIR 1960 SC 1208, relied on
Picking out employees belonging to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes
from the same class of lower division clerks to give them additional opportunity
to be promoted as upper division clerks is not a measure for the promotion of
the economic welfare of these castes and tribes, Some incidental financial gain
to certain individuals, assuming it results in the welfare of the cases and tribes
to which they belong in some remote and indirect way, is not, what Article 46
contemplates.
(Para 230)
I agree with the views expressed by Khanna, J. on Article 16(4) which comes
in for consideration incidentally in this case.
(Para 231)
Where the advancement of the backward classes or the scheduled castes and
tribes was concerned the fundamental rights of the citizens constituting the rest
of the society are not to be completely and absolutely ignored.
(Para 232)
M. R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp I SCR 439: AIR 1963 SC 649 and State of Rajas-
than V. Thakur Pratap Singh, (1961) 1 SCR 222: AIR 1960 SC 1208, referred to.
Constitution of India - Articles 16(4) and 15(4) - Percentage of reservation
beyond which equality principle is violated - Rule of limit of 50% in Devadasan's
case if sustainable
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS
325
Per Ray, C.J.
(No opinion expressed.)
(Para 26)
Reservation is not a constitutional compulsion but is discretionary according
to the ruling of the Supreme Court in Rajendran's case.
(Para 26)
M. R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp 1 SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 149 and State of Mysore
V. V. P Narasing Rao, (1968) 1 SCR 407 : AIR 1968 SC 349: (1968) 2 LLJ 120, referred to,
Per Krishna Iyer, J.
I agree with my learned brother Fazal Ali, J. in the view that the arithmetical
limit of 50% in any one year set by some earlier rulings cannot perhaps be
pressed too far. Overall representation in a department does not depend on recruit-
ment in a particular year, but the total strength of a cadre. I agree with his
construction of Article 16(4) and his view about the 'carry forward' rule. (Para 143)
Per Fazal Ali, J.
Analysing clause (4) of Article 16 it appears that it contains express provisions
empowering the State to make reservations in suitable cases provided the following
conditions are satisfied
(i)
That the class for which reservation is made must be socially and
educationally backward.
(ii)
That the class for which reservation is made is not adequately repre-
sented in the services under the State.
(iii) The reservation should not be too excessive so as to destroy the very
concept of equality.
(Paras 189 and 190)
As to what would be a suitable reservation within permissible limits will
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case and no hard and fast
rule can be laid down, nor can this matter be reduced to a mathematical formula
so as to be adhered to in all cases. Decided cases of the Supreme Court have
no doubt laid down that the percentage of reservation should not exceed 50%.
As I read the authorities, this is, however, a rule of caution and does not exhaust
all categories. The dominant object of this provision is to take steps to make
inadequate representation adequate. Reservation should not be made at the cost
of efficiency.
(Paras 191 and 192)
Constitution of India - Article 14 - Basis of rule of classification restated
Per Ray, C.J.
The rule of parity is the equal treatment of equals in equal circumstances.
The rule of differentiation is enacting laws differentiating between different persons
or things in different circumstances. The circumstances which govern one set
of persons or objects may not necessarily be the same as those governing another
set of persons or objects so that the question of unequal treatment does not really
arise between persons governed by different conditions and different sets of circum-
stances. The principle of equality does not mean that every law must have
universal application for all persons who are not by nature, attainment or circum-
stances in the same position and the varying needs of different classes of persons
require special treatment. The Legislature understands and appreciates the need
of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made manifest by
experience and that its discriminations are based upon adequate grounds. The
rule of classification is not a natural and logical corollary of the rule of equality,
but the rule of differentiation is inherent in the concept of equality. Equality
means parity of treatment under parity of conditions. Equality does not connote
absolute equality. A classification in order to be constitutional must rest upon
distinctions that are substantial and not merely illusory. The test is whether it
has a reasonable basis free from artificiality and arbitrariness embracing all and
omitting none naturally falling into that category.
(Para 31)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
326
SUPREME COURT CASES
Per Mathew, J.
It is no doubt a paradox that though in one sense classification brings about
inequality, it is promotive of equality if its object is to bring those who share
a common characteristic under a class for differential treatment for sufficient and
justifiable reasons.
(Para 83)
It is a mistake to assume a priori that there can be no classification within a
class. If there are intelligible differentia which separate a group within that class
from the rest and that differentia have nexus with the object of classification,
there is no objection to a further classification within the class.
(Para 83)
Constitution of India - Article 46 - "Weaker sections", meaning of
Per Krishna Iyer, J.
'Weaker sections', in this context, means not every 'backward class' but those
dismally depressed categories comparable economically and educationally to scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes.
(Para 126)
Constitutional Interpretation - Doctrinaire approach to be avoided
Per Khanna, J.
In construing the provisions of the Constitution we should avoid a doctrinaire
approach. A Constitution is the vehicle of the life of a nation and deals with
practical problems of the Government. It is, therefore, imperative that the approach
to be adopted by the courts while construing the provisions of the Constitution
should be pragmatic and not one as a result of which the court is likely to get
lost in a maze of abstract theories.
(Para 213)
The important task of construing the articles of a Constitution is not an
exercise in mere syllogism. It necessitates an effort to find the true purpose and
object which underlines that article. The historical background, the felt necessities
of the time, the balancing of the conflicting interests must all enter into the
crucible when the court is engaged in the delicate task of construing the pro-
visions of a Constitution. The words of Holmes that life of law is not logic
but experience have a direct relevance in the above context.
(Para 213)
Another thing which must be kept in view while construing the provisions
of the Constitution is to foresee as to what would be the impact of that construction
not merely on the case in hand but also on the future cases which may arise
under those provisions.
(Para 214)
Constitutional Interpretation - Mischief Rule - Application of to Article 16
Per Krishna Iyer, J.
Given two alternative understandings of the relevant sub-articles [Articles 16(1)
and (2)], the Court must so interpret the language as to remove that ugly 'inferiority'
complex which has done genetic damage to Indian polity and thereby suppress
the malady and advance the remedy, informed by sociology and social anthropology.
My touchstone is that functional democracy postulates participation by all sections
of the people and fair representation in administration is an index of such
participation.
(Para 120)
Appeal allowed
M/2661/CL
Advocates who appeared in this case:
M. M. Abdul Khader, Advocate General, Kerala (K. M. K. Nair, Advocate, with him), for
the Appellants;
T. S. Krishnamoorthy Iyer, Senior Advocate (P. K. Pillai and N. Sudhakaran, Advocates, with
him), for Respondent No. 1
R. K. Garg, V. J. Francis and K. R. Nambiyar, Advocates, for Respondents Nos. 2-4, 6 & 7
and the Intervener-Mr. Surendran
R. K. Garg and O. P. Rana, Advocates, for the Intervener-State of
L. N. Sinha, Sol-Gen. (P. P. Rao and Girish Chandra, Advocates, with him), for the Attorney-
General for India
Ex parte, Respondent No. 5.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Ray, C.J.)
327
The Judgments of the Court were delivered by
RAY, C.J.-This appeal is by certificate from the judgment dated
April 19, 1974 of the High Court of Kerala.
2.
This appeal concerns the validity of Rule 13AA of the Kerala
State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 hereinafter called the Rules
and two orders which are marked P-2 and P-6.
3. In order to appreciate Rule 13AA, it is necessary to refer to
Rules 12, 13A, 13AA. These rules were framed in exercise of the powers
conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution. These rules
came into existence on December 17, 1958.
4.
"Promotion" is defined in Rule 2(11) to mean the appointment
of a member of any category or grade of a service or a class of service to
a higher category or grade of such service or class.
5.
Rule 12 states that where general educational qualifications, special
qualifications or special tests are prescribed by /the Special Rules of a service
for any category, grade or post therein, or in a class thereof, which are not
prescribed for a category or grade in such service or class carrying a lower
rate of pay and no member in the category or grade carrying the lower
rate of pay is eligible for promotion to such category, grade or post a
member in such lower category or grade may be promoted to the cate-
gory or grade carrying the higher rate of pay temporarily until a member
of the former category or grade qualified under this rule is available for
promotion. A member temporarily promoted under this rule shall not
by reason only of such promotion, be regarded as a probationer in the
category or grade to which he has been promoted, or be entitled to any
preferential claim to future promotion.
6. Rule 13 speaks of special qualifications. Rule 13 does not
concern this appeal.
7.
The two rules which are of importance in this appeal are Rules 13A
and 13AA. They are as follows
13A. Special and Departmental Tests - Temporary exemption for promo-
tion.-Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 13, where a pass in a special
or departmental test is newly prescribed by the Special Rules of a service for any
category, grade or post therein or in any class thereof, a member of a service who
has not passed the said test but is otherwise qualified and suitable for appointment
to such class, category, grade or post may within 2 years of the introduction of
the test be appointed thereto temporarily. If a member so appointed does not
pass the test within two years from the date of introduction of the said test or
when the said test also involves practical training within two years after the first
chance to undergo such training he shall be reverted to the class, category or grade
or post from which he was appointed and shall not again be eligible for appoint-
ment under this rule
Provided that a person so reverted shall not by reason only of the appoint-
ment under this rule be entitled to any preferential claim to future appointment
to the class, category, grade or post, as the case may be to which he had been
appointed under this rule :
Provided further that the period of temporary exemption shall be extended
by two years in the case of a person belonging to any of the scheduled castes
or scheduled tribes
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
328
SUPREME COURT CASES
Provided also that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for
purposes of promotion of the executive staff below the rank of Sub Inspectors
belonging to the Police Department.
13AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Government
may, by order, exempt for a specified period, any member or members, belonging
to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, and already in service, from passing
the tests referred to in Rule 13 or Rule 13A of the said Rules:
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for pur-
poses of promotion of the executive staff below the rank of Sub Inspectors belong-
ing to the Police Department.
8.
It is necessary to state here that the third proviso to Rule 13A
and the proviso to Rule 13AA were introduced with effect from October
12, 1973. Rule 13AA was introduced with effect from January 13, 1972.
Exhibit P-2 is an order dated January 13, 1972. The order is made by
the Governor. The order refers to a memorandum dated June 19, 1971
from the President, Kerala Harijan Samskarika Kshema Samithy, State
Committee, Trivandrum and a letter dated November 13, 1971 from the
Secretary, Kerala Public Service Commission. The order is as follows
The President, Kerala Harijan Samskarika Kshema Samithy, Trivandrum has
brought to the notice of Government that a large number of Harijan employees
are facing immediate reversion from their posts for want of test qualifications and
has therefore requested that all Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes employees
may be granted temporary exemption from passing the obligatory departmental
tests for a period of two years with immediate effect.
(2) Government have examined the matter in consultation with the Kerala
Public Service Commission and are pleased to grant temporary exemption to
members already in service belonging to any of the Scheduled Castes and Sche-
duled Tribes from passing all tests (unified and special or departmental tests) for
a period of two years.
(3) The benefit of the above exemption will be available to those employees
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who are already enjoying
the benefits of temporary exemption from passing newly prescribed tests under
General Rule 13A. In their case, the temporary exemption will expire only on
the date of expiry of the temporary exemption mentioned in para (2) above or
on the date of expiry of the existing temporary exemption, whichever is later.
(4) This order will take effect from the date of the order.
9. Exhibit P-6 is an order dated January 11, 1974. It is an order
made by the Governor. The order is as follows
Government are pleased to order that the period of temporary exemption
granted to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the G. O. read above from
passing all tests (unified and special or departmental tests) be extended from
January 13, 1974 to cover a period during which two tests are held by the Public
Service Commission and results thereof published so that each individual gets two
chances to appear. Government also order that these categories of employees
will not be given any further extension of time to acquire the test qualifications.
10.
Pursuant to Rule 13AA which came into force on January 13,
1972, the order Exhibit P-2 was passed on January 13, 1972 granting
temporary exemption to members already in service belonging to any of
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes from passing all tests (unified
and special or departmental tests) for a period of two years. The exemp-
tion granted by Exhibit P-2 in almost all cases would have expired on
January 12, 1974.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Ray, C. J.)
329
11. The other impugned order is Exhibit P-6 which was passed on
January 11, 1974 gave further exemption to members of scheduled castes
and tribes from January 13, 1974 from passing tests to cover a period
during which two tests would be held by the Public Service Commission
and results thereof published SO that each individual would get two chances
to appear within that period. The Government also ordered that these
categories of employees would not be given any further extension of time
to acquire the test qualifications.
12. On the basis of these exemption orders, several promotions have
been effected. The respondent alleged in the writ petition that 12 lower
division clerks who were members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes were promoted without test qualification. The further allegation
is that by an order dated June 15, 1972. 19 lower division clerks belong-
ing to scheduled castes and tribes were promoted as upper division clerks
of which 5 were unqualified scheduled castes and scheduled tribes mem-
bers and 14 were qualified scheduled castes and scheduled tribes members.
By order dated September 19. 1972, another 8 promotions of members
of scheduled castes and tribes were ordered of which only two were
qualified and the remaining six were unqualified. By another order dated
October 31, 1972, 7 scheduled castes and scheduled tribes members
were promoted without qualifying test and one was promoted with
the qualifying test. The grievance of the respondent-petitioner before the
High Court was that out of 51 vacancies which arose in the category of
upper division clerks in the year 1972, 34 were filled up by scheduled
castes members who did not possess qualifications and only 17 were given
to qualified persons.
13. The respondent is a lower division clerk working in the Regis-
tration Department. For promotion to upper division clerk in that depart-
ment on the basis of seniority, the lower division clerks have to pass (1)
Account Test (Lower), (2) Kerala Registration Test and (3) Test in
the manual of office procedure. The respondent's grievance is that in view
of certain concessions given to members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, they were able to obtain promotions earlier than the respondent,
though the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes who
were promoted had not passed the tests.
14. The respondent in the writ petition filed in the High Court asked
for a declaration that Rule 13AA is unconstitutional and a mandamus
for compelling the State to forbear from giving effect to order dated
January 13, 1972 marked Exhibit P-2. The respondent by an affidavit
asked for a similar order that Exhibit P-6 dated January 11, 1974 be set
aside.
15. The respondents' contentions in the High Court were that Rule
13AA of the Service Rules and Exhibits P-2, P-6 and Exhibit P-7 which
was another order dated October 31, 1972 and all orders of promotion
made thereunder were violative of Articles 6(1) and 16(2). The High
Court upheld the contentions of respondent No. 1.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
330
SUPREME COURT CASES
16. The contention of the State is that the impugned rules and
orders are not only legal and valid but also support a rational classifica-
tion under Article (1).
17.
The contentions on behalf of respondent No. 1 are these. First,
Article 16 is a specific application of Article 14 in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any service in the State. Clauses (1) and
(2) of Article 16 give effect to equality before law guaranteed by Article 14
and to prohibition against discrimination guaranteed by Article 5(1). In
other words, Article 16(1) is absolute in terms guaranteeing equality of
opportunity to every individual citizen seeking employment or appoint-
ment. Emphasis is placed on similar opportunity and equal treatment for
seeking employment or appointment. Second, matters relating to employ-
ment in Article 16(1) include all matters in relation to employment both
prior and subsequent to the employment and form part of the terms and
conditions of service. Equal opportunity is to be given for appointment,
promotion, termination of employment and payment of pension and
gratuity. Third, the abridgement of equality guaranteed by Article 6(1)
is only to the extent curtailed by Article 16(4). Apart from Article 16(4),
the right guaranteed under Article 16(1) cannot be curtailed. Article
16(4) is, in substance, an exception to rights guaranteed by Article 6(1)
and (2). Fourth, Article 16(4) does not cover the entire field occupied
by Article 16(1) and (2). Some of the matters relating to employment
in respect of which equality of opportunity has been guaranteed by Article
6(1) and (2) do not fall within the mischief of non-obstante clause in
Article 16(4). To illustrate, clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 do not
prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection to any employ-
ment or appointment in office. Any provision as to the qualification for
employment or appointment in office reasonably fixed and applicable to
all citizens would be consistent with the doctrine of equality of opportunity
in Article 5(1). Reasonable qualification of employment for the pur-
pose of efficiency of service is justified. Fifth, Rule 13AA is violative
of Article 16(1) and (2). The impeached exhibits fall within the same
mischief. There is no scope for dealing with scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes different from other backward classes. Exemption from qualifica-
tion necessary for promotion is not conducive to the maintenance of
efficiency of administration and violates not only Article 335 of the Constitu-
tion but also Article 16(1).
18. Before the introduction of the Kerala State and Subordinate
Services Rules, 1958 on December 17, 1958 and also the formation of
Kerala State on November 1, 1956, the Travancore-Cochin Government
had issued orders on June 14, 1956 directing that the standard of qualifica-
tion should be lower for members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes than compared to others in the matter of examinations relating
to various tests. By government order dated June 27, 1958, it was directed
that the period of exemption from passing tests be extended by two years
in the case of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. Again by govern-
ment order dated January 2, 1961, the period of exemption to scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes was further extended to 3 years. By another
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Ray, C. J.)
331
government order dated January 14, 1963, a unified account test (lower)
and a test in office procedure were introduced replacing the old tests and
as this was treated as a new test, all persons who were formerly in Travancore-
Cochin or Madras Service were given two years time to pass the test
and members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes were given
extra time in accordance with the orders earlier mentioned. A circular
was issued on February 9, 1968 granting 7 years' time from January 14,
1963 to members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to pass
the unified tests. This period was to expire on January 14, 1970. On
January 13, 1970, an order was passed extending the time for another
year upto January 14, 1971. On January 14, 1971 another government
order was issued extending the period by another year.
19. It was brought to the notice of the government that large
number of government servants belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes were unable to get their promotion because of want of test quali-
fications. In order to give relief to the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, the Government incorporated Rule 13AA which enabled the Govern-
ment to grant exemption to members of scheduled castes and sche-
duled tribes for a specified period. On January 13, 1972 exemption from
passing the tests was granted to members of scheduled castes and sche-
duled tribes for two years. On January 11, 1974 order was made under
Rule 13AA giving members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes
exemption from passing the tests for the period of two tests to be con-
ducted after the order dated January 11, 1974.
20. The criterion for promotion of lower division clerks to upper
division clerks is seniority-cum-merit qualification. For want of test quali-
fication a large number of lower division clerks belonging to scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes were passed over. It is because of the afore-
said government order dated January 13, 1972 marked Exhibit P-2 that
promotions were made according to seniority-cum-merit qualification. The
larger share went to the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes because they were senior hands. After the issue of the order dated
January 13, 1972, 34 out of 51 lower division clerks who were promoted
belonged to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. These 34 persons
were given temporary exemption from passing the departmental tests. It
also appears that these 34 members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes
have become seniormost in the lower cadre.
21. Articles 14, 15 and 16 form part of a string of constitutional
guaranteed rights. These rights supplement each other. Article 16 which
ensures to all citizens equality of opportunity in matters relating to employ-
ment is an incident of guarantee of equality contained in Article 14.
Article 16 (1) gives effect to Article 14. Both Articles 14 and 6(1)
permit reasonable classification having a nexus to the objects to be achieved.
Under Article 16 there can be a reasonable classification of the
employees in matters relating to employment or appointment.
22. This Court in the State of Gujarat V. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd.,
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
332
SUPREME COURT CASES
The equal protection of the laws is a pledge of the protection of equal laws.
But laws may classify. And the very idea of classification is that of inequality.
In tackling this paradox the Court has neither abandoned the demand for equality
nor denied the legislative right to classify. It has taken a middle course. It has
resolved the contradictory demands of legislative specialization and constitutional
generality by a doctrine of reasonable classification. (See Joseph Tussman and
Jacobusten Brook, "The Equal Protection of the Laws", 37 California Rev. 341.)
23. In the Ambica Mills case (supra) this Court explained reason-
able classification to be one which includes all who are similarly situated
and none who are not. The question as to who are similarly situated
has been answered by stating that one must look beyond the classifica-
tion to the purpose of law.
The purpose of a law may be either the elimination of a public mischief or
para 54]
24. Discrimination is the essence of classification. Equality is violated
if it rests on unreasonable basis. The concept of equality has an inherent
limitation arising from the very nature of the constitutional guarantee.
Those who are similarly circumstanced are entitled to an equal treatment.
Equality is amongst equals. Classification is, therefore, to be founded on
substantial differences which distinguish persons grouped together from
those left out of the groups and such differential attributes must bear a
just and rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
25. The crux of the matter is whether Rule 13AA and the two
orders Exhibits P-2 and P-6 are unconstitutional violating Article 16(1).
Article (1) speaks of equality of opportunity in matters relating to
employment or appointment under the State. The impeached rule and
orders relate to promotion from lower division clerks to upper division
clerks. Promotion depends upon passing the test within two years in all
cases and exemption is granted to members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes for a longer period namely. four years. If there is a rational classi-
fication consistent with the purpose for which such classifica-
tion is made equality is not violated. The categories of classification
for purposes of promotion can never be closed on the contention that they
are all members of the same cadre in service. If classification is made on
educational qualifications for purposes of promotion or if classification is
made on the ground that the persons are not similarly circumstanced in
regard to their entry into employment. such classification can be justified.
Classification between direct recruits and promotees for purposes of promo-
tion has been held to be reasonable in C. A. Rajendran V. Union of India'.
26. The respondent contended that apart from Article 16(4)
members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes were not entitled to any
favoured treatment in regard to promotion. In T. Devadasan V. Union of
India reservation was made for backward classes. The number of reserved
1
(1968) 2 LLJ 407.
381.
3.
(1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179:
2. (1968) 1 SCR 721 AIR 1968 SC 507 :
(1965) 2 LLJ 560.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Ray, .J.)
333
seats which were not filled up was carried forward to the subsequent year.
On the basis of "carry forward" principle it was found that such reserved
seats might destroy equality. To illustrate, if 18 seats were reserved and
for two successive years the reserved seats were not filled and in the third
year there were 100 vacancies the result would be that 54 reserved seats
would be occupied out of 100 vacancies. This would destroy equality.
On that ground "carry forward" principle was not sustained in Devadasan's
case (supra) The same view was taken in the case of M. R. Balaji V.
State of Mysore'. It was said that not more than 50 per cent should be
reserved for backward classes. This ensures equality. Reservation is not
a constitutional compulsion but is discretionary according to the ruling
of this Court in Rajendran's case (supra).
27. There is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person
who complains of discrimination is equally situated with the person or
persons who are alleged to have been favoured. Article 16(1) does not
bar a reasonable classification of employees or reasonable tests for their
selection (State of Mysore V. V. P. Narasing Rao5).
28. This equality of opportunity need not be confused with abso-
lute equality. Article 16(1) does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable
rules for selection to any employment or appointment to any office. In
regard to employment, like other terms and conditions associated with
and incidental to it, the promotion to a selection post is also included
in the matters relating to employment and even in regard to such a promotion
to a selection post all that Article 16(1) guarantees is equality of oppor-
tunity to all citizens. Articles 16(1) and (2) give effect to equality before
law guaranteed by Article 14 and to the prohibition of discrimination
guaranteed by Article 15(1). Promotion to selection post is covered
by Article 16(1) and (2).
29. The power to make reservation, which is conferred on the
State, under Article 16(4) can be exercised by the State in a proper case
not only by providing for reservation of appointments but also by provid-
ing for reservation of selection posts. In providing for reservation of
appointments or posts under Article 16(4) the State has to take into
consideration the claims of the backward classes consistently with the
maintenance of the efficiency of administration. It must not be forgotten
that the efficiency of administration is of such paramount importance that
it would be unwise and impermissible to make any reservation at the cost
of
efficiency of administration. (General Manager, S. Rly. V. Rangachari.
The present case is not one of reservation of posts by promotion.
30. Under Article 16(1) equality of opportunity of employment
means equality as between members of the same class of employees and
not equality between members of separate, independent class. The Road-
side Station Masters and Guards are recruited separately, trained separately
and have separate avenues of promotion. The Station Masters claimed
4
1963 Supp 1 SCR 439 AIR 1963 SC
(1968) 2 LLJ 120.
649.
6. (1962) 2 SCR-586: AIR 1962 SC 36.
5
(1968) 1 SCR 407 AIR 1968 SC 349:
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
334
SUPREME COURT CASES
equality of opportunity for promotion vis-a-vis the guards on the ground
that they were entitled to equality of opportunity. It was said the con-
cept of equality can have no existence except with reference to matters
which are common as between individuals. between whom equality is
predicated. The Roadside Station Masters and Guards were recruited
separately. Therefore, the two form distinct and separate classes and
there is no scope for predicating equality or inequality of opportunity in
matters of promotion. (See All India Station Masters and Assistant
Station Masters' Association V. General Manager, Central Railway").
The present case is not to create separate avenues of promotion for these
persons.
31. The rule of parity is the equal treatment of equals in equal
circumstances. The rule of differentiation is enacting laws differentiating
between different persons or things in different circumstances. The cir-
cumstances which govern one set of persons or objects may not necessarily
be the same as those governing another set of persons or objects SO that
the question of unequal treatment does not really arise between persons
governed by different conditions and different sets of circumstances. The
principle of equality does not mean that every law must have universal
application for all persons who are not by nature, attainment or circum-
stances in the same position and the varying needs of different classes of
persons require special treatment. The Legislature understands and appre-
ciates the need of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made
manifest by experience and that its discriminations are based
upon adequate grounds. The rule of classification is not a natural and
logical corollary of the rule of equality, but the rule of differentiation is
inherent in the concept of equality. Equality means parity of treatment
under parity of conditions. Equality does not connote absolute equality.
A classification in order to be constitutional must rest upon distinctions
that are substantial and not merely illusory. The test is whether it has a
reasonable basis free from artificiality and arbitrariness embracing all and
omitting none naturally falling into that category.
32. The following decisions illustrate how classification for promo-
tion has been upheld within the content of Article 16.
33. There can be cases where the differences between the two groups
of recruits may not be sufficient to give any preferential treatment to one
against the other in the matter of promotions, and in that event a court
may hold that there is no reasonable nexus between the differences and
the recruitment. (Govind Dattatray Kelkar V. Chief Controller of
Imports ).
34. The equality of opportunity takes within its fold all stages of
service from initial appointment to its termination including promotion
but it does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection
and promotion, applicable to all members of a classified group. (Ganga
Ram V. Union of India).
7. (1960) 2 SCR 311 AIR 1960 SC 384.
(1967) 1 LLJ 691.
8. (1967) 2 SCR 29: AIR 1967 SC 839:
9.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Ray, C. J.)
335
35. When the petitioner and the direct recruits were appointed to
Grade 'D', there was one class of Grade 'D' formed of direct recruits and
the promotees from the grade of artisans. The recruits from both the
sources to Grade 'D' were integrated into one class and no discrimination
could thereafter be made between them. There was only one rule of
promotion for both the departmental promotees and the direct recruits.
(Roshan Lal Tandon V. Union of India ¹0 )
36. In State of J. & K. V. Triloki Nath Khosa11 this Court said
that dealing with practical exigencies a rule-making authority may be guided
is free to recognise degrees of harm and it may confine its restrictions to those
classes of cases where the need is deemed to be the clearest.
Educational qualifications in that case were recognised as criteria for
determining the validity of classification. The discrimination is not in
relation to the source of recruitment unlike in Roshan Lal's case (supra).
37. The rule of equality within Articles 14 and 16(1) will not
be violated by a rule which will ensure equality of representation in the
services for unrepresented classes after satisfying the basic needs of efficiency
of administration. Article 6(2) rules out some basis of classification
including race, caste, descent, place of birth etc. Article 6(4) clarifies
and explains that classification on the basis of backwardness does not fall
within Article 16(2) and is legitimate for the purposes of Article 16(1).
If preference shall be given to a particular under-represented community
other than a backward class or under-represented State in an all-India
service such a rule will contravene Article 16(2). A similar rule giving
preference to an under-represented backward community is valid and will
not contravene Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2). Article 16(4) removes
any doubt in this respect.
38. The principle of equality is applicable to employment at all
stages and in all respects, namely. initial recruitment, promotion, retire-
ment, payment of pension and gratuitv. With regard to promotion the
normal principles are either merit-cum-seniority or seniority-cum-merit.
Seniority-cum-merit means that given the minimum necessary merit requisite
for efficiency of administration, the senior though the less meritorious shall
have priority. This will not violate Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2). A rule
which provides that given the necessary requisite merit, a member of the
backward class shall get priority to ensure adequate representation will not
similarly violate Article 14 or Article 16(1) and (2). The relevant touch-
stone of validity is to find out whether the rule of preference secures adequate
representation for the unrepresented backward community or goes beyond it.
39. The classification of employees belonging to scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes for allowing them an extended period of two years
for passing the special tests for promotion is a just and reasonable classi-
fication having rational nexus to the object of providing equal opportunity
10. (1968) 1 SCR 185 AIR 1967 SC 1889
(1968) I LLJ 576.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
336
SUPREME COURT CASES
for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment
to public office. Granting of temporary exemptions from special tests
to the personnel belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes by
executive orders has been an integral feature of the service conditions in
Kerala from its very inception on November 1, 1956. That was the
pattern in Travancore-Cochin State. The special treatment accorded to
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in government service which had
become part and parcel of the conditions of service over these long periods
amply justify the classification of the members of the scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes as a whole by the impugned rule and orders challenged.
What was achieved by the government orders is now given a statutory basis
by Rule 13AA. The historical background of these rules justifies the classi-
fication of the personnel of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in
service for the purpose of granting them exemption from special tests
with a view to ensuring them the equality of treatment and equal oppor-
tunity in matters of employment having regard to their backwardness and
under-representation in the employment of the State.
40. The Constitution makes a classification of scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes in numerous provisions and gives a mandate to the State
to accord special or favoured treatment to them. Article 46 contains a
directive principle of State policy - fundamental in the governance of the
country enjoining the State to promote with special care educational and
economic interests of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and to
protect them from any social injustice and exploitation. Article 335 enjoins
that the claims of the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes
to the services and posts in the Union and the States shall be taken into
consideration. Article 338 provides for appointment by the President of
a Special Officer for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to investigate
all matters relating to the safeguards provided for them under the Constitu-
tion. Article 341 enables the President by public notification to specify
castes, races or tribes which shall be deemed to be scheduled castes in
the States and the Union territories. Article 342 contains provision for
similar notification in respect of scheduled tribes. Article 366(24) and
(25) defines scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. The classification by
the impugned rule and the orders is with a view to securing adequate
representation to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the services
of the State as otherwise they would stagnate in the lowest rung of the
State services.
41. Article 335 of the Constitution states that claims of members
of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes shall be taken into considera-
tion in the making of appointments to the services and posts in connec-
tion with affairs of the State consistent with the maintenance of efficiency
of administration. The impugned rule and the impugned orders are related
to this constitutional mandate. Without providing for relaxation of special
tests for a temporary period it would not have been possible to give ade-
quate promotion to the lower division clerks belonging to scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes to the posts of upper division clerks. Only those
lower division clerks who were senior in service will get the benefit of the
relaxation contemplated by Rule 13AA and the impeached orders. Promo-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Ray, J.)
337
tion to upper division from lower division is governed by the rule of
seniority subject only to passing of the qualified test. The temporary
relaxation of test qualification made in favour of scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes is warranted by their inadequate representation in the
services and their overall backwardness. The classification of the mem-
bers of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes already in service made
under Rule 13AA and the challenged orders for exempting them for a
temporary period from passing special tests are within the purview of
constitutional mandate under Article 335 in consideration of their claims
to redress imbalance in publie service and to bring about parity in all
communities in public services.
42. The High Court was wrong in basing its conclusion that the
result of application of the impeached rule and the orders is excessive
and exorbitant namely that out of 51 posts, 34 were given to the members
of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. The promotions made in the
services as a whole are nowhere near 50% of the total number of posts.
The scheduled castes and scheduled tribes constitute 10% of the State's
population. Their share in the gazetted services of the State is said to
be 2% namely 184 out of 8,780. Their share in the non-gazetted appoint-
ments is only 7% namely 11,437 out of 1,62,784. It is, therefore,
correct that Rule 13AA and the orders are meant to implement not only
the direction under Article 335 but also the directive principle under
Article 46.
43. Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are not a caste within
the ordinary meaning of caste. In Bhaiyalal V. Harikishan Singh1* this
Court held that an enquiry whether the appellant there belonged to the
Dohar caste which was not recognised as a scheduled caste and his declara-
tion that he belonged to the Chamar caste which was a scheduled caste
could not be premitted because of the provisions contained in Article 341.
No court can come to a finding that any caste or any tribe is a scheduled
caste or scheduled tribe. Scheduled caste is a caste as notified under
Article 366(25). A notification is issued by the President under Article 341
as a result of an elaborate enquiry. The object of Article 341 is to
provide protection to the members of scheduled castes having regard
to the economic and educational backwardness from which they suffer.
44. Our Constitution aims at equality of status and opportunity
for all citizens including those who are socially, economically and educa-
tionally backward. The claims of members of backward classes require
adequate representation in legislative and executive bodies. -If members
of scheduled castes and tribes, who are said by this Court to be back-
ward classes, can maintain minimum necessary requirement of adminis-
trative efficiency, not only representation but also preference may be given
to them to enforce equality and to eliminate inequality. Article 15(4)
and 16(4) bring out the position of backward classes to merit equality.
Special provisions are made for the advancement of backward classes and
reservations of appointments and posts for them to secure adequate
12. (1965) 2 SCR 877 AIR 1965 SC 1557.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
338
SUPREME COURT CASES
representation. These provisions will bring out the content of equality
guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 (1) and 16(1). The basic concept of
equality is equality of opportunity for appointment. Preferential treat-
ment for members of backward classes with due regard to administra-
tive efficiency alone can mean equality of opportunity for all citizens.
Equality under Article 16 could not have a different content from equa-
lity under Article 14. Equality of opportunity for unequals can only
mean aggravation of inequality. Equality of opportunity admits discri-
mination with reason and prohibits discrimination without reason. Dis-
crimination with reasons means rational classification for differential treatment
having nexus to the constitutionally permissible object. Preferential
representation for the backward classes in services with due regard to
administrative efficiency is permissible object and backward classes are
a rational classification recognised by our Constitution. Therefore, diffe-
rential treatment in standards of selection are within the concept of equality.
45. A rule in favour of an under-represented backward commu-
nity specifying the basic needs of efficiency of administration will not contra-
vene Articles 14, (1) and 16(2). The rule in the present case does
not impair the test of efficiency in administration inasmuch as members of
scheduled castes and tribes who are promoted have to acquire the quali-
fication of passing the test. The only relaxation which is done in their
case is that they are granted two years more time than others to acquire
the qualification. Scheduled castes and tribes are descriptive of backward-
ness. It is the aim of our Constitution to bring them up from handi-
capped position to improvement. If classification is permissible under
Article 14, it is equally permissible under Article 16, because both the
articles lay down equality. The quality and concept of equality is that
if persons are dissimilarly placed they cannot be made equal by having
the same treatment. Promotion of members of scheduled castes and tribes
under the impeached rules and orders is based on the classification with
the object of securing representation to members of scheduled castes and
tribes. Efficiency has been kept in view and not sacrificed.
46. All legitimate methods are available for equalitv of opportunity
in services under Article 6(1). Article 16(1) is affirmative whereas
Article 14 is negative in language. Article 16(4) indicates one of the
methods of achieving equality embodied in Article 16(1). Article 16(1)
using the expression "equality" makes it relatable to all matters of employ-
ment from appointment through promotion and termination to payment of
pension and gratuity. Article 16(1) permits classification on the basis
of object and purpose of law or State action except classification involving
discrimination prohibited by Article 16(2). Equal protection of laws
necessarily involves classification. The validity of the classification must be
adjudged with reference to the purpose of law. The classification in the
present case is justified because the purpose of classification is to enable
members of scheduled castes and tribes to find representation by promo-
tion to a limited extent. From the voint of view of time a differential
treatment is given to members of scheduled castes and tribes for the pur-
pose of giving them equality consistent with efficiency.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Mathew, J.)
339
47. For the foregoing reasons, I uphold the validity of Rule 13AA
and Exhibits P-2 and P-6. The appeal is accepted. The judgment of
the High Court is set aside. Parties will pay and bear their own costs.
MATHEW, J. (concurring)-The facts of the case have been stated
in the judgment of the learned Chief Justice and it is not necessary to
repeat them. The point which arises for consideration is whether Rule
13AA made by Ex. P-1 amendment to the Kerala State and Subordinate
Services Rules, 1958, and Exhibits P-2 and P-6, the orders passed by
Government in the exercise of their power under that rule, were valid.
The rule reads
13AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Government
may, by order, exempt for a specified period, any member or members, belonging
to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, and already in service, from passing
the tests referred to in Rule 13 or Rule 13A of the said Rules.
49. Rule 13AA came into force on January 13, 1972 and on the
same day Ex. P-2 order was passed granting temporary exemption to
members already in service belonging to any of the scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes from passing any of the tests (unified and special or
departmental tests) for a period of two years. Thereafter, another order
was passed (Ex. P-6) on January 11, 1974 granting exemption for a
period of another two years.
50. The High Court was of the view that Rule 13AA violated
Article 16(1) and that Article 16(4) which provides for making reserva-
tion of appointments or posts in favour of backward classes of citizens
which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the
service under the State has no application. The Court relied on the
decision of this Court in General Manager, Southern Railway V. Rangachari13
where it was held that Article 16(4) is an exception to Article 6(1)
and that it does not take in all the matters covered by Article 16(1)
as it is concerned only with reservation of appointments and posts in
favour of backward classes and that but for Article 16(4) there could
be no reservation of posts in favour of backward classes under the
guarantee of equality of opportunity in the matter of employment.
51. The learned Advocate General of Kerala submitted that the
Constitution has enjoined a favoured treatment to the members of scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes by Article 46 and that Rule 13AA which
empowers the Government to exempt for a specified period any member
or members of the scheduled castes or scheduled tribes already in service
from passing the tests referred to in Rules 13 and 13A of the Rules
is only a law passed by the 'State' in pursuance to its fundamental
obligation to advance the interest of the weakest section of the community.
He said that the implementation of the directive in Article 46 will not
be inconsistent in any manner with the principle of equality of opportunity
guaranteed under Article 16(1) and that a rule which dispenses with
13. AIR 1962 SC 36 (1962) 2 SCR 586.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
340
SUPREME COURT CASES
the passing of a test or tests for a specified period in the case of members
of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes will not in any way run counter
to the equality of opportunity guaranteed to the other sections of the
community. Article 46 provides
46. The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic
interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in particular, of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and
all forms of exploitation.
52. Justice Brandeis has said that knowledge must precede under-
standing and that understanding must precede judgment. It will therefore
be in the interest of clarity of thought to begin with an understanding
of just what equality of opportunity means. Article 16(1) provides for
equality of opportunity for all citizens in the matter of employment and
there can be no doubt that the equality guaranteed is an individual right.
The concept of equality of opportunity is an aspect of the mere com-
prehensive notion of equality. The idea of equality has different shades
of meaning and connotations. It has many facets and implications.
Plato's remark about law is equally applicable to the concept of equality :
"A perfectly simple principle can never be applied to a state of things
which is the reverse of simple." "14 Different writers tend to emphasize
some forms of equality rather than others as of overriding importance -
equality before the law, equality of basic human rights, economic equality,
equality of opportunity or equality of consideration for all persons.
53. Formal equality is achieved by treating all persons equally
"Each man to count for one and no one to count for more than one."
But men are not equal in all respects. The claim for equality is in fact a
protest against unjust. undeserved and unjustified inequalities. It is a
symbol of man's revolt against chance, fortuitous disparity, unjust power
and crvstallised privileges. Although the decision to grant equality is
motivated prima facie by the alleged reason that all men are equal yet,
as soon as we clear up the confusion between equality in the moral sense
and equality in the physical sense, we realise that the opposite is the truth ;
for, we think that it is just to promote certain equalities precisely to
compensate for the fact that men are actually born different. We, there-
fore, have to resort to some sort of proportionate equality in many spheres
to achieve justice.
54. The principle of proportional equality is attained only when
equals are treated equally and unequals unequally. This would raise the
baffling question Equals and unequals in what ? The principle of pro-
portional equality therefore involves an appeal to some criterion in terms
of which differential treatment is justified. If there is no significant
respect in which persons concerned are distinguishable, differential treat-
ment would be unjustified. But what is to be allowed as a significant
difference such as would justify differential treatment
55. In distributing the office of a State, not any sort of personal
equality is relevant for, unless we employ criteria appropriate to the
14. 'Statesman', p. 294, Translation by Jowett.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Mathew, J.)
341
sphere in question, it would turn out that a man's height or complexion
could determine his eligibility or suitability for a post. As Aristotle said,
claims to political office cannot be based on prowess in athletic contests.
Candidates for office should possess those qualities that go to make up
an effective use of the office. But this principle also does not give any
satisfactory answer to the question when differential treatment can be
meted out. As 1 said, the principle that if two persons are being treated
or are to be treated differently there should be some relevant difference
between them is, no doubt, unexceptionable. Otherwise, in the absence
of some differentiating feature what is sauce for the goose is sauce for
the gander. The real difficulty arises in finding out what constitutes a
relevant difference.
56. If we are all to be treated in the same manner, this must
carry with it the important requirement that none of us should be better
or worse in upbriging, education, than anyone else which is an unattain-
able ideal for human beings of anything like the sort we now see. Some
people maintain that the concept of equality of opportunity is an unsatis-
factory concept. For, a complete formulation of it renders it incom-
patible with any form of human society. Take for instance, the case of
equality of opportunity for education. This equality cannot start in
schools and hence requires uniform treatment in families which is an
evident impossibility. To remedy this. all children might be brought up
in State nurseries, but, to achieve the purpose, the nurseries would have
to be run on vigorously uniform lines. Could we guarantee equality of
opportunity to the young even in those circumstances ? The idea is well
expressed by Laski
Equality means, in the second place, that adequate opportunities are laid open
to all. By adequate opportunities we cannot imply equal opportunities in a sense
that implies identity of original chance. The native endowments of men are by
no means equal. Children who are brought up in an atmosphere where things of
the mind are accounted highly are bound to start the race of life with advantages
no legislation can secure. Parental character will inevitably affect profoundly the
equality of the children whom it touches. So long, therefore, as the family endures -
and there seems little reason to anticipate or to desire its disappearance -
the
varying environments it will create make the notion of equal opportunities a fantastic
one 17
57
Though complete identity of equality of opportunity is impossible
in the world, measures compensatory in character and which are calculated
to mitigate surmountable obstacles to ensure equality of opportunity can
never incur the wrath of Article 16(1).
58. The notion of equality of opportunity is a notion that a limited
good shall in fact be allocated on the grounds which do not a priori exclude
any section of those that desire it. 16 All sections of people desire and
claim representation in the public service of the country, but the avail-
able number of posts are limited and therefore, even though all sections
of people might desire to get posts, it is practically impossible to satisfy
15.
"Liberty and Equality" in Special Problems
16. Williams on "The Idea of Equality" in
and Public Policy: Inequality and Justice,
Justice and Equality, Ed. Hugo A. Baden,
Ed. Lee Rainwater, pp. 26 to 31.
p. 116.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
342
SUPREME COURT CASES
the desire. The question therefore is : On what basis can any citizen or
class of citizens be excluded from his or their fair share of representation ?
Article 335 postulates that members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes have a claim to representation in the public service both of the
Union and the States and that the claim has to be taken into consideration
consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration in the
making of appointments to services of the Union and the States. As I
said, the notion of equality of opportunity has meaning only when a
limited good or, in the present context, a limited number of posts, should
be allocated on grounds which do not a priori exclude any section of
citizens of those that desire it.
59. What, then, is a priori exclusion ? It means exclusion on
grounds other than those appropriate or rational for the good (posts) in
question. The notion requires not merely that there should be no
exclusion from access on grounds other than those appropriate or rational
for the good in question, but the grounds considered appropriate for the
good should themselves be such that people from all sections of society
have an equal chance of satisfying them.
60. Bernard A. O. Williams, in his article "The Idea of Equality"
(supra) gives an illustration of the working of the principle of equality
of opportunity :
Suppose that in a certain society great prestige is attached to membership of
a warrior class, the duties of which require great physical strength. This class
has in the past been recruited from certain wealthy families only but egalitarian
reformers achieve a change in the rules, by which warriors are recruited from all
sections of the society, on the result of a suitable competition. The effect of this,
however, is that the wealthy families still provide virtually all the warriors, because
the rest of the populace is so under-nourished by reason of poverty that their physical
strength is inferior to that of the wealthy and well-nourished. The reformers protest
that equality of opportunity has not really been achieved ; the wealthy reply that
in fact it has, and that the poor now have the opportunity of becoming warriors
it is just bad luck that their characteristics are such that they do not pass the test.
"We are not", they might say, "excluding anyone for being poor we exclude people
for being weak, and it is unfortunate that those who are poor are also weak".
61. This is not a satisfactory answer though it may sound logical.
The supposed equality of opportunity is quite empty. One knows that
there is a causal connection between being poor and being under-nourished
and between being under-nourished and being physically weak. One
supposes further that something should be done subject to whatever
economic conditions obtain in the society to alter the distribution of wealth.
All this being so, the appeal by the wealthy to bad luck of the poor
must appear rather disingenuous.
62. It is clear that one is not really offering equality of opportunity
to X and Y if one contents oneself with applying the same criteria to X
and Y. What one is doing there is to apply the same criteria to X as
affected by favourable conditions and to Y as affected by unfavourable
but curable conditions. Here there is a necessary pressure to equal up
the conditions. To give X and Y equality of opportunity involves regard-
ing their conditions, where curable, as themselves part of what is done
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Mathew, J.)
343
to X and Y and not part of X and Y themselves. Their identity for this
purpose does not include their curable environment, which is itself unequal
and a contributor of inequality [see Williams, "The Idea of Equality" (supra)].
In Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society V. State of Gujarat17
in
the judgment on behalf of Chandrachud, J. and myself, I said at
pp. 798-799 : (para 132)
The problem of the minorities is not really a problem of the establishment
of equality because, if taken literally, such equality would mean absolute identical
treatment of both the minorities and the majorities. This would result only in
equality in law but inequality in fact,
and that [p. 799, para 132]
it is obvious that equality in law precludes discrimination of any kind ; whereas
equality in fact may involve the necessity of differential treatment in order to
attain a result which establishes an equilibrium between different situations.
64. It would follow that if we want to give equality of opportunity
for employment to the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, we will have to take note of their social, educational and economic
environment. Not only is the directive principle embodied in Article 46
binding on the law-maker as ordinarily understood but it should equally
inform and illuminate the approach of the Court when it makes a decision
as the Court also is 'State' within the meaning of Article 12 and makes
law even though "interstitially from the molar to the molecular". I have
explained at some length the reason why Court is 'State' under Article 12
in my judgment in His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru V.
State of Kerala18
65. Equality of opportunity is not simply a matter of legal equality.
Its existence depends, not merely on the absence of disabilities, but on
the presence of abilities. It obtains in SO far as, and only in so far
as, each member of a community, whatever his birth or occupation or
social position, possesses in fact, and not merely in form, equal chances
of using to the full his natural endowments of physique, of character,
and of intelligence. 19
66. The guarantee of equality before the law or the equal oppor-
tunity in matters of employment is a guarantee of something more than
what is required by formal equality. It implies differential treatment of
persons who are unequal. Egalitarian principle has therefore enhanced
the growing belief that Government has an affirmative duty to eliminate
inequalities and to provide opportunities for the exercise of human rights
and claims. Fundamental rights as enacted in Part III of the Constitution
are, by and large, essentially negative in character. They mark off a
world in which the Government should have no jurisdiction. In this
realm, it was assumed that a citizen has no claim upon Government except
to be left alone. But the language of Article 16(1) is in marked contrast
with that of Article 14. Whereas the accent in Article 14 is on the
injunction that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the
19. See R. H. Tawney, "Equality", (1965)
pp. 103-104.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
344
SUPREME COURT CASES
law or the equal protection of the laws. that is, on the negative character
of the duty of the State, the emphasis in Article 16(1) is on the mandatory
aspect, namely, that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens
in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under
the State implying thereby that affirmative action by Government would
be consistent with the article if it is calculated to achieve it. If we
are to achieve equality, we can never afford to relax
:
While inequality is easy since it demands no more than to float with the
current, equality is difficult for it involves swimming against it. 20
67. Today, the political theory which acknowledges the obligation
of Government under Part IV of the Constitution to provide jobs, medical
care, old age pension, etc., extends to human rights and imposes an
affirmative obligation to promote equality and liberty. The force of the
idea of a State with obligation to help the weaker sections of its members
seems to have increasing influence in constitutional law. The idea finds
expression in a number of cases in America involving social discrimination
and also in the decisions requiring the State to offset the effects of poverty
by providing counsel, transcript of appeal, expert witnesses, etc. Today,
the sense that Government has affirmative responsibility for elimination
of inequalities, social, economic or otherwise, is one of the dominant
forces in constitutional law. While special concessions for the under-
privileged have been easily permitted, they have not traditionally been
required. Decisions in the areas of criminal procedure, voting rights
and education in America suggest that the traditional approach may not
be completely adequate. In these areas, the inquiry whether equality has
been achieved no longer ends with numerical equality ; rather the equality
clause has been held to require resort to a standard of proportional equality
which requires the State, in framing legislation, to take into account the
private inequalities of wealth, of education and other circumstances.
21
68. The idea of compensatory State action to make people who
are really unequal in their wealth, education or social environment, equal,
in specified areas, was developed by the Supreme Court of the United
States. Rousseau has said
It is precisely because the force of circumstances tends to destroy equality
that force of legislation must always tend to maintain it. 22
69. In Griffin V. Illinois"3, an indigent defendant was unable to
take advantage of the one appeal of right granted by Illinois law because
he could not afford to buy the necessary transcript. Such transcripts were
made available to all defendants on payment of a similar fee but in
practice only non-indigents were able to purchase the transcript and take
the appeal. The Court said that
there can be no equal justice where the kind of trial a man gets depends on the
amount of money he has
and held that the Illinois procedure violated the equal protection clause.
20. R. H. Tawney, "Equality", (1952),
Harv L R 1165.
p. 47.
22. Contract Social ii, 11.
21. See "Developments-Equal Protection", 82
23. 351 US 12.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Mathew, J.)
345
The State did not have to make appellate review available at all but
if it did, it could not do so in a way which operated to deny access to
review to defendants solely because of their indigency. A similar theory
underlies the requirement that counsel be provided for indigents on appeal.
In Douglas V. California24, the case involved the California procedure
which guaranteed one appeal of right for criminal defendants convicted
at trial. In the case of indigents the appellate Court checked over the
record to see whether it would be of advantage to the defendant or helpful
to the appellate Court to have counsel appointed for the appeal. A
negative answer meant that the indigent had to appeal pro se if at all.
The Court held that this procedure denied defendant the equal protection
of the laws. Even though the State was pursuing an otherwise legitimate
objective of providing counsel only for non-frivolous claims, it had created
a situation in which the well-to-do could always have a lawyer - even
for frivolous appeals - whereas the indigent could not.
70. Justice Harlan, dissenting in both Griffin and Douglas cases (supra)
said that they represented a new departure from the traditional view that
numerically equal treatment cannot violate the equal protection clause.
He concluded that the effect of the decisions was to require State dis-
crimination. He said
The Court thus holds that, at least in this area of criminal appeals, the
Equal Protection Clause imposes on the States an affirmative duty to lift the
handicaps flowing from differences in economic circumstances. That holding
produces the anomalous result that a constitutional admonition to the States to
treat all persons equally means in this instance that Illinois must give to some
that it requires others to pay for
It may accurately be said that the
real issue in this case is not whether Illinois has discriminated but whether it bas
a duty to discriminate.
71. Though in one sense Justice Harlan is correct, when one comes
to think of the real effect of his view, one is inclined to think that the
opinion failed to recognise that there are several ways of looking at
equality. and treating people equally in one respect always results in
unequal treatment in some other respects. For Mr. Justice Harlan, the
only type of equality that mattered was numerical equality in the terms
upon which transcripts were offered to defendants. The majority, on the
other hand, took a view which would bring about equality in fact, requiring
similar availability to all of criminal appeals in Griffin's case (supra) and
counsel-attended criminal appeals in Douglas' case (supra). To achieve
this result, the Legislature had to resort to a proportional standard of
equality. These cases are remarkable in that they show that the kind
of equality which is considered important in the particular context and
hence of the respect in which it is necessary to treat people equally. 25
72. Look at the approach of the Supreme Court of United States
of America in Harper V. Virginia Board of Elections2 The Court there
declared as unconstitutional a Virginia poll tax of $ 1.50 per person which
had been applied to all indiscriminately. As in Griffin (supra) and
Douglas (supra) the State had treated everyone numerically alike with
24. 372 US 353.
82 Harv LR 1165.
25. See "Developments-Equal Protection",
26.
383 US 6
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
346
SUPREME COURT CASES
respect to the fee. Whatever discrimination existed was the result of the
State's failure to proportion the fee on the basis of need or, what is
the same thing, to employ a numerically equal distribution with respect
to the vote itself. The result again is a requirement that the Legislature
should take note of difference in private circumstances in formulating
its policies.
73. There is no reason why this Court should not also require the
State to adopt a standard of proportional equality which takes account
of the differing conditions and circumstances of a class of citizens when-
ever those conditions and circumstances stand in the way of their equal
access to the enjoyment of basic rights or claims.
74. The concept of equality of opportunity in matters of employ-
ment is wide enough to include within it compensatory measures to put
the members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes on par with the
members of other communities which would enable them to get their
share of representation in public service. How can any member of the
so-called forward communities complain of a compensatory measure made
by Government to ensure the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes their due share of representation in public services ?
75. It is said that Article 16(4) specifically provides for reserva-
tion of posts in favour of backward classes which according to the decision
of this Court would include the power of the State to make reservation
at the stage of promotion also and therefore Article 6(1) cannot include
within its compass the power to give any adventitious aids by legislation
or otherwise to the backward classes which would derogate from strict
numerical equality. If reservation is necessary either at the initial stage
or at the stage of promotion or at both to ensure for the members of
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes equality of opportunity in the
matter of employment, I see no reason why that is not permissible under
Article 16(1) as that alone might put them on a parity with the forward
communities in the matter of achieving the result which equality of
opportunity would produce. Whether there is equality of opportunity can
be gauged only by the equality attained in the result. Formal equality
of opportunity simply enables people with more education and
intelligence to capture all the posts and to win over the less fortunate
in education and talent even when the competition is fair. Equality of
result is the test of equality of opportunity.
76. Daniel P. Moynihan, one of America's leading urban scholars,
spelled out the problem in a widely publicized study that he prepared
while he was Assistant Secretary of Labour. The Moynihan Report, as
it came to be known, made the point in a passage that deserves full
quotation
It is increasingly demanded that the distribution of success and failure within
one group be roughly comparable to that within other groups. It is not enough
that all individuals start out on even terms. if the members of one group almost
invariably end up well to the fore and those of another far to the rear. This
is what ethnic politics are all about in America, and in the main the Negro
American demands are being put forth in this new traditional and established
framework.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Mathew, J.)
347
Here a point of semantics must be grasped. The demand for equality of
opportunity has been generally perceived by White Americans as a demand for
liberty, a demand not to be excluded from the competitions of life - at the
polling place, in the scholarship examinations, at the personnel office, on the
housing market. Liberty does, of course, demand that everyone be free to try
his luck, or test his skill in such matters. But these opportunities do not necessarily
produce equality on the contrary, to the extent that winners imply losers, equality
of opportunity almost insures inequality of results.
The point of semantics is that equality of opportunity now has a different
meaning for Negroes than it has for Whites. It is not (or at least no longer) a
demand for liberty alone, but also for equality - in terms of group results. In
Bayard Rustin's terms, 'It is now concerned not merely with removing the barriers
to full opportunity but with achieving the fact of equality'. By equality Rustin
means a distribution of achievements among Negroes roughly comparable to that
among Whites.27
77. Beginning most notably with the Supreme Court's condemnation
of school segregation in 1954, the United States has finally begun to correct
the discrepancy between its ideals and its treatment of the black man.
The first steps, as reflected in the decisions of the courts and the civil
rights laws of Congress, merely removed the legal and quasi-legal forms
of racial discrimination. These actions while not producing true equality,
or even equality of opportunity, logically dictated the next step positive
use of government power to create the possibility of a real equality. In
the words of Professor Lipset
Perhaps the most important fact to recognise about the current situation of
the American Negro is that (legal) equality is not enough to insure his movement
into larger society. 28
78. I agree that Article 16(4) is capable of being interpreted as
an exception to Article 16(1) if the equality of opportunity visualized in
Article 16(1) is a sterile one, geared to the concept of numerical equality
which takes no account of the social, economic, educational background
of the members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. If equality of
opportunity guaranteed under Article 16(1) means effective material
equality, then Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1). It is
only an emphatic way of putting the extent to which equality of oppor-
tunity could be carried viz., even upto the point of making reservation.
79. The State can adopt any measure which would ensure the
adequate representation in public service of the members of the scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes and justify it as a compensatory measure to
ensure equality of opportunity provided the measure does not dispense
with the acquisition of the minimum basic qualification necessary for the
efficiency of administration.
80. It does not matter in the least whether the benefit of Rule 13AA
is confined only to these members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes
in service at the time and that it is not extended to all members of the
backward classes. The law-maker should have liberty to strike the evil
where it is felt most.
27. The Moynihan Report and the Politics of
28.
"The American Democracy", Mcgrath,
Controversy, Eds. Lee Rainwater and
Cornwell and Goodman, p. 18.
William L. Yancey, p. 49.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
348
SUPREME COURT CASES
81. Article 6(1) is only a part of a comprehensive scheme to
ensure equality in all spheres. It is an instance of the application of the
larger concept of equality under the law embodied in Articles 14 and 15.
Article 16(1) permits of classification ust as Article 14 does (see S. G.
Jaisinghani V. Union of India²9 ; State of Mysore V. P. Narasing Raoso
and C. A. Rajendran V. Union of But, by the classification,
there can be no discrimination on the ground only of race, caste and
other factors mentioned in Article 16(2).
82. The word 'caste' in Article 16(2) does not include 'scheduled
caste". The definition of "scheduled castes' in Article 366(24) means
such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races, or
tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes
of this Constitution.
This shows that it is by virtue of the notification of the President that
the scheduled castes come into being. Though the members of the
scheduled castes are drawn from castes. races or tribes, they attain a new
status by virtue of the Presidential notification. Moreover, though the
members of tribe might be included in scheduled castes, tribe as such is
not mentioned in Article 16(2).
83. A classification is reasonable if it includes all persons who are
similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law. In other words,
the classification must be founded on some reasonable ground which dis-
tinguishes persons who are grouped together and the ground of distinction
must have rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the
rule or even the rules in question. It is a mistake to assume a priori
that there can be no classification within a class, say, the lower division
clerks. If there are intelligible differentia which separates a group within
that class from the rest and that differentia have nexus with the object
of classification, I see no objection to a further classification within the
class. It is no doubt a paradox that though in one sense classification brings
about inequality, it is promotive of equality if its object is to bring those
who share a common characteristic under a class for differential treatment
for sufficient and justifiable reasons. In this view, I have no doubt that
the principle laid down in All India Station Masters and Assistant Station
Masters Association V. General Manager, Central Railway's S. G. Jai-
singhani V. Union of India (supra) and State of J. & K. V. Triloki Nath
Khosa' has no application here.
84. Article 16 (1) and Article 16(2) do not prohibit the pre-
scription of a reasonable qualification for appointment or for promotion.
Any provision as to qualification for employment or appointment to an
office reasonably fixed and applicable to all would be consistent with the
doctrine of equality of opportunity under Article 16(1) [see General
Manager, Southern Railway V. Rangachari (supra)}.
29. (1967) 2 SCR 703, 712 AIR 1967 SC
507 : (1968) 2 LLJ 407.
1427 : 65 ITR 34.
32. (1960) 2 SCR 311 AIR 1960 SC 384.
30. (1968) 1 SCR 407, 410 AIR 1968 SC
349: (1968) 2 LLJ 120.
31. (1968) I SCR 721, 729 AIR 1968 SC
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Mathew, J.)
349
85. Rule 13 provides that no person shall be eligible for appoint-
ment to any service unless he possesses the special qualification and has
passed such special tests as may be prescribed in that behalf by special
rules or possesses such special qualification as be considered to be equivalent
to the said special qualification or special tests.
86. The material provision in Rule 13A provides that notwith-
standing anything contained in Rule 13, where a pass in a special or
departmental test is newly prescribed by the special rules of a service
for any category, grade or post therein or in any class thereof, a member
of a service who has not passed the said test but is otherwise qualified
and suitable for appointment to such class, category, grade or post may
within two years of the introduction of the test be appointed thereto
temporarily.
87. Rule 14 provides for reservation of appointments to members
of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
88. Rule 13AA has been enacted not with the idea of dispensing
with the minimum qualification required for promotion to a higher category
or class, but only to give enough breathing space to enable the members
of scheduled castes and scheduled tribcs to acquire it. The purpose of
the classification made in Rule 13AA viz., of putting the members of
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in one class and giving them an
extension of time for acquiring the test qualification prescribed by Rule 13
and Rule 13A is to enable them to have their due claim of representation
in the higher category without sacrificing the efficiency implicit in the
passing of the test. That the passing of some of these tests does not
spell in the realm of minimum basic requirement of efficiency is clear
from Rule 13A. That rule, at any rate, contemplated passing of the
test by all the employees within two vears of its introduction showing
thereby that acquisition of the test qualification was not a sine qua non
for holding the posts. Rule 13 (b) which provides for exemption from
passing the test would also indicate that passing of the test is not absolutely
essential for holding the post. The classification made in Rule 13AA
has a reasonable nexus with the purpose of the law, namely, to enable
the members of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to get their due
share of promotion to the higher grade in the service without impairing
the efficiency of administration. Rule 13AA is not intended to give per-
manent exemption to the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes from passing the test but only reasonable time to enable them to
do SO. The power to grant exemption under the rule, like every other
power, is liable to be abused. If the power is abused and the members
of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are given favoured treatment
to the extent not warranted by their legitimate claim, the courts are not
rendered helpless. That the power is liable to be abused is no reason
to hold that the rule itself viz., Rule 13AA, is bad.
89. The ultimate reason for the demand of equality for the members
of backward classes is a moral perspective which affirms the intrinsic
value of all human beings and call for a society which provides these
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
350
SUPREME COURT CASES
conditions of life which men need for development of their varying capacities.
It is an assertion of human equality in the sense that it manifests an
equal concern for the well-being of all men. On the one hand it involves
a demand for the removal of those obstacles and impediments which stand
in the way of the development of human capacities - that is, it is a
call for the abolition of unjustifiable inequalities. On the other hand,
the demand itself gets its sense and moral driving force from the recogni-
tion that 'the poorest he that is in England hath a life to live, as the
greatest he's4.
90. I agree with the conclusion of My Lord the Chief Justice
that the appeal should be allowed.
BEG, J. (concurring)-I share the conclusion reached by the learned
Chief Justice and my learned brethren Mathew, Krishna Iyer, and Murtaza
Fazal Ali. I would, however, like to add, with great respect, that a view
which though not pressed in this Court by the Advocate General of
Kerala, perhaps because it had been repelled by the Kerala High Court
seems to me to supply a more satisfying legal justification for the benefits
conferred, in the form of an extended period granted to government
employees of a backward class to pass a qualifying test for promotion
to a higher grade of service, that is to say, from that of the lower division
clerks to that of the upper division clerks in the State of Kerala. I think
that we have to, in such a case, necessarily consider whether the manner
in which scheduled caste and scheduled tribe government employees are
treated by the rules and orders under consideration falls within Article
6(4) of the Constitution.
92. Strictly speaking, the view adopted by my learned brother Khanna,
that the ambit of the special protection of "equality of opportunity in
matters relating to public service", which can be made available to members
of backward classes of citizens, is exhausted by Article 16(4) of the
Constitution, seems inescapable. Article 16 is, after all, a facet of the
grand principles embraced by Article 14 of our Constitution. It gua-
rantees : "Equality of opportunity in matters of public appointment". It
does SO in absolute terms. It is a necessary consequence and a special
application of Article 14 in an important field where denial of equality
of opportunity cannot be permitted. While Article (1) sets out the
positive aspect of equality of opportunity in matters relating to employ-
ment by the State, Article 16(2) negatively prohibits discrimination on the
grounds given in Article 16(2) in the area covered by Article 16(1) of
the Constitution. If scheduled castes do not fall within the ambit of
Article 16(2), but, as a "backward class" of citizens, escape the direct
prohibition it is because the provisions of Article 16(4) make such an
escape possible for them. They could also avoid the necessary consequences
of the positive mandate of Article 16(1) if they come within the only
exception contained in Article 16(4) of the Constitution. I respectfully
concur with my learned brethren Khanna and Gupta that it would be
dangerous to extend the limits of protection against the operation of the
34. See John Raes, "Equality", p. 123
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Beg, J.)
351
principle of equality of opportunity in this field beyond its express constitu-
tional authorization by Article 16(4).
93. When citizens are already employed in a particular grade, as
government servants, considerations relating to the sources from which
they are drawn lose much of their importance. As public servants of that
grade they could, quite reasonably and logically, be said to belong to one
class, at least for purposes of promotion in public service for which there
ought to be a real "equality of opportunity", if we are to avoid heart
burning or a sense of injustice or frustration in this class. Neither as
members of this single class nor for purposes of the equality of opportunity
which is to be afforded to this class does the fact that some of them are
also members of an economically and socially backward class continue
to be material, or, strictly speaking, even relevant. Their entry. into the
same relevant class as others must be deemed to indicate that they no
longer suffer from the handicaps of a backward class. For purposes of
government service the source from which they are drawn should cease
to matter. As government servants they would, strictly speaking, form
only one class for purposes of promotion.
94. As has been pointed out by My Lord the Chief Justice, the
protection of Article 16(1) continues throughout the period of service. If
Article 16(1) is only a special facet or field, in which an application of
the general principles of Article 14 is fully worked out or stated, as it
must be presumed to be, there is no room left for importing into it any
other or further considerations from Article 14. Again, the express provi-
sions of Article 16(4) would be presumed to exhaust all exceptions made
in favour of backward classes not contained there if we apply the maxim
"expressio unius est exclusio alterius". It is true that the principle of
reasonable classification may still claim recognition or be relevant for
working out the exact significance of "equality of opportunity" even within
Article 16(1) in some aspect or context other than the one indicated by
Article 16(4). But, in view of Article 16(4), that aspect or context must
be different from one aimed at realizing the objects of Articles 46 and 335
in the sphere of government service. The specified and express
mode of realization of these objects contained in Article 6(4), must
exclude the possibility of other methods which could be implied and read
into Article (1) for securing them in this field, one could think of so
many other legally permissible and possibly better, or, at least more direct,
methods of removing socio-economic inequalities by appropriate legis-
lative action in other fields left open and unoccupied for purposes of dis-
crimination in favour of the backward.
95. In relation to promotions, "equality of opportunity" could only
mean subjection to similar conditions for promotion by being subjected
uniformly to similar or same kind of tests. This guarantee was, in fact,
intended to protect the claims of merit and efficiency as against incur-
sions of extraneous considerations. The guarantee contained in Article
16(1) is not, by itself, aimed at removal of backwardness due to
socio-economic and educational disparities produced by past history of social
oppression, exploitation, or degradation of a class of persons. In fact.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
352
SUPREME COURT CASES
efficiency tests, as parts of a mechanism to provide equality of opportunity,
are meant to bring out and measure actually existing inequalities in compe-
tence and capacity or potentialities SO as to provide a fair and rational basis
for justifiable discrimination between candidates. Whatever may be the
real causes of unequal performances which imposition of tests may dis-
close, the purpose of equality of opportunity by means of tests is only to
ensure a fair competition in securing posts and promotions in government
service, and not the removal of causes for unequal performances in competi-
tions for these posts or promotions. Thus, the purposes of Articles 46 and
335, which are really extraneous to the objects of Article 16(1), can only
be served in such a context by rules which secure preferential treatment
for the backward classes and detract from the plain meaning and obvious
implications of Articles 16(1) and 16(2). Such special treatment miti-
gates the rigour of a strict application of the principle contained in Article
16(1). It constitutes a departure from the principle of absolute equality
of opportunity in the application of uniform tests of competence. Article
6(4) was designed to reconcile the conflicting pulls of Article 16(1),
representing the dynamics of justice, conceived of as equality in condi-
tions under which candidates actually compete for posts in government
service, and of Articles 46 and 335, embodying the duties of the State to
promote the interests of the economically, educationally, and socially
backward so as to release them from the clutches of social injustice. These
encroachments on the field of Article 6(1) can only be permitted to
the extent they are warranted by Article 16(4). To read broader con-
cepts of social justice and equality into Article 16(1) itself may stultify
this provision itself and make Article 16(4) otiose.
96. Members of a backward class could be said to be discriminated
against if severer tests were prescribed for them. But, this is not the posi-
tion in the case before us. All promotees, belonging to any class, caste,
or creed, are equally subjected to efficiency tests of the same type and
standard. The impugned rules do not dispense with these tests for any
class or group. Indeed, such tests could not be dispensed with for employees
from scheduled castes, even as a backward class, keeping in view the
provisions of Article 335 of the Constitution. All that happens here is
that the backward class of employees is given a longer period of time to
pass the efficiency tests and prove their merit as determined by such
tests. It has been, therefore, argued that, in this respect, there is sub-
stantial equality. In other words, the argument is that if Article 6(1)
could be interpreted a little less rigidly and more liberally the discrimina-
tion involved here will not fall outside it. Even if this was a tenable
view, I would, for all the reasons given here, prefer to find the justifica-
tion, if this is possible, in the express provisions of Article 16(4) because
this is where such a justification should really lie.
97. In the case before us, it appears that the respondent petitioner's
grievance was that certain members of the scheduled castes, as a back-
ward class, had been given preference over him inasmuch as he was not
promoted despite having passed the efficiency test, but certain members
of the backward class were allowed to remain in the higher posts as tempo-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Beg, J.)
353
rary promotees, without having passed the efficiency tests, because they
had been given an extended period of time to satisfy the qualifying tests.
The petitioner thus claimed priority on the ground of merit judged solely
by taking and passing the efficiency test earlier. Apparently, he was not
even promoted, whereas the backward class employees said to have been
given preference over him were, presumably quite satisfactorily, discharg-
ing their duties in the higher grade in which they were already working
as temporary promotees. He also admits that the respondents, over whom
he claims preference for promotion, were his seniors in service who had
put in longer terms of total service before their conditional promotions
temporarily into the grade of the upper division clerks. It seems to me
that the taking and passing of a written test earlier than another employee
could not be the sole factor to consider in deciding upon a claim to superiority
or to preference on grounds of merit and efficiency for promotion as a
government servant.
98. The relevant Rule 13A shows that a person who is allowed
temporarily to work in the cadre of promotees, even without having passed
the special efficiency test, must, nevertheless, have satisfied the test of
being "otherwise qualified and suitable for appointment". Thus, an
employee from a scheduled caste has also to be "otherwise qualified" before
he is given an opportunity to work with others similarly promoted tempo-
rarily. The only difference is that, whereas the others get only two years
from the introduction of the new test within which to qualify according
to the newly introduced test, an employee of a scheduled caste or a sche-
duled tribe, similarly placed, gets two more years under the second proviso.
The impugned Rule 13AA, however, gives power to the Government to
specify a longer period of exemption if it considers this to be necessary.
The Governor passed the impugned order of January 13, 1972 under
Rule 13AA, extending the period still more. This order and the relevant
Rules 13A and 13AA are already set out above in the judgment of My
Lord the Chief Justice. I need not. therefore, reproduce them here.
99. What is the effect of the provisions of Rules 13A and 13AA
and the order of January 13, 1972 ? Is it not that a person who is in the
position of the respondent petitioner must wait for a place occupied by
OF reserved for a person from a scheduled caste or tribe, treated as back-
ward class, until it is shown that the employee from the backward class
has failed to take and pass the new test despite the extended period given
to him. The effect of the relaxation is that the backward class employee
continues in the post temporarily for a longer period before being either
confirmed or reverted. For this period, the post remains reserved for
him. If he does not satisfy the efficiency tests even within this extended
period he has to revert to the lower grade. If he does satisfy the special
efficiency test, in this extended period, he is confirmed in the class of
promotees into which he obtained entry because of a reservation. Among
meanings of the term "reserve". given in the Oxford Dictionary, are
To keep back or hold over to a later time or place for further treatment to
set apart for some purpose or with some end in view.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
354
SUPREME COURT CASES
In the Webster's New International Dictionary II Edn. (at p. 2118), the
following meanings are given
To keep back to retain or hold over to a future time or place not to deliver,
make over or disclose it at once.
The result of the abovementioned rules and orders does seem to me to
be a kind of reservation. If a reservation of posts under Article 6(4)
for employees of backward classes could include complete reservation of
higher posts to which they could be promoted, about which there could
be no doubt now, I fail to see why it cannot be partial or for a part of the
duration of service and hedged round with the condition that a temporary
promotion would operate as a complete and confirmed promotion only if
the temporary promotee satisfies some tests within a given time.
100. If the impugned rules and orders could be viewed as an imple-
mentation of a policy of qualified or partial or conditional reservation,
in the form indicated above, which could satisfy the requirements of sub-
stantial equality in keeping with Article 335, and meet the demands of
equity and justice looked at from the broader point of view of Article 46
of the Constitution, they could, in my view, also be justified under Article
16(4) of the Constitution.
101. It may be that the learned Advocate General for the appellant
State did not press the ground that the impugned rules and orders are
governed by Article 16(4) because of the tests required for complete
or absolute reservations dealt with in T. Devadasan V. Union of India"
and H. R. Balaji V. State of Mysore where it was held that more than
50 per cent reservations for a backward class would violate the require-
ment of reasonableness inasmuch as it would exclude too large a propor-
tion of others. Apart from the fact that the case before us is distinguish-
able as it is one of only a partial or temporary and conditional reserva-
tion, it is disputed here that the favoured class of employees really con-
stituted more than fifty per cent of the total number of government servants
of this class (i.e. clerks) if the overall position and picture, by taking
the number of employees in all government departments, is taken into
account. Furthermore, it is pointed out that a large number of tempo-
rary promotions of backward class government servants of this grade had
taken place in 1972 in the Registration Department, in which the peti-
tioning respondent worked, because promotions of backward class employees
had been held up in the past due to want of necessary provisions in rules
which could enable the Government to give effect to a policy of a suffi-
cient representation of backward class employees of this grade in govern-
ment service. The totality of facts of this case is distinguishable in their
effects from those in cases cited before us. No case was cited which could
fully cover the position we have before us now.
102. I am not satisfied that the only ground given by the High Court
for refusing to give the benefits of impugned rules and orders to the back-
ward class government servants, that they fall outside the purview of
35.
(1964) 4 SCR 680: AIR 1964 SC 179:
36.
1963 Supp 1 SCR 439: AIR 1963 SC
(1965) 2 LLJ 560.
649.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
355
Article 16(4). was substantiated. It was for the respondent-petitioner
to discharge the burden of establishing a constitutionally unwarranted
discrimination against him. His petition ought, in my opinion, to have
been dismissed on the ground that he had failed to discharge this initial
burden.
103. Accordingly. I would allow this appeal and set aside the judg-
ment and order of the High Court and leave the parties to bear their own
costs throughout.
KRISHNA IYER, J. (concurring)-A case which turns the focus on
the political philosophy pervading the Constitution and affects a large
human segment submerged below the line of ancient social penury,
naturally prompts me to write a separate opinion substantially concurring
with that of the learned Chief Justice. Silence is not always golden.
105. The highlight of this civil appeal against the High Court's
judgment striking down a State Subordinate Service rule, thereby adversely
affecting lower rung officials belonging to the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes. is the seminal issue of admissibility and criteria of classification
within the 'equal opportunity' rule in Article 16(1) and the lethal effect of
the built-in inhibition against caste-based classification contained in
Article 6(2) in relation to these frightfully backward categories. In
a large sense. the questions are res integra and important and cannot be
dismissed easily on the remark of Justice Holmes that the equal protection
clause is 'the last resort of constitutional arguments'87.
106. Law, including constitutional law, can no longer 'go it alone'
but must be illumined in the interpretative process by sociology and
allied fields of knowledge. Indeed, the term 'constitutional law' symbolizes
an intersection of law and politics, wherein issues of political power are
acted on by persons trained in the legal tradition, working in judicial
institutions, following the procedures of law. thinking as lawyers think.
88
So much so. a wider perspective is needed to resolve issues of constitu-
tional law. Maybe, one cannot agree with the view of an eminent jurist
and former Chief Justice of India
The judiciary as a whole is not interested in the policy underlying a legislative
measure. so
Moreover, the Indian Constitution is a great social document, almost
revolutionary in its aim of transforming al medieval, hierarchical society
into a modern. egalitarian democracy. Its provisions can be com-
prehended only by a spacious, social-science approach, not by pedantic,
traditional legalism. Here we are called upon to delimit the amplitude
and decode the implications of Article 16 (1) in the context of certain
special concessions relating to employment. under the Kerala State (the
37. 274 US 200, 208.
New Jersey, 19
38. Perspectives in Constitutional Law-Charles
39. Mr. Hidayatullah-'Democtacy in India
Black-Foundations of Modern Political
and the Judicial Process', 1965, p. 70.
Science Series, Prentice Hall Inc.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
356
SUPREME COURT CASES
appellant), given to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes (for short,
hereinafter referred to as harijans) whose social lot and economic indigence
are an Indian reality recognized by many articles of the Constitution.
An overview of the decided cases suggests the need to reinterpret the
dynamic import of the 'equality clauses' and, to stress again, beyond
reasonable doubt, that the paramount law, which is organic and regulates
our nation's growing life, must take in its sweep 'ethics, economics, politics
and
sociology'. Equally pertinent to the issue mooted before us is the
lament of Friedmann
It would be tragic if the law were so petrified as to be unable to respond to
the
unending challenge of evolutionary or revolutionary changes in society.40
The main assumptions which Friedmann makes are
:
First, the law is, in Holmes' phrase, not a 'brooding omnipotence in the sky',
but a flexible instrument of social order, dependent on the political values of the
society which it purports to regulate
41
107. Naturally surges the interrogation, what are the challenges
of changing values to which the guarantee of equality must respond and
how ? To pose the problem with particular reference to our case, does
the impugned rule violate the constitutional creed of equal opportunity
in Article 16 by resort to a suspect classification or revivify it by making
the less equal more equal by a legitimate differentiation ? Chief Justice
Marshall's classic statement in McCulloch V. Maryland4* followed by
Justice Brennan in Kazenbach V. Morgan's remains a beacon light
Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and
all
means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are
not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are
constitutional.
108. The background facts may be briefly set out in the elemental
form. The Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 (for short,
the Rules) regulate the conditions of service of the State employees of
the lower order. We are concerned with the prescription of qualifications
for promotion of the lower division clerks to upper division posts in
the Registration Department. Rule 13 insists on passing certain tests
for promotional eligibility. When tests were newly introduced, Rule 13A
gave two years from their introduction for passing them, to all
hands - harijan and non-harijan, but the former enjoyed an extra two-
year grace period. Rule 13B totally exempted pentagenarians from
passing these tests. Rule 13AA, which is impugned as violative of
Article 16(1) and (2) of the Constitution, was promulgated on
January 13, 1972 and it reads
13AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Government
may, by order, exempt for a specified period, any member or members, belonging
to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, and already in service, from passing
the tests referred to in Rule 13 or Rule 13A of the said Rules
40. Law in a Changing Society-W. Fried-
by S. K. Agarwala, N. M. Tripathi,
mann, p. 503.
Bombay (1970)]
41.
Ibid. p. xiii.
42.
17 US (4 Wheat) 316, 421 quoted in
[40 and 41 quoted in the Foreword by
384 US 650.
P. B. Gajendragadkar to Legal Educa-
43.
(1966) 384 US 641.
tion in India-Problems and Perspectives
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
357
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for pur-
poses of promotion of the executive staff below the rank of Sub-Inspectors belong-
ing to the Police Department.
A note appended to the rule gives the raison d'etre of the rule
It has been brought to the notice of Government that a large number of
Harijan employees in public service are facing immediate reversion from their
posts for want of test qualifications. So it is considered necessary to incorporate
an enabling provision in the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958
to grant by order temporary exemption to members already in service belonging
to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes from passing all tests for a specified
period. This notification is intended to achieve the above object.
109. A break-up of Rule 13AA of the Rules certainly gives power
to Government to extend the time to harijan officials of 'subordinate
services' for passing tests prescribed for occupying promotional posts.
But it does not for ever exempt these hands but only waive for a specified,
presumably, short term. Nor does it relax the minimal qualifications
held necessary for these posts from the point of view of basic adminis-
trative efficiency. The subsidiary need of passing certain new tests, for
which all employees get some period (from the time of their introduction)
is relaxed for a longer period in the case of harijan hands under Rule 13A
and still inore under Rule 13AA. We must expect that Government
will, while fixing the longer grace time for passing tests, have regard to
administrative efficiency. You can't throw to the winds considerations
of administrative capability and grind the wheels of Government to a halt
in the name of 'harijan welfare'. The administration runs for good
government, not to give jobs to harijans. We must accept the necessary
import of the rule as a limited concession to this weaker group and test
its vires on this basis.
110. One significant factor must be reinembered to guard against
exaggerating the bearing of these tests as a coefficient of efficiency.
Certainly, they were not so important as all that because Rule 13A -
not challenged all these years - gave two years' qualifying period for
all and four years for harijans. Also, those above 50 years of age did
not have to pass the tests at all (Rule 13B). The nature of the tests
vis-a-vis the nature of work of upper division clerks, and their indis-
pensability for official capability have not been brought but in the writ
petition and, absent such serious suggestions, we have to assume that
Government (the author of Rule 13) would have granted varying periods
of exemption only because of their desirability, not their precedent necessity.
To expatiate a little more, it is not unusual to fix basic qualifications for
eligibility to a post. Their possession is a must, having regard to the
functions of the office. A second and secondary category of qualifications
is insisted on as useful to discharge the duties of the post, e.g., accounts
test, or civil and criminal judicial tests and the like, depending on the
department where he is to work. After all, here he is a pen-pushing
clerk, not a magistrate, accounts officer, forest officer, sub-registrar, space
scientists or top administrator or one on whose initiative the wheels
of a department speed up or slow down. Even so, it makes his clerical
work more understanding and efficient. These tests are, therefore,
demanded for better performance. not basic proficiency, but relaxation
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
358
SUPREME COURT CASES
is also allowed in suitable class of cases, their absence not being fatal
to efficiency. A third class of virtues which will make the employee
ultra efficient, but is not regarded as cardinal, is listed as entitled to
preference. A doctorate in business management, or LL.M. where the
basic degree is the essential requisite, social service or leadership training,
sports distinction and a host of other extra attainments which will improve
the aptitude and equipment of the officer in his speciality but are, in
no sense, necessary - these are welcome additives, are good and may
even get the employee a salary raise but are not insisted on for initial
appointment to the post either as a direct recruit or as a promotee. This
trichotomy of qualifications makes pragmatic meaning to any employer
and is within anyone's ken if he turns over the advertisements in news-
papers. To relax on basic qualifications is to compromise with minimum
administrative efficiency to relent, for a time, on additional test qualifica-
tions is to take a calculated but controlled risk, assured of a basic standard
of performance to encourage the possession of higher excellence is to
upgrade the efficiency status of the public servant and, eventually, of the
department. This is the sense and essence of the situation arising in
the present case, viewed from the angle of administrative requirements
or fair employment criteria.
111. Back now to the rule of exemption and its vires. Frankly,
here the respondents who have passed the 'tests' are stalled in their pro-
motion because of the new rule of harijan exemption. As individuals,
their rights vis-a-vis their harijan brethren are regarded unequally. In a
strictly competitive context or narrowly performance-oriented standard.
Rule 13AA discriminates between a harijan and a non-harijan. The
question is whether a perceptive sensitivity sees on 'equal opportunity' a
critical distinction between distribution according to 'merit' of individuals
and distribution according to 'need' of depressed groups, subject to broad
efficiency criteria. We enter here 'a conceptual disaster area'.
112. Factual contexts dictate State action. The differential impact
of
a law on a class will influence judicial evaluation of the reasonableness
of a classification and its relation to a purpose which is permissible. Courts,
however, adopt a policy of restrained review where the situation is complex
and is intertwined with social, historical and other substantially human
factors. Judicial deference - not abdication - is best expressed by
Justice Holmes in his dissent in Louisville Gas & Elec. Co. V. Coleman
But when it is seen that a line or a point there must be, and that there is
no mathematical and logical way of fixing it precisely, the decision of the Legis-
lature must be accepted unless we can say that it is very wide of any reasonable
mark.
In Buck V. Bell45 Holmes, J. observed :
The law does all that is needed when it does all that it can, indicates a
policy, applies it to all within the lines, and seeks to bring within the lines all
similarly situated so far and so fast as its means allow.
Given a legitimate overriding purpose for selectivity the court passes,
leaving it to the law-maker the intricate manner of implementation. Faced
44. (1928) 277 US 32.
45. (1927) 274.US 200, 208.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
359
with a suspect classification based on a quasi-caste differentia and apparently
injuring administrative quality, the court turns activist. Conceptual
equilibrium between these two lines is the correct guideline.
113. The operational technique may vary with time and circum-
stance but the goal and ambit must be constitutionally sanctioned. In
the instant case, the State has taken a certain step to advance the economic
interests of harijans. What - if we break down the rule into its com-
ponents - have Government done ? Have they transgressed the rights
under Article 16(1) and (2) ? If they have, the Court, as consti-
tutional invigilator interdicts, after making permissible presumptions in
favour of State actions and importing the liberal spirit of effective equality
into the mandate of Articles 14 and 16. Otherwise, the hammer does
not fall.
114. Why was this second 'holiday' under Rule 13AA to harijans
granted The hapless circumstance which compelled this course was,
according to the State, the need to help this class, acting within the
constitutional bounds, to avert mass reversion to lower posts, without
abandoning insistence on passing 'tests'. The note to Rule 13AA is
explanatory. The State viewed this disturbing situation with concern,
and, having regard to their backward condition, made Rule 13AA which
conferred power on Government to grant further spells of grace time to
get through these tests. Simultaneously, a period within which two
opportunities for passing tests would be available was afforded by a G.O.
issued under Rule 13AA. The consequence was their immediate reversion
was averted and the promotion prospects of the non-harijan writ petitioners,
who were test-qualified, stood postponed. This grievance of theirs drove
them to the High Court where the rule of teinporary exemption from
passing tests for promotional eligibility in favour of harijans was held
ultra vires Articles 16(1) and 335.
115. 1 shall focus on the basics because my learned brethren have
dilated on the necessary details of facts and, more importantly, because
confusion on fundamentals deflects the construction of constitutional
clauses - all this against the admitted backdrop of die-hard harijan
bondage, sometimes subtle, sometimes gross. The learned Advocate
General fairly conceded - and I think rightly - that Rule 13AA was
not a 'reservation' under Article 16(4) and yet the favoured treatment
to harijan clerks was valid, being based on reasonable classification under
a constitutionally recognised differentia which had a relation to the legitimate
end of promoting the advancement of this handicapped class, subject to
administrative efficiency. The learned Solicitor General, appearing on
notice by the Court to the Attorney General, stated the law on a broader
basis and urged that the grouping of classes of socially and educationally
downtrodden people, especially the scheduled castes and tribes, was good
and did not offend Article 16(1) or (2). Shri R. K. Garg, for some
of the respondents and for the interveners, spread out the social canvas,
focussed on the age-old suppression and consequential utter backwardness
of those societal brackets and the State's obligation to wipe out the
centuries of deprivation by making a concerted effort to bring them up
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
360
SUPREME COURT CASES
to the same level as the other classes so that, after this levelling up, the
whole nation could march forward on terms of democratic equality. Dis-
crimination on the ground of caste did not arise, according to Counsel,
scheduled castes and tribes being not a caste but an amalgam of the
socially lowly and the lost, including groups with a caste saviour.
Shri
Krishnamoorthy Iyer, for the respondents, naturally disputed all
these
propositions. The cornerstone of his case was that in the field of State
employment caste-wise compassion to harijans flew in the face of Article
16(1) and (2) and separate but special treatment was permissible only
under Article (4) which was expressly designed as benignant discri-
mination devoted to lifting backward classes to the level of the rest through
the constitutional technology of 'reservation'. To travel beyond this
special clause and evolve a general doctrine of backward classification was
to overpower the basic concept of equality and to bring in, by a specious
device, a backdoor casteism subverting the scheme of a casteless society
set as one of the goals of our constitutional order. Efficiency of administra-
tion, an important desideratum of public service, would also suffer.
116. I will examine these contentions in depth and detail later in
this judgment.
117. Let us proceed to assess the constitutional merit of the State's
ex facie 'unequal' service rule favouring in-service harijan employees in
a realist socio-legal perspective. But before that, some memorable facts
must be stated. The Father of the Nation adopted, as his fighting faith,
the uplift of the bhangi and his assimilation, on equal footing, into Hindu
society, and the Constitution, whose principal architect was himself a
militant mahar, made social justice a founding faith and built into it
humanist provisions to lift the level of the lowly scheduled castes and
tribes to make democracy viable and equal for all. Studies in social
anthropology tell us how cultural and material suppression has, over the
ages, crippled their personality, and current demography says that nearly
every fifth Indian is a harijan and his social milieu is steeped in squalour.
The conscience of the Constitution found adequate expression on this
theme, in Dr. Ambedkar's words of caution and premonition in the
Constituent Assembly
We must begin by acknowledging first that there is complete absence of
two things in Indian society. One of these is equality. On the social plane,
we have in India a society based on privilege of graded inequality which means
elevation for some and degradation of others. On the economic plane, we have
a society in which there are some who have immense wealth as against the many
who are living in abject poverty. On the 26th of January, 1950, we are going to
enter into a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality and in social
and economic life we will have inequality
We must remove this contra-
diction at the earliest possible moment, or else those who suffer from inequality
will blow up the structure of political democracy which this Assembly has so
laboriously built up. (Speeches, Vol. II, pp. 184-187).
Judges may differ in constitutional construction but, without peril of
distorting the substance cannot discard the activism of the equal justice
concept in the setting of deep concern for the weaker sections of the com-
munity. What I endeavour to emphasize, as I will elaborate later, is
that equal justice is an aspect of social justice, the salvation of the very
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
361
weak and downtrodden, and the methodology for levelling them up to a
real, not formal, equality, being the accent.
118. The Kerala State. the appellant, has statistically shown the
yawning gap between what number of posts in government service harijans
are entitled to, population-ratio wise, and the actual number of posts
occupied by them. Their 'official' fate is no less ominous elsewhere in
India and would have been poorer on the competitive market method of
selection unaided by 'reservation'. The case for social equality and
economic balance, in terms of employment under the State, cries for more
energised administrative effort and a Government that fails to repair this
depressed lot, fools the public on harijan welfare. Indeed, an aware mass
of humanity, denied justice for generations, will not take it lying down
too long but may explode into Dalit Panthers, as did the Black. Panthers
in another country, - a theme on which Sri Gajendragadkar, a former
Chief Justice of India. has laid disturbing stress in two memorial lectures
delivered recently. Jurists must listen to real life and, theory apart, must
be alert enough to read the writing on the wall ! Where the rule of law
bars the doors of collective justice. the crushed class will seek hope in
the streets ! The architects of our Constitution were not unfamiliar with
direct action where basic justice was long withheld and conceived of
'equal opportunity' as inclusive of equalising opportunity. Only a clinical
study of organic law will yield correct diagnostic results.
119. Social engineering - which is law in action - must adopt
new strategies to liquidate encrusted group injustices or surrender society
to traumatic tensions. Equilibrium, in human terms, emerges from release
of the handicapped and the primitive from persistent social disadvantage.
by determined, creative and canny legal manoeuvres of the State, not by
hortative declaration of arid equality. 'To discriminate positively in
favour of the weak may sometimes be promotion of genuine equality before
the law' as Anthony Lester argued in his talk in the B. B. C. in 1970
in the series 'What is wrong with the law'n 'One law for the Lion
and Ox is oppression'. Or, indeed. as was said of another age by
Anatole France
The law in its majestic equality forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep
under bridges, to beg in the streets and to steal bread. ¹8
Re-distributive justice to harijan humanity insists on effective reforms.
designed to produce equal partnership of the erstwhile 'lowliest and the
lost', by State action, informed by short-run and long-run sociologically
potent perspective planning and implementation. An uneven socio-
economic landscape hardly gives the joy of equal opportunity and develop-
ment or draw forth their best from manpower resources now wallowing
in the low visibility areas of discontented life.
120. The domination of a class generates, after a long night of
16. (a) Govind Ballabh Pant Memorial
47. Published in book -Edited
Lecture.
Micheel Zander--BBC, 1970-quoted
(b) Indian Democracy-Its Major Impe-
in Mod Law Rev , \ of 33, Sept. 1970,
ratives (1975)-Mohan Kumaramanga-
pp. 579, 580.
lam Memorial Leeture, p 102.
48. Ibid., p 580.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
362
SUPREME COURT CASES
sleep or stupor of the dominated, an angry awakening and protestant
resistance and this conflict between thesis, i.e. the status quo, and anti-
thesis, i.e., the hunger for happy equality, propels new forces of synthesis,
i.e., an equitable constitutional order or just society. Our founding
fathers, possessed of spiritual insight and influenced by the materialist inter-
pretation of history, forestalled such social pressures and pre-empted such
economic upsurges and gave us a trinity of commitments - justice
social, economic and political. The 'equality articles' are part of this
scheme. My proposition is, given two alternative understandings of the
relevant sub-articles [Article 16(1) and (2)], the Court must so interpret
the language as to remove that ugly 'inferiority' complex which has done
genetic damage to Indian polity and thereby suppress the malady and
advance the remedy. informed by sociology and social anthropology.
My touchstone is that functional democracy postulates participation by all
sections of the people and fair representation in administration is an index
of such participation.
121. Justice Brennen, in a somewhat different social milieu, uttered
words which may not be lost on us*9 :
Lincoln said this Nation was 'conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposi-
tion that all men are created equal'. The Founders' dream of a society where
all men are free and equal has not been easy to realize. The degree of liberty
and equality that exists today has been the product of unceasing struggle and
sacrifice. Much remains to be done - so much that the very institutions of our
society have come under challenge. Hence, today, as in Lincoln's time, a man
may ask 'whether (this) nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can
long endure'. It cannot endure if the Nation falls short on the guarantees of
liberty, justice, and equality embodied in our founding documents. But it also
cannot endure if our precious heritage of ordered liberty be allowed to be ripped
apart amid the sound and fury of our time. It cannot endure if in individual cases
the claims of social peace and order on the one side and of personal liberty on
the other cannot be mutually resolved in the forum designated by the Constitu-
tion. If that resolution cannot be reached by judicial trial in a court of law,
it will be reached elsewhere and by other means, and there will be grave danger
that liberty, equality, and the order essential to both will be lost.
122. The note to Rule 13AA explains the immediate motivation
behind the rule but the social backdrop set out by me helps us appreciate
its constitutionality. However, we are under a Constitution and mere
social anthropology cannot override the real words used in the Constitu-
tion. For, judges may read, not reconstruct. Plainly, harijans enjoy a
temporary advantage over their non-harijan brethren by virtue of Rule
13AA and this, it is plausibly urged by Counsel for the contestants, is
violative of the merciless mandate of equality 'enshrined' dually in
Article 16(1) and (2). It discriminates without constitutional justifica-
tion and imports the caste differentia in the face of a contrary provision.
The learned Advocate General seeks to meet it more by a legal realist's
approach and, in a sense, by resort to functional jurisprudence. What is
the constitutional force of equality ? What social philosophy animates
it ? What luminous connotation does the pregnant, though terse, phrase
'equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of employment' bear ?
49. Mi. Justice Brenuan, concurring with
Black in Illinois v. Allen, (1970) 197 US
the majority opinion of Mr. Justice
337.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna lyer, J.)
363
What excesses of discrimination are banned and what equalitarian implica-
tions invite administrative exploration ? Finally. what light do we derive
from precedents of this Court on these facets of Article 16? I will examine
these contentious issues presently.
123. The Solicitor General, in his brief but able submissions, has
offered a harmonious and value-based construction of the constitutional
code guaranteeing equality (Articles 14 to 16). Sri Garg has swung to
extreme positions, some of which spill over beyond the specific issue arising
in this case. Even so, I agree that a quickened social vision is needed to
see in the Constitution what a myopic glimpse may not reveal.
124. A word of sociological caution. In the light of experience,
here and elsewhere, the danger of 'reservation', it seems to me, is three-
fold. Its benefits, by and large. are snatched away by the top creamy
layer of the 'backward' caste or class, thus keeping the weakest among
the weak always weak and leaving the fortunate layers to consume the
whole cake. Secondly, this claim is overplayed extravagantly in democracy
by large and vocal groups whose burden of backwardness has been
substantially lightened by the march of time and measures of better educa-
tion and more opportunities of employment, but wish to wear the 'weaker
section' label as a means to score over their near-equals formally cate-
gorised as the upper brackets. Lastly, a lasting solution to the problem
comes only from improvement of social environment, added educational
facilities and cross-fertilisation of castes by inter-caste and inter-class
marriages sponsored as a massive State programme, and this solution is
calculatedly hidden from view by the higher 'backward' groups with a
vested interest in the plums of backwardism. But social science research,
not judicial impressionism, will alone tell the whole truth and a constant
process of objective re-evaluation of progress registered by the 'under-
dog' categories is essential lest a once deserving 'reservation' should be
degraded into 'reverse discrimination'. Innovations in administrative
strategy to help the really untouched. most backward classes also emerge
from such socio-legal studies and audit exercises, if dispassionately made.
In fact, research conducted by the A. N. Sinha Institute of Social Studies,
Patna, has revealed a dual society among harijans, a tiny elite gobbling
up the benefits and the darker layers sleeping distances away from the
special concessions. For them. Articles 46 and 335 remain a 'noble
romance'50, the bonanza going to the 'higher' harijans. I mention this in
the present case because lower division clerks are likely to be drawn from
the lowest levels of harijan humanity and promotion prospects being
accelerated by withdrawing, for a time, `test' qualifications for this category
may perhaps delve deeper. An equalitarian breakthrough in a hierarchical
structure has to use many weapons and Rule 13AA perhaps is one.
125. The core conclusion I seek to emphasize is that every step
needed to achieve in action actual, equal, partnership for the harijans.
alone amounts to social justice - not enshrinement of great rights in
50. As Huxley called it in "Administrative Nihilism" (Methods and Results, Vol. 4 of Collected
Essays).
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
364
SUPREME COURT CASES
Part III and good goals in Part IV. Otherwise, the solemn undertakings
in Articles 14 to 16 read with Articles 46 and 335 may be reduced to
a 'teasing illusion or promise of unreality'. A clear vision of the true
intendment of these provisions demands a deep understanding of the Indian
spiritual-secular idea that divinity dwells in all and that ancient environ-
mental pollution and social placement, which the State must extirpate,
account for the current socio-economic backwardness of the blacked-out
human areas described euphemistically as scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes. The roots of our constitutional ideas - at least some of them -
can be traced to our arcient culture. The noble Upanishadic
behest of collective acquisition of cultural strength ( Ad
is involved in and must evolve out of 'equality`, if we are true to the
subtle substance of our finer heritage.
126. Let me now turn to the essential controversy. Is Rule 13AA
valid as protective discrimination to the harijans ? The Advocate General
drew our attention to the articles of the Constitution calculated to over-
come the iniquitous alienation of harijans from the three branches of
Government. The Preamble to the Constitution silhouettes a 'justice-
oriented` community. The Directive Principles of State Policy, funda-
mental in the governance of the country, enjoin on the State the promotion
with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections
of the people, and, in particular, of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes,
and protect them from social injustice.
To neglect this obligation is to play truant with Article 46. Undoubtedly,
economic interests of a group - as also social justice to it - are tied
up with its place in the services under the State. Our history, unlike
that of some other countries, has found a zealous pursuit of government
jobs as a mark of share in State power and economic position. More-
over, the biggest - and expanding, with considerable State undertakings, -
employer is Government, Central and State, SO much SO appointments in
the public services matter increasingly in the prosperity of backward segments.
The scheduled castes and scheduled tribes have earned special mention in
Article 46 and other `weaker sections in this context, means not every
backward class' but those dismally depressed categories comparable
economically and educationally to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
To widen the vent is to vitiate the equal treatment which belongs to
all citizens, many of whom are below the poverty line. Realism reveals
that politically powerful castes may try to break into equality, using the
masterkey of backwardness but. leaving aside Article 16(4), the ramparts
of Article (1) and (2) will resist such oblique infiltration.
127. Even so, does Article 46 at all authorise the breach of uniform
equality of opportunity guaranteed by Article 16(1) ? Can a favoured
treatment to harijans. by way of temporary concessions in passing tests, be
founded on Article 46 as a basis for rational classification ? Is such a
benign discrimination a caste-oriented legislation contravening Article 16(2) ?
Before 1 consider these vital questions, I may as well glance at some of
the important pro-harijan provisions in the Constitution.
128
The Constitution itself makes a super-classification between
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
365
harijans and others, grounded on the fundamental disparity in our society
and the imperative social urgency of raising the former's sunken status.
Apart from reservation of seats in the Legislatures for harijans, which is
a deliberate departure, taking note of their utter backwardness (Articles 330
and 332), a special officer to investigate and report to the President upon
the working of special constitutional safeguards made to protect harijans
has to be appointed under Article 338. Gross inadequacy of representa-
tion in public services is obviously one subject for investigation and report.
More importantly, Article 335, which Shri Garg relied on to hammer
home his point, reads :
335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts.-
The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall
be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of
administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
This provision directs pointedly to (a) the claims of - not compassion
towards - harijans to be given special consideration in the making of
appointments to public services ; and (b) lest this extra-attention should
run riot and ruin administrative efficiency, a caution is uttered that main-
tenance of efficiency in administration should not suffer mayhem.
129. Now we may deduce from these and other like articles, unaided
by authority, certain clear conclusions of great relevance to the present
case (1) The Constitution itself demarcates harijans from others.
(2) This is based on the stark backwardness of this bottom layer of the
community. (3) The differentiation has been made to cover specifically
the area of appointments to posts under the State. (4) The twin objects,
blended into one, are the claims of harijans to be considered in such
posts and the maintenance of administrative efficiency. (5) The State
has been obligated to promote the economic interests of harijans and like
backward classes, Articles 46 and 335 being a testament and Articles 14
to 16 being the tool-kit, if one may put it that way. To blink at this
panchsheel is to be unjust to the Constitution.
130. Shri Krishnamoorthy Iyer, for the contesting respondents,
argued that harijans may have been grouped separately for protective care
by the Constitution but its expression, in the matter of employment under
the State, has to be subject to the fundamental right of every citizen like
his client to the enjoyment of equal opportunity and non-discrimination
on the score of caste. His proposition is that, in the name of harijan
welfare, dilution of Article 16(1) and (2) is impermissible under the
scheme of Part III which is paramount and contains enforceable guaranteed
rights. Secondly, 'scheduled castes' are castes all the same and pre-
ferment shown to them is plainly opposed to Article 16(2). Thirdly, even
Article 335 insists on administrative tone, SO essential to good government,
and prolonged exemption from tests prescribed by the impugned rule, from
the point of view of official efficiency. undermines this pertinent criterion.
This Court has all along struck down measures of 'reserved' representation
for backward classes in educational institutions and public services when
a high proportion has been so earmarked, escalating the risk of making
the administration itself backward. Finally, the Constitution has set
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
366
SUPREME COURT CASES
apart an exclusive exception to the equal opportunity rule in Article 16(4),
so much so Articles 46 and 335 must be projected through that provision
only and cannot spill over into Article 16 (1) and (2). Fundamental rights
are fundamental and cannot be cut back upon or insidiously eroded by
the classificatory technique.
131. Both the presentations have a flawless look, the controlling
distinction being between two visions of the mood and message of the
supreme law we call the Constitution, the dynamic and the static, the
sociological and the formal. It is unexceptional to say that any insightful
construction must opt for the former methodology and also seek a good
fellowship among the various provisions, conventionally called 'harmonious
construction'. In an elevating and organic instrument, antagonisms can-
not exist. If that be the lodestar to help interpret the suprema lex we
have to discover a note of unison in Article 16(1), (2) and (4) as well
as Articles 46 and 335, the background tune being one of profound effort
first to equalise and then to march together without class-creed distinc-
tion. The social engineering knowhow of our Constitution, viz., levelling
up the groups buried under the debris by a generous consideration and
thereafter enforcing strict equality among all - this two-tier process
operating symbiotically, is the life of the law and the key to the "equal
opportunity mechanism. Equally emphatic is the grave concern shown
for a casteless and classless society - not in a magic instant but through
a careful striving - and for the standards of performance of the adminis-
tration. noted from Curzon's days for drowsiness.
132. Efficiency meahs, in terms of good government, not marks
in examinations only, but responsible and responsive service to the people.
A chaotic genius is a grave danger in public administration. The inputs
of efficiency include a sense of belonging and of accountability which
springs in the bosom of the bureaucracy (not pejoratively used) if its
composition takes in also the weaker segments of 'we, the people of India'.
No other understanding can reconcile the claim of the radical present and
the hangover of the unjust past.
133. Now to the precedential guidelines. I am alive to the correctly
reluctant attitude of this Court to depart from precedent lest an unstable
and uncertain situation be created. Stare decisis et non quiets movers.
Khanna, J. has rightly einphasized this great need but also quoted Brandeis
As observed by Brandeis, 'stare decisis' is always a desideratum, even in these
constitutional cases. But in them, it is never a command'.
As observed by Cardozo, J. :
But 1 am ready to concede that the rule of adherence to precedent,
though it ought not to be abandoned, ought to be in some degree relaxed.
I think that when a rule, after it has been duly tested by experience, has
been found to be inconsistent with the sense of justice or with the social
51
Per Khanna, J. in Maganial Chhaganial V. Municipal Corporation, (1975) I SCR 26, 28:
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
367
welfare, there should be less hesitation in frank avowal and full abandon-
ment. We have had to do this sometimes in the field of constitutional law.
Anyway, here no case is being overruled because no case has said sche-
duled castes and tribes are a caste nor that advancement of sunken sec-
tions of society consistently with administrative efficiency cannot be a
rational object linked with outrageous backwardness of a class as the
intelligible differentia within an official cadre.
134. Kesavananda Bharati has clinched the issue of primacy as
between Part III and Part IV of the Constitution. The unanimous ruling
there is that the Court must wisely read the collective directive princi-
ples of Part IV into the individual fundamental rights of Part III, neither
part being superior to the other Since the days of Dorairajan58 judicial
opinion has hesitatingly tilted in favour of Part III but in Kesavananda
Bharati the supplementary theory. treating both parts as fundamental,
gained supremacy. Khanna, J. spoke with a profound sense of depth (if
The Directive Principles embody a commitment which was imposed by the
Constitution-makers on the State to bring about economic and social regeneration
of the teeming millions who are steeped in poverty, ignorance and social back-
wardness. They incorporate a pledge to the coming generations of what the State
would strive to usher in.
There should be no reluctance to abridge or regulate the fundamental rights
to property if it was felt necessary to do so for changing the economic structure
and attaining the objective contained in the Directive Principles (at p. 1880)
Chandrachud, J. has (again, I quote with deference) set the judicial sights
What is fundamental in the governance of the country cannot surely be less
significant than what is fundamental in the life of an individual. The freedoms of
a few have to be abridged in order to ensure the freedom of all. If State fails to
create conditions in which the fundamental freedom could be enjoyed by all,
the freedom of the few will be at the mercy of the many and then all freedoms
will vanish. In order, therefore, to preserve their freedom, the privileged few
must part with a portion of it.
The upshot, after Bharati, is that Article 46 has to be given emphatic
expression while interpreting Article 16(1) and (2). Indeed, Article 335
is more specific and cannot be brushed aside or truncated in the opera-
tional ambit vis-a-vis Article (1) and (2) without hubristic aberration.
135. We may clear the clog of Article 16(2) as it stems from
a
confusion about caste in the terminology of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes. This latter expression has been defined in Articles 341 and 342.
A bare reading brings out the quintessential concept that they (sic there) are
no castes in the Hindu fold but an amalgam of castes, races, groups,
tribes, communities or parts thereof found on investigation to be the lowliest
and in need of massive State aid and notified as such by the President. To
confuse this backwardmost social composition with castes is to commit a
1
53. State of Madras V. Champakam Dorairajan,
1951 SCR 525: AIR 1951 SC 226.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
368
SUPREME COURT CASES
constitutional error, misled by a compendious appellation. So that, to
protect harijans is not to prejudice any caste but to promote citizen soli-
darity. Article 16(2) is out of the way and to extend protective discri-
mination to this mixed bag of tribes, races, groups, communities and non-
castes outside the four-fold Hindu division is not to compromise with the
acceleration of castelessness enshrined in the sub-article. The discern-
ing sense of the Indian Corpus Juris has generally regarded scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes, not as caste but as a large backward group deserv-
ing of societal compassion. The following provisions of the Income-tax
Act. 1961 are illustrative of this principle
13. Section 11 not to apply in certain cases. (1) Nothing contained in
Section 11 or Section 12 shall operate so as to exclude from the total income of
the previous year of the person in receipt thereof-
(a) *
(b) in the case of a trust for charitable purposes or a charitable institu-
tion created or established after the commencement of this Act, any income
thereof if the trust or institution is created or established for the benefit of
any particular religious community or caste;
*
Explanation 2. A trust or institution created or established for the benefit
of Scheduled Castes, backward classes, Scheduled Tribes or women and
children shall not be deemed to be a trust or institution created or estab-
lished for the benefit of a religious community or caste within the meaning
of clause (b) of sub-section (1).
136. The next hurdle in the appellant's path relates to Article 16(4).
To my mind, this sub-article serves not as an exception but as an emphatic
statement, one mode of reconciling the claims of backward people
and the opportunity for free competition the forward sections are ordi-
narily entitled to. In the language of Subba Rao, J. (as he then was),
in Devadasan*4:
The expression 'nothing in this article' is a legislative device to express its
intention in a most emphatic way that the power conferred thereunder is not limited
in any way by the main provision but falls outside it. It has not really carved out
an exception, but has preserved a power untrammelled by the other provisions of
the article.
True, it may be loosely said that Article 16 (4) is an exception but, closely
examined, it is an illustration of constitutionally sanctified classification.
Public services have been a fascination for Indians even in British days,
being a symbol of State power and SO a special article has been devoted
to it. Article 16(4) need not be a saving clause but put in due to the
over-anxiety of the draftsman to make matters clear beyond possibility
of doubt (see. for instance. C. I. T. V. Shaw Wallace & Co.55).
137. 'Reservation' based on classification of backward and forward
classes, without detriment to administrative standards (as this Court has
underscored) is but an application of the principle of equality within
a class and grouping based on a rational differentia, the object being
advancement of backward classes consistently with efficiency. Article
16(1) and (4) are concordant. This Court has viewed Article 6(4)
54
(1964) 4 SCR 680, 700 AIR 1964 SC 55. 59 IA 206 : AIR 1932 PC 138.
179: (1965) 2 LLJ 560.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
369
as an exception to Article 16(1). Does classification based on desparate
backwardness render Article 16(4) redundant ? No. Reservation confers
pro tanto monopoly, but classification grants under Article 16(1) ordi-
narily a lesser order of advantage. The former is more rigid, the latter
more flexible, although they may overlap sometimes. Article 16(4) covers
all backward classes but to earn the benefit of grouping under Article
16 (1) based on Articles 46 and 335 as I have explained, the twin consi-
derations of terrible backwardness of the type harijans endure and mainte-
nance of administrative efficiency must be satisfied.
138. The surviving, but substantial, controversy centres round the
'equal opportunity' rule and its transgression, if any, by Rule 13AA. The
learned Advocate General fairly and rightly agreed that the impugned
rule falls outside Article 16(4). Therefore; he sought to salvage the
temporary exemption from passing tests by urging that a constitutionally
valid classification was all that had been done and cited Indian rulings
and American juridical writings in support of his stand.
139. It is platitudinous constitutional law that Articles 14 to 16
are a common code of guaranteed equality, the first laying down the
broad doctrine, the other two applying it to sensitive areas historically
important and politically polemical in a climate of communalism and
jobbery.
140. We need not tarry to consider whether Article 16 applies to
appointments on promotion. It does. Nor need we worry about adminis-
trative calamities if test qualifications are not acquired for a time by some
hands. For one thing, these tests are not SO telling on efficiency as
explained earlier by me. And, after all, we are dealing with clerical posts
in the Registration Department where alert quill-driving and a smatter-
ing of special knowledge will make for smoother turnout of duties. And
the Government is only postponing, not foregoing, test qualification. As
for the bearing of 'tests' on basic efficiency, everything depends on the
circumstances of a case and the post.
141. The basic question thus is one of social dynamics implied in
Article 16(1). Let us go to the fundamentals and ignore the frills. In
a spacious sense, 'equal opportunity' for members of a hierarchical society
makes sense only if a strategy by which the underprivileged have environ-
mental facilities for developing their full human potential. This consumma-
tion is accomplished only when the utterly depressed groups can claim a
fair share in public life and economic activity, including employment under
the State, or when a classless and castelss society blossoms as a result of
positive State action. To help the lagging social segments, by special
care, is a step towards and not against a larger and stabler equality.
I
In this unequal world the proposition that all men are equal has working
limitations, since absolute equality leads to Procrustean cruelty or sanctions indolent
inefficiency. Necessarily, therefore, an imaginative and constructive modus vivendi
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
370
SUPREME COURT CASES
between commonness and excellence must be forged to make the equality clauses
viable. This pragmatism produced the judicial gloss of 'classification' and 'diffe™
entia', with the by-products of equality among equals and dissimilar things having
to be treated differently. The social meaning of Articles 14 to 16 is neither dull
uniformity nor spacious 'talentism'. It is a process of producing quality out of
larger areas of equality extending better facilities to the latent capabilities of the
lowly. It is not a methodology of substitution of pervasive and solvenly medio-
crity for activist and intelligent - but not snobbish and uncommitted - cadres.
However, if the State uses classification casuistically for salavaging status and elitism,
the point of no return/ is reached for Articles 14 to 16 and the Court's jurisdiction
awakens to deaden such manoeuvres. The soul of Article 16 is the promotion of
the common man's capabilities, overpowering environmental adversities and open-
ing up full opportunities to develop in official life without succumbing to the sophistic
argument of the elite that talent is the privilege of the few and they must rule,
wriggling out of the democratic imperative of Articles 14 and 16 by the theory
of classified equality which at its worst degenerates into class domination.
This observation was approved later by this Court in Mohd. Shujat Ali
V. Union of India57
142. Sri Krishnamoorthy Iyer pressed before us, backed by a catena
of cases, that this Court has frowned upon a classification for promotion
from within a homogeneous group except when it is based on qualifica-
tion for higher functional efficiency, and to inject a new ground for group-
ing within the class for promotion was constitutional anathema. I think
not. The fact that better educational prescriptions for promotion posts
have been upheld by this Court does not rule out other reasonable diffe-
rentia, having a nexus with the object. The true test is, what is the object
of the classification and is it permissible ? Further, is the differentia sound
and substantial and clearly related to the approved object ? I agree this
is virgin ground, but does not, for that reason alone, violate, equality.
My conclusion is that the genius of Articles 14 to 16 consists not in literal
equality but in progressive elimination of pronounced inequality. Indeed,
to treat sharply dissimilar persons equally is subtle injustice. Equal oppor-
tunity is a hope, not a menace.
143. If Article 14 admits of reasonable classification, so does Article
16(1) and this Court has held so. In the present case, the economic
advancement and promotion of the claims of the grossly underrepresented
and pathetically neglected classes, otherwise described as scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes. consistently with the maintenance of administrative
efficiency, is the object, constitutionally sanctioned by Articles 46 and
335 and reasonably accommodated in Article 16(1). The differentia, so
loudly obtrusive, is the dismal social milieu of hariians. Certainly this
has a rational relation to the object set out above. I must repeat the note of
caution earlier struck. Not all caste backwardness is recognised in this
formula. To do so is subversive of both Article 16(1) and (2). The
social disparity must be so grim and substantial as to serve as a founda-
tion for benign discrimination If we search for such a class. we cannot
find any large segment other than the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes. Any other caste, securing exemption from Article 6(1) and (2).
(para 28).
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Krishna Iyer, J.)
371
by exerting political pressure or other influence, will run the high risk
of unconstitutional discrimination. If the real basis of classification is
caste, masked as backward class, the Court must strike at such communal
manipulation. Secondly, the Constitution recognizes the claims of only
harijans (Article 335) and not of every backward class. The profile of
Article 46 is more or less the same. So, we may readily hold that casteism
cannot come back by the back door and, except in exceptionally rare cases,
no class other than harijans can jump the gauntlet of 'equal opportunity'
guarantee. Their only hope is in Article 16(4). I agree with my learned
brother Fazal Ali, J. in the view that the arithmetical limit of 50% in
any one year set by some earlier rulings cannot perhaps be pressed too
far. Overall representation in a department does not depend on recruit-
ment in a particular year, but the total strength of a cadre. I agree with
his construction of Article 16(4) and his view about the 'carry forward'
rule.
144. The American jurisprudential response to the problem of
repairing the handicaps of the coloureds in public employment and educa-
tion is similar, although equal protection of the laws to all is assured by
the Fourteenth Amendment to the U. S. Constitution.
145.
Jurisprudence, to be living law, must respond to the bhangi
colony and the black ghetto intelligently enough to equalise opportunities
within the social, political and economic orders, by making up for long
spells of deprivation. Hence, if a court is convinced that the purpose of
a measure using a suspect classification is truly benign, that is, that the
measure represents an effort to use the classification as part of a program
designed to achieve an equal position in society for all tribes and groups
and communities, then it may be justified in permitting the State to choose
the means for doing so. so long as the means chosen are reasonably related
to achieving that end. The distinction would seem to be between handi-
caps imposed accidentally by nature and those resulting from societal
arrangements such as caste structures and group suppression. Society
being, in a broad sense, responsible for these latter conditions, it also has
the duty to regard them as relevant differences among men and to com-
pensate for them whenever they operate to prevent equal access to basic,
minimal advantages enjoyed by other citizens. In a sense, the theory
broadens the traditional concept of 'State action' to require government
attention to those inequalities for which it is not directly responsible, but
which nevertheless are concomitant features of the existence of the orga-
nized State. I quote from Harvard Law Review 1968-69. Vol. 82,
excerpts from 'Developments in the Law - Equal Protection'
A State might, for example, decide to give some racial groups an exemption
from qualification examinations or establish a racial credit on such examinations
to that often given to veterans. (pp. 1105-96) (emphasis, mine)
Where racial classifications are being used ostensibly to remedy deprivation
arising from past and continuing racial discrimination, however a court might
think it proper to judge the measures by a less stringent standard of review,
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
372
SUPREME COURT CASES
possibly even the permissive or rationality standard normally used in constitutional
appraisal of regulatory measures. (p. 1107)
Moreover, even if racial classifications do have some negative educative effects, the
classifications may be so effective that they should be instituted despite this drawback.
If the measures succeed in aiding blacks to obtain opportunities within the social,
political and economic orders that have formerly been denied to them, they may
be worth the cost of emphasizing men's differences. It may be that the actual
participation of blacks in positions alongside whites will ultimately prove to have
the most important and long-lasting educative effect against discrimination.
(p. 1113)
Hence, if a court is convinced that the purpose of a measure using a racial
classification is truly benign that is, that the measure represents an effort to use
the classification as part of a program designed to achieve an equal position in
society for all races, then it may be justified in permitting the State to choose
the means for doing so, so long as the means chosen are reasonably related to
achieving that end. (p. 1115)
146. Illustrative of an allied type of State action to eliminate gross
group inequality for attaining general equality is a recent ruling of the
U. Supreme Court. The good omen for American women in Schlesinger
V. Ballard58 is indicative of high judicial hunch in understanding the classi-
ficatory clue to promotion of employment equality. The case related to
a male challenge of a provision entitling women officers in the U. S. Navy
to longer years of commissioned service. The Court remarked, upholding
the unequal step to promote eventual gender equality, that
in enacting and retaining of Section 6401 Congress may thus quite rationally have
believed that women line officers had less opportunity for promotion than did
their male counterparts and that a longer period of tenure for women officers
would therefore be consistent with the goal to provide women officers with fair
and equitable career advancement programs.
The key thought is the broader test of constitutional classification and this
reinforces my line of thinking.
147. It is a statistically proved social reality in India that the
depressed employment position of harijans is the master problem in the
battle against generations of retardation and 'reservation' and other solu-
tions have made no significant impact on their employment in public services.
In such an unjust situation. to maintain mechanical equality is to perpe-
tuate actual inequality. A batterv of several programmes to fight down
this fell backwardness must be tried out by the State. Relaxation of 'tests'
qualification at the floor level of clerical posts (lower or upper division)
is a part of this multiform strategy to establish broader, though seemingly
'differential' equality.
148. If the Court has its listening posts on raw Indian earth. its
assessment of 'equal opportunity' cannot remain legalistic or individualistic
but should see the age-old inequality to mend which is also the means
to real equality, a demanding command of our Constitution. The poig-
58. 419 US 42 L Ed 2d 610.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
373
nant and ominous words of Sterling Tucker, in his book 'For Blacks Only'59
will awaken the judicial vision to the harijan situation and so I quote :
If white Americans had learned to see us as we are, human beings, like
themselves without individual burdens of hope, or fear, they could have under-
stood our rage and our defiance. They might have wished to accommodate to
it, but they could have comprehended it. They could have understood our need
for pride and grasped what black power meant to us. But as Ralph Ellison
potently expressed, they never really saw us
I am an invisible man
I am a man of substance, of flesh and
bone, fiber and liquids, - and I might even be said to possess a mind.
I am invisible, understand, simply because people refuse to see me
When they approach me they see only my surrounding, themselves or
figments of their imagination - indeed, everything and anything except me.
That invisibility to which I refer occurs because of a peculiar disposition of
the eyes of those with whom I come in contact. A matter of the construction
of their inner eyes, those eyes with which they look through their physical eyes
upon reality
You wonder whether you aren't simply a phantom in
other people's minds
You ache with the need to convince yourself
that you do exist in the real world, that you're a part of all the sound and
anguish, and you strike out with your fists, you curse and you swear to make
them recognize you. And, alas, it is seldom successful.
149. I end my opinion of concurrence with the learned Chief
Justice with the admonition, induced by apprehension and for reasons
already given, that no caste, however seemingly backward, or claiming to
be derelict, can be allowed to breach the dykes of equality of opportunity
guaranteed to all citizens. To them the answer is that, save in rare cases
of 'chill penury repressing their noble rage', equality is equality - nothing
less and nothing else. The heady upper berth occupants from 'backward'
classes do double injury. They beguile the broad community into believ-
ing that backwardness is being banished. They rob the need-based bulk
of the backward of the 'office' advantages the nation, by classification,
reserves or proffers. The constitutional dharma, however, is not an un-
ending deification of 'backwardness' and showering 'classified' homage,
regardless of advancement registered, but progressive exercising of the
social evil and gradual withdrawal of artificial crutches. Here the Court
has to be objective, resisting mawkish politics. But, by that standard,
as statistically shown to us in this case, harijan have-nots have 'miles to
go' and so long, the administration has 'promises to keep'.
FAZAL ALI, J. (concurring)-I agree with the lucid judgment
proposed by My Lord the Chief Justice, but I would like to add a few
lines of my own highlighting some of the important aspects which arise
in this appeal.
151. The facts of this appeal lie within a very narrow compass.
This appeal by certificate is directed against the judgment of the Kerala
High Court dated April 19, 1974. The judgment has struck down
Rule 13AA of the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958.
The impugned rule was substituted by Government Order (P) 21/PD
59. Reprinted by permission-Eurasia Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi-55.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
374
SUPREME COURT CASES
dated January 13, 1972. It appears that the main dispute between the
appellants and respondent No. 1 centres round the promotion of some
lower division clerks to the grade of upper division clerks. The grievance
of respondent No. 1 before the High Court was that some of the lower
division clerks who were members of scheduled castes or scheduled tribes
were shown a preferential treatment in that they had been promoted to the
higher grade of upper division clerks in spite of the fact that they had
not cleared the test prescribed for reaching the said grade. The Govern-
ment of Kerala selected the respondent for hostile discrimination as against
these persons by granting extension after extension to the members belong-
ing to the scheduled castes or tribes so as to enable them to pass the test.
The series of such extensions culminated into the order creating Rule 13AA
which was wholly discriminatory and violative of Article 16 of the Constitu-
tion of India. The plea of respondent No. 1 appears to have found favour
with the High Court which held that Rule 13AA was discriminatory and
was clearly violative of Article 16(1) of the Constitution and was also
beyond the reservation permitted by clause (4) of Article 16.
152. It may be necessary here to mention a few admitted facts.
In the first place it is not disputed that respondent No. 1 himself passed
the test necessary for promotion to the upper grade on November 2, 1971.
It is, therefore, manifest that whatever grievance the respondent No. 1
may have against the other clerks, he cannot put forward his claim for
being promoted earlier than November 2, 1971, i.e. before the time he
passed the test. In these circumstances extensions granted by the Govern-
ment to the clerks belonging to the scheduled castes or tribes from 1958
to 1972 and thereafter upto 1974 will affect the respondent No. 1 only
after November 2, 1971 and not before that. Secondly it is also not
denied that the lower division clerks belonging to the scheduled castes
and tribes were undoubtedly senior to the respondent No. 1 and had
been promoted on the express condition that unless they passed the test
prescribed by the Government they would have to be reverted. This
was obviously done to advance and lift the members of the scheduled castes
and tribes who were backward class of citizens SO that they may be able
to compete with the other stronger sections of the society. It may also
be mentioned here that the promotees were not completely exempted from
the test but they were given extension of time for passing the test. Thus
it is obvious that but for the passing of the test the respondent No. 1 could
not have any other claim to promotion as upper division clerk. The res-
pondent No. 1 was previously serving as a lower division clerk in the
Registration Department at Kottayam but is at present serving in Chitty
Auditor's Office at Kottayam. Lastly it is also admitted that the promotees
against whom the respondent No. 1 has a grievance were undoubtedly
members of the scheduled castes or tribes and such lower division clerks
belonging to the scheduled castes or tribes will hereafter be referred as
'the promotees' for the purpose of brevity.
153. In the background of these admitted facts, we have now to
see whether Rule 13AA violates Article 16(1) of the Constitution in
any way. The High Court has struck down Rule 13AA on three grounds :
(1) that it is beyond the permissible limits of clause (4) of Article 16;
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
375
(2) that by virtue of the carry-forward rule the Government has promoted
more than 62% of the clerks belonging to the scheduled castes and tribes
and have thereby destroyed the concept of equality and
(3) that the rule is discriminatory inasmuch as it makes an uncalled for
distinction between the members of the same service and the classification
made by the Government is neither reasonable nor rational.
154. It may be mentioned here that the High Court has not dis-
puted that the members of the scheduled castes and tribes were not
adequately represented in the services under the State of Kerala which is
the positive case of the appellants before us. The High Court has traced
the history of the various orders passed by the Government of Kerala
from 1951 to 1972 granting extensions for two years, three years and so
on, to the promotees - a fact which was not at all germane for the pur-
pose of this case - because the respondent No. 1 who was the petitioner
before the High Court himself admitted that he had passed the test held
on November 2, 1971. Thus the conduct of the Government in granting
extensions prior to November 2, 1971 was wholly irrelevant in order to
decide the question of discrimination as canvassed by respondent No. 1.
155. Mr. M. M. Abdul Khader, Advocate General of Kerala appear-
ing for the appellants submitted two points before us. In the first place
he argued that Rule 13AA did not provide for reservation as contemplated
by clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution and the High Court was,
therefore, in error in striking down the rule because it exceeded the per-
missible limits of clause (4) of Article 16. Secondly it was submitted that
the members of the scheduled castes and tribes were not only members of one
caste but for historical reasons they are a special class by themselves and
they have been given an exalted status under the Constitution itself. There
is thus nothing in Article 16 (1) of the Constitution to prevent the State
from making reasonable classification in order to boost up the members
of the scheduled castes and tribes by giving concessions without imperilling
the efficiency of the services. The State action in the instant case was,
therefore, justified by the Advocate General of Kerala on the ground that
it had only implemented the directive principles contained in Part IV of
the Constitution. Mr. L. N. Sinha, Solicitor-General appearing for the
Attorney General of India and Mr. R. K. Garg appearing for the inter-
vener State of U. P. also more or less supported the stand taken by
Advocate General of Kerala.
156. Mr. T. S. Krishnamoorthy Iyer appearing for the respondent
No. 1, however, submitted that classification could only be made under
clause (4) of Article 16. In the instant case even if the provisions con-
tained in Rule 13AA be deemed a reservation within the meaning of
clause (4) of Article 16 they exceed the permissible limits and destroy
the concept of equality. Secondly it was argued that as the respondent
No. 1 and the promotees were members of the same class of service they
were equally circumstanced and any discrimination made in favour of
the promotees was clearly hit by Article 16(1) of the Constitution. It
was also faintly suggested by him that there was no reliable evidence to
show that the members of the scheduled castes and tribes were not
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
376
SUPREME COURT CASES
adequately represented in the services under the State SO as to justify any
classification being made in their favour.
157. In order to understand the arguments put forward by the
parties it may be necessary to examine the nature and extent of the provi-
sions of Article 16 of the Constitution of India. Article 16 may be
extracted as follows
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating
to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent,
place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against
in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law pres-
cribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office
under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union
territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union territory prior
to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the
services under the State.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides
that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be
a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.
158. It is no doubt true that Article 16(1) provides for equality
of opportunity for all citizens in the services under the State. It is, how-
ever, well-settled that the doctrine contained in Article 16 is a hard and
reeling reality, a concrete and constructive concept and not a rigid rule
or an empty formula. It is also equally well-settled by several authorities
of this Court that Article 16 is merely an incident of Article 14, Article 14
being the genus is of universal application whereas Article 16 is the species
and seeks to obtain equality of opportunity in the services under the State.
The theory of reasonable classification is implicit and inherent in the con-
cept of equality for there can hardly be any country where all the citizens
would be equal in all respects. Equality of opportunity would naturally
mean a fair opportunity not only to one section or the other but to all
sections by removing the handicaps if a particular section of the society
suffers from the same. It has never been disputed in judicial pronounce-
ments by this Court as also of the various High Courts that Article 14
permits reasonable classification. But what Article 14 or Article 16
forbid is hostile discrimination and not reasonable classification. In other
words, the idea of classification is implicit in the concept of equality because
equality means equality to all and not merely to the advanced and educated
sections of the society. It follows, therefore, that in order to provide
equality of opportunity to all citizens of our country, every class of citizens
must have a sense of equal participation in building up an egalitarian
society, where there is peace and plenty, where there is complete economic
freedom and there is no pestilence or poverty, no discrimination and
oppression, where there is equal opportunity to education, to work, to
earn their livelihood SO that the goal of social justice is achieved. Could
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
377
we, while conferring benefits on the stronger and the more advanced sec-
tions of the society, ignore the more backward classes merely because
they cannot come up to the fixed standards ? Such a course, in my
opinion, would lead to denial of opportunity to the backward classes
resulting in complete annihilation of the concept of equality contained
in Articles 14 and 16. The only manner in which the objective of equa-
lity as contemplated by the founding fathers of our Constitution and as
enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 can be achieved is to boost up the back-
ward classes by giving them concessions, relaxations, facilities, removing
handicaps, and making suitable reservations so that the weaker sections
of the people may compete with the more advanced and in due course
of time all may become equals and backwardness is banished for ever.
This can happen only when we achieve complete economic and social
freedom. In our vast country where we have diverse races and classes
of people, some of whom are drowned in the sea of ignorance and illi-
teracy, the concept of equality assumes very important proportions. There
are a number of areas in some States like Kashmir, Sikkim, hilly areas
of U. P., Bihar and the South, where due to lack of communications or
transport, absence of proper educational facilities or because of old customs
and conventions and other environmental reasons, the people are both
socially and educationally backward. Could we say that the citizens
hailing from these areas should continue to remain backward merely
because they fall short of certain artificial standards fixed by various institu-
tions ? The answer must be in the negative. The directive principles en-
shrined in our Constitution contain a clear mandate to achieve equality
and social justice. Without going into the vexed question as to whether
or not the directive principles contained in Part IV override the funda-
mental rights in Part III there appears to be a complete unanimity of
judicial opinion of this Court that the directive principles and the funda-
mental rights should be construed in harmony with each other and every
attempt should be made by the Court, to resolve any apparent inconsis-
tency. The directive principles contained in Part IV constitute the stairs
to climb the high edifice of a socialistic State and the fundamental rights
are the means through which one can reach the top of the edifice. I am
fortified in my view by several decisions of this Court to which I will refer
briefly.
159. In In re The Kerala Education Bill, 195761 this Court observed
at p. 1022
Nevertheless, in determining the scope and ambit of the fundamental rights
relied on by or on behalf of any person or body the court may not entirely ignore
these directive principles of State policy laid down in Part IV of the Constitution
but should adopt the principle of harmonious construction and should attempt to
give effect to both as much as possible.
160. In Mohd. Hanif Quareshi V. State of Bihar61 this Court observed
as follows :
The directive principles cannot override this categorical restriction imposed
on the legislative power of the State. A harmonious interpretation has to be placed
upon the Constitution and so interpreted it means that the State should certainly
60. 1959 SCR 995 AIR 1958 SC 956.
61. 1959 SCR 628, 648 AIR 1958 SC 731.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
378
SUPREME COURT CASES
implement the directive principles but it must do so in such a way that its laws do
not take away or abridge the fundamental rights
161. In 1. C. Golak Nath V. State of 'Punjabe' it was observed by
this Court
At the same time Parts III and IV constituted an integrated scheme forming
a self-contained code. The scheme is made so elastic that all the directive princi-
ples of State policy can reasonably be enforced without taking away or abridging
the fundamental rights.
162. In Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging, Bangalore V. State
It is a fallacy to think that under our Constitution there are only rights and
no duties. While rights conferred under Part III are fundamental, the directives
given under Part IV are fundamental in the governance of the country. We see
no conflict on the whole between the provisions contained in Part III and Part IV
The mandate of the Constitution is to build a welfare society in which
justice social, economic and political shall inform all institutions of our national
life. The hopes and aspirations aroused by the Constitution will be belied if
the minimum needs of the lowest of our citizens are not met.
1 Finally the matter has been extensively considered by the
Full Court in His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru V. State
of Kerala64 where Shelat and Grover, JJ. observed : (p. 427, para 533)
While most cherished freedoms and rights have been guaranteed the Govern-
ment has been laid under a solemn duty to give effect to the directive principles.
Both Parts III and IV which embody them have to be balanced and harmonised
then alone the dignity of the individual can be achieved.
They further observed : (p. 459, para 596)
Our Constitution-makers did not contemplate any disharmony between the
fundamental rights and the directive principles. They were meant to supplement
one another. It can well be said that the directive principles prescribed the goal
to be attained and the fundamental rights laid down the means by which that goal
was to be achieved.
Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. observed (p. 503, para 716)
Our founding fathers were satisfied that there is no antithesis between the
fundamental rights and the directive principles. One supplements the other. The
directives lay down the end to be achieved and Part III prescribes the means through
which the goal is to be reached.
Ray, J., as he then was and now C.J., observed : (p. 580, para 1015)
But the directive principles are also fundamental. They can be effective if they
are to prevail over fundamental rights of a few in order to subserve the common
good and not to allow economic system to result to the common detriment.
It
is the duty of the State to promote common good.
He further observed : (p. 589, para 1044)
Parts III and IV of the Constitution touch each other and modify. They are
not parallel to each other. Different legislation will bring in different social princi-
ples. These will not be permissible without social content operating in a flexible
manner.
Jaganmohan Reddy, J. observed : (p. 640, para 1161)
There can be no doubt that the object of the fundamental rights is to ensure
62. (1967) 2 SCR 762, 789-790 AIR 1967
SC 1643
84.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
379
the ideal of political democracy and prevent authoritarian rule, while the object
of the directive principles of State policy is to establish a welfare State where there
is economic and social freedom without which political democracy has no meaning.
What is implicit in the Constitution is that there is a duty on the courts to interpret
the Constitution and the laws to further the directive principles which under Article
37, are fundamental in the governance of the country.
Palekar, J. observed : (p. 711, para 1305)
The Preamble read as a whole, therefore, does not contain the implication
that in any genuine implementation of the directive principles, a fundamental right
will not suffer any diminution.
Mathew, J. observed (p. 878, para 1704)
I can see no incongruity in holding, when Article 37 says in its latter part
"it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws",
that judicial process is 'State action' and that the Judiciary is bound to apply the
directive principles in making its judgment.
Beg, J. observed : (p. 902, para 1802)
Perhaps, the best way of describing the relationship between the fundamental
rights of individual citizens, which imposed corresponding obligations upon the
State and the directive principles, would be to look upon the directive principles
as laying down the path of the country's progress towards the allied objectives
and aims stated in the Preamble, with fundamental rights as the limits of that
path,
Chandrachud, J. observed (p. 962, para 2002)
Our decision of this vexed question must depend upon the postulate of our
Constitution which aims at bringing about a synthesis hetween Fundamental Rights'
and the 'Directive Principles of State Policy', by giving to the fornier a pride of
place and to latter a place of permanence. Together, not individually, they form
the core of the Constitution. Together, not individually, they constitute its true
conscience.
164. In view of the principles adumbrated by this Court it is clear
that the directive principles form the fundamental feature and the social
conscience of the Constitution and the Constitution enjoins upon the State
to implement these directive principles. The directives thus provide the
policy, the guidelines and the end of socio-economic freedom and Articles 14
and 16 are the means to implement the policy to achieve the ends sought
to be promoted by the directive principles. So far as the courts are con-
cerned where there is no apparent inconsistency between the directive
principles contained in Part IV and the fundamental rights mentioned in
Part III, which in fact supplement each other, there is no difficulty in
putting a harmonious construction which advances the object of the
Constitution. Once this basic fact is kept in mind, the interpretation of
Articles 14 and 16 and their scope and ambit become as clear as day.
165. In the instant case one of the main planks of the arguments
put forward by Mr. M. M. Abdul Khader, Advocate-General, Kerala, was
that SO far as the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes were concerned
they had been given an exalted and privileged status under the Constitu-
tion and in the directive principles contained in Part IV which contain
a mandate to the State to consider their claims. It is necessary to consider
this aspect of the matter in a little detail, because the main argument of
Mr. Abdul Khader has been that the scheduled castes and tribes did not
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
380
SUPREME COURT CASES
fall at all within the mischief of clause (2) of Article 16 which prohibits
discrimination on the ground of caste etc. The scheduled caste is not
caste as mentioned in Article 16(2). I am inclined to agree with the
argument advanced by the Advocate General that the word 'caste' appear-
ing after 'scheduled' is really a misnomer and has been used only for the
purpose of identifying this particular class of citizens which has a special
history of several hundred years behind it. The scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes have been a special class of citizens who have been SO
included and described that they have come to be identified as the most
backward classes of citizens that we have in our country. Article 366,
clauses (24) & (25) of the Constitution read thus :
366. (24) "Scheduled Castes" means such castes, races or tribes or parts
of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under Article 341
to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution ;.
(25) "Scheduled Tribes" means such tribes or tribal communities or parts of
or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under Article 342
to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this Constitution
These constitutional provisions, therefore, create a presumption in favour
of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes that they are backward classes
of citizens. It is not disputed that the members of the scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes are specified in the notifications issued under Articles 341
and 342 of the Constitution and, therefore, they must be deemed to be
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes for the purposes of the Constitution.
166. Article 46 of the Constitution runs thus :
The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests
of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all
forms of exploitation.
Properly analysed this article contains a mandate on the State to take
special care for the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people and as illustrations of the persons who constitute
the weaker sections the provision expressly mentions the scheduled castes
and the scheduled tribes.
167. A combined reading of Article 46 and clauses (24) and (25)
of Article 366 clearly shows that the members of the scheduled castes
and the scheduled tribes must be presumed to be backward classes of
citizens, particularly when the Constitution gives the example of the
scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes as being the weaker sections of
the society.
168. Similarly Article 335 which expressly provides that the claims
of the members of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes shall be
taken into consideration runs thus :
The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency
of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
169. Thus in view of these provisions the members of the scheduled
castes and the scheduled tribes have been given a special status in the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal
381
Constitution and they constitute a class by themselves. That being the
position it follows that they do not fall within the purview of Article 16(2)
of the Constitution which prohibits discrimination between the members
of the same caste. If, therefore, the members of the scheduled castes
and the scheduled tribes are not castes, then it is open to the State to make
reasonable classification in order to advance or lift these classes SO that
they may be able to be properly represented in the services under the
State. This can undoubtedly be done under Article 16(1) of the
Constitution.
170. Before, however, examining the nature of classification that
can be made by the Government under Article 16(1) of the Constitution
it may be necessary to state three principles which are supported by abun-
dant authority.
171. (1) That Article 16 is merely an incident of Article 14 and
both these articles form a part of the common system seeking to achieve
the saine end. I am fortified in my view by several decisions of this Court.
In State of J. & K. V. Triloki Nath Khosa65 this Court observed : (p. 783)
Article 16 of the Constitution which ensures to all citizens equality of
opportunity in matters relating to employment is but an instance or incident of
the guarantee of equality contained in Article 14. The concept of equal opportunity
undoubtedly permeates the whole spectrum of an individual's employment from
appointment through promotion and termination to the payment of gratuity and
pension.
172. In Mohammad Shujat Ali V. Union of India66 this Court
Article 14 ensures to every person equality before law and equal protection
of the laws and Article 16 lays down that there shall be equality of opportunity
for all citizens in matters relating to employment or- appointment to any office
under the State. Article 16 is only an instance or incident of the guarantee of
equality enshrined in Article 14 it gives effect to the doctrine of equality in the
sphere of public employment. The concept of equal opportunity to be found
in Article 16 permeates the whole spectrum of an individual's employment from
appointment through promotion and termination to the payment of gratuity and
pension and gives expression to the ideal of equality of opportunity which is
one of the great socio-economic objectives set out in the Preamble of the Constitution.
173. In Govind Dattatray Kelkar V. Chief Controller of Imports
& Exports this Court observed :
Article 16 of the Constitution is only an incident of the application of the
concept of equality enshrined in Article 14 thereof. It gives effect to the doctrine
of equality in the matter of appointment and promotion. It follows that there
can be a reasonable classification of the employees for the purpose of appointment
or promotion.
The same view was expressed by this Court in S. G. Jaisinghani V. Union
of India68
65.
67.
(1967) 2 SCR 29, 33: AIR 1967 SC
839 : (1967) 2 LLJ 691.
68.
(1967) 2 SCR 703, 712: AIR 1967 SC
(L&S) 454.
1427 : 65 ITR 34.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
382
SUPREME COURT CASES
174. In General Manager, Southern Railway V. Rangachari®
this
Court observed
In this connection it may be relevant to remember that Article 16(1) and (2)
really give effect to the equality before law guaranteed by Article 14 and to the
prohibition of discrimination guaranteed by Article 15(1). The three provisions
form part of the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other.
If that be so, there would be no difficulty in holding that the matters relating
to employment must include all matters in relation to employment both prior, and
subsequent, to the employment which are incidental to the employment and form
part of the terms and conditions of such employment.
175. (2) It is also well-settled that Article 16 applies to all classes
of appointment including promotions and selection posts. It has been
observed by this Court in C. A. Rajendran V. Union of India 70 :
The first question to be considered in this case is whether there is a constitu-
tional duty or obligation imposed upon the Union Government to make reservations
for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes either at the initial stage of recruitment
and at the stage of promotion in the Railway Board Secretariat Service Scheme.
The relevant law on the subject is well-settled. Under Article 16 of the
Constitution there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating
to employment or appointment to any office under the State or to promotion from
one office to a higher office thereunder. Articles 14, 15 and 16 form part of
the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other. In other
words, Article 16 of the Constitution is only an incident of the application of
the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14 thereof. It gives effect to the
doctrine of equality in the matter of appointment and promotion. It follows
therefore that there can be a reasonable classification of the employees for the
purpose of appointment and promotion.
176. (3) That Article 16 permits a valid classification.
177. In State of J. & K. V. Triloki Nath Khosa (supra) it was
Since the constitutional code of equality and equal opportunity is a charter
for equals, equality of opportunity in matters of promotion means an equal pro-
motional opportunity for persons who fall, substantially, within the same class.
A classification of employees can therefore be made for first identifying and
then distinguishing members of one class from those of another.
The same view has been expressed by this Court in C. A. Rajendran's case
in S. G. Jaisinghani's case Rangachari's case and Mohammad Shujat Ali's
case quoted supra.
178. The concept of equality or equal opportunity as contained in
Article 16 does not mean that same laws must be applicable to all persons
under every circumstance. Indeed if this artificial interpretation is put
on the scope and ambit of Article 16 it will lead to channelisation of legis-
lation or polarisation of rules. Differences and disparities exist among
men and things and they cannot be treated alike by the application of
the same laws but the law has to come to terms with life and must be
able to recognise the genuine differences and disparities that exist in
human nature. Legislature has also to enact legislation to meet specific
ends by making a reasonable and rational classification. In Morey V.
69.
(1962) 2 SCR 586, 597 AIR 1962 SC
70. (1968) 1 SCR 721, 728-729 AIR 1968
36.
SC 507 (1968) 2 LI.J 407.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
383
Doud it was SO aptly observed :
To recognise marked differences that exist in fact is living law ; to disregard
practical differences and concentrate on some abstract identities is lifeless logic.
179. Coming now to Article 16 it may be analysed into three
separate categories so far as the facts of the present case are concerned :
Category I--Clause (1) of Article 16
Category II--Clause (2) of Article 16.
Categorv III-Clause (4) of Article 16.
180. Clause (1) of Article 16 clearly provides for equality of oppor-
tunity to all citizens in the services under the State. It is important to
note that the Constitution uses the words "equality of opportunity for all
citizens". This inherently implies that the opportunity must be given not
only to a particular section of the society or a particular class of citizens
who may be advanced or otherwise more affluent but to all classes of
citizens. This, therefore, can be achieved by making a reasonable classi-
fication so that every class of citizens is duly represented in services which
will enable equality of opportunity to all citizens. The classification, how-
ever, must be a reasonable one and must fulfill the following conditions
(i) It must have a rational basis
(ii) it must have a close nexus with the object sought to be achieved
(iii) it should not select any person for hostile discrimination at the cost
of others.
Now let us see whether Rule 13AA can be justifiable under clause (1)
of Article 16. Rule 13AA of the Rules reads thus
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Government may, by
order, exempt for a specified period, any member or members, belonging to a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, and already in service, from passing the
tests referred to in Rule 13 or Rule 13A of the said Rules.
What the rule does is merely to authorise the Government to exempt for
a specified period any member or members of the scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes from passing the tests referred to in Rule 13 and Rule 13A.
It may be noticed that this rule does not at all give a complete licence.
A lower division clerk who is a member of the scheduled caste or scheduled
tribe could not be promoted without passing any test at all so as to destroy
the concept of equality. It merely gives a special concession or a tempo-
rary relaxation to backward class of citizens in order to lift them, advance
them and enable them to compete with the stronger sections of the society.
Thus the basis of the rule is undoubtedly both rational and reasonable.
181. Article 335 of the Constitution contains a mandate to the
State for considering the claims of the members of the scheduled castes
and the scheduled tribes consistently with the maintenance of efficiency
of administration. By giving the special concessions to the promotees
this mandate is sought to be obeyed by the Government. Mr. T. S.
Krishnamoorthy Iyer Counsel for the respondent No. 1 submitted that the
mandate given in Article 335 is violated because by granting exemption
71. 354 US 457, 473.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
384
SUPREME COURT CASES
to the members of the scheduled castes and tribes the standard of efficiency
of the services would be impaired. We are, however, unable to agree
with this argument. Both the respondent No. 1 and the promotees were
members of the same service and had been working as lower division clerks
for a pretty long time. The promotees who were members of the sche-
duled castes and tribes are admittedly senior to respondent No. 1 and
have gained more experience. Further the rule does not grant complete
exemption to the promotees from passing the test : it only provides for
grant of extension of time to enable them to clear the test. In these cir-
cumstances it cannot be held that the State's action in incorporating
Rule 13AA in any way violates the mandate contained in Article 335.
In these circumstances, therefore, I am clearly satisfied that the concession
given in Rule 13AA amounts to a reasonable classification which can
be made under Article 16(1) of the Constitution and does not amount
to the selection of the respondent No. 1 for hostile discrimination so as
to be violative of Article (1) of the Constitution of India.
182. Category II refers to clause (2) of Article 16 which may be
reproduced as follows :
No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place
of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against
in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
In view of my findings and the various provisions of the Constitution regard-
ing the status of the members of the scheduled castes and the scheduled
tribes, it is obvious that the members of the scheduled castes and the
scheduled tribes are not a 'caste' but a special class of backward citizens
whose backwardness cannot be doubted. In these circumstances, there-
fore, if the promotees do not belong to a caste as contemplated by Article
16(2) then they do not fall within the mischief of Article 16(2) at all.
Thus the case of the promotees squarely falls within the four corners of
Article 16(1) and can be justified as based on reasonable classification.
183. Before leaving Categories I and II it might be mentioned that
the Court has to apply strict scrutiny to the classification made by the
Government and to find out that it does not destroy or fructify the concept
of equality. In other words, the State cannot be permitted to invoke
favouritism or nepotism under the cloak of equality. Having considered
the matter in all its comprehensive aspects I am satisfied that in this parti-
cular case the classification made by the Government by virtue of Rule 13AA
is fully justified by Article 16 of the Constitution.
184. This brings us to the consideration of Category III which is
clause (4) of Article 16. Clause (4) may be extracted as under
Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens
which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services
under the State.
Clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution cannot be read in isolation
but has to be read as part and parcel of Article 16 (1) and (2). Suppose
there are a number of backward classes who form a sizeable section of the
population of the country but are not properly or adequately represented
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
385
in the services under the State the question that arises is what can be done
to enable them to join the services and have a sense of equal participation.
One course is to make a reasonable classification under Article 16(1) in
the manner to which I have already adverted in great detail. The other
method to achieve the end may be to make suitable reservations for the
backward classes in such a way so that the inadequate representation of
the backward classes in the services is made adequate. This form of
classification which is referred to as reservation, is, in my opinion, clearly
covered by Article 6(4) of the Constitution which is completely exhaus-
tive on this point. That is to say clause (4) of Article 16 is not an
exception to Article 14 in the sense that whatever classification can be
made can be done only through clause (4) of Article 16. Clause (4) of
Article 16, however, is an explanation containing an exhaustive and
exclusive provision regarding reservation which is one of the forms of
classification. Thus clause (4) of Article 16 deals exclusively with reserva-
tion and not other forms of classification which can be made under Article
16(1) itself. Since clause (4) is a special provision regarding reserva-
tion, it can safely be held that it overrides Article 16(1) to that extent
and no reservation can be made under Article 16(1). It is true that there
are some authorities of this Court that clause (4) is an exception to
Article 16(1) but with due respect I am not in a position to subscribe
to this view for the reasons that I shall give hereafter.
185. In the first place if we read Article 16(4) as an 'exception
to Article 16(1) then the inescapable conclusion would be that Article
6(1) does not permit any classification at all because an express provi-
sion has been made for this in clause (4). This is, however, contrary
to the basic concept of equality contained in Article 14 which implicitly
permits classification in any form provided certain conditions are fulfilled.
Furthermore, if no classification can be made under Article 16(1) except
reservation contained in clause (4) then the mandate contained in Arti-
cle 335 would be defeated.
186. I have already observed that the fundamental guarantees
provided by the Constitution have to be read in harmony with the direc-
tive principles contained in Part IV. Again if Article 16(4) is deemed
to be the only mode of classification, then it would follow that the Constitu-
tion permits only one form of classification, namely, reservation and no
other form SO far as the services are concerned. This will render the
concept of equality nugatorv and defeat the very purpose which is sought
to be achieved by Article (1). Equality of opportunity to all citizens
does not mean equality to some and inequality to others. As I have already
pointed out that in our country there are a large number of backward
classes of citizens who have to be granted certain concessions and faci-
lities in order to be able to compete with others. Does it mean that such
citizens should be denied these facilities which may not fall under the
term "reservation" Let US take a few instances. A notification provides
that all candidates for a particular post must apply before a specified
date. A person belonging to a backward class of citizens living in a
very remote area gets information late. The Government, however, in
case of such a backward class candidate makes a relaxation and extends
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
386
SUPREME COURT CASES
the date. Can it be said that this has resulted in violation of Article 16(1)
because it does not fall within the reservation contemplated by clause (4)
of Article 16? It is obvious that the intention of the Government is merely
to help the backward class of citizens to apply for the job along with others
by condoning the delay for special reasons. Another instance may be where
the State makes a relaxation regarding the age in case of backward classes
of citizens in view of the farfetched and distant area to which that class
of citizens belongs. Lastly let us take the instance of the present case.
The clerks belonging to the scheduled castes and tribes were given a further
extension of time to pass the test because of their backwardness. They
were not exempted from passing the test. This could only be done under
Article 16(1) and not under clause (4) of Article 16.
187. For these reasons, therefore, I respectfully agree with the
observations of Subba Rao, J., as he then was, in T. Devadasan V. Union
of India where he observed
That is why the makers of the Constitution introduced clause (4) in Article 16.
The expression "nothing in this article" is a legislative device to express its intention
in a most emphatic way that the power conferred thereunder is not limited in
any way by the main provision but falls outside it. It has not really carved
out an exception, but has preserved a power untrammelled by the other provisions
of the article.
My view that Article 16(4) is not a proviso to Article 16(1) but that
this clause covers the whole field of Article 16 is amplv supported by the
decision of this Court in General Manager, Southern Railway V. Ranga-
chari (supra) where it was observed (p. 599)
It is common ground that Article 16(4) does not cover the entire field covered
by Article 16(1) and (2). Some of the matters relating to employment in respect
of which equality of opportunity has been guaranteed by Article 16(1) and (2)
do not fall within the mischief of non-obstantive clause in Article 16(4).
188. Now analysing clause (4) of Article 16 it appears that it
contains express provisions empowering the State to make reservations
in suitable cases provided the following conditions are satisfied
(i) That the class for which reservation is made must be socially and
educationally backward.
189. I might mention that SO far as the members of the scheduled
castes and tribes are concerned, in view of the constitutional provisions
referred to above, this fact will have to be presumed and it was also SO
held in Rangachari's case (supra).
(ii) That the class for which reservation is made is not adequately represented
in the services under the State.
190. So far as this is concerned it was suggested by Mr. Krishna-
moorthy Iyer appearing for respondent No. 1 that there is no material
on the record to show that the promotees were not adequately represented
in the services under the State and the Government had not issued any
notification declaring this fact. It, however, appears that this point was
not canvassed before the High Court at all. Nevertheless the appellants
72. (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179 : (1965) 2 LLJ 560.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
387
have produced before us sufficient materials to show that the members
of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes were not adequately and
properly represented in the services under the State and particularly in
the Registration Department with which we are dealing in this appeal.
It is clear from Annexure 'A' of the Appeal Paper Book that there were
as many as 2254 non-gazetted employees in the Registration Department
out of which members of the scheduled castes and tribes are only 198.
It has also been stated in the counter-affidavit before the High Court that
the members of the scheduled castes and tribes form about 8 per cent
of the population of the State of Kerala. This, therefore, clearly shows
that the promotees were inadequately represented in the services under
the State and, therefore, they fulfil the second condition required by clause (4)
of Article 16.
(iii) The reservation should not be too excessive so as to destroy the very
concept of equality.
191. This means that the reservation should be within the per-
missible limits and should not be a cloak to fill all the posts belonging to
a particular class of citizens and thus violate Article 6(1) of the Constitu-
tion indirectly. At the same time clause (4) of Article 16 does not fix
any limit on the power of the Government to make reservation. Since
clause (4) is a part of Article 16 of the Constitution it is manifest that
the State cannot be allowed to indulge in excessive reservation so as to
defeat the policy contained in Article 16(1). As to what would be a
suitable reservation within permissible limits will depend upon the facts
and circumstances of each case and no hard and fast rule can be laid
down, nor can this matter be reduced to a mathematical formula so as
to be adhered to in all cases. Decided cases of this Court have no doubt
laid down that the percentage of reservation should not exceed 50%. As
I read the authorities, this is, however, a rule of caution and does not
exhaust all categories. Suppose for instance a State has a large number
of backward classes of citizens which constitute 80% of the population
and the Government, in order to give them proper representation, reserves
80% of the jobs for them, can it be said that the percentage of reserva-
tion is bad and violates the permissible limits of clause (4) of Article 16
The answer must necessarily be in the negative. The dominant object
of this provision is to take steps to make inadequate representation adequate.
192. This brings us to the validity of the carry-forward rule which
also has been touched by the High Court. It has been held by the High
Court that as a result of the special rule adopted by the State 34 out of
51 vacancies have been filled up by the members of the scheduled castes
and tribes, thus far exceeding the 50 per cent limit which has been laid
down by this Court. It is true that in T. Devadasan's case (supra) the
majority judgment of this Court did strike down a rule which permitted
carry-forward of the vacancies. With respect, however, I am not able
to agree with this view because such a rule sometimes defeats the ends
of Article 16 itself. By the carry-forward rule what is meant is that if
suppose there are 50 vacancies in a year, 25 of such vacancies are set
apart for backward classes of citizens and if out of these 25 only 10 such
candidates are available, then the remaining 15 vacancies instead of being
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
388
SUPREME COURT CASES
kept vacant which may result in inefficiency and stagnation are filled up
from other classes but the deficiency is sought to be made up in the next
year or in the year next to that. I can see no objection to this course
being adopted which is fully in consonance with the spirit of clause (4)
of Article 16. The main idea is to give adequate representation to the
backward classes of citizens if they are not adequately represented in the
services. What difference does it make if instead of keeping the reserved
vacancies vacant from year to year as a result of which work of the Govern-
ment would suffer they are allowed to be filled up by other candi-
dates and the number of vacancies so filled up are kept reserved for the
next year to accommodate candidates from backward classes. This does
not and cannot destroy the concept of equality, nor result in hostile dis-
crimination to one or the other. There can be no doubt that reservation
to the extent of 50% is permissible and if the candidates to that extent
are not available, and those vacancies could not be filled up by other
candidates then such candidates would not get any appointment at all.
It is only by chance that some of the candidates of the backward classes
not being available that the other candidates are appointed. In fact if
the carry-forward rule is not allowed to be adopted it may result in in-
equality to the backward classes of citizens who will not be able to be
absorbed in public employment in accordance with the full quota reserved
for them by the Government. Thus if the carry-forward rule is not up-
held, then backwardness will be perpetrated and it would result ultimately in
a vacuum. For these reasons, therefore, I am of the opinion that the
High Court was in error in holding that the State's action in filling 34
vacancies out of 51 by members of the scheduled castes and tribes was
illegal and could not be justified.
(iv) Reservation should not be made at the cost of efficiency.
193. This is a very important condition for the application of
clause (4) of Article 16. No reservation can be made at the cost of
efficiency which is the prime consideration. But one should not take an
artificial view of efficiency. A concession or relaxation in favour of a
backward class of citizens particularly when they are senior in experience
would not amount to any impairment of efficiency. It is, however, not
necessary for me to dilate on this aspect because in my view the relaxation
contained in Rule 13AA of the rules does not fall within clause (4) of
Article 16 but falls squarely within clause (1) of Article 16 as shown
above, and, therefore, I am of the opinion that the High Court was in
error in holding that Rule 13AA was ultra vires and was violative of
Article 16 as it thought that this rule came within the mischief of clause (4)
of Article 16.
194. Before closing this judgment I would like to allay a serious
apprehension that has been expressed by learned Counsel for respondent
No. 1 that if the Court is to give a wide and liberal interpretation to
Article 14 and Article 16, the guarantees of fundamental right to equality
might be completely eroded in due course of time. I have given my
anxious consideration to this argument and I am clearly of the opinion
that the apprehension expressed by the learned Counsel does not appear
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Fazal Ali, J.)
389
to be well founded. This Court has upheld in several cases classifications
graver and more damaging than the one made in the present case without
affecting the concept of equality. For instance in Triloki Nath Khosa's
case (supra) this Court upheld a classification made by the State between
the members of the same service, recruited from the same source and
holding the same posts on the ground that one set of members having
possessed a higher qualification, namely, a degree in engineering, could
constitute a separate class and could be differently treated from the other
members of the same service who were merely diploma holders. What
had happened in that case was that the service of engineers was one
integrated service consisting of Assistant Engineers who were merely
diploma holders and those who were degree holders. The Government
passed an order by which the degree holders could be promoted to higher
grade of service, namely, to the posts of Executive Engineer or Super-
intending Engineer, which was however blocked to those Assistant Engineers
who were merely diploma holders. This rule was struck down by the
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir but the Supreme Court on appeal
held that qualification was a reasonable ground of classification and by
virtue of the qualification the Assistant Engineers who were degree holders
could be shown a preferential treatment. The position does not appear
to be worse in this case and on a parity of reasoning the Government
has merely extended the time prescribed for departmental tests for the
promotees by treating them as a special class for two reasons - (1) that
they were senior to and more experienced than the respondent No.
and (2) that they belonged to backward classes being members of the
scheduled castes and tribes and for historical reasons they did not have
sufficient opportunity to develop their genius and intellectual capacity as
others could do. I, therefore, see no reason to hold that this classifica-
tion was in any way unreasonable or arbitrary. The conditions under
which classification has to be made, as pointed out by me, are so strict
and stringent that the apprehension of erosion of the concept of equality
appears to be illusory. We must remember that the courts are meant
to interpret and not make the law. As Justice Frankfurter observed
A Judge must not rewrite a statute, neither to enlarge nor to contract it.
195. Finally there can be no doubt that if the State action in a
particular case amounts to an arbitrary classification or a hostile discri-
mination which is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution the Court
is there to act as sentinel on the qui vive in order to strike down such
an action.
196. For the reasons given above, I have come to the conclusion
that Rule 13AA of the rules is a valid piece of statutory provision which
is fully justified under Article 6(1) of the Constitution of India and
does not fall within the purview of Article 16(4).
197. I would, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the judgment
of the High Court and direct the status quo ante to be restored. In the
circumstances of this case, I leave the parties to bear their respective costs.
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
390
SUPREME COURT CASES
KHANNA, J. (dissenting)- -Whether the State Government can grant
exemption for specified period to employees belonging only to the scheduled
castes or scheduled tribes from passing departmental test for the purpose
of promotion under clause (1) of Article 16 of the Constitution is the
important question which arises for determination in this appeal filed on
certificate by the State of Kerala and the Inspector General of Registration
against the judgment of the Kerala High Court. The High Court
answered the question in the negative in a petition filed by N. M. Thomas,
lower division clerk of the Registration Department of the Kerala State,
respondent No. 1, under Article 226 of the Constitution.
199. According to clause (a) of Rule 13 in Part II of the Kerala
State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the
Rules) framed under Article 309 of the Constitution, no person shall be
eligible for appointment to any service, class, category or grade or any
post borne on the cadre thereof unless he possesses such special qualifica-
tions and has passed such special tests as may be prescribed in that behalf
in the Special Rules. In January, 1963, a unified test was prescribed by
the Kerala Government for lower division clerks for promotion to the
upper division. A pass in the test in the Manual of Office Procedure,
Account Test and the Registration Test was obligatory for promotion of
lower division clerks as upper division clerks in the Registration Depart-
ment. Rule 13A, however, provided for temporary exemption from passing
a newly prescribed special or departmental test for a period of two years.
Rule 13A reads as under
Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 13, where a pass in a special
or departmental test is newly prescribed by the Special Rules of a service for
any category, grade or post therein or in any class thereof, a member of a service
who has not passed the said test but is otherwise qualified and suitable for
appointment to such class, category, grade or post may within 2 years of the
introduction of the test be appointed thereto temporarily. If a member so
appointed does not pass the test within two years from the date of introduction
of the said test or when the said test also involves practical training, within two
years after the first chance to undergo such training he shall be reverted to the
class, category or grade or post from which he was appointed and shall not again
be eligible for appointment under this rule :
Provided that a person so reverted shall not by reason only of the appointment
under this rule be entitled to any preferential claim to future appointment to
the class, category, grade or post, as the case may be to which he had been
appointed under this rule
Provided further that the period of temporary exemption shall be extended
by two years in the case of a person belonging to any of the scheduled castes
or scheduled tribes :
Provided also that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for
purposes of promotion of the executive staff below the rank of Sub Inspectors
belonging to the Police Department.
On January 13, 1972, Rule 13AA was inserted in the Rules. It reads
as under
13AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Government
may, by order, exempt for a specified period, any member or members, belonging
to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, and already in service, from passing
the tests referred to in Rule 13 or Rule 13A of the said Rules.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Khanna, J.)
391
Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to tests prescribed for pur-
poses of promotion of the executive staff below the rank of Sub Inspectors belonging
to the Police Department.
The following order was issued by the State Government on January 13,
1972
The President, Kerala Harijan Samskarika Kshema Samithy, Trivandrum has
brought to the notice of Government that a large number of Harijan employees
are facing immediate reversion from their posts for want of test qualifications and
has therefore requested that all Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes employees
may be granted temporary exemption from passing the obligatory departmental tests
for a period of two years with immediate effect.
(2) Government have examined the matter in consultation with the Kerala
Public Service Commission and are pleased to grant temporary exemption to
members already in service belonging to any of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes from passing all tests (unified and special or departmental tests) for a
period of two years.
(3) The benefit of the above exemption will be available to those employees
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who are already enjoying
the benefits of temporary exemption from passing newly prescribed tests under
General Rule 13A. In their case the temporary exemption will expire only on
the date of expiry of the temporary exemption mentioned in para (2) above or
on the date of expiry of the existing temporary exemption, whichever is later.
(4) This order will take effect from the date of the order.
During the pendency of the writ petition in the High Court, a further
order was issued by the State Government on July 11, 1974 for extending
the period of exemption as under :
1. G. O. (MS) No. 22/PD dated 13 1.1972
ORDER
Government are pleased to order that the period of temporary exemption
granted to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the G. O. read above from
passing all tests (unified and special or departmental tests) be extended from
13.1.1974 to cover a period during which two tests are held by the Public
Service Commission and results thereof published so that each individual gets two
chances to appear. Government also order that these categories of employees will
not be given any further extension of time to acquire the test qualifications.
200. Respondent No. 1 passed all the tests by November 2, 1971.
The other respondents, who are members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes and who too were lower division clerks working in the Registration
Department of the State, were promoted as upper division clerks even
though they had not passed the tests mentioned above. Respondent No. 1
was not, however, promoted despite the fact that he had passed the
requisite tests. In 1972 out of 51 lower division clerks promoted as
upper division clerks, 34 belonged to scheduled castes and tribes. Res-
pondent No. 1 thereupon filed petition under Article 226 on March 15,
1972 for a declaration that Rule 13AA under which exemption had been
granted to the other respondents in the matter of promotion was violative
of Article 16 of the Constitution. Prayer was also made for quashing
order dated January 13, 1972 reproduced above by which exemption was
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
392
SUPREME COURT CASES
actually granted to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes employees from
passing the obligatory departmental test for a period of two years.
201. The petition was resisted by the appellants and the other res-
pondents and it was averred on their behalf that the impugned rule and
order were not violative of Article 16. The High Court held that Rule
13AA was void being violative of clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16
of the Constitution. Orders dated January 13, 1972 and January 11,
1974 as well as other orders promoting members of scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes who had not passed the prescribed tests were quashed.
The High Court also expressed the view that the promotion of 34 out
of 51 persons even though they had not passed the necessary test was
not conducive to the maintenance of efficiency of administration. The
order in this respect was stated to be violative of Article 335 of the
Constitution.
202. In appeal before us the learned Advocate General on behalf
of the appellants has contended that the impugned rule and order are
constitutionally valid under clause (1) of Article 16. He has in this
context invited our attention to Articles 46 and 335 of the Constitution.
It has, however, been frankly conceded by the Advocate General that
he does not rely upon clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution for
sustaining the validity of the impugned rule and orders. The stand taken
on behalf of the appellants has also been supported by the learned Solicitor
General as well as by Mr. Garg on behalf of respondents other than
respondent No. 1. As against the above, Mr. Krishnamoorthy on behalf
of respondent No. 1 has canvassed for the correctness of the view taken
by the High Court and has contended that the validity of the impugned
rule and orders cannot be justified under clause (1) of Article 16.
203. It may be apposite at this stage to reproduce Articles 16, 46
and 335 of the Constitution
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters
relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent,
place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against
in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an
office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State
or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union
territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in
the services under the State.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides
that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be
a
person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.
46. The State promote with special care educational and economic interests
of the weaker sections of the peopie, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Khanna, J.)
393
and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all
forms of exploitation.
335. The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of
efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts
in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
204. Article 14 of the Constitution enshrines the principle of
equality before the law. Article 15 prohibits discrimination against
citizens on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or
any of them. Article 16 represents one facet of the guarantee of equality.
According to this article, there shall be equality of opportunity for all
citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State. No citizen, it is further provided, shall on grounds only
of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of
them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employ-
ment or office under the State. Articles 14, 15 and 16 underline the
importance which the framers of our Constitution attached to ensuring
equality of treatment. Such equality has a special significance in the matter
of public employment. It was with a view to prevent any discrimination
in that field that an express provision was made to guarantee equality
of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appoint-
ment to any office under the State.
205. At the same time the framers of the Constitution were conscious
of the backwardness of large sections of the population. It was also plain
that because of their backwardness those sections of the population would
not be in a position to compete with advanced sections of the community
who had all the advantages of affluence and better education. The fact that
the doors of competition were open to them would have been a poor con-
solation to the members of the backward classes because the chances of
their success in the competition were far too remote on account of the
inherent handicap and disadvantage from which they suffered. The result
would have been that, leaving aside some exceptional cases, the members
of backward classes would have hardly got any representation in jobs
requiring educational background. It would have thus resulted in virtually
repressing those who were already repressed. The framers of the Consti-
tution being conscious of the above disadvantage from which backward
classes were suffering enjoined upon the State in Article 46 of the Consti-
tution to promote with special care educational and economic interests of
the weaker sections of the people, in particular of the scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes, and also protect them from social injustice and all
forms of exploitation. To give effect to that objective in the field of
public employment, a provision was made in clause (4) of Article 16
that nothing in that article would prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward
class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, was not adequately
represented in the services under the State. Under the above clause, it
is permissible for the State, in case it finds the representation of any
backward class of citizens in the State services to be not adequate, to
make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
394
SUPREME COURT CASES
that backward class of citizens. The reservation of seats for the members
of the backward classes was not, however, to be at the cost of efficiency.
This fact was brought out in Article 335, according to which the claims
of the members of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes shall
be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency
of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts
in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State. In view of
that it is not permissible to waive the requirement of minimum educational
qualification and other standards essential for the maintenance of efficiency
of service.
206. It is further plain that the reservation of posts for a section
of population has the effect of conferring a special benefit on that section
of the population because it would enable members belonging to that
section to get employment or office under the State which otherwise in
the absence of reservation they could not have got. Such preferential
treatment is plainly a negation of the equality of opportunity for all citizens
in matters relating to employment or appointment to an office under the
State. Clause (4) of Article 16 has, therefore, been construed as a
proviso or exception to clause (1) of that article [see General Manager,
Southern Railway V. Rangachari73 and T. Devadasan V. Union of
207. It has been argued on behalf of the appellants that equality
of treatment does not forbid reasonable classification. Reference in this
context is made to the well accepted principle that Article 14 of the
Constitution forbids class legislation but does not forbid classification.
Permissible classification, it is equally well established, must be founded
on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are
grouped together from others left out of the group and the differentia must
have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute
in question. It is urged that the same principle should apply when the
court is concerned with the equality of opportunity for all citizens in
matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the
State. In this respect I may observe that this Court has recognized the
principle of classification in the context of clause (1) of Article 16 in
matters where appointments are from two different sources, e.g., guards
and station masters, promotees and direct recruits, degree holder and
diploma holder engineers [see All India Station Masters & Asstt.
Station Masters' Assn. V. General Manager, Central Railway75, S. G.
Jaisinghani V. Union of India76 and State of J. & K. V. Triloki Nath
Khosa77]. The question with which we are concerned, however, is whether
we can extend the above principle of classification SO as to allow pre-
ferential treatment to employees on the ground that they are members of
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. So far as this question is con-
cerned I am of the view that the provision of preferential treatment for
members of backward classes, including scheduled castes and, scheduled
73. (1962) 2 SCR 586 AIR 1962 SC 36.
76.
(1967) 2 SCR 703 AIR 1967 SC 1427:
74.
(1974) 4 SCR 680: AIR 1964 SC 179
65 ITR 34.
(1965) 2 LLJ 569.
75. (1960) 2 SCR 311: AIR 1960 SC 384.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Khanna, J.)
395
tribes, is that contained in clause (4) of Article 16 which permits reserva-
tion of posts for them. There is no scope for spelling out such preferential
treatment from the language of clause (1) of Article 16 because the
language of that clause does not warrant any preference to any citizen
against another citizen. The opening words of clause (4) of Article 16
that
nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of backward class of citizens,
indicate that but for clause (4) it would not have been permissible to
make any reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward
class of citizens.
208. In the case of All India Station Masters' & Asstt. Station
Master's Association (supra) the Roadside Station Masters of the Central
Railway challenged the constitutionality of promotion of guards to higher
grade station masters' posts. The petitioners contention was that the
channel of promotion amounted to a denial of equal opportunity as between
Roadside Station Masters and guards in the matter of promotion and thus
contravened clause (1) of Article 16 of the Constitution. It was urged
that taking advantage of this channel of promotions, guards became
station masters at a much younger age than Roadside Station Masters who
reached the scale when they were much older. According to the petitioners,
Roadside Station Masters and guards really formed one and the same class
of employees. This Court rejected that contention and held that the
Roadside Station Masters belonged to a wholly distinct and separate class
from guards and SO there could be no question of equality of opportunity
in matters of promotions as between Roadside Station Masters and guards.
It was further laid down that the question of denial of equal opportunity
required serious consideration only as between the members of the same
class. The concept of equal opportunity in matters of employment did
not apply as between members of different classes of employees under the
State. Equality of opportunity in matters of employment could be pre-
dicated only between persons who were either seeking the same employ-
ment, or had obtained the same employment. Equality of opportunity in
matters of promotion must mean equality between members of the same
class of employees and not equality between members of separate, independent
classes. In the case of Jaisinghani (supra) the dispute was about seniority
between two classes of income-tax service, the direct recruits to Class I
grade II and promotees from Class II to Class I grade II. For the
purpose of promotion, the Government fixed a ratio of 2 to 1 for direct
recruits and promotees. It was in that context and of those facts that
this Court laid down that it is not correct to say that all officers appointed
to Class I, grade II service formed one class and that after the officers
have been once recruited there could be no distinction between direct
recruits and promotees. It is really a case of recruitment to the service
from two different sources and the adjustment of seniority between them.
The concept of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated
only when the promotees are drawn from the same source. If the pre-
ferential treatment of one source in relation to the other is based on the
differences between the two sources, and the said differences have a reasonable
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
396
SUPREME COURT CASES
relation to the nature of the office it can legitimately be sustained on
the basis of a valid classification. The reason for the classification in that
case was that the higher echelons of the service should be filled by
experienced officers possessing not only a high degree of ability but also
first rate experience. In the case of Triloki Nath Khosa (supra) the
question before the Court was with regard to the validity of a rule which
provided that only those assistant engineers would be eligible for pro-
motion as executive engineers who possessed a degree in engineering. The
validity of this rule was challenged by assistant engineers who were diploma
holders and did not possess the degree in engineering. This Court held
that though persons appointed directly and by promotion were integrated
into a common class of assistant engineers, they could for purposes of
promotion to the cadre of executive engineers be classified on the basis
of educational qualifications. The rule providing that graduates shall be
eligible for such promotion to the exclusion of diploma holders was held to
be not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. It would
thus appear that in each of the above cases the Court was concerned with
two categories of employees, each one of which category constituted a
separate and distinct class. Differential treatment for those classes was
upheld in the context of their educational and other qualifications and
because of the fact that they constituted distinct and separate classes.
Not much argument is needed to show that a rule requiring that an official
must possess a degree in engineering before he can be promoted to the
post of executive engineer is conceived in the interest of efficiency of
service. A classification based upon that consideration is obviously valid.
Likewise, classification based upon the consideration that one category
of employees are direct recruits while others are promotees, is permis-
sible classification because the two categories of employees constitute
two separate and distinct classes. The same is true of roadside
station masters and guards. Classification of employees in each of these
cases was linked with the nature of their initial employment or educa-
tional qualifications and had nothing to do with the fact that they belonged
to any particular section of the population. A classification based upon
the first two factors was upheld because it was conceived in the interest
of efficiency of service and because they constituted two different classes
in view of the fact that they were initially appointed to posts of diffe-
rent categories. Such classification does not impinge upon the rule of
equality of opportunity. As against that, a classification based upon
the consideration that an employee belongs to a particular section of the
population with a view to accord preferential treatment for promotion
is clear violation of equality of opportunity enshrined in clause (1) of
Article 16. In no case has the Court ever accepted and upheld under
Article 6(1) classification and differential treatment for the purpose of
promotion among employees who possessing the same educational quali-
fications were initially appointed as in the present case to the same cate-
gory of posts, viz., that of lower division clerks. The present case falls
squarely within the dictum laid down in the case of Station Masters &
Asstt. Station Masters' Association (supra) that equality of opportunity
in matters of employment could be predicated between persons who were
either seeking the same employment or had obtained the same employ-
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA V. N. M. THOMAS (Khanna, J.)
397
ment. The essential object of various rules dealing with appointment to
posts under the State and promotion to higher posts is to ensure efficiency
of service. Classification upheld under clause (1) of Article 16 sub-
served and in no case militated against the attainment of that object.
Exemption granted to a class of employees, even though for a limited
period, from passing the departmental tests which have been prescribed
for the purpose of promotion would obviously be subversive of the object
to ensure efficiency of service. It cannot be disputed that departmental
tests are prescribed with a view to appraise and ensure efficiency of diffe-
rent employees. To promote employees even though they have not passed
such efficiency test can hardly be consistent with the desideratum of
ensuring efficiency in administration.
209. Much has been made of the fact that exemption from passing
departmental tests granted to members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes is not absolute but only for a limited period. This fact, in our
opinion. would not lend constitutionality to the impugned rule and orders.
Exemption granted to a section of employees while being withheld from
the remaining employees has obvious element of discrimination between
those to whom it is granted and those from whom it is withheld. If the
passing of departmental tests is an essential condition of promotion, it
would plainly be invidious to insist upon compliance with that condition
in the case of one set of employees and not to do so in the case of other.
The basic question is whether exemption is constitutionally permissible.
If the answer to that question be in the negative, the fact that exemption
is for a limited period would not make any material difference. In either
event the vice of discrimination from which exemption suffers would conta-
minate it and stamp it with unconstitutionality. Exemption for a limited
period to be constitutionally valid cannot be granted to one set of employees
and withheld from the other.
210. What clause (1) of Article 16 ensures is equality of opportunity
for all citizens as individuals in matters relating to employment or appoint-
ment to any office under the State. It applies to them all, the least deserv-
ing as well as the most virtuous. Preferential and favoured treatment for
some citizens in the matter of employment or appointment to any office
under the State would be antithesis of the principle of equality of oppor-
tunity. Equalitv of opportunity in matters of employment guaranteed by
clause (1) of Article 16 is intended to be real and effective. It is not
something abstract or illusory. It is a command to be obeyed, not one
to be defied or circumvented. It cannot be reduced to shambles under
some cloak. Immunity or exemption granted to a class, however, limited,
must necessarily have the effect of according favoured treatment to that
class and of creating discrimination against others to whom such immu-
nity or exemption is not granted. Equality of opportunity is one of the
cornerstones of our Constitution. It finds a prominent mention in the
preamble to the Constitution and is one of the pillars which gives support
and strength to the social. political and administrative edifice of the nation.
Privileges. advantages, favours, exemptions. concessions specially earmarked
for sections of population run counter to the concept of equality of oppor-
tunity, they indeed eat into the very vitals of that concept. To countenance
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
398
SUPREME COURT CASES
classification for the purpose of according preferential treatment to
persons not sought to be recruited from different sources and in cases not
covered by clause (4) of Article 16 would have the effect of eroding, if
not destroying altogether, the valued principle of equality of opportunity
enshrined in clause (1) of Article 16.
211. The proposition that to overdo classification is to undermine
equality is specially true in the context of Article 16(1). To introduce
fresh notions of classification in Article 16(1), as is sought to be done
in the present case, would necessarily have the effect of vesting the State
under the garb of classification with power of treating sections of popula-
tion as favoured classes for public employment. The limitation imposed
by clause (2) of Article 16 may also not prove very effective because, as
has been pointed out during the course of arguments, that clause prevents
discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place
of birth, residence or any of them. It may not be difficult to circum-
vent that clause by mentioning grounds other than those mentioned in
clause (2).
212. To expand the frontiers of classification beyond those which
have so far been recognized under clause (1) of Article 16 is bound to
result in creation of classes for favoured and preferential treatment for
public employment and thus erode the concept of equality of opportunity
for all citizens in matters relating to employment under the State.
213. In construing the provisions of the Constitution we should
avoid a doctrinaire approach. A Constitution is the vehicle of the life
of a nation and deals with practical problems of the Government. It is,
therefore. imperative that the approach to be adopted by the courts while
construing the provisions of the Constitution should be pragmatic and
not one as a result of which the court is likely to get lost in a maze of
abstract theories. Indeed, so far as theories are concerned, human think-
ing in its full efflorescence, free from constraints and inhibitions, can
take such diverse forms that views and reasons apparently logical and
plausible can be found both in favour of and against a particular theory.
If one eminent thinker supports one view, support for the opposite view
can be found in the writings of another equally eminent thinker. What-
ever indeed may be the conclusion, arguments not lacking in logic can
be found in support of such conclusion. The important task of constru-
ing the articles of a Constitution is not an exercise in mere syllogism. It
necessitates an effort to find the true purpose and object which underlies
that article. The historical background, the felt necessities of the time,
the balancing of the conflicting interests must all enter into the crucible
when the court is engaged in the delicate task of construing the provi-
sions of a Constitution. The words of Holmes that life of law is not
logic but experience have a direct relevance in the above context.
214. Another thing which must be kept in view while construing
the provisions of the Constitution is to foresee as to what would be the
impact of that construction not merely on the case in hand but also on
the future cases which may arise under those provisions. Out of our
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Khanna, J.)
399
concern for the facts of one individual case, we must not adopt a con-
struction the effect of which might be to open the door for making all
kinds of inroads into a great ideal and desideratum like that of equality
of opportunity. Likewise, we should avoid, in the absence of compelling
reason, a course that has the effect of unsettling a constitutional position,
which has been settled over a long term of years by a series of decisions.
215. The liberal approach that may sometimes have been adopted
in upholding classification under Article 14 would in the very nature
of things be not apt in the context of Article 16 when we keep in view
the object underlying Article 16. Article 14 covers a very wide and
general field of equality before the law and the equal protection of the
laws. It is, therefore, permissible to cover within its ambit manifold
classifications as long as they are reasonable and have a rational connec-
tion with the object thereof. As against that, Article 16 operates in the
limited area of equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating
to employment or appointment to an office under the State. Carving
out classes of citizens for favoured treatment in matters of public employ-
ment, except in cases for which there is an express provision contained
in clause (4) of Article 16, would as already pointed out above in the
very nature of things run counter to the concept underlying clause (1)
of Article 16.
216. The matter can also be looked at from another angle. If
it
was permissible to accord favoured treatment to members of backward
classes under clause (1) of Article 16, there would have been no neces-
sity of inserting clause (4) in Article 16. Clause (4) in Article 16 in such
an event would have to be treated as wholly superfluous and redundant.
The normal rule of interpretation is that no provision of the Constitution
is to be treated as redundant and superfluous. The Court would, there-
fore, be reluctant to accept a view which would have the effect of ren-
dering clause (4) of Article 16 redundant and superfluous.
217. This Court in the case of State of Madras V. Shrimathi
Champakam Dorairajan78 unequivocally repelled the argument the effect
of which would have been to treat clause (4) of Article 16 to be wholly
unnecessary and redundant. Question which arose for consideration in
that case was whether a communal G. O. fixing percentage of seats for
different sections of population for admission in the engineering and medical
colleges of the State of Madras contravened the fundamental rights. It
was held that the communal G. O. by which percentage of seats was appor-
tioned contravened Article 9(2) of the Constitution. A seven-Judge
Bench of this Court in that case referred to clause (4) of Article 16 of
the Constitution and observed
If the argument founded on Article 46 were sound then clause (4) of Article 16
would have been wholly unnecessary and redundant. Seeing, however, that
clause (4) was inserted in Article 16. the omission of such an express provision
from Article 29 cannot but be regarded as significant. It may well be that the
intention of the Constitution was not to introduce at all communal considerations
in matters of admission into any educational institution maintained by the State
78. 1951 SCR 525: AIR 1951 SC 226.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
400
SUPREME COURT CASES
or receiving aid out of State funds. The protection of backward classes of citizens may
require appointment of members of backward classes in State services and the reason
why power has been given to the State to provide for reservation of such appointments
for backward classes may under those circumstances be understood. That consideration,
however, was not obviously considered necessary in the case of admission into an
educational institution and that may well be the reason for the omission from
Article 29 of a clause similar to clause (4) of Article 16.
After the above decision of this Court, clause (4) of Article 15 was added
in the Constitution by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951
and the same reads as under
Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State
from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educa-
tionally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes.
218. If the power of reservation of seats for backward classes was
already contained in clause (1) of Article 15, the decision in the above
mentioned case would in the very nature of things have been different and
there would have been no necessity for the introduction of clause (4) in
Article 15 by means of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act. The
fact that clause (4) of Article 15 is similar to clause (4) of Article 16
was also emphasised by this Court in the case of M. R. Balaji V. State of
Mysore79
219. It has been argued that there are observations in the case of
Champakam (supra) relating to the Directive Principles of State Policy
which should be deemed to have been overruled by the decision of this
Court in the case of Kesavananda Bharati80. It is, in our opinion, not
necessary to express an opinion on this aspect. Whatever view one may
take with regard to those observations, they would not detract from the
correctness of the unanimous decision of the seven-Judge Bench of this
Court in that case that, in the absence of provision like clause (4) of
Article 15, it was not permissible to make reservation of seats for admis.
sion to engineering and medical colleges on the ground of backwardness.
220. The matter can also be looked at from another angle.
Departmental tests are prescribed to ensure standards of efficiency for the
employees. To promote 34 out of 51 persons although they have not
passed the departmental tests and at the same time not to promote those
who have passed the departmental tests can hardly be conducive to effici-
ency. There does not, therefore, appear to be any infirmity in the finding
of the High Court that the impugned promotions are also violative of
Article 335 of the Constitution.
221. I may state that there is no dispute SO far as the question is
concerned about the need to make every effort to ameliorate the lot of
backward classes. including the members of the scheduled castes and the
scheduled tribes. We arc all agreed on that. The backwardness of those
sections of population is a stigma on our social set-up and has got to be
crased as visualized in Article 46 of the Constitution. It may also call
79.
1963 Supp 1 SCR 439, 473: AIR 1963
80.
(1973)
1
225
1973
Supp
SCR
I
SC 649.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Gupta, J.)
401
for concrete acts to atone for the past neglect and exploitation of those
classes with a view to bring them on a footing of equality, real and effec-
tive. with the advanced sections of the population. The question with
which we are concerned, however, is whether the method which has been
adopted by the appellants is constitutionally permissible under clause (1)
of Article 16. The answer to the above question, in my opinion, has to
be in the negative. Apart from the fact that the acceptance of the appel-
lants' contention would result in undermining the principle of equality
of opportunity enshrined in clause (1) of Article 16, it would also in
effect entail overruling of the view which has so far been held by this
Court in the cases of Champakam, Rangachari and Devadasan (supra).
I find no sufficient ground to warrant such a course. The State, in my
opinion, has ample power to make provision for safeguarding the interest
of backward classes under clause (4) of Article 16 which deals with reserva-
tion of appointments or posts for backward classes not adequately repre-
sented in the services under the State. Inaction on the part of the State
under clause (4) of Article 16 cannot, in my opinion, justify strained
construction of clause (1) of Article 16. We have also to guard against
allowing our supposed zeal to safeguard the interests of members of sche-
duled castes and scheduled tribes to so sway our mind and warp our
judgment that we drain off the substance of the contents of clause (1)
of Article 16 and whittle down the principle of equality of opportunity
in the matter of public employment enshrined in that clause in such a way
as to make it a mere pious wish and teasing illusion. The ideals of supre-
macy of merit, the efficiency of services and the absence of discrimination
in sphere of public employment would be the obvious casualties if we
once countenance inroads to be made into that valued principle beyond
those warranted by clause (4) of Article 16.
222. The appeal is dismissed with costs.
GUPTA, J. (dissenting)- agree with brother Khanna, J. that this
appeal should be dismissed, and for the reasons given by him. I only wish
to add a few words on one aspect of the question that arises for decision
in this case.
224.
The lower division clerks working in the Registration Depart-
ment of the State of Kerala have to pass within a fixed time certain depart-
mental tests to be eligible for promotion as upper division clerks. For some
of these lower division clerks who happen to belong to scheduled castes
or scheduled tribes, the time for passing the tests has been extended by
successive orders made by the Government in exercise of the power con-
ferred by Rule 13AA of the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules
1958. The High Court of Kerala held that Rule 13AA was violative of
Article 16(1) and (2) of the Constitution and set aside the orders made
under that rule. On behalf of the appellant, State of Kerala, and some
of the respondents and interveners, validity of Rule 13AA is sought to be
justified on a construction of Article 16(1) which, it is claimed, is based
on the provisions of Articles 46 and 335 of the Constitution. It is
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
402
SUPREME COURT CASES
contended that Article 6(1) should be read in the light of the other two
articles. I am not clear as to what exactly that means ; neither Article
46 and Article 335 mention Article 16(1), nor Article (1) refers to
either of them. All the three articles coexist in the Constitution which we,
the People of India, have given to ourselves, and if it is correct to say that
one of them should be read in the light of the other two, it is equally right
to suggest that the two of them should be read in the light of other.
This means that the various parts of an organic instrument like the Constitu-
tion ought to be harmoniously construed, but that is not the same thing
as suggesting that even where the scope and ambit of one part is clear,
it should be abridged, extended or amended to prove its affinity with
another part. Each limb of the body has its own function, and to try to
make one of them do the work of another is both unnecessary and un-
wise this might throw the entire system out of gear.
225. Article 16 (1) declares a right which is one of the fundamental
rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution, and Article 13 (1) in-
validates all laws inconsistent with such rights. Article 16(1) lays down
There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
226. Article 46 is in Part IV of the Constitution containing the
'Directive Principles of State Policy'. Article 46 reads
The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic inte-
rests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms
of exploitation.
Article 37 states that the provisions contained in Part IV shall not be
enforceable by the courts but the principles embodied in them are "funda-
mental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the
State to apply these principles in making laws". It is difficult to see how
Article 46 which, SO far as relevant for the present purpose, requires the
State to promote with special care the economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, especially of the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes, can serve as an aid to the construction of Article 16(1).
227. Article 335 occurs in Part XVI of the Constitution which
contains some 'Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes'. Article 335
provides
The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of
administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of a State.
This article does not create any right in the members of the scheduled
castes and the scheduled tribes which they might claim in the matter of
appointments to services and posts ; one has to look elsewhere, Article
16(4) for instance, to find out the claims conceded to them. Article 335
says that such claims shall be considered consistently with administrative
efficiency this is a provision which does not enlarge but qualify such
claims as they may have as members of the scheduled castes or scheduled
tribes. Article 335, it seems clear, cannot furnish any clue to the under-
standing of Article 16(1).
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA v. N. M. THOMAS (Gupta, J.)
403
228. Article 6(1) which ensures equality of opportunity for all
citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment has been des-
cribed as an instance or incident of the general guarantee of equality con-
tained in Article 14 [see State of J. & K. V. T. N. Khosa (supra)]. Article 14
which guarantees equality before the law and equal protection of the laws,
it has been held, does not insist on absolute equality of treatment to all
persons in disregard of all differences among them but provides for equa-
lity among equals only. This Court observed in T. Devadasan V. Union
of India81 that
while the aim of this article is to ensure that invidious distinction or arbitrary dis-
crimination shall not be made by the State between a citizen' and a citizen who answer
the same description and the differences which may obtain between them are of
no relevance for the purpose of applying a particular law, reasonable classification
is permissible.
Reasonable classification is thus permissible, and often necessary, to achieve
this equality. Article 16(1) which is an instance of the application of
the general rule of equality with special reference to opportunity for appoint-
ments under the State also does not require
absolute equality as such. What is guaranteed is the equality of opportunity
and nothing more. Article 16(1) or (2) does not prohibit the prescription of reason-
able rules for selection to any employment or appointment to any office. Any
provision as to the qualifications for the employment or the appointment to office
reasonably fixed and applicable to all citizens would certainly be consistent with
the doctrine of the equality of opportunity but in regard to employment, like
other terms and conditions associated with and incidental to it, the promotion to
a selection post is also included in the matters relating to employment, and even
in regard to such a promotion to a selection post all that Article 16(1) guarantees is
equality of opportunity to all citizens who enter service. (General Manager, Southern
Railway V. Rangachari52.)
Article (1) thus contemplates classification on the basis of eligibility
for an appointment those who have the qualifications needed for the
post form one class ; it also implies that the same class of employees
constitute a separate unit. In Sham Sunder V. Union of Indiass, this
Court explained that "Article 16(1) means equality as between members
of the same class of employees" and forbids between the members of
this class discrimination and denial of equal opportunity in the matter
of promotion.
229. The lower division clerks in the Registration Department of
the State of Kerala belong to the same class as employees. Article 16(1)
ensures to all of them equality of opportunity in the matter of promo-
tion. Rule 13AA and the orders made thereunder giving additional
opportunity in this regard to some out of the same class of employees
would be obviously void unless the fact that the favoured members of
the class belong to scheduled castes or scheduled tribes made any diffe-
rence in the position, as contended. It is argued that scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes constitute a well-recognized class of citizens and, as
Article 16(1) permits classification, employees belonging to these castes
and tribes may be treated as a separate unit for promotion. It is claimed
81.
(1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179:
83. (1969) 1 SCR 312: AIR 1969 SC 212:
(1965) 2 LLJ 560.
1969 Lab IC 319.
82. (1962) 2 SCR 586: AIR 1962 SC 36.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
404
SUPREME COURT CASES
that Article 46 and Article 335 encourage such further classification within
the same class which should therefore be regarded as valid for the purpose
of Article 6(1). Two assumptions are implicit in this argument first,
that Article 16(1) is subservient to Article 46 and Article 335 and has
no requirements of its own and, secondly, that these two articles justify the
discrimination made by Rule 13AA. I do not consider either of these
assumptions to be correct. I have stated already that neither Article 46
nor Article 335 is of any assistance in interpreting Article 16(1).
Article 16(1) in clear terms insists on equality of opportunity for
all employees of the same class and this requirement cannot be
dispensed with because of anything in Article 46 or Article 335
which do not in any way qualify the guarantee in Article 6(1).
The article of course permits classification, but only such classi-
fication as is reasonable, and the test of reasonableness, having regard to
the object of the article, must be whether the proposed classification helps
in achieving this object. Judging by this test, is it possible to hold the
sub-division of lower division clerks into two categories, those who belong
to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and those who do not, as
reasonable ? I do not think SO such classification is not relevant to
the object of the article and, therefore, not reasonable.
230. Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are castes and tribes
specified by the President under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution
to be known as such for the purposes of the Constitution. It is accepted
that generally speaking these castes and tribes are backward in educa-
tional and economic fields. It is claimed that the expression "scheduled
castes" does not refer to any caste of the Hindu society but connotes a
backward class of citizens. A look at Article 341 however will show
that the expression means a number of existing social castes listed in a
schedule ; castes do not cease to be castes being put in a schedule though
backwardness has come to be associated with them. Article 46 requires
the State to promote the economic interests of the weaker sections of the
people and, in particular. of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes.
The special reference to the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes does
not suggest that the State should promote the economic interests of these
castes and tribes at the expense of other "weaker sections of the people".
I do not find anything reasonable in denying to some lower division clerks
the same opportunity for promotion as others have because they do not
belong to a particular caste or tribe. Scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes no doubt constitute a well-defined class, but a classification valid
for one purpose may not be so for another ; in the context of Article 16 (1)
the sub-class made by Rule 13AA within the same class of employees
amounts to, in my opinion, discrimination only on grounds of race and
caste which is forbidden by clause (2) of Article 16. In the State of
Rajasthan V. Thakur Pratap Singh4, this Court struck down a notifica-
tion under Section 15 of the Police Act issued by the State of Rajasthan
exempting the Harijan inhabitants of certain villages from payment of the
cost of additional police force stationed in those villages. It was held
84. (1961) 1 SCR 222 AIR 1960 SC 1208.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
STATE OF KERALA 1. N. M. THOMAS (Gupta, J.)
405
that the notification discriminated against the law-abiding members of the
other communities on the basis only of caste. I do not find it possible
to accept that picking out employees belonging to the scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes from the same class of lower division clerks to give
them additional opportunity to be promoted as upper division clerks is
a measure for the promotion of the economic welfare of these castes and
tribes. Some incidental financial gain to certain individuals, assuming it
results in the welfare of the castes and tribes to which they belong in some
remote and indirect way, is not, in my view, what Article 46 contemplates
the other view of Article 46 would justify as valid the exemption granted
to the Harijan villagers of Thakur Pratap Singh's case (supra) from
payment of the cost of additional police force. In any case, Article 16(1),
as I have sought to explain earlier, does not permit such classification
as made by Rule 13AA. That rule may have been inspired by Article 46
which requires the State to take measures to bridge the educational and
economic gap between the weaker sections of the people and other citizens,
but Article 46 does not qualify the provisions of Article 16(1). Article
(1) speaks of equality of opportunity, not opportunity to achieve equality.
For reasons I have stated already, Article 335 appears to be even less
relevant on the question under consideration.
231. All I have said above relates to the scope of Article 16(1)
only, because Counsel for the appellant has built his case on this pro-
vision alone. Clause (4) of Article 16 permits reservation of appoint-
ments on posts in favour of backward classes of citizens notwithstanding
Article 16(1) ; I agree with the views expressed by Khanna, J. on Article
(4) which comes in for consideration incidentally in this case. The
appalling poverty and backwardness of large sections of the people must
move the State machinery to do everything in its power to better their
condition but doling out unequal favours to members of the clerical staff
does not seem to be a step in that direction : tilting at the windmill taking
it to be a monster serves no useful purpose.
232. It may be pertinent in this connection to reter to the observa-
tions of Gajendragadkar, J. (as he then was) in M. R. Balaji V. State
of Mysore85 which, though made in the context of Article 5(4), has
relevance for this case also
Wi-en Article 15(4) refers to the special provision for the advancement of
certain classes or scheduled castes or scheduled tribes, it must not be ignored that
the provision which is authorised to be made is a special .provision it is not a
provision which is exclusive in character, so that in looking after the advancement
of those classes, the State would be justified in ignoring altogether the advancement
of the rest of the society. It is because the interests of the society at large would
be served by promoting the advancement of the weaker elements in the society
that Article 15(4) authorises special provision to be made. But if a provision which
is in the nature of an exception completely excludes the rest of the society, that
clearly is outside the scope of Article 15(4). It would be extremely unreasonable
to assume that in enacting Article 15(4) the Parliament intended to provide that
where the advancement of the backward classes or the scheduled castes and tribes
was concerned, the fundamental rights of the citizens constituting the rest of the
society were to be completely and absolutely ignored.
85
1963 Supp I SCR 439 AIR 1963 SC 649.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
406
SUPREME COURT CASES
More recently, in the State of J. & K. V. T. N. Khosa (supra) this Court
has sounded a note of caution :
let us not evolve, through imperceptible extensions, a theory of classification
which may subvert, perhaps submerge, the precious guarantee of equality. The
eminent spirit of an ideal society is equality and so we must not be left to ask in
wonderment what after all is the operational residue of equality and equal
opportunity ?
I believe these words are not just so much rhetoric, but meant to be taken
seriously.
233. I concur with the order proposed by Khanna, J.
ORDER
Order by Majority*
234. The validity of Rule 13AA of the Kerala State and Subordinate
Services Rules, 1958 and two orders, Exhibits P-2 and P-6 is upheld.
The judgment of the High Court is set aside and the appeal is allowed.
Parties will pay and bear their own costs.
(1976) 2 Supreme Court Cases 406
(Before H. R. Khanna and P. K. Goswami, JJ.)
THE STATE OF MADRAS
Appellant ;
Versus
K. N. SHANMUGHA MUDALIAR AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 1425 of 1968t, decided on March 4, 1976
Land Acquisition - Owner of land notified under the Madras Estates Abolition
Act (26 of 1948) but acquisition made under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 -
Held, compensation payable under the Land Acquisition Act - State can
no
longer plead that the interest of landholder vested in the State - State itself
admitted the interest of the landholder by impleading him in the reference under
Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act
(Para 5)
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 - Sections 29 and 30 - Compensation in
Tamil Nadu to melavaramdars (landholders) is half of that to kudiwaramdars
(cultivators)
(Para 6)
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 - Section 34 - Interest on amount awarded to
run from the date when possession of the land taken
(Para 6)
Appeal dismissed
M/2900/C
Advocates who appeared in this case
A. V. Rangam and Miss A. Subhashini, Advocates, for the Appellant;
K. Fayaram and R. Chandrasekhar, Advocates, for Respondent No. 1 ;
Ex parte, Respondents Nos. 2-8.
[Ed. : The certified copy so indicates but it is in fact an order of the Court having been
signed by all the seven Judges constituting the Bench. The order is based of course on
the majority decision of Ray, C.J. and Mathew, Beg, Krishna Iyer and Fazal Ali, JJ.]
From the Judgment and Decree dated August 5, 1964 of the Madras High Court in
Appeal No. 448 of 1960.