this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
50
SUPREME COURT CASES
thirdly, the Tribunal did not find that the appellant was a tenant, since the
stage for such an inquiry was still to arrive.
7. It is remarkable that though the appellant contended that he was in
possession of the lands as a tenant of the respondent, he could produce no
evidence at all in support of that contention. He kept away from the witness-
box and made his unknowledgeable son bear the brunt of the burden. The
appellant was unable to produce any rent receipt and the effective entries in
the revenue records show beyond any manner of doubt that he was not in
possession of the lands as a tenant of the respondent. The High Court was,
therefore, justified in concluding that the finding recorded by the revenue
authorities did not have "even an iota of evidence" to support it.
8. Accordingly, we confirm the judgment of the High Court and dismiss
the appeal. There will be no order as to costs.
(1978) 2 Supreme Court Cases 50
(BEFORE M. H. BEG, C.J. AND Y. V. CHANDRACHUD, P. N. BHAGWATI,
V. R. KRISHNA IYER, S. MURTAZA FAZAL ALI, P. N. SHINGHAL AND
D. A. DESAI, JJ.)
Writ Petition No. 108 of 1976
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK AND ANOTHER
Petitioners ;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
And
Writ Petition Nos. 174-177 of 1976
RAM PARKASH MANCHANDA AND OTHERS
Petitioners ;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Writ Petition Nos. 108 and 174-177 of 1976, decided on February 21, 1978
Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 -
Constitutionality - Under the Settlement the annual cash bonus accruing to
Class III and Class IV employees was a debt iu the nature of property within the
meaning of Article 31(2) - For their compulsory acquisition by trausfer to
LIC itself no compensation provided by the Act - Hence violative of Arti-
cle 31(2) - Therefore not necessary to consider whether the Act also violates
Article 19(1)(f) - [Per Beg, C.J., the Act did not violate Article 31(2) but Arti-
cles 19(1)(f) and 14]
Constitution of India - Articles 19(1)(f), 31(1) and 31(2) - 'Property'
has the same connotation in all these constitutional provisions - Held must be
given the widest interpretation and refers to property of every kind, tangible
or intangible, debts and choses-in-action - Therefore choses-iu-action can be
compulsorily acquired under Article 31(2)
(Paras 13 & 16)
Constitution of India - Articles 31(2A) and 31(2) - 'Transfer of owner-
ship' in Article 31(2A) - The term 'transfer of ownership' is of wide import and
comprises every mode by which ownership may be trausferred - Extinguishment
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK V. UNION OF INDIA
51
of a debt of a creditor with the corresponding benefit to the State or State-owned/
controlled Corporation would be transfer of ownership to the State - Hence
cancellation of bonus agreed to be paid to employees by a State-owned Corpora-
tion is transfer of ownership to itself and therefore compulsory acquisition under
Article 31(2)
(Paras 18 to 20)
Constitution of India - Article 31(2) - Acquisition of moneys, debts and
choses-in-action must be made to achieve a public purpose - Held, does not
imply that property required must itself be used for a public purpose (Para 16)
Constitution of India - Part IV - Binding force and limits of Directive
Principles of State Policy discussed
(Para 33)
Constitution of India - Article 19(2) to (6) - Reasonableness, determina-
tion of - The prospects held ont, the representations made, the conduct of the
Government, and equities arising therefrom to be considered
(Para 34)
Constitution of India - Articles 358 and 359(1A) - Only the enforcement
of these suspended - Any act of legislature can be impugned on the basis of
these articles once emergency is lifted - Valid claims cannot be washed off by
the emergency per se - "things done or omitted to be done" in Article 359(1A)
to be interpreted narrowly
(Paras 39 & 40)
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 - Sections 49(2)(b) and (bb) - Life
Insurance Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1960-Reguation 8-Settlement dated
January 24, 1974 for payment of bonus to Class III and Class IV employees -
Grant of bonns once approved by the Central Government cannot be rescinded
by it - That would force LIC to commit breach of its obligation under Sec-
tion 18(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to pay bonus in terms of the settle-
ment
(Para 11)
Statute Law - An Act of legislature cannot annul a final judgment giving
effect to rights of any party - A declaratory jndgment holding an impost or tax
invalid can be superseded by a validation statute - But where the factual
or
legal situation is retrospectively altered by an act of legislature, the judgment
stands unless reversed by an appeal or review - The Life Insurance Corpora-
tion (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 therefore did not affect the writ of
mandamus dated May 21, 1976 of the Calcutta High Court issned against the
LIC for breach of the settlement - Such legislative acts may also trench upon
judicial power
(Paras 9, 21, 31 & 32)
Words and Phrases - "Transfer of ownership" - Meaning of
Section 49 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 provides that the
Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
make regulations not inconsistent with the Act which provide for the method
of recruitment of employees and agents of the Corporation and the terms and
conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation. The Corporation
made certain Regulations of which Regulation 58 provided that the Corpora-
tion may grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees subject to such direc-
tions as the Central Government may issue. From 1959, various settlements
were arrived at between the Corporation and its employees in regard to various
matters including bonus relating to Class III and Class IV employees of the
Corporation. The last settlement having expired on March 31, 1973, the
employees of the Corporation submitted a charter of demands and a settlement
was arrived at on January 24, 1974. Clause 8 of the Settlement provided
that -
"(i) No profit-sharing bonus shall be paid. However, the Corpora-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
52
SUPREME COURT CASES
tion may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue
from time to time, grant any other kind of bonus to its Class III and IV
employees.
(ii) An annual cash bonus will be paid to all Class III and Class IV
employees at the rate of 15% of the annual salary (i.e. basic pay inclusive
of special pay, if any, and dearness allowance and additional dearness
allowance) actually drawn by an employee in respect of the financial year
to which the bonus relates.
(iii) Save as provided herein all other terms and conditions attached
to the admissibility and payment of bonus shall be as laid down in the
Settlement on bonus dated June 26, 1972."
Clause 12 provided that the Settlement shall be effective from April 1, 1973
and shall be for a period of four years, i.e. from April 1, 1973 to March 31,
1977. Thereafter, administrative instructions in regard to various matters
relating to payment of cash bonus were issued and one of them provided that
in case of retirement or death, salary up to the date of cessation of service shall
be taken into account for the purpose of determining the amount of bonus
payable to the employee or his heirs. Another such direction provided that
the bonus shall be paid along with the salary for the month of April but in case
of retirement or death the payment will be made soon after the contingency.
The bonus was paid to the Class III and Class IV employees for the first two
years, i.e. up to March 31, 1975. In September 1975, the Payment of Bonus
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 was promulgated by the President of India
followed by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 1976. The Ordinance
and the Act did not apply to the employees of the Life Insurance Corporation.
The Central Government decided that the employees of establishments which
are not covered by the Payment of Bonus Act would not be eligible for pay-
ment of bonus but ex-gratia cash payment in lieu of bonus would be made as
may be determined by the Government taking into account the wage level,
financial circumstances etc., in each case and such payment will be subject to
a maximum of 10% ; and pursuant to this decision the LIC was advised by the
Ministry of Finance that no further payment of bonus should be made to the
LIC employees without getting the same cleared by the Government. The
LIC, therefore, issued circulars that, since the question of payment of bonus
was being reviewed, no bonus should be paid to the employees under the
existing provisions until further instructions. Thereupon, the Insurance Em-
ployees' Association filed a writ petition in the High Court of Calcutta and on
May 21, 1976 a single Judge allowed the writ petition and issued a writ of
mandamus directing the LIC to act in accordance with the terms of the Settle-
ment dated January 24, 1974 and a writ of prohibition not to refuse to pay
cash bonus along with their salary for the month of April 1976 as provided
by the Settlement read with the administrative instructions. The LIC pre-
ferred a Letters Patent Appeal but in the meantime, i.e. on May 29, 1976, the
impugned Act, the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlement)
Act, 1976, came into force and, therefore, it was stated on behalf of the LIC
before the Division Bench that there was no necessity for proceeding with the
appeal and hence the Division Bench did not disturb the judgment of the single
Judge.
Section 3 of the impugned Act provided that-
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, the provisions of the settlement in so far as they relate to the pay-
ment of an annual cash bonus to every Class III and Class IV employee
of the Corporation at the rate of fifteen per cent, of his annual salary, shall
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA
53
not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to have had any force
or effect on and from April 1, 1975.
The effect of the impugned Act therefore was to deprive the Class III and Class
IV employees of the annual cash bonus to which they were entitled under
Clause 8(2) of the Settlement, for the years April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976
and April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977. Therefore, the employees filed writ peti-
tions challenging the constitutional validity of the impugned Act on the ground
that it violated Articles 31(2) and 19(1)(f) of the Constitution. It was
also
contended that there was nothing in the impugned Act which set at naught
the effect of the Judgment of the Calcutta High Court or the binding character
of the writ of mandamus issued against the LIC.
Held :
Per Curiam
The writ petitions should be allowed. The L. I. C. (Modification of
Settlement) Act, 1976 should be declared void and a writ of mandamus should
be issued directing the Union of India and the LIC toforbearfrom implementing
or enforcing the provisions of the Act and to pay annual cash balance for the
years April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977
to the Class III and Class IV employees of the LIC in accordance with the
terms of Clause 8(2) of the Settlement dated January 24, 1974.
(Para 23)
Per Beg, C.J.
(1) It is true that the right to receive bonus, which has been recognised by
the Central Government both by its orders and conduct under a settlement, is
a right to property. Nevertheless, in view of Article 31(2A) defining acqui-
sition, viz.,
Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownership or
right to possession of any property to the State or to a Corporation owned
or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to provide for the com-
pulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, notwithstanding that it
deprives any person of his property,
it is doubtful that this definition of acquisition is satisfied in the present
case.
(Para 37)
(2)(a) Section 3 of the impugned Act is, however, struck by the provisions
of Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution and is not saved by Article 19(6). The
impugned Act is a pure and simple case of deprivation of the rights of the
Class III and Class IV employees without any apparent nexus with any public
interest.
(Paras 39 & 28)
Now there is no basis for the contention of the employees that Article 43
of the Directive Principles of State Policy casts an obligation on the State to
secure I living wage for the workers, that it is part of the principles declared
fundamental in the governance of the country and that, therefore, the Article
conferred practically a fundamental right which could be enforced, in the face
of Article 37 which provides that the Directive Principles of State Policy shall
not be enforceable by any court. The best way in which the Directive Prin-
ciples without being directly enforced are given vitality and effect by courts
is to use them as criteria of reasonableness and, therefore, of the validity of
legislation and executive action. If progress towards goals found in Arti-
cles 38, 39 and 43 is desired there should not be any curtailment of wage rates
arbitrarily without disclosing any valid reason for it. The enactment in the
present case seeks to deprive the workers of the benefits of the Settlement
arrived at and assented to by the Central Government. It is therefore con-
trary to public interest and, hence not protected by Article 19(6) of the Consti-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
54
SUPREME COURT CASES
tution. The prospects held out, the representations made, the conduct of the
Government, the equities arising therefrom, may all be taken into considera-
tion for judging whether a particular piece of legislation initiated by the Govern-
ment and enacted by the Parliament is reasonable. The principle in Union
of India V. Indo-Afghan Agencies Ltd, [(1968) 2 SCR 365] may be applicable
even though in the instant case it is a provision of the Act of Parliament,
because, the Act is the result of the proposal made by the Government of the
day, which, instead of proceeding under Section 11(2) of the LIC Act, chose
to make an Act of Parliament protected by emergency provisions. (Paras 33 & 34)
(b) The impugned Act is also violative of Article 14. It is unfair to adopt
legislative procedure to undo the settlement which had become the basis of a
decision of the High Court. Even if legislation can remove the basis of a deci-
sion it has to do it by an alteration of a general right of a class but not by simply
excluding specific settlements between the Corporation and its employees from
the purview of Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which settle-
ments had been held to be valid and enforceable by the High Court. The
LIC has been making very handsome profits so that the question of jeopardiz-
ing its interests or of the policy-holders would not arise. The impugned Act
is nothing more than selective discrimination practised against the lower levels
of the staff of the LIC.
(Paras 39, 27 & 35)
(c) Articles 358 of the Constitution under which Emergency was declared
is not a bar to giving effect to rights under Article 19. Both Article 358 and
Article 359(1A) provide that as soon as the proclamation of emergency ceases
to operate the effect of suspension imposed vanishes except in respect of things
done or omitted to be done before the law so ceased to have effect. It would
be wrong to hold that the suspension of invalidity during emergency is con-
verted into a validation of law and that the rights conferred under the Settle-
ment were washed off. The law made during the emergency would not be
validated but only its invalidation was suspended. The phrase "things done
or omitted to be done" should be interpreted very narrowly and so interpreted
settlements were not deemed to be wiped off. The effect, therefore, is that no
payment could be demanded under them during the einergency, but as soon as
emergency was over, the Settlements would revive and what could not
be
demanded during the emergency would become rayable even for the period
of emergency for which payment was suspended. Otherwise, the enactment
will have effect even after the emergency had ceased.
(Paras 29, 39 & 40)
521, relied on
(3) Moreover, to give effect to the judgment of the Calcutta High Court
is not the same thing as enforcing a right under Article 19 of the Constitution.
If the right conferred by the Judgment independently is sought to be set aside,
Section 3 of the Act would be invalid for trenching upon the judicial power.
Even if Section 3 of the impugned Act seeks to take away the basis of the Judg-
ment of the Calcutta High Court (it does not in fact say so) by enacting what
may appear to be a law, yet, where the rights of the citizens against the
State are concerned, an interpretation which upholds the right should be
adopted.
(Paras 27, 31 & 32)
Per Bhagwati, Krishna Iyer and Desai, JJ.
(1) (a) Article 31(2) as it stood at the relevant time is in the following
terms :
(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned save
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA
55
for a public purpose and save by authority of a law which provides for
acquisition or requisitioning of the property for an amount which may be
fixed by such law or which may be determined in accordance with such
principles and given in such manner as may be specified in such law ;
and no such law shall be called in question in any court on the ground that
the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate or that the whole or any
part of such amount is to be given otherwise than in cash.
Article 31, clauses (2A) and (2B) were as follows :
(2A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownership
or right to possession of any property to the State or to a corporation
owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to provide for the
compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, notwithstanding
that it deprives any person of his property.
(2B) Nothing in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of Article 19 shall affect
any such law as is referred to in clause (2).
(Para 29)
(b) Regulation 58 undoubtedly says that non-profit sharing bonus may
be granted by the LIC to its employees subject to such directions as the Central
Government may issue and, therefore, if the Central Government issues
a
direction to the contrary, non-profit sharing bonus cannot be granted by the
LIC to any class of employees. But in the instant case, the grant of annual
cash bonus to Class III and Class IV employees under Clause 8(ii) of the Settle-
ment was approved by the Central Government as provided in Clause 12 and
a direction contemplated by Regulation 58 was given by the Central Govein-
ment that such annual cash bonus may be granted. The Settlement having
been arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceedings was
binding on the parties under Section 18(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947. It was, therefore, not competent to the Central Government to issue
another contrary direction which would have the effect of compelling the
LIC to commit a breach of its obligation under Section 18(1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act.
(Paras 10 & 11)
(c) Clause 8(i) of the Settlement certainly provides that non-profit sharing
bonus could be granted "subject to such directions as the Central Govern-
ment may issue from time to time". But these words are conspicuously absent
in Clause 8(ii). Clauses 8(i) and (ii) are distinct and independent clauses and
while Clause 8(i) enacts a general provision, Clause 8(ii) picks out one kind of
non-profit sharing bonus and specifically provides that annual cash bonus shall
be paid to all Class III and Class IV employees at the rate of 15% There-
fore, Class 111 and Class IV employees had an absolute right to receive the
annual cash bonus from the LIC in terms of Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement and
it was not competent to the Central Government to issue any direction to the
LIC to refuse or withhold the payment.
(Para 11)
(d) The bonus was payable at the end of the year and not before, but even
an employee who retired or resigned before the expiration of the year as also
the heirs of the deceased employee who died during the currency of the year
were entitled to receive proportionate bonus. The annual cash bonus payable
under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement, therefore, accrued from day-to-day though
payable in case of retirement, resignation or death, on the happening of that
contingency and otherwise on the expiration of the year to which the bonus
related. There was thus plainly and unquestionably a debt in respect of the
annual cash bonus accruing to each of the Class III or Class IV employees
from day-to-day and consequently, on the expiration of the year April 1, 1975
to March 31, 1976, the annual cash bonus payable was a debt due and owing
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
56
SUPREME COURT CASES
from the LIC to each of the Class III and Class IV employees ; so also at the
date when the impugned Act came into force each of such employee was
entitled to a debt due and owing to him from the LIC in respect of the annual
cash bonus from April 1, 1976 up to the date.
(Paras 12 & 13)
(e) These debts due and owing from the LIC were the property of the Class
III and Class IV employees within the meaning of Article 31(2) of the Consti-
tution.
(Para 13)
Even jurisprudentially debts and other rights of action are property and
there is no reason why they should be excluded from the protection of the
constitutional guarantee.
(Para 13)
(f) Perhaps the preponderant view in U.S is that choses-in-action cannot
come within the power of eminent domain but it would not be right for this
Court to be unduly influenced by such a view in the interpretation of Article 31(2)
which must be interpreted on its own terms without any preconceived notions
borrowed from other systems of law. Property in Articles 19, 31(1) and 31(2)
must have the same connotation and since these are constitutional provisions
intended to secure a fundamental right they must receive the widest inter-
pretation and must be held to refer to property of every kind. Property within
the meaning of Articles 19(1)(f) and 31(2) comprises every form of property,
tangible or intangible, including debts and choses-in-action such as unpaid
accumulation of wages, pension and cash grants. The trend of recent deci-
sions of this Court also has been to regard debts or choses-in-action as property
which can be compulsorily acquired under Article 31(2). Therefore, the
debts due and owing from the LIC to the Class III and Class IV employees in
respect of annual cash bonus were property within the meaning of Article 31(2)
and they could be compulsorily acquired under that clause. The premise on
which a contrary view was taken in some of the cases is that the only purpose
for which choses-in-action may be acquired is for augmenting the revenue
of the State, and since there can be no other purpose for such acquisition, it
would not be a public purpose. This premise is plainly incorrect because
choses-in-action can be acquired for a public purpose other than mere adding
to the revenues of the State as in a case where such acquisition is for the relief
of the distress of the poor and helpless debtors.
(Paras 13 to 17)
Deokinandan Prasad V. State of Biliar, (1971) Supp SCR 634 : (1971) 2
Ravon Silk Manufacturing (Wvg.) Co. Ltd., (1974) 1 SCR 671 : (1973) 2
State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde, (1968) 3 SCR 489 ; State of Bihar V.
Kameshwar Singh, 1952 SCR 889 and Bonibay Dyeing & Manufacturing
Co. Ltd. V. State of Bombay, 1959 SCR 1122, explained
The principle in State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde that the majority view
in Kameshwar Singh's case was followed by this Court in the Bombay Dyeing
case does not correctly represent what was decided in the Bombay Dyeing
and Manufacturing Company's case. The majority view in Kameshwar Singh's
case and in State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde can no longer be regarded as
good law in view of the statement of law in the majority judgment of Shah, J.
in the R. C. Cooper's case and of the judgment of Hidayatullah, C.J. in the
Privy Purse case,
(Paras 14 & 17)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA
57
(g) The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the impugned Act state
that the provisions with respect to the Settlement in regard to payment of
annual cash bonus were being set aside with a view to enabling the LIC to
make ex-gratia payment to the employees, but the impugned Act does not
contain any provision to that effect. The Class III and Class IV employees
were deprived of the debts due and owing to them without any provision in
the statute for payment of compensation
(Para 18)
(h) While interpreting Article 31(2A) it must be remembered tha+ the
interpretation will determine the scope and ambit of the constitutional guarantee
under Article 31(2). Therefore, clause (2A) should not be construed in
a
narrow or pedantic manner nor a doctrinaire or legalistic approach should be
adopted. The interpretation must be guided by the substance of the matter.
When clause (2A) says that in order to attract the applicability of clause (2)
the law must provide for the transfer of ownership of property to the State
or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State, it is not necessary that
the law should, in SO many words, provide for such transfer. Transfer of
ownership is also a term of wide import and it comprises every mode by which
ownership may be transferred from one person to another. The mode of
transfer may vary from one kind of property to another and it would depend
on the nature of the property to be transferred. Article 1(2), after the amend-
ment of the Article, dealt with compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of
property by the State, and Article 31(1) dealt with deprivation of property
in other ways. What should be regarded as compulsory acquisition or re-
quisitioning of property for the purpose of clause (2) was defined in clause (2A).
It is only where a law provides for the transfer of ownership or right to posses-
sion of any property to the State or to a corporation owned and controlled
by the State that it would have to meet the challenge of Article 1(2) as a law
providing for compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property.
(i) In the present case, the LIC is a corporation owned by the State. The
debts due and owing to Class III and Class IV employees from the LIC are
cancelled or extinguished by the impugned Act.
(Paras 18 & 19)
But it cannot be said on that account that there can be no
transfer of ownership of a right or interest unless such right or interest
continues to have a separate identifiable existence in the hands of the
transferee. There can be cases where ownership of a right or interest may
be transferred from one person to another by extinguishment. as in the
case of a lessor terminating the lease granted by him to the lessee or
where a law provides for such cancellation. Where by reason of extinguish-
ment of a right or interest of a person detriment is suffered by him and a corres-
ponding benefit accrues to the State there would be a transfer of ownership
of such right or interest to the State. Therefore, when a debt due and owing
by the State or corporation owned or controlled by the State is extinguished
by law, there is transfer of ownership of the money representing the debt from
the creditors to the State or the State owned/controlled corporation. The
extinguishment of the debt of the creditor with the corresponding benefit to
the State or State owned/controlled corporation would plainly and indubit-
ably involve transfer of ownership of the amount representing the debt from the
former to latter. This is the real effect of extinguishment of a debt and the
State or the State owned/controlled corporation cannot obtain the benefit at
the cost of the creditor and yet avoid applicability of Article 31(2). This is a
case where a constitutionally guaianteed right is sought to be enforced and
the protection of such right should not be allowed to be defeated or rendered
illusory by the legislative stratagems. The court and the bar should be alert
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
58
SUPREME COURT CASES
to rip open such stratagems and devices and find out whether in effect and
substance the legislation trenches upon fundamental rights. Therefore, the
conclusion is inevitable that the direct effect of the impugned Act was to transfer
ownership of the debts due and owing to the Class III and Class IV employees
in respect of the annual cash bonus to the LIC and since the LIC is a corpora-
tion owned by the State the impugned Act was a law providing for compulsory
acquisition of the debts by the State within the meaning of Article 31(2A).
If that be so, the impugned Act must be held to be violative of Article 31(2)
since it did not provide for payment of any compensation for the compulsory
acquisition of those debts.
(Paras 20 & 21)
State of W. B. V. Subodh Gopal Bose, 1954 SCR 587 and Dwarkadas Srinivas
V. Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd., 1954 SCR 674, referred to
State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde, (1968) 3 SCR 489 and Ajit Singh V. State
of Punjab, AIR 1967 SC 856, followed
(2) It is a settled practice of the Court to decide no more than what is
absolutely necessary for the decision of a case. Also once it is held that the
impugned Act falls within Article 1(2) its validity cannot be tested by reference
to Article 19(1)(f) by reason of Article 31(2B). Therefore, it is not necessary
to test the validity of the Act as against Article 19(1)(f).
(Para 22)
(3) (a) Section 3 of the impugned Act provides that the provisions of the
Settlement in so far as they relate to payment of annual cash bonus to Class III
and Class 1V employees shall not have any force or effect and shall not be
deemed to have any force or effect from April 1, 1975 ; but the writ of mandamus
issued by the Calcutta High Court to pay the amount of bonus from April
1,
1975 to March 31, 1976 remained untouched by the impugned Act. So far
as the right of the employees to this annual cash bonus is concerned it became
crystallised in the judgment and thereafter they became entitled to enforce
the writ of mandamus and not any right under the Settlement. This right
under the judgment was not sought to be taken away by the impugned Act.
The judgment is deemed to subsist and the LIC was bound to pay the annual
cash bonus in obedience to the writ of mandamus. The LIC committed an
error in withdrawing its L. P. Appeal and allowing the judgment of the single
Judge to become final.
(Paras 7 & 8)
Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. V. Broach Borough Municipality, (1970) 1 SCR
Patel Gordhandas V. Municipal Committee, AIR 1963 SC 1742, referred
to
(b) The judgment given by the Calcutta High Court which is relied upon
by the petitioners is not a mere declaratory judgment holding an impost or tax
to be invalid so that a validation statute can remove the defect pointed out by
the judgment amending the law with retrospective effect and validate such
impost or tax. It is a judgment giving effect to the right of the petitioners
to annual cash bonus under the settlement by issuing a writ of mandamus
directing the LIC to pay the amount. If by reason of retrospective altera-
tion of the factual or legal situation, the judgment is rendered erroreous, the
remedy may be by way of appeal or review but so long as the judgment stands,
it cannot be disregarded or ignored and it must be obeyed by the LIC. There-
fore, in any event, irrespective of whether the impugned Act is constitutionally
valid or not, the LIC is bound to obey the writ of mandamus issued by the
Calcutta High Court and pay annual cash bonus for the year April 1, 1975
to March 31, 1976 to the Class 111 and Class IV employees.
(Para 9)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK y. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
59
Per Chandrachud, Fazal Ali and Shinghal, JJ.
We agree with the conclusion of Brother Bhagwati but prefer to rest our
decision on the ground that the impugned Act violates the provisions of
Article 31(2) and is, therefore, void. We consider it unnecessary to express
any opinion on the effect of the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in W. P.
No. 371 of 1976.
(Para 42)
S-M/3811/CL
Advocates who appeared 111 this case :
R. K. Garg, S. C. Agarwala and Aruneshwar Gupta, Advocates, for the peti-
tioners in W. P. 108 :
Somnath Chatterjee, Senior Advocate (P. K. Chatterjee and Rathin Das,
Advocates, with him). for the petitioners in 174-177 ;
S. V. Gupte, Attorney General and U. R. Lalit, Senior Advocate (R. N.
Sachthey and Miss A. Subhashini, Advocates, with him), for Respondent 2
in all the W. Ps. :
S. V. Gupte, Attorney General (D. N. Mishra, Advocate, with him), for
Respondents 2 and 3 in W. P. 108 and Respondents 2-4 in W. P. 174-177 ;
P. S. Khera, Advocate, for the intervener ( AIN LIC Employees Federation).
The Judgments of the Court were delivered by
BHAGWATI, J. (for himself, Krishna Iyer and Desai, JJ.)- These writ petit-
tions arc liled by employees of the Life Insurance Corporation challenging the
constitutional validity of the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of
Settlement) Act, 1976. This unusual piece of legislation was enacted by Parlia-
ment during the emergency at a time when there could hardly be any effective
debate or discussion and it sought to render ineffective a solemn and deli-
berate Settlement arrived at between the Life Insurance Corporation and four
different associations of its employees for payment of cash bonus. It is neces-
sary, in order to appreciate the various contentions arising in the writ petitions
to recapitulate briefly the facts leading up to the enactment of the Life Insurance
Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976, hereinafter referred to as
the impugned Act.
1A. The Life Insurance Corporation is a statutory authority established
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 and under Section 6 it is the
general duty of the Life Insurance Corporation to carry on life insurance business,
whether in or outside India, and it is required to so exercise its powers as to
secure that life insurance business is developed to the best advantage of the
community. It is not necessary to refer to the various provisions of the Life
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 which define the powers, duties and func-
tions of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, since we are not concerned with
them in these writ petitions. It would be enough to refer to Section 49 which
confers power on the Life Insurance Corporation to make regulations. Sub-
section (1) of that section provides that the Life Insurance Corporation may,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations, not
inconsistent with the Act, "to provide for all matters for which provision is
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions" of the Act and
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
60
SUPREME COURT CASES
sub-section (2) enacts that in particular and without prejudice to the generality
of the power conferred under sub-section (1), such regulations may provide
for-
(b) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the Cor-
poration and the terms and conditions of service of such employees or
agents ;
(bb) the terms and conditions of service of persons who have become
employees of the Corporation under sub-section (1) of Section 11 ;
The Life Insurance Corporation has in exercise of the power conferred under
clauses (b) and (bb) of sub-section (2) of Section 49 and with the previous
approval of the Central Government, made the Life Insurance Corporation
(Staff) Regulations, 1960 defining the terms and conditions of service of its
employees. There is only one Regulation which is material for our purposes
and that is Regulation 58 which is in the following terms :
The Corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central
Government may issue, grant non-profit sharing bonus to its employees
and the payment thereof, including conditions of eligibility for the bonus,
shall be regulated by instructions issued by the Chairman from time 10
time.
We have set out Regulation 58 in its present form as that is the form in which
it stood throughout the relevant period. It will be a matter for consideration
as to what is the effect of this Regulation on the Settlement arrived at between
the Life Insurance Corporation and its employees in regard to bonus.
2. It appears that right from 1959 settlements were arrived at between
the Life Insurance Corporation and its employees from time to time in regard
to various matters relating to the terms and conditions of service of Class III
and Class IV employees including bonus payable to them. The last of such
settlement dated June 20, 1970, as modified by the Settlement dated June 26,
1972, expired on March 31, 1973. Thereupon four different associations
of employees of the Life Insurance Corporation submitted their charter
of demands for revision of scales of pay, allowance and other terms and condi-
tions of service on behalf of Class III and Class IV employees. The Life
Insurance Corporation carried on negotiations with these associations between
July 1973 and January 1974 at which there was free and frank exchange of
views in regard to various matters including the obligation of the Life Insur-
ance Corporation to the policy-holders and the community and ultimately
these negotiations culminated in a Settlement dated January 24, 1974 between
the Life Insurance Corporation and these associations. The Settlement having
been arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding, was
binding on the parties under Section 18, sub-section (1) of the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947 and since the four associations which were parties to the Settle-
ment covered among themselves all Class III and Class IV employees, the
Settlement was binding on the Life Insurance Corporation and all its Class III
and Class IV employees. The Settlement provided for various matters relat-
ing to the terms and conditions of service but we are concerned only with
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
61
clause (8) which made provision in regard to bonus. That clause was in
the
following terms :
(i) No profit sharing bonus shall be paid. However, the Corpora-
tion may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue
from time to time, grant any other kind of bonus to its Class III and Class
IV employees.
(ii) An annual cash bonus will be paid to all Class III and Class IV
employees at the rate of 15% of the annual salary (i.e. basic pay inclu-
sive of special pay, if any, and dearness allowance and additional dearness
allowance) actually drawn by an employee in respect of the financial
year to which the bonus relates.
(iii) Save as provided herein all other terms and conditions attached
to the admissibility and payment of bonus shall be as laid down in the
Settlement on bonus dated the June 26, 1972.
It is also necessary to reproduce here clause (12) as that has some bearing on
the controversy between the parties :
PERIOD OF SETTLEMENT :
(1) This Settlement shall be effective from April 1, 1973 and shall be for
a period of four years, i.e., from April 1, 1973 to March 31, 1977.
(2) The terms of this Settlement shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of the Corporation and the Central Government.
(3) This Settlement disposes of all the demands raised by the work-
men for revision of terms and conditions of their service.
(4) Except as otherwise provided or modified by this Settlement,
the workmen shall continue to be governed by all the terms and conditions
of service as set forth and regulated by the Life Insurance Corporation
of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960 as also the administrative instructions
issued from time to time and they shall, subject to the provisions thereof
including any period of operation specified therein be entitled to the
benefits thereunder.
It was common ground between the parties that the Settlement was approved
by the Board of the Life Insurance Corporation as also by the Central Govern-
ment and the Chief of Personnel by his circular dated March 12, 1974 intimated
to the Zonal and Divisional Managers that the approval of the Central Govern-
ment to the Settlement having been received, the Life Insurance Corporation
should proceed to implement the terms of the Settlement. The Executive
Director also issued a circular dated March 29, 1974 containing administrative
instructions in regard to payment of cash bonus under Clause 8(ii) of the Settle-
mont. These administrative instructions set out directions in regard to various
matters relating to payment of cash bonus and of these, two are material.
One was that in case of retirement or death, salary up to the date of cessation
of service shall be taken into account for the purpose of determining the amount
of bonus payable to the employee or his heirs and the other was that the bonus
shall be paid along with the salary for the month of April, but in case of retire-
ment or death, payment will be made "soon after the contingency". There
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
62
SUPREME COURT CASES
was no dispute that for the first two years, April 1, 1973 to March 31, 1974
and April 1, 1974 to March 31, 1975, the Life Insurance Corporation paid bonus
to its Class III and Class IV employees in accordance with the provisions of
Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement read with the administrative instructions dated
March 29, 1974. But then came the declaration of emergency on June 26,
1975 and troubles began for Class III and Class IV employees of the Life
Insurance Corporation.
3. On September 25, 1975 an Ordinance was promulgated by the President
of India called the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 which came
into force with immediate effect. Subsequently, this Ordinance was replaced
by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 1976 which was brought into
force with retrospective effect from the date of the Ordinance, namely, Sep-
tember 25, 1975. This amending law considerably curtailed the rights of the
employees to bonus in industrial establishments, but it had no impact so far as
the employees of the Life Insurance Corporation were concerned since the
original Payment of Bonus Act was not applicable to the Life Insurance Cor-
poration by reason of Section 32 which exempted the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion from its operation. The Central Government, however, decided that the
employees of establishments which were not covered by the Payment of Bonus
Act would not be eligible for payment of bonus but ex-gratia cash payment
in lieu of bonus would be made "as may be determined by the Government
taking into account the wage level, financial circumstances etc. in each case
and such payment will be subject to a maximum of 10% and pursuant to this
decision, the Life Insurance Corporation was advised by the Ministry of Finance
that no further payment of bonus should be made to the employees "without
getting the same cleared by the Government". The Life Insurance Corpora-
tion thereupon by its Circular dated September 25, 1975 informed all its offices
that since the question of payment of bonus was being reviewed in the light of the
Bonus Ordinance dated September 25, 1975, no bonus should be paid to the
employees "under the existing provisions until further instructions". The
All-India Insurance Employees' Association protested against this stand taken
by the Life Insurance Corporation and pointed out that the Life Insurance
Corporation was bound to pay bonus in accordance with the terms of the
Settlement and the direction not to pay bonus was clearly illegal and unjusti-
fied. The Life Insurance Corporation conceded that payment of bonus was
covered by the Settlement but contended that it was subject to such directions
as the Central Government might issue from time to time and since the Central
Government had advised the Life Insurance Corporation not to make any
payment of bonus without their specific approval, the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion was justified in not making payment to the employees. This stand was
taken by the Life Insurance Corporation in its letter dated February 7, 1976
addressed to the All-India Insurance Employees' Association and this was
followed by a Circular dated March 22, 1976 instructing all the offices of the
Life Insurance Corporation not to make payment by way of bonus.
4. The All-India Insurance Employees' Association and some others there-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK V. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
63
upon filed writ petition 371 of 1976 in the High Court of Calcutta for a writ of
mandamus and prohibition directing the Life Insurance Corporation to act in
accordance with the terms of the Settlement dated January 24, 1974 read with the
administrative instructions dated March 29, 1974 and to rescind or cancel the
Circulars dated September 25. 1975, February 7, 1976 and March 22, 1976 and not
to refuse to pay cash bonus to Class III and Class IV employees along with their
salary for the month of April 1976 as provided by the Settlement read with the ad-
ministrative instructions. The writ petition was resisted by the Life Insurance
Corporation on various grounds to which it is not necessary to refer since
we are not concerned with the correctness of the judgment of the Calcutta High
Court disposing of the writ petition. Suffice it to state, and that is material
for our purpose, that by a judgment dated May 21, 1976 a single Judge of the
Calcutta High Court allowed the writ petition and issued a writ of mandamus
and prohibition as prayed for in that writ petition. The Life Insurance Cor-
poration preferred a Letters Patent Appeal against the judgment of the learned
single Judge but in the meantime the impugned Act had already come into
force and it was, therefore, stated on behalf of the Life Insurance Corporation
before the Division Bench that there was no necessity for proceeding with the
appeal and hence the Division Bench made no order in the appeal. The result
was that the judgment of the learned single Judge remained intact with what
effect, is a matter we shall presently consider.
5. On May 29, 1976 Parliament enacted the impugned Act providing
inter alia for modification of the Settlement dated January 24, 1974 arrived
at between the Life Insurance Corporation and its employees. The impugned
Act was a very short statute consisting only of three sections. Section 1 gave
the short title of the impugned Act, Section 2 contained definitions and Sec-
tion 3, which was the operative section, provided as follows :
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,
1974, the provisions of the settlement in as far as they relate to the payment
of an annual cash bonus to every Class III and Class IV employee of
the Corporation at the rate of fifteen per cent, of his annual salary, shall
not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to have had any
force or effect on and from the 1st day of April, 1975.
Since the impugned Act did not set at naught the entire Settlement dated
January 24, 1974 but merely rendered without force and effect the provisions
of the Settlement in so far as they related to payment of annual cash bonus
to Class 1II and Class 1V employees and that too not from the date when the
Settlement became operative but from April I, 1975, it was said to be a statute
modifying the provisions of the Settlement. The plain and undoubted effect
of the impugned Act was to deprive Class III and Class IV employees of the
annual cash bonus to which they were entitled under Clause 8(ii) of the Settle-
ment for the years April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and April 1, 1976 to March
31, 1977 and therefore, two of the associations along with their office-bearers
filed the present writ petitions challenging the constitutional validity of the
impugned Act.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
64
SUPREME COURT CASES
6. There were two grounds on which the constitutionality of the impugned
Act was assailed on behalf of the petitioners and they were as follows :
A. The right of Class III and Class IV employees to annual cash
bonus for the years April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and April I, 1976
to March 31, 1977 under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement was property and
since the impugned Act provided for compulsory acquisition of this pro-
perty without payment of compensation, the impugned Act was violative
of Article 31(2) of the Constitution and was hence null and void.
B. The impugned Act deprived Class III and Class IV employees
of the right to annual cash bonus for the years April 1, 1975 to March
31, 1976 and April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977 which was vested in them
under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement and there was, therefore, clear infringe-
ment of their fundamental right under Article 19(1)(f) and since this de-
privation of the right to annual cash bonus, which was secured under
a
Settlement arrived at as a result of collective bargaining and with full
and mature deliberation on the part of the Life Insurance Corporation
and the Central Government after taking into account the interests of the
policy-holders and the community and with a view to approximating
towards the goal of a living wage as envisaged in Article 43 of the Consti-
tution, amounted to an unreasonable restriction, the impugned Act was
not saved by Article 19(5) and hence it was liable to be struck down as
invalid.
We shall proceed to consider these grounds in the order in which we have set
them out, though we may point out that if either ground succeeds, it would
be unnecessary to consider the other.
7. But before we proceed further, it would be convenient at this stage to
refer to one other contention of the petitioner based on the judgment of the
Calcutta High Court in Writ Petition 371 of 1976. The contention was that
since the Calcutta High Court had by its judgment dated May 21, 1976 issued
a
writ of mandamus directing the Life Insurance Corporation to pay annual
cash bonus to Class III and Class IV employees for the year April 1, 1975 to
March 31, 1976 along with their salary for the month of April, 1976 as pro-
vided by the Settlement and this judgment had become final by reason of with-
drawal of the Letters Patent Appeal preferred against it, the Life Insurance
Corporation was bound to obey the writ of mandamus and to pay annual
cash bonus for the year April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 in accordance with
the terms of Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement. It is, no doubt, true, said the peti-
tioners, that the impugned Act, if valid, struck at Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement
and rendered it ineffective and without force with effect from April I, 1975
but it did not have the effect of absolving the Life Insurance Corporation from
its obligation to carry out the writ of mandamus. There was, according to
the petitioners, nothing in the impugned Act which set at naught the effect
of the judgment of the Calcutta High Court or the binding character of the
writ of mandamus issued against the Life Insurance Corporation. This con-
tention of the petitioners requires serious consideration and we are inclined to
accept it.
8. It is significant to note that there was no reference to the judgment
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK V. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
65
of the Calcutta High Court in the Statement of Objects and Reasons, nor any
non-obstante clause referring to a judgment of a Court in Section 3 of the
impugned Act. The attention of Parliament does not appear to have been
drawn to the fact that the Calcutta High Court has already issued a writ of
Mandamus commanding the Life Insurance Corporation to pay the amount
of bonus for the year April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976. It appears that un-
fortunately the judgment of the Calcutta High Court remained almost un-
noticed and the impugned Act was passed in ignorance of that judgment.
Section 3 of the impugned Act provided that the provisions of the Settlement
in so far as they relate to payment of annual cash bonus to Class III and Class
IV employees shall not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to
have had any force or effect from April 1, 1975. But the writ of mandamus
issued by the Calcutta High Court directing the Life Insurance Corporation
to pay the amount of bonus for the year April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976
remained untouched by the impugned Act. So far as the right of Class III
and Class IV employees to annual cash bonus for the year April 1, 1975 to
March 31, 1976 was concerned, it became crystallised in the judgment and
thereafter they became entitled to enforce the writ of mandamus granted by
the judgment and not any right to annual cash bonus under the Settlement.
This right under the judgment was not sought to be taken away by the im-
pugned Act. The judgment continued to subsist and the Life Insurance
Corporation was bound to pay annual cash bonus to Class III and Class IV
employees for the year April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 in obedience to the
writ of mandamus, The error committed by the Life Insurance Corporation
was that it withdrew the Letters Patent Appeal and allowed the judgment of
the learned single Judge to become final. By the time the Letters Patent Appeal
came up for hearing, the impugned Act had already come into force and the
Life Insurance Corporation could, therefore, have successfully contended
in the Letters Patent Appeal that, since the Settlement, in so far as it provided
for payment of annual cash bonus, was annihilated by the impugned Act with
effect from April 1, 1975, Class III and Class IV employees were not entitled
to annual cash bonus for the year April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and hence no
writ of mandamus could issue directing the Life Insurance Corporation to make
payment of such bonus. If such contention had been raised, there is little doubt,
subject of course to any constitutional challenge to the validity of the impugned
Act, that the judgment of the learned single Judge would have been upturned
and the writ petition dismissed. But on account of some inexplicable reason,
which is difficult to appreciate, the Life Insurance Corporation did not press
the Letters Patent Appeal and the result was that the judgment of the learned
single Judge granting writ of mandamus became final and binding on the
parties. It is difficult to see how in these circumstances the Life Insurance
Corporation could claim to be absolved from the obligation imposed by the
judgment to carry out the writ of mandamus by relying on the impugned
Act.
9. The Life Insurance Corporation leaned heavily on the decision of this

this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
66
SUPREME COURT CASES
Court in Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. V. Broach Borough Municipality1
in
support of its contention that when the Settlement in so far as it provided for
payment of annual cash bonus was set at naught by the impugned Act with
effect from April 1, 1975, the basis on which the judgment proceeded was
fundamentally altered and that rendered the judgment ineffective and not
binding on the parties. We do not think this decision lays down any such wide
proposition as is contended for on behalf of the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion. It does not say that whenever any factual or legal situation is altered
by retrospective legislation, a judicial decision rendered by a Court on the
basis of such factual or legal situation prior to the alteration, would straight-
away, without more, cease to be effective and binding on the parties. It is true
that there are certain observations in this decision which seem to suggest that
a Court decision may cease to be binding when the conditions on which it is
based are so fundamentally altered that the decision could not have been given
in the altered circumstances. But these observations have to be read in the
light of the question. which arose for consideration in that case. There, the
validity of the Gujarat Imposition of Taxes by Municipalities (Validation)
Act, 1963 was assailed on behalf of the petitioners. The Validation Act had
to be enacted because it was held by this Court in Patel Gordhandas Hargovin-
das V. Municipal Commissioner, Ahmedabad that since Section 73 of the Bombay
Municipality Boroughs Act, 1925 allowed the Municipality to levy a 'rate'
on buildings or lands and the term 'rate' was confined to an imposition on the
basis of annual letting value, tax levied by the Municipality on lands and build-
ings on the basis of capital value was invalid. Section 3 of the Validation
Act provided that notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree
or order of a Court or tribunal or any other authority, no tax assessed or
purported to have been assessed by a municipality on the basis of capital value
of a building or land and imposed, collected or recovered by the municipality
at any time before the commencement of the Validation Act shall be deemed
to have invalidly assessed, imposed, collected or recovered and the imposition,
collection or recovery of the tax so assessed shall be valid and shall be deemed
to have always been valid and shall not be called in question merely on the
ground that the assessment of the tax on the basis of capital value of the build-
ing or land was not authorised by law and accordingly any tax so assessed
before the commencement of the Validation Act and leviable for a period
prior to such commencement but not collected or recovered before such com-
mencement may be collected or recovered in accordance with the relevant
municipal law. It will be seen that by Section 3 of the impugned Act the
Legislature retrospectively imposed tax on building or land on the basis of
capital value and if the tax was already imposed, levied and collected on that
basis, made the imposition, levy, collection and recovery of the tax valid,
notwithstanding the declaration by the Court that as 'rate', the levy was in-
competent. This was clearly permissible to the Legislature because in doing
2. (1964) 2 SCR608 AIR 1963 SC 1742:
AIR 1970 SC 192
(1965) 1 SCJ 15

this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
67
so, the Legislature did not seek to reverse the decision of this Court on the
interpretation of the word 'rate', but retrospectively amended the law by pro-
viding for imposition of tax on land or building on the basis of capital value
and validated the imposition, levy, collection and recovery of tax on that basis.
The decision of this Court holding the levy of tax to be incompetent on the
basis of the unamended law, therefore, became irrelevant and could not stand
in the way of the tax being assessed, collected and recovered on the basis of
capital value under the law as retrospectively amended. That is why this
Court held that the Validation Act was effective to validate imposition, levy,
collection and recovery of tax on land or building on the basis of capital value.
It is difficult to see how this decision given in the context of a validating statute
can be of any help to the Life Insurance Corporation. Here, the judgment
given by the Calcutta High Court, which is relied upon by the petitioners, is
not a mere declaratory judgment holding an impost or tax to be invalid, so that
a validation statute can remove the defect pointed out by the judgment amend-
ing the law with retrospective effect and validate such impost or tax. But it
is
a judgment giving effect to the right of the petitioners to annual cash bonus
under the Settlement by issuing a writ of mandamus directing the Life Insurance
Corporation to pay the amount of such bonus. If by reason of retrospective
alteration of the factual or legal situation, the judgment is rendered erroneous,
the remedy may be by way of appeal or review, but so long as the judgment
stands, it cannot be disregarded or ignored and it must be obeyed by the Life
Insurance Corporation. We are, therefore, of the view that, in any event,
irrespective of whether the impugned Act is constitutionally valid or not, the
Life Insurance Corporation is bound to obey the writ of mandamus issued by
the Calcutta High Court and to pay annual cash bonus for the year April 1, 1975
to March 31, 1976 to Class III and Class IV employees. Now, to the grounds
of constitutional challenge :
Re : Ground A :
10. This ground raises the question whether the impugned Act is viola-
tive of clause (2) of Article 31. This clause provides safeguards against com-
pulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property by laying down conditions
subject to which alone property may be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned
and at the date when the impugned Act was enacted, it was in the following
terms :
(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned save
for a public purpose and save by authority of a law which provides for
acquisition or requisitioning of the property for an amount which may
be fixed by such law or which may be determined in accordance with such
principles and given in such manner as may be specified in such law ;
and no such law shall be called in question in any court on the ground
that the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate or that the whole
or any part of such amount is to be given otherwise than in cash.
Clause (2) in this form was substituted in Article 31 by the Constitution (Twenty-
fifth Amendment) Act, 1971 and by this amending Act, clauses (2A) and (2B)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
68
SUPREME COURT CASES
were also introduced in Article 31 and they read as follows :
"(2A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownership
or right to possession of any property to the State or to a corporation
owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to provide for the
compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, notwithstanding that
it deprives any person of his property.
(2B) Nothing in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of Article 19 shall affect
any such law as is referred to in clause (2)."
The argument of the petitioners was that the right of Class III and Class IV
employees to 'annual cash bonus' for the years April 1, 1975 to March 31,
1976 and April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977 under the Settlement was property
and since the impugned Act provided for transfer of the ownership of this
right to the Life Insurance Corporation which was 'State' within the meaning
of Article 12, it was a law providing for compulsory acquisition of property
as contemplated under clause (2A) of Article 31 and it was, therefore, required
to meet the challenge of Article 31, clause (2). The compulsory acquisition
of the right to 'annual cash bonus' sought to be effectuated by the impugned
Act, said the petitioners, was not supported by public purpose nor did the
impugned Act provide for payment of any compensation for the same and
hence the impugned Act was void as contravening clause (2) of Article 31.
11. The first question which arises for consideration on this contention
is whether the right of Class III and Class IV employees to 'annual cash bonus'
for the years April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and April 1, 1976 to March 31,
1977 under the Settlement was property so as to attract the inhibition of Arti-
cle 31, clause (2). The Life Insurance Corporation submitted that at the date
when the impugned Act was enacted, Class III and Class IV employees had no
absolute right to receive 'annual cash bonus' either for the year April 1, 1975
to March 31, 1976 or for the year April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977 and there
was, therefore, no property which could be compulsorily acquired under the
impugned Act. The argument of the Life Insurance Corporation was that the
Life Insurance Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1960 which laid down the terms
and conditions of service inter alia of Class III and Class IV employees did not
contain any provision for payment of bonus except Regulation 58 and since
under this Regulation, grant of annual cash bonus by the Life Insurance Cor-
poration was subject to such directions as the Central Government might
issue, the right of Class III and Class IV employees to receive annual cash
bonus could not be said to be an absolute right. It was a right which was
liable to be set at naught by any directions that might be issued by the Central
Government and in fact the Central Government did issue a direction to the
Life Insurance Corporation not to make payment of bonus to the employees
"without getting the same cleared by the Government" and consequently,
Class III and Class IV employees had no absolute right to claim bonus. The
result, according to the Life Insurance Corporation, also followed on a proper
interpretation of Clauses 8(i) and 8(ii) of the Settlement, for it was clear on
a proper reading of these two clauses that annual cash bonus payable to Class
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK V. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
69
III and Class IV employees under Clause 8(ii) was, by reason of Clause 8(i),
subject to such directions as the Central Government might issue from time to
time and the Central Government having directed that no further payment
of bonus should be made to the employees, Class III and Class IV employees
were not entitled to claim annual cash bonus from the Life Insurance Cor-
poration. This argument of the Life Insurance Corporation is plainly erro-
neous and it is not possible to accept it. Regulation 58 undoubtedly says
that non-profit sharing bonus may be granted by the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion to its employees, subject to such directions as the Central Government
may issue and, therefore, if the Central Government issues a direction to the
contrary, non-profit sharing bonus cannot be granted by the Life Insurance
Corporation to any class of employees. But here, in the present case, grant
of annual cash bonus by the Life Insurance Corporation to Class III and
Class IV employees under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement was approved by the
Central Government as provided in Clause 12 and the 'direction' contem-
plated by Regulation 58 was given by the Central Government that annual
cash bonus may be granted as provided in Clause 8(11) of the Setilement, It
was not competent to the Central Government thereafter to issue another
contrary direction which would have the effect of compelling the Life insurance
Corporation to commit a breach of its obligation under Section 18, sub-section
(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to pay annual cash bonus in terms of
Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement. Turning to Clause 8(i) of the Settlement, it IS
true that under this clause non-profit sharing bonus could be granted by the
Life Insurance Corporation 'subject to such directions as the Central Govern-
ment may issue from time to time', but these words giving overriding power
to the Central Government to issue directions from time to time are conspi-
cuously absent in Clause 8(ii) and it is difficult to see how they could be pro-
jected or read into that clause. Clauses 8(i) and 8(ii) are distinct and indepen-
dent clauses and while Clause 8(i) enacts a general provision that non-profit
sharing bonus may be paid by the Life Insurance Corporation to Class III
and Class 1V employees subject to such directions as the Central Government
might issue from time to time, Clause 8(ii) picks out one kind of non-profit
sharing bonus and specifically provided that annual cash bonus shall be paid to
all Class III and Class IV employees at the rate of 15 per cent of the annual
salary and this specific provision in regard to payment of annual cash bonus
is made subject only to the approval of the Central Government which was
admittedly obtained. It is, therefore, clear that Class III and Class IV em-
ployees had absolute right to receive annual cash bonus from the Life Insurance
Corporation in terms of Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement and it was not competent
to the Central Government to issue any directions to the Life Insurance Cor-
poration to refuse or withhold payment of the same.
12. It is true that under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement the annual cash
bonus for a particular year was payable at the rate of 15 per cent of the annual
salary actually drawn by the employee in respect of the financial year to which
the bonus related and it would, therefore, seem that the bonus was payable
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
70
SUPREME COURT CASES
at the end of the year and not before, but it was not disputed on behalf of the
Life Insurance Corporation that even an employee who retired or resigned
before the expiration of the year, as also the heirs of a deceased employee
who died during the currency of the year, were entitled to receive propor-
tionate bonus and the Life Insurance Corporation in fact recognised this to be
the correct position in its administrative instructions dated March 29, 1974
and actually paid proportionate bonus to the retiring or resigning employee
and the heirs of the deceased employee. The annual cash bonus payable
under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement, therefore, accrued from day-to-day, though
payable in case of retirement, resignation or death, on the happening of that
contingency and otherwise, on the expiration of the year to which the bonus
related. There was thus plainly and unquestionably a debt in respect of
annual cash bonus accruing to each Class III or Class IV employee from day-
to-day and consequently, on the expiration of the year April 1, 1975 to March
31, 1976, the annual cash bonus payable under Clause 8(ii) of the Settlement
was a debt due and owing from the Life Insurance Corporation to each Class
III or Class IV employee and so also at the date when the impugned Act came
into force, each Class III or Class IV employee was entitled to a debt due and
owing to him from the Life Insurance Corporation in respect of the annual
cash bonus from April 1, 1976 up to that date. The question is whether these
debts due and owing from the Life Insurance Corporation were property of
Class 111 and Class IV employees within the meaning of Article 31(2) ? So
also, was the right of each Class III and Class IV employee to receive annual
cash bonus for the period from the date of commencement of the impugned
Act up to March 31, 1977 property for the purpose of Article 31(2) ? These
questions we shall now procced to consider, for on the answer to them depends
the applicability of Article 31(2).
13. It is clear from the scheme of fundamental rights embodied in Part
III of the Constitution that the guarantee of the right to property is contained
in Article 19(1)(f) and clauses (1) and (2) of Article 31. It stands to reason
that 'property' cannot have one meaning in Article 19(1)(f), another in Arti-
cle 31, clause (1) and still another in Article 31, clause (2). 'Property' must
have the same connotation in all the three articles and since these are con-
stitutional provisions intended to secure a fundamental right, they must receive
the widest interpretation and must be held to refer to property of every kind.
While discussing the scope and contents of Entry 42 in List III of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution, which confers power on Parliament and the
State Legislatures to legislate with respect to "acquisition and requisitioning
of property", it was pointed out by Shah, J., speaking on behalf of the majo-
rity in R. C. Cooper V. Union of India3 that property which can be compulsorily
highest right a man can have to anything, being that right which one
has to lands or tenements, goods or chattels which does not depend on
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
71
another's courtesy : it includes ownership, estates and interests in cor-
poreal things, and also rights such as trade-marks, copyrights, patents
and even rights in personam capable of transfer or transmission, such as
debts ; and signifies a beneficial right to or a thing considered as having
a money value, especially with reference to transfer or succession, and to
their capacity of being injured.
It would, therefore, seem that, according to the decision of the majority in
R. C. Cooper's case, debts and other rights in personam capable of transfer
or transmission are property which can form the subject-matter of compulsory
acquisition. And this would seem to be unquestionable on principle, since
even jurisprudentially debts and other rights of action are property and there
is no reason why they should be excluded from the protection of the consti-
tutional guarantee. Hidayatullah, C.J., had occasion to consider the true
nature of debt in H. H. Maharujadhiraja Madhav Rao Jiwaji Rao Scindia
Bahadur V. Union of India where the question was whether the Privy Purse
payable to the Ruler was property of which he could be said to be deprived by the
order of the President withdrawing his recognition as Ruler. The learned
Chief Justice, making a very penetrating analysis of the jural relationship
a debt or a liability to pay money passes through four stages. First
there is a debt not yet due. The debt has not yet become a part
of the obligor's 'things' because no net liability has yet arisen.
The
second stage is when the liability may have arisen but is not either ascer-
tained or admitted. Here again the amount due has not become a part
of the obligor's things. The third stage is reached when the liability is
both ascertained and admitted. Then it is property proper of the debtor
in the creditor's hands. The law begins to recognise such property in
insolvency, in dealing with it in fraud of creditors, fraudulent preference
of one creditor against another, subrogation, equitable estoppel, stoppage
intransitu etc. A credit-debt is then a debt fully provable and which is
fixed and absolutely owing. The last stage is when the debt becomes
a
judgment-debt by reason of a decree of a Court.
and applying this test, concluded that the Privy Purse would be property and
As soon as an Appropriation Act is passed there is established a
credit-debt and the outstanding Privy Purse becomes the property of the
Ruler in the hands of Government. It is also a sum certain and absolutely
payable.
Since the effect of the order of the President was to deprive the Ruler of his
Privy Purse which was his property, the learned Chief Justice held that there was
infringement of the fundamental right of the Ruler under Article 31(2).
Hegde, J., also pointed out in a separate but concurring judgment that since the
right to get the Privy Purse was a legal right "enforceable through the courts",
it was undoubtedly property and its deprivation was sufficient to found a petition
based on contravention of Article 31(2). It was also held by this Court in State
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
72
SUPREMB COURT CASES
of Madhya Pradesh V. Ranajirao Shinde5 that a right to receive cash grant
annually from the State was property within the meaning of that expression
in Article 19(1)(f) and clause (2) of Article 31. The right to pension was also
regarded as property for the purpose of Article 19(1)(f) by the decisions of this
Court in Deokinandan Prasad V. State of Bihar6 and State of Punjab V. K. R.
Erry & Sobhag Rai Mehta. This Court adopted the same line of reasoning
p. 664, para 19) that
unpaid accumulations represent the obligation of the employers to the
employees and they are the property of the employees. Mathew, J.,
speaking on behalf of the Court, observed that the obligation to the em-
ployees owed by the employers was "property from the standpoint of the
employees".
It would, therefore, be seen that property within the meaning of Article 19(1)(f)
and clause (2) of Article 31 comprises every form of property, tangible or
intangible, including debts and choses-in-action, such as unpaid accumulation
of wages, pension, cash grant and constitutionally protected Privy Purse.
The debts due and owing from the Life Insurance Corporation in respect of
annual cash bonus were, therefore, clearly property of Class III and Class IV
employees within the meaning of Article 31, clause (2). And so also was their
right to receive annual cash bonus for the period from the date of commence-
ment of the impugned Act up to March 31, 1977, for that was a legal right
enforceable through a court of law by issue of a writ of mandamus. (Vide the
observations of Hegde, J., at page 194 in the Privy Purse case.)
14. But a question was raised on behalf of the respondents whether
debts and choses-in-action, though undoubtedly property, could form the
subject-matter of compulsory acquisition so as to attract the applicability of
Article 31, clause (2). There is diveigence of opinion amongst jurists in the
United States of America on this question and though in the earlier decisions
of the American courts, it was said that the power of eminent domain cannot
be exercised in respect of money and choses-in-action, the modern trend, as
pointed by Nichols on Eminent Domain, Vol. 1, page 99, para 2, seems to be that
the right of eminent domain can be exercised on choses-in-action. But even
if the preponderant view in the United States were that choses-in-action cannot
come within the power of eminent domain, it would not be right to allow us
to be unduly influenced by this view in the interpretation of the scope and
ambit of clause (2) of Article 31. We must interpret Article 31, clause (2)
on its own terms without any preconceived notions borrowed from the law
in the United States on the subject of eminent domains. Let us see how this
interpretative exercise has been performed by this Court in the decisions that
have been rendered so far and what light they throw on the question as to
whether choses-in-action can be compulsorily acquired under clause (2) of
J. (1968) 3 SCR 489 AIR 1968 SC 1053
330: AIR 1971 SC 1409
(1968) 2 SCJ 760
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
73
Article 31. We shall confine our attention only to the question of compulsory
acquisition of choses-in-action and not say anything in regard to compulsory
acquisition of money, for in these appeals the question arises only in regard to
choses-in-action and it is not necessary to consider whether money can form the
subject-matter of compulsory acquisition. This question came to be con-
sidered by a Constitution Bench of this Court in State of Bihar V. Kameshwar
Singli Section 4(b) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, which provided
for vesting in the State of arrears of rent due to the proprietors or tenure-holders
for the period prior to the date of vesting of the estates or tenures held by
them. on payment of only 50 per cent of the amount as compensation, was
challenged as constitutionally invalid on the ground that there was no public
purpose for which such acquisition could be said to have been made. The
necessity for existence of public purpose was not sought to be spelt out from
Article 31, clause (2), because even if there were violation of that clause, it
would be protected by Article 31A and the Ninth Schedule read with Arti-
cle 31B, the Act being included as Item I in the Ninth Schedule, but it was said
that public purpose was an essential element in the very nature of the power
of acquisition and even apart from Article 31, clause (2), no acquisition could
be made save for a public purpose. It was in the context of this argument that
Mahajan, J., observed that money and choses-in-action could not be taken
under the power of compulsory acquisition, since the only purpose which
such taking would serve would be to augment the revenues of the State and that
would clearly not be a public purpose. The learned Judge pointed out at
pages 942-944 of the Report :
It is a well accepted proposition of law that property of individuals
cannot be appropriated by the State under the power of compulsory acqui-
sition for the mere purpose of adding to the revenues of the State
no instance is known in which it has been taken for the mere purpose of
raising a revenue by sale or otherwise
Taking money under
the right of eminent domain, when it must be compensated in money
afterwards is nothing more or less than a forced loan. Money or that
which in ordinary use passes as such and which the Government may
reach by taxation, and also rights in action which can only be available
when made to produce money, cannot be taken under this power
for the taking would not be for a public purpose, and proceeded to add that
the only purpose to support the acquisition of the arrears of rent was "to raise
revenue to pay compensation to some of the zamindars whose estates are being
taken" and this purpose did not fall within any definition, however wide, of the
phrase 'public purpose' and the law was, therefore, to this extent unconsti-
tutional. Mukherjea, J., came to the same conclusion and observed at page
961 of the Report :
Money as such and also rights in action are ordinarily excluded from
this List by American jurists and for good reasons. There could be no
possible necessity for taking either of them under the power of eminent
domain. Money in the hands of a citizen can be reached by the exercise
9. 1952 SCR 889: AIR 1952 SC 252: 1952 SCJ 354
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
74
SUPREMB COURT CASES
of the power of taxation, it may be confiscated as a penalty under judicial
order
But, as Cooley has pointed out, taking money under the
right of eminent domain when it must be compensated by money after-
wards could be nothing more or less than a forced loan and it is difficult to
say that it comes under the head of acquisition
and is embraced
within its ordinary connotation.
Chandrasekhara Aiyar, J., also took the same view and held that money and
choses-in-action were exempt from compulsory acquisition "not on the ground
that they are movable property, but on the ground that generally spcaking
there could be no public purpose in their acquisition". Patanjali Sastri, C.J.,
and Das, J., on the other hand held that the arrears of rent constituted a debt
due by the tenants. It was nothing but an actionable claim against the tenants
which was undoubtedly a species of 'property' which was assignable and,
therefore, it could equally be acquired by the State as a species of 'property'.
These two rival views were referred to by Venkatarama Aiyar, J., speaking
on behalf of the Court in Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. V. State
of Bombay10, but the learned Judge did not treat the majority view as finally
settling the law on the subject. It appears that in the subsequent case of State
of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde (supra) Hegde, J., delivering the judgment of the
Court observed that the majority view in Kameshwar Singh's case was followed
by this Court in Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co.'s case, but we do not
think that this observation correctly represents what was decided in Bombay
Dyeing & Manufacturing Co.'s case. Venkatarama Aiyar, J., rested his decision
in Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co.'s case on alternative grounds : if the
impugned section provided for the acquisition of money, and if money could not
be acquired, then the section was void under Article 19(1)(f) as imposing an
unreasonable restriction on the right to hold property. If, on the other hand,
money could be acquired, the section was void as offending Article 31, clause (2)
since the section did not provide for payment of compensation. The decision
in Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co.'s case did not, therefore, lay down that
money and choses-in-action could not be acquired under Article 31, clause (2).
15. But in State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde (supra) this Court did hold
that money and choses-in-action could not form the subject-matter of acquisi-
tion under Article 31, clause (2) and the reason it gave for taking this view was
the same as that which prevailed with the majority judges in Kameshwar Singh's
case. This Court held that the power of compulsory acquisition conferrea
under Article 31, clause (2) could not be utilised for enriching the coffers of the
State that power could be exercised only for a public purpose and augment-
ing the resources of the State could not be regarded as public purpose. Hegde,
J., speaking on behalf of the Court, pointed out that if it were otherwise,
it would be permissible for the legislatures to enact laws acquiring all
public debts due from the State, annuity deposits returnable by it and
provident fund payable by it by providing for the payment of some nominal
10. 1958 SCR 1122: AIR 1958 SC 328: 1958 SCJ 620: (1958) 1 LLJ 778
TruePrint source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
75
compensation to the persons whose rights are acquired, as the acquisitions
in question would augment the resources of the State,
but nothing so bad could be said to be within the contemplation of clause (2)
of Article 31. Let us first examine on principle whether this reasoning qua
choses-in-action is sound and commends itself for our acceptance.
16. This premise on which this reasoning is based is that the only purpose
for which choses-in-action may be acquired is augmenting the revenues of the
State and there can be no other purpose for such acquisition. But this premise
is plaintly incorrect and so is the reasoning based upon it. Why can choses-
in-action not be acquired for a public purpose other than mere adding to the
revenues of the State ? There may be debts due and owing by poor and de-
prived tillers, artisans and landless labourers to money-lenders and the State
may acquire such debts with a view to relieving the weak and exploited debtors
from the harassment and oppression to which they might be subjected by their
economically powerful creditors. The purpose of the acquisition in such a case
would not be to enrich the coffers of the State. In fact, the coffers of the State
would not be enriched by such acquisition, because having regard to the finan-
cial condition of the debtors, it may not be possible for the State to recover
much, or perhaps anything at all, from the impoverished debtors. The purpose
of such acquisition being relief of the distress of the poor and helpless debtors
would be clearly a public purpose. We have taken one example by way of
illustration, but in a modern welfare State, dedicated to a socialist pattern of
society, myriad situations may arise where it may be necessary to acquire
choses-in-action for achieving a public purpose. It is not correct to say that
in every case where choses-in-action may be acquired, the purpose of acqui-
sition would necessarily and always be augmenting of the revenues of the
State and nothing else. Even the theory of forced loan may break down in case
of acquisition of choses-in-action. There is a fundamental difference between
chose-in-action and money, in that the former has not the same mobility and
liquidity as the latter and its value is not measured by the amount recoverable
under it, but it depends on a variety of factors such as the financial condition
of the person liable, the speed and effectiveness of the litigative process and the
eventual uncertainty as to when and to what extent it may be possible to realise
the chose-in-action. Even after the chose-in-action is acquired, the State may
not be able to recover the amount due under it and there may even be cases
where the chose-in-action may be released by the State. Where money is given
as compensation for taking of money, the theory of forced loan may apply,
but it is difficult to see how it can be applicable where chose-in-action is taken
and money representing its value, which in a large majority of cases would
be less than the amount recoverable under it, is given as compensation. More-
over, the theory of forced loan stands considerably eroded after the amend-
ment of Article 31, clause (2) by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment)
Act, 1971, because under the amended clause, even if an amount less than the
just equivalent is given as compensation for acquisition of property, it would
TruePrint source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
76
SUPREME COURT CASES
not be violative of the constitutional guarantee. It is true, and this thought
was also expressed by Krishna Iyer, J., and myself in our separate but con-
curring judgment in the State of Kerala V. The Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. 11, that, notwithstanding the amended clause (2) of Article 31,
the Legislature would be expected, save in exceptional socio-historical setting,
to provide just compensation for acquisition of property, but if for any reason
the Legislature provides a lesser amount than the just equivalent, it would not be
open to challenge on the ground of infringement of clause (2) of Article 31.
Then, how can the theory of forced loan apply when chose-in-action is acquired
and what is paid for it is not the just equivalent but a much lesser amount,
which is of course not illusory. Moreover, there is also one other fallacy
underlying the argument that there can be no public purpose in the acquisition
of choses-in-action and that is based on the assumption that the public purpose
contemplated by Article 31, clause (2) lies in the use to which the property
acquired is to be put, as for example, where land or building or other movable
property is acquired for being used for a public purpose. But this assump-
tion is not justified by the language of Article 31, clause (2), because all that
this clause requires is that the purpose for which the acquisition is made must
be a public purpose, or, in other words, the acquisitions must be made to
achieve a public purpose. Article 31, clause (2) does not require that the
property acquired must itself be used for a public purpose. So long as the
acquisition subserves a public purpose, it would satisfy the requirement of
clause (2) of Article 31 and, therefore, if it can be shown that the acquisition
of choses-in-action is for subserving a public purpose, it would be constitutionally
valid. Hegde, J., expressed an apprehension in State of M. P. V. Ranojirao
Shinde (supra) that if this view were accepted, it would be permissible for the
Legislature to enact laws acquiring the public debts due from the State, the
annuity deposits returnable by it and the provident fund payable by it by pro-
viding for payment of some nominal compensation to the persons whose rights
were acquired. We do not think this apprehension is well founded. It is
difficult to see what public purpose can possibly justify a law acquiring the
public debts due to the State or the annuity deposits returnable by it or the
provident fund payable by it. If the Legislature enacts a law acquiring any
of these choses-in-action, it could only be for the purpose of augmenting the
revenues of the State or reducing State expenditure and that would clearly not
be a public purpose and the legislation would plainly be violative of the con-
stitutional guarantee embodied in Article 31, clause (2). We would, therefore,
prefer the minority view of Das, J., in Kameshwar Singh's case (supra) as against
the majority view of Mahajan, J., Mukherjea, J. and Chandrasekhara Aiyar, J.
17. So much on principle. Turning now to the authorities, we find that,
apart from the view of the majority judges in Kameshwar Singh's case and the
decision in the State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde (supra), there is no other
decision of this Court which has taken the view that choses-in-action cannot be
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
77
compulsorily acquired under Article 31, clause (2). There are in fact sub-
sequent decisions which clearly seem to suggest the contrary. We have already
referred to R. C. Cooper's case. The majority judgment of Shah, J., in that case
gives the widest meaning to 'property' which can be compulsorily acquired and
includes within it "rights in personam capable cf transfer or transmission,
such as debts". The majority view in Kameshwar Singh's case (supra) and
the decision in State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde (supra) on this point can no
longer be regarded as good law in view of this statement of the law in the majo-
rity judgment of Shah, J. Then again, in the Privy Purse case (supra), Hidayat-
ullah, C.J., held that the Privy Purse payable to a Ruler was a credit-debt
owned by him and since he was deprived of it by the order of the President,
there was violation of his fundamental right under Article 31, clause (2). The
learned Chief Justice thus clearly recognised that debt or chose-in-action could
form the subject-matter of compulsory acquisition under Article 31, clause (2).
Hegde, J., also took the same view in his separate but concurring judgment
in the Privy Purse case. It will, therefore, be seen that the trend of the recent
decisions has been to regard debt or chose-in-action as property which can be
compulsorily acquired under clause (2) of Article 31. We are accordingly
of the view that the debts due and owing from the Life Insurance Corporation
to Class III and Class IV employees in respect of annual cash bonus were
'property' within the meaning of Article 31, clause (2) and they could be com-
pulsorily acquired under that clause.
18. The question, however, still remains whether by the impugned Act
there was compulsory acquisition of the debts due and owing from the Life
Insurance Corporation to Class III and Class IV employees in respect of annual
cash bonus. It was not disputed on behalf of the Life Insurance Corporation
that if the impugned Act had the effect of compulsorily acquiring these debts
belonging to Class III and Class IV employees, it would be void as offending
Article 31, clause (2), since it admittedly did not provide for payment of any
compensation. The Statement of Objects and Reasons undoubtedly said
that the provisions of the Settlement in regard to payment of annual cash
bonus were being set aside with effect from April 1, 1975 with a view to enab-
ling the Life Insurance Corporation to make ex gratia payment to the employees
"at the rates determined on the basis of the general Government policy for
making ex gratia payments to the employees of non-competing public sector
undertakings". But the impugned Act did not contain any provision to that
effect and Class III and Class IV employees were deprived of the debts due and
owing to them without any provision in the statute for payment of compen-
sation. The learned Attorney-General on behalf of the Life Insurance Cor-
poration, however, strenuously contended that there was no compulsory acqui-
sition of the debts due and owing to Class III and Class IV employees under
the impugned Act, but all that the impugned Act did was to extinguish these
debts by annihilating the provisions of the Settlement in regard to payment of
annual cash bonus with effect from April 1, 1975. The debts due and owing
from the Life Insurance Corporation to Class III and Class IV employees,
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
78
SUPREME COURT CASES
said the learned Attorney-General, were extinguished and not compulsorily
acquired and hence there was no contravention of Article 31, clause (2). Now,
prior to the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, which introduced
clauses (2A) and (2B) in Article 31, there was considerable controversy as to the
inter-relation between clauses (1) and (2) and that coloured the interpretation
of the words "taken possession of or acquired" in clause (2) as it stood prior
to the amendment. The majority view in the State of W. B. V. Subodh Gopal
Bose12 and Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay V. The Sholapur Spinning & Weaving
Co. Ltd. 13 was that clauses (1) and (2) of Article 31 were not mutually exclu-
sive but they dealt with same topic and the deprivation contemplated in clause
(1) was no other than the compulsory acquisition or taking possession of pro-
perty referred to in clause (2) and hence where the deprivation was so subs-
tantial as to amount to compulsory acquisition or taking possession, Arti-
cle 31 was attracted. The introduction of clause (2A) in Article 31 snapped
the link between clauses (1) and (2) and brought about a dichotomy between
these two clauses. Thereafter, clause (2) alone dealt with compulsory acqui-
sition or requisitioning of property by the State and clause (1) dealt with depri-
vation of property in other ways and what should be regarded as compulsory
acquisition or requisitioning of property for the purpose of clause (2) was
defined in clause (2A). It was as if clause (2A) supplied the dictionary for the
meaning of 'compulsory acquisition and requisitioning of property' in clause
(2). Clause (2A) declared that a law shall not be deemed to provide for the
compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, if it does not provide
for the transfer of the ownership or right to possession of the property to the
State or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State. It is only where a
law provides for the transfer of ownership or right to possession of any pro-
perty to the State or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State that
it would have to meet the challenge of clause (2) of Article 31 as a law provid-
ing for compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property. Whenever,
therefore, the constitutional validity of a law is challenged on the ground of
infraction of Article 31, clause (2), the question has to be asked whether the
law provides for the transfer of ownership or right to possession of any pro-
perty to the State or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State. Here,
the Life Insurance Corporation is a corporation owned by the State as its
entire capital has been provided by the Central Government. The debts due
and owing to Class III and Class IV employees from the Life Insurance Cor-
poration are cancelled or extinguished by the impugned Act. Does that
amount to transfer of ownership of any property to the Life Insurance Cor-
poration within the meaning of clause (2A) of Article 31 ? It it does, Arti-
cle 31, clause (2) would be attracted, but not otherwise. That depends on
the true interpretation of Article 31, clause (2A).
19. Now, whilst interpreting Article 31, clause (2A), it must be remem-
bered that the interpretation we place upon it will determine the scope and
12. 1954 SCR 587 : AIR 1954 SC 92
13. 1954 SCR 674 AIR 1954 SC 119
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
79
ambit of the constitutional guarantee under clause (2) of Article 31. We must
not, therefore, construe clause (2A) in a narrow pedantic manner nor adopt a
doctrinaire or legalistic approach. Our interpretation must be guided by the
substance of the matter and not by lex scripts. When clause (2A) says that in
order to attract the applicability of clause (2) the law must provide for the
transfer of ownership of property to the State or to a corporation owned or
controlled by the State, it is not necessary that the law should in so many words
provide for such transfer. No particular verbal formula need be adopted.
It is not a ritualistic mantra which is required to be repeated in the law. What
has to be considered is the substance of the law and not its form. The ques-
tion that is to be asked is : does the law in substance provide for transfer of
ownership of property, whatever be the linguistic formula employed ? What
is the effect of the law : does it bring about transfer of ownership of property ?
Now, 'transfer of ownership' is also a term of wide import and it comprises
every mode by which ownership may be transferred from one person to another.
The mode of transfer may vary from one kind of property to another ; it would
depend on the nature of the property to be transferred. And moreover, the
Court would have to look to the substance of the transaction in order to deter-
mine whether there is transfer of ownership involved in what has been brought
about by the law.
20. There is no doubt that in the present case the impugned Act extin-
guished or put an end to the debts due and owing from the Life Insurance
Corporation to Class III and Class IV employees. That was the direct effect
of the impugned Act and it can, therefore, be legitimately said that in sub-
stance the impugned Act provided for extinguishment of these debts, though
it did not say so in so many words. This much indeed was not disputed on
behalf of the Life Insurance Corporation and the controversy between the
parties only centred round the question whether the extinguishment of these
debts involved any transfer of ownership of property to the Life Insurance
Corporation. The learned Attorney-General on behalf of the Life Insurance
Corporation sought to make a distinction between extinguishment and transfer
of ownership of a debt and contended that when ownership of a debt is trans-
ferred, it continues to exist as a debt in the hands of the transferee, but when
a debt is extinguished it ceases to exist as a debt and it is not possible to say
that the debtor has become the owner of the debt. There can be no transfer
of ownership of a debt, said the learned Attorney-General, unless the debt
continues to exist as such in the hands of the transferee, and, therefore, extin-
guishment of a debt does not involve transfer of ownership of the debt to the
debtor. This contention of the learned Attorney-General, though attractive
at first blush, is, in our opinion not well founded. It is not correct to say that
there can be no transfer of ownership of a right or interest unless such right or
interest continues to have a separate identifiable existence in the hands of
the transferee. It is not difficult to find instances where ownership of a right
or interest may be transferred from one person to another by extinguishment.
Take for example, a case where the lessor terminates the lease granted by him
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
80
SUPREME COURT CASES
to the lessee by exercising his right of forfeiture or the lessee surrenders the
lease in favour of the lessor. The lease would in such a case come to an end
and the interest of the lessee would be extinguished and correspondingly, the
reversion of the lessor would be enlarged into full ownership by the return of the
leasehold interest. There would clearly be transfer of the leasehold interest
from the lessee to the lessor as a result of the determination of the lease and
the extinguishment of the interest of the lessee. The same would be the posi-
tion where a law provides for cancellation of the lease and in such a case, if
the lessor is the State or a corporation owned or controlled by the State, it
would amount to compulsory acquisition of the leasehold interest of the lessee
within the meaning of clause (2A) of Article 31. It was in fact so held by this
Court and in our opinion rightly in Ajit Singh V. State of Punjab14 where Sikri,
J., speaking on behalf of the majority, pointed out at page 149 that if
the State is the landlord of an estate and there is a lease of that pro-
perty and a law provides for the extinguishment of leases held in an estate
it would properly fall under the category of acquisition by the
State because the beneficiary of extinguishment would be the State.
Where by reason of extinguishment of a right or interest of a person, detriment
is suffered by him, and a corresponding benefit accrues to the State, there would be
transfer of ownership of such right or interest to the State. The question would
always be: who is the beneficiary of the extinguishment of the right or interest
effectuated by the law? If it is the State, then there would be transfer of owner-
ship of the right or interest to the State, because what the owner of the right or
interest would have lost by reason of the extinguishment would be the benefitaccru
ed to the State. This was precisely the reason why Hegde, J., speaking on behalf
of the Court observed in the State of M. P. V. Ranojirao Shinde (supra) that
it was possible to view the abolition of cash grants under the Madhya Pradesh
law impugned in that case "as a statutory transfer of rights of the grantees to
the State". It was pointed out in that case that there was no difference bet-
ween taking by the State of money that is in the hands of others and the abro-
gration of the liability of the State to make payment to others, for in the former
case the State would be compulsorily taking others' property, while in the
latter it would be seeking to appropriate to itself the property of others which
is in its hands. It is, therefore, clear that when a debt due and owing by the
State or a corporation owned or controlled by the State is extinguished by
law, there is transfer of ownership of the money representing the debt from the
creditor to the State or the State owned/controlled corporation. So long as
the debt is due and owing to the creditor, the State or the State-owned/con-
trolled corporation is under a liability to pay the amount of the debt to the
creditor and, therefore, if the amount of the debt is X, the total wealth of the
creditor would be A plus X, while that of the State or State-owned/controlled
corporation would be B minus X. But if the debt is extinguished, the total
wealth of the creditor would be reduced by X and that of the State or State-
owned/controlled corporation augmented by the same amount. Would this
14. (1967) 2 SCR 143: AIR 1967 SC 856
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK V. UNION OF INDIA (Bhagwati, J.)
81
not be in substance and effect of transfer of X from the creditor to the State
or
State-owned/controlled corporation ? The extinguishment of the debt of the
creditor with corresponding benefit to the State or State-owned/controlled
corporation would plainly and indubitably involve transfer of ownership of
the amount representing the debt from the former to the latter. This is the
real effect of extinguishment of the debt and by garbing it in the form of extin-
guishment, the State or State-owned/controlled corporation cannot obtain
benefit at the cost of the creditor and yet avoid the applicability of Article 31,
clause (2). The verbal veil constructed by employing the device of extinguish-
ment of debt cannot be permitted to conceal or hide the real nature of the
transaction. It is necessary to remember that we are dealing here with a case
where a constitutionally guaranteed right is sought to be enforced and the
protection of such right should not be allowed to be defeated or rendered
illusory by legislative strategems. The courts should be ready to rip open
such strategems and devices and find out whether in effect and substance the
legislation trenches upon any fundamental rights. The encroachments on
fundamental rights are often subtle and sophisticated and they are disguised
in language which apparently seems to steer clear of the constitutional inhi-
bitions. The need for a perceptive and alert Bar is, therefore, very great and the
courts too have to adopt a bold and dynamic approach, if the fundamental
rights are to be protected against dilution or erosion.
21. In the light of this discussion, the conclusion is inevitable that the
direct effect of the impugned Act was to transfer ownership of the debts due and
owing to Class III and Class IV employees in respect of annual cash bonus
to the Life Insurance Corporation and since the Life Insurance Corporation
is a corporation owned by the State, the impugned Act was a law providing
for compulsory acquisition of these debts by the State within the meaning of
clause (2A) of Article 31, If that be so, the impugned Act must be held to be
violative of Article 31, clause (2) since it did not provide for payment of any
compensation at all for the compulsory acquisition of these debts.
Re Ground (B)
22. Since the impugned Act has been held void as offending Article 31,
clause (2) under Ground (A), it is unnecessary to consider Ground (B) based
on infraction of Article 19(1)(f). It is the settled practice of this Court to
decide no more than what is absolutely necessary for the decision of a case.
Moreover, once it is held that the impugned Act falls within Article 31, clause
(2), its validity cannot be tested by reference to Article 19(1)(f) by reason of
clause (2B) of Article 31. Hence we do not propose to discuss the very interest-
ing arguments advanced before us in regard to Article 19(1)(f).
23. We accordingly allow the writ petitions and declare the Life Insurance
Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 void as offending Article 31.
clause (2) of the Constitution and issue a writ of mandamus directing the Union
of India and the Life Insurance Corporation to forebear from implementing
or enforcing the provisions of that Act and to pay annual cash bonus for the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
82
SUPREME COURT CASES
years April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and April 1, 1976 to March 31, 1977
to Class III and Class IV employees in accordance with the terms of Clause
8(ii) of the Settlement dated January 24, 1974. The respondents will pay the
costs of the writ petitions to the petitioners.
BEG, C.J.-The Life Insurance Corporation was constituted under the
Life Insurance Corporation Act 31 of 1956 (hereinafter to be referred to as
"the Act"). On June 1, 1957, the Central Government issued, under Sec-
tion 11(1) of the Act, an order prescribing the pay scales, dearness allowance
and conditions of service applicable to Class III and IV employees. Among
these conditions it is stated that no bonus would be paid but amenities like
insurance and medical treatment free of cost would be provided. On June
26, 1959, an order was passed by the Central Government under Section 11(2)
of the Act, amending para 9 of the 1957 Order inasmuch as it was provided that
bonus other than profit sharing bonus would be paid to the employees drawing
the salary not exceeding Rs. 500 per month. On July 2, 1959, there was a
settlement between the L. I. C. and the employees providing for payment of
cash bonus at the rate of one-and-a-half month's basic salary which was to be
effective from September 1, 1956 and valid upto December 31, 1961. In July
1960, regulations were framed under Section 49 to regulate the conditions of
service of classes of employees and Regulation 58 provided for payment of
non-profit sharing bonus to the employees. Orders were again passed on
April 14, 1962 and August 3, 1963, the effect of which was to remove the restric-
tion of Rs. 500 for eligibility for payment of bonus. On January 29, 1963,
another settlement was arrived at between the L. I. C. and its employees for
payment of cash bonus at the rate of one-and-a-half month's basic salary.
This was to continue in operation until March 31, 1969. On June 20, 1970,
a third settlement was reached for payment of cash bonus at the same rate
which was to be effective upto March 31, 1972. On June 26, 1972, a fourth
settlement for payment of cash bonus at the rate of 10 per cent of gross wages
(basic and special pay and dearness allowance) was made effective from April
1, 1972 to 1973. On January 21, 1974 and February 6, 1974, settlements for
payment of cash bonus at 15 per cent of gross wages valid for four years from
April 1, 1973 to March 31, 1977, were reached. It is clear that this so called
"bonus" did not depend upon profits earned but was nothing short of increased
wages. The settlements were approved by the Board of Directors of the L.I. C.
and also by the Central Government. On March 29, 1974, a circular was
issued by the L. I. C. for payment of bonus in accordance with the settlement
along with the salary in April. In April 1974, the payment of bonus for the
year 1973-74 was actually made in accordance with the settlement. Again,
in April 1975. bonus for the year 1974-75 was made in accordance with the
settlements. On September 25, 1975, however, a Payment of Bonus Amend-
ment Ordinance was promulgated. On September 25, 1975, the L. I. C. issued
a circular stating that as the payment of bonus was being reviewed in the light
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Beg, C.J.)
83
of the Ordinance, and, on March 22, 1976, payment of bonus for the year
1975-76 was to be withheld until a final decision was taken. Against this,
a writ petition was filed in the High Court of Calcutta. On May 21, 1976,
The Calcutta High Court passed an order recognising the right of petitioners to
payment of bonus for the year 1975-76 which had become payable along with
the salary in April 1976, and ordered that it must be paid to the employees.
Apparently, bonus was treated as part of the right of the petitioners to pro-
perty protected by Articles 19(1)(f) and 31(1) of the Constitution. On May
29, 1976, the Life Insurance Corporation Modification of Settlement Act,
1976 was enacted by Parliament denying to the petitioners the right which had
been recognised by the settlements, approved by the Central Government
and acted upon by the actual payment of bonus to the employees, and, finally,
converted into right under the decision of the Calcutta High Court on May
21, 1976.
25. Provisions of Section 11(2) read as follows :
(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for the purpose
of securing uniformity in the scales of remuneration and the other terms
and condivions of service applicable to employees of insurers whose con-
trolled business has been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation,
it is necessary so to do, or that, in the interests of the Corporation-and
its policy-holders, a reduction in the remuneration payable, or a revision
of the other terms and conditions of service applicable, to employees or
any class of them is called for, the Central Government may, notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (1), or in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any award,
settlement or agreement for the time being in force, alter (whether by way
of reduction or otherwise) the remuneration and the other terms and condi-
tions of service to such extent and in such manner as it thinks fit ; and
if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee, the Corporation may
terminate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent to
three months' remuneration unless the contract of service with such em-
ployee provides for a shorter notice of termination.
Explanation.-The compensation payable to an employee under this
sub-section shall be in addition to. and shall not affect, any pension,
gratuity, provident fund money or any other benefit to which the em-
ployee may be entitled under his contract of service,
Section 11(2) of the Act shows that the Central Government had ample power
to revise the scales of remuneration and other terms and conditions of service
if it was satisfied that the interest of the Corporation or the policy-holders
demanded this. Of course, such orders had to be passed as a result of satis-
faction upon material placed before the Central Government relating to the
interests of the Corporation or its policy holders. But, no such order was
passed. What was actually done was that the Act was passed to set aside
the terms of the settlements which had been incorporated in the judgment
inter-parties of the Calcutta High Court.
26. The objects and reasons of the Act were set out as follows :
The provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 do not apply to the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
84
SUPREME COURT CASES
employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India. How-
ever, the Corporation has, as a matter of practice, been paying bonus to
its employees. The bonus to Class I and Class II employees is being
paid in pursuance of agreements between the Corporation and such em-
ployees. The bonus to Class III and Class IV employees is being paid
under the terms of settlement arrived at between the Corporation and
such employees from time to time. In terms of the settlement arrived
at between the Corporation and its Class III and Class IV employees on
January 24, 1974 under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which is in
force upto the March 31, 1977, bonus is payable by the Corporation to
its Class III and Class IV employees at the rate of fifteen per cent of their
annual salary without any maximum limit.
2. It is proposed to set aside, with effect from April 1, 1975, these
provisions of the settlement arrived at between the Corporation and its
Class III and Class IV employees on January 24, 1974 to enable the Cor-
poration to make ex gratia payments to such employees at the rates deter-
mined on the basis of the general Government policy for making ex gratia
payments to the employees of the non-competing public sector under-
takings.
3. The bill seems to achieve the above object.
27. The statement of objects and reasons discloses that the purpose of the
impugned Act was to undo settlements which had been arrived at between the
Corporation and Class III and Class IV employees on January 24 and February
6, 1974, and actually recognised by the order of the Calcutta High Court. The
question could well arise whether this was really the exercise of a legislative
power or of a power comparable to that of an appellate authority considering
the merits of what had passed into a right to property recognised by the courts.
This Court has decided in Shrimati Indira Gandhi V. Raj Narain15 that even
a constitutional amendment cannot authorise the assumption of a judicial
power by Parliament. One of the tests laid down there was whether the deci-
sion is of a kind which requires hearing to be given to the parties, or, in other
words, involves at least a quasi-judicial procedure, which the Parliament does
not, in exercise of its legislative power, follow. A decision reached by the
Central Government, under Section 11(2) of the Act, is the result of a satis-
faction on matters stated there and would imply quasi-judicial procedure
where the terms of a settlement had to be reviewed or revised. But, the legis-
lative procedure, followed here, does not require that to be done. It would,
in any event, be unfair to adopt legislative procedure to undo such a settle-
ment which had become the basis of a decision of a High Court. Even if
legislation can remove the basis of a decision it has to do it by an alteration
of general rights of a class but not by simply excluding two specific settlements
between the Corporation and its employees from the purview of Section 18
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which had been held to be valid and
enforceable by a High Court. Such selective exclusion could also offend
Article 14.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK v. UNION OF INDIA (Beg, C.J.)
85
28. If Parliament steps in to set aside such a settlement, which the Central
Government could much more reasonably have examined after going into the
need for it or for its revision, the question also arises whether it violates the
fundamental right to property guaranteed under Article 19(1)(f) of the Consti-
tution, inasmuch as the right to get bonus is part of wages and, by its deprivation,
a judicially recognised right to property is taken away and not saved by the
provisions of Article 19(6) of the Constitution ? A restriction upon a right
may even cover taking away of the right to increased remuneration in the
interests of the general public. Where was the question of any restriction
here in the interests of the general public ? It seems a pure and simple case
of a deprivation of rights of Class III and Class IV employees without any
appaient nexus with any public interest.
29. The first hurdle in the way of this attack upon the Act undoing the
settlement under Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution placed before us was that
the Act of 1976 notified on May 29, 1976 was passed during the emergency.
Hence, it was submitted that Article 358 of the Constitution is an absolute bar
against giving effect to any right arising under Article 19 of the Constitution.
Furthermore, it was submitted that the effect of the Act was to wash off the
liability altogether after April 1, 1975 so that nothing remained to be enforced
after April 1, 1975.
30. The Act is a very short one of 3 sections. After defining the settle-
ment as the one which was arrived at between the Corporation and their
workers on January 24, 1974 under Section 18, read with clause (p) of Sec-
tion 2, of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the similar further settlement
of February 6, 1974, Section 3 lays down :
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, the provisions of each of the settlements, in so far as they relate
to the payment of an annual cash bonus to every Class III and Class IV
employees of the Corporation at the rate of fifteen per cent of his annual
salary, shall not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to have
any force or effect on and from first day of April, 1975.
31. The object of the Act was, in effect, to take away the force of the
judgment of the Calcutta High Court recognizing the settlements in favour
of Class III and Class IV employees of the Corporation. Rights under that
judgment could be said to arise independently of Article 19 of the Constitution.
I find myself in complete agreement with my learned brother Bhagwati that
to
give effect to the judgment of the Calcutta High Court is not the same thing as
enforcing a right under Article 19 of the Constitution. It may be that a right
under Article 19 of the Constitution becomes linked up with the enforceability
of the judgment. Nevertheless, the two could be viewed as separable sets of
rights. If the right conferred by the judgment independently is sought to be set
aside, Section 3 of the Act, would, in my opinion, be invalid for trenching
upon the judicial power.
32. I may, however, observe that even though the real object of the Act

this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
86
SUPREME COURT CASES
may be to set aside the result of the mandamus issued by the Calcutta High
Court, yet, the section does not mention this object at all. Probably this was
so because the jurisdiction of a High Court and the effectiveness of its orders
derived their force from Article 226 of the Constitution itself. These could
not be touched by an ordinary act of Parliament. Even if Section 3 of the
Act seeks to take away the basis of the judgment of the Calcutta High Court,
without mentioning it, by enacting what may appear to be a law, yet, I think
that, where the rights of the citizen against the State are concerned, we should
adopt an interpretation which upholds those rights. Therefore, according
to the interpretation I prefer to adopt the rights which had passed into those
embodied in a judgment and became the basis of a mandamus from the High
Court could not be taken away in this indirect fashion.
33. Apart from the considerations mentioned above there are also other
considerations put forward, with his usual vehemence, by Mr. R. K. Garg who
relies upon the directive principles of the State policy as part of the basic struc-
ture of our Constitution. At any rate, he submits that in judging the reason-
ableness of a provision the directive principles of State policy can be used, as
this Court has repeatedly done, as criteria of reasonableness, and, therefore,
of validity. Mr. Garg had relied strongly upon the provisions of Article 43
of the Constitution which says :
43. The State shall endeavour to secure by suitable legislation or
economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural,
industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring
a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and
cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to
promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis in rural
areas.
He submits that Article 43 casts an obligation on the State to secure a living
wage for the workers and is part of the principles "declared fundamental in the
governance of the country". In other words, he would have us use Article 43
as conferring practically a fundamental right which can be enforced. I do
not think that we can go so far as that because, even though the directive prin-
ciples of State policy, including the very important general ones contained in
Articles 38 and 39 of the Constitution, give the direction in which the funda-
mental policies of the State must be oriented, yet, we cannot direct either the
Central Government or Parliament to proceed in that direction. Article 37
says that they "shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles there-
in laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country
and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws".
Thus, even if they are not directly enforceable by a court they cannot be
declared ineffective. They have the life and force of fundamentals. The
best way in which they can be, without being directly enforced, given vitality
and effect in Courts of law is to use them as criteria of reasonableness, and,
therefore. of validity, as we have been doing. Thus, if progress towards goals
found in Articles 38. 39 and 43 are desired, there should not be any curtail-
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
MADAN MOHAN PATHAK V. UNION OF INDIA (Beg, C.J.)
87
ment of wage rates arbitrarily without disclosing any valid reason for it as is
the case here. It is quite reasonable, in my opinion, to submit that the measure
which seeks to deprive workers of the benefits of a settlement arrived at and
assented to by the Central Government, under the provisions of the Industrial
Disputes Act, should not be set at naught by an Act designed to defeat a parti-
cular settlement. If this be the purpose of the Act, as it evidently is, it could
very well be said to be contrary to public interest, and, therefore, not protected
by Article 19(6) of the Constitution.
34. Furthermore, I think that the principle laid down by this Court
in
Union of India V. M/s. Indo-Ajghan Agencies Ltd. 6 can also be taken
into
account in judging the reasonableness of the provision in this case. It was
held there (at p. 385) :
Under our jurisprudence the Government is not exempt from lia-
bility to carry out the representation made by it as to its future conduct
and it cannot on some undefined and undisclosed ground of necessity
or expediency fail to carry out the promise solemnly made by it, nor claim
to be the judge of its own obligation to the citizen on an ex parte appraise-
ment of the circumstances in which the obligation has arisen.
In that case, equitable principles were invoked against the Government. It
is true that, in the instant case, it is a provision of the Act of Parliament and
not merely a governmental order whose validity is challenged before us.
Nevertheless, we cannot forget that the Act is the result of a proposal made by
the Government of the day which, instead of proceeding under Section 11(2)
of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, chose to make an Act of Parliament
protected by emergency provisions. I think that the prospects held out, the
representations made, the conduct of the Government, and equities arising
therefrom, may all be taken into consideration for judging whether a parti-
cular piece of legislation. initiated by the Government and enacted by Parlia-
ment, is reasonable.
35. Mr. Garg has also strongly attacked Section 3 of the Act as violative
of Article 14 of the Constitution which was also not available to the petitioners
during the emergency. He alleges that the Corporation has been making
very handsome profits so that the question of jeopardizing the interests of the
Corporation or policy-holders could not arise. He submits that the Act is
nothing more than selective discrimination practised against the lower levels
of the staff of the Life Insurance Corporation. I do not think that these con-
tentions are devoid of force.
36. I am sorry that due to the very short interval left for me to dictate
my opinion in this case I have not been able to fully set out the reasoning or to
cite all the authorities I would have liked to have done. The pressure of work
on hand is too great. I have several judgments to pronounce tomorrow, the
last day on which I shall have the authority to participate as a Judge in the
16. (1968) 2 SCR 366: AIR 1968 SC 718
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
88
SUPREME COURT CASES
decisions of this Court. I have, however, thought it to be my duty to indicate
my line of thinking briefly as I have my doubts whether Article 31(2A) is not
an effective answer to complete reliance upon Article 31(2) of the Constitution.
37. It is true that the right to receive bonus which had been recognised
by the Central Government both by its orders and conduct under a Settlement
is a right to property. Nevertheless, since acquisition is defined by Arti-
cle 31(2A) of the Constitution, I seriously doubt whether that definition of
acquisition is really satisfied by the facts in the case before us. The provision
reads as follows :
31(2A). Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the owner-
ship or right to possession of any property to the State or to a corporation
owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to provide for the
compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, notwithstanding
that it deprives any person of his property.
38. I have, however, no doubt that the conclusion reached by my learned
brother Bhagwati is quite correct inasmuch as the benefits of the rights recog-
nised by the judgment of the Calcutta High Court could not be indirectly taken
away by Section 3 of the Act selectively directed against specified settlements
only.
39. I think that Section 3 of the impugned Act is struck by the provisions
of Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution and not saved by Article 19(6) of the
Constitution. It is also struck by Article 14. If the fundamental rights
guaranteed by Articles 14 and 19 are not suspended, but their operation is
only suspended, a view which I expressed in A. D. M., Jabalpur V. Shivakant
Shukla7, the effect of the suspension is to restore the status quo ante. Would
this not mean that only the validity of an attack based on Articles 14 and 19
is suspended during the Emergency ? But, once this embargo is lifted Arti-
cles 14 and 19 of the Constitution whose use was suspended, would strike down
any legislation which would have been bad. In other words, the declaration
of invalidity is stayed during the emergency. Both Articles 358 and 359(1A)
provide that, as soon as a proclamation of emergency ceases to operate, the
effect of suspension must vanish "except as respects things done or omitted
to be done before the law so ceases to have effect".
40. The things done or omitted to be done could certainly not mean
that the rights conferred under the Settlements were washed off completely
as the learned Attorney General suggested. To hold that would be to convert
the suspension of invalidity into a validation of law made during the emer-
gency. If the law was not validated but only its invalidation was suspended,
we should not give any wider effect to the suspension. I think we should
interpret "things done or omitted to be done" very narrowly. If this be so,
it means that the Settlements are not to be deemed to be wiped off. No doubt
payments under them were temporarily suspended. This must obviously
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
S. P. ROY CHOUDHURY v. K. B. ROY CHOUDHURY (Untwalia, J.)
89
mean that no payment could be demanded under them during the emergency,
but, as soon as the emergency was over, the Settlements would revive and
what could not be demanded during the emergency would become payable
even for the period of emergency for which payment was suspended. Other-
wise, the enactment will have effect even after the emergency had ceased. This
would clearly be contrary to the express provisions of Articles 358 and 359(1A).
In other words, valid claims cannot be washed off by the emergency per se.
They can only be suspended by a law passed during the operation of Arti-
cles 358 and 359(1A) of the Constitution.
41. For the reasons given above, I reach the same conclusion as my
learned brother Bhagwati although perhaps by a different route. I concur in
the final order made by my learned brother Bhagwati.
Order by CHANDRACHUD, FAZAL ALI AND SHINGHAL, IJ.
42. We agree with the conclusion of brother Bhagwati but prefer to rest
our decision on the ground that the impugned Act violates the provisions of
Article 31(2) and is, therefore, void. We consider it unnecessary to express
any opinion on the effect of the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in
W. P. 371 of 1976.
(1978) 2 Supreme Court Cases 89
(BEFORE N. L. UNTWALIA AND P. S. KAILASAM, JJ.)
SUBHENDU PROSAD ROY CHOUDHURY AND
OTHERS
Appellants ;
Versus
KAMALA BALA ROY CHOUDHURY AND
OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 2099 of 1968, decided on February 1, 1978
Rent Control and Eviction - Notice - Minor co-owner's name
appearing in the list on the top of the notice - Father signing the
notice need not specifically mention at the foot of the notice that
he was signing on behalf of the son also-Even otherwise notice
good and valid
(Para 2)
followed.
Rent Control and Eviction - Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act, 1949 -
Section 4 - Eviction proceedings filed in 1958 - Validity of
notice decided in 1978 - Case in view of Section 13 of Calcutta
Thika Tenancy (Second Amendment Act (W. B. Act 29 of 1969)
to be decided under the amended provisions
(Para 4)
Appeal allowed and case remanded
M/3789/S
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
UNTWALIA, J.-This is a landlords' appeal by special leave. They had
filed a petition in the year 1958 in the Court of the Munsif at Alipore