this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
33
continue in the circumstances of this case as long as the consolidation
operations are going on.
12. As in a fresh petition the High Court has stayed the operation
of the notification under Section 6 of the Consolidation Act, it is of no
avail to the respondent in this appeal.
13. The appeal is allowed and the judgment of the High Court
is set aside. The writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court
is allowed in toto. The order of the District Judge, dated January 31,
1964, is quashed and the proceedings under the Ceiling Act are abated
under Section 5 (2) of the Consolidation Act. The proceedings under
the Ceiling Act may be resumed after the issue of a notification under
Section 52 or after the dismissal of the writ petition challenging the
notification under Section 6. In the circumstances of this case, there
will be no order as to costs.
(1974) 2 Supreme Court Cases 33
(Advisory Jurisdiction)
(BEFORE A. N. RAY, C.J. AND P. JAGANMOHAN REDDY,
D. G. PALEKAR, H. R. KHANNA, K. K. MATHEW,
M. H. BEG AND Y. V. CHANDRACHUD, JJ.)
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
Special Reference No. 1 of 1974*, decided on June 5, 1974
Constitution of Indis - Articles 54, 55, 56, 62 and 71 - Presidential election
- Whether the election to fill the vacancy on the expiry of the term of the office
of the President must be completed before the expiry of the term of office not-
withstanding the fact that the Legislative Assembly of one or more of the States
is dissolved - Whether provision of Article 62(1) mandatory - Word "other-
wise" in Article 62(2) whether contemplates the above situation - Effect of Article
56(1)(c) - Section 7 of Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952
Scope and effect of the provisions of Article 71(4) [as introduced by Constitution
(Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961] - Validity - Article 56(1)(c) when applles
Constitution of India - Article 170 - Dissolution of Gnjarat Assembly
after publication of 1971 census figures and passing of notification under Section 8,
Delimitation Act, 1972 - Whether fresh elections can now be held on the basis
of the 1961 census
Constitution of India - Article 143 - Scope of Supreme Court's jurisdiction
under - Whether Court can go into the veracity of the facts stated in the Refe-
rence - Whether bona fides of the Reference can be tested
Interpretation of Statutes - Provision directory or mandatory - Determina-
tion of - Legislative intent
Maxims - Impotentia excusat legam - Meaning and scope of
HELD:
(i) The fixed term of office mentioned in Article 56(1) as well as the mandate
in Article 62(1) that the election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the
Reference by the President of India under Article 143 of the Constitution.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
34
SUPREME COURT CASES
(1974) 2 SCO
term of office shall be completed before the expiration of the term reflects the
dominant constitutional purpose and intent regarding the time when the election
of the President is to be held. Further, the provision in Article 62(2) shows that
the time to hold an election to fill a vacancy is also mandatory in character.
(Para 4)
Article 62(1) and (2) do not contain any provision for extension of time.
(Para 5)
The word "otherwise" does not refer to a vacancy caused by the expiration
of the term of office for the obvious reason that the same is the subject matter
of Article 62(1). The marginal note to Article 62 fully bears this out. Further,
a President whose term has expired can continue to hold the office only under
Article 56(1)(c) until his successor enters upon his office. Article 56(1)(c) is comple-
mentary to Article 62(1). Here successor means a successor elected before or
even after the expiration of the term stated in Article 62(1). Article 65(1) is
complementary to Article 62(2). An election to fill a vacancy in the office of the
President for the reasons mentioned in Article 62(2) obviously does not attract
Article 56(1)(c). The word "otherwise" may take in cases where, for example.
a President becomes disqualified to hold the office or where his election is declared
void, and, therefore, he cannot hold the office.
(Paras 6, 8 and 7)
The impossibility of the completion of the election to fill the vacancy in the
office of the President before the expiration of the term of office in the case of
death of a candidate as may appear from Section 7 of the 1952 Act does not rob
Article 62(1) of its mandatory character.
(Para 15)
The observations of the Supreme Court in N. B. Khare's case regarding the
mandatory nature of Article 62 were not obiter.
(Para 16)
Narayan Bhaskar Khare V. Election Commission of India, 1957 SCR 1081,
relied on.
It is possible that the successor cannot enter upon his office on the day
following the expiration of the term of office of the outgoing President for un-
avoidable reasons. That is why Articles 56(1), 56(1)(c) and 62(1) are to be read
together to give effect to the constitutional intent and content that the election
to fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of the President is to be
completed before the expiration of the term.
(Para 18)
Neither Article 54 nor Article 55 has anything to do either with the time of
the election to fill the vacancy before the expiration of the term or to prevent the
holding of the election before the expiration of the term by reason of dissolution
of Legislative Assembly of a State. The true meaning of Article 54 is that such
persons as possess the qualification of being elected members of both Houses of
Parliament and of Legislative Assemblies of States at the crucial time of the date
of election will be eligible members of the electoral college entitled to cast vote
at the election to fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office
of the President. The submissions of the interveners that Article 62 will be cons-
trued in the light of Articles 54, 55 and 368 are unsound. Article 62 is the
constitutional mandate and other provisions like Articles 54, 55 subserve Article 62.
Article 62 stands by itself independent of any other provision. (Paras 23 & 31)
Warburton V. Loveland. (1932) 2 D & CL 480, relied on.
Parity is not between each State separately as a unit on the one hand and the
Union on the other but between the States as a whole and the Union.
(Para 25)
Article 71(4) was really introduced after the Khare case to shut out any
challenge to the election on the ground that there was any vacancy among mem-
bers of the electoral college. In view of the constitutional declaration or exposi-
tion of Article 71(4) it is manifest that the language is of wide amplitude, viz.,
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
35
existence of any vacancy for any reason whatever among the members of the
electoral college.
(Para 34)
If as a result of dissolution of a Legislative Assembly of a State, there are
no elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a State, a State will not have
any elected member of a State Legislative Assembly to qualify for the electoral
college. It may be said that there are vacancies in the electoral college by reason
of the fact that there are no elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a
State where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved. That matter will not be a ground
either for preventing the holding of the election on the expiry of the term of the
President or suggesting that the election to fill the vacancy caused by the expiry of
the term of the office of the President could be held only after the election to the
Legislative Assembly of a State where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved is held.
(Para 33)
The validity of the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961 cannot be
considered in this reference.
(Para 46)
It will not only be undemocratic but also unconstitutional to deny the elected
members of both the Houses of Parliament as well as the elected members of the
Legislative Assemblies of the States the right to elect the President in accordance
with the provisions of the Constitution only because the Assembly of a State is
dissolved.
(Para 30)
No opinion is expressed on the question which has been posed during argu-
ments as to what would be the position if there is "mala fide dissolution" of a
State Legislative Assembly or Assemblies or if there is, after the dissolution of
the Assembly or Assemblies, a "mala fide refusal" to hold elections thereto within
reasonable time before the Presidential election because such a question does not
arise on the present Reference. Likewise no opinion is expressed on the effect of
the dissolution of a substantial number of State Assemblies before the Presiden-
tial election.
(Para 35)
(ii) The provisions contained in Article 170 repel the submission that the
election to the Gujarat Legislative Assembly can be held on the basis of 1961
census.
(Para 42)
There is nothing in Section 10(4) of the Delimitation Act, 1972 to the con-
trary which enjoins the Election Commission to hold elections to the House of the
People or the Legislative Assembly dissolved after the census of 1971 according
to the electoral rolls prepared of the constituencies delimited on the basis of the
census of 1961.
(Para 43)
Now that the census figures of 1971 have been published elections have to
be held under Article 170 only after delimitation of the constituencies has been
made in accordance with clauses (2) and (3) of Article 170.
(Para 43)
When a notification under Section 8 of the 1972 Act has been published by
assigning 182 seats to the Gujarat Assembly which notification under Section 10(2)
of the 1972 Act has the force of law and cannot be questioned in any court,
elections to these 182 seats cannot be held on the basis of the old electoral rolls
because those electoral rolls applied only to the 168 seats as fixed under the old
Delimitation Act.
(Para 44)
The Legislative Assembly of the State of Gujarat has been dissolved. There-
fore, any election which has to be held to the Legislative Assembly of the State
of Gujarat can only be held after the delimitation of constituencies under the
1972 Act.
(Para 45)
(iii) The Supreme Court is bound by the recitals in the order of Reference.
Under Article 143(1) the Court accepts the statements of fact set out in the
Reference. The truth or otherwise of the facts cannot be enquired or gone into
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
36
SUPREME COURT CASES
nor can the Supreme Court go into the question of bona fides or otherwise of the
authority making the Reference. The Court cannot go behind the recital. It cannot
go into disputed questions of fact in its advisory jurisdiction under Article 143(1).
(Para 37)
Parties appearing in the Reference cannot go behind the order of Reference
and present new questions by raising doubts.
(Paras 39)
Re The Allocation of Lands and Buildings in a Chief Commissioner's Province,
1943 FCR 20, relied on.
Re Kerala Education Bill, 1959 SCR 995, relied on.
Re Levy of Estate Duty, 1944 FCR 317, relied on
(iv) In determining the question whether a provision is mandatory or direc-
tory, the subject matter, the importance of the provision, the relation of that
provision to the general object intended to be secured by the Act will decide
whether the provision is directory or mandatory. It is the duty of the courts to
get at the real intention of the Legislature by carefully attending the whole scope
of the provision to be construed.
(Para 13)
Brett V. Brett, (1826) 3 Addams 210, 216, relied on.
(v) The maxim of law impotentia excusat legam is intimately connected with
another maxim of law lex non cogit ad impossibilia. Impotentia excusat legam
is that when there is a necessary or invincible disability to perform the mandatory
part of the law that impotentia excuses. The law does not compel one to do
that which one cannot possibly perform. Where the law creates a duty or charge,
and the party is disabled to perform it, without any default in him, and has no
remedy over it, there the law will in general excuse him. Therefore, when it
appears that the performance of the formalities prescribed by a statute has been
rendered impossible by circumstances over which the persons interested had no
control, like the act of God, the circumstances will be taken as a valid excuse.
Where the act of God prevents the compliance of the words of a statute, the
statutory provision is not denuded of its mandatory character because of super-
vening impossibility caused by the act of God.
(Para 15)
Broom's Legal Maxims, 10th Edn., pp. 162-63, relied OR
Craies on Statute Law, 6th Edn., p. 268, relied on
Advised accordingly.
M/2050/C
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS
In this Reference the Attorney-General of India, the Election Commission of
India, the States of Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Kerala, Manipur, Uttar Pradesh and
Maharashtra and four opposition parties - the Congress (O), Jana Sangh, Socialist
Party and the Indian Union Muslim League of Kerala - put forward their views
on the constitutional issues in a mid-vacation hearing which lasted five days.
The Court had issued notices to the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Chairman of
the Rajya Sabha and Speakers of all the Legislative Assemblies but none of them
responded. Only some of the Advocate-Generals responded to the notices issued
to all of them.
Written Statements
Mr. NIREN DE: In the written statement, the Attorney-General, Mr. Niren
De, took the stand that the Presidential election must be held before the expiry of
the five year term irrespective of the fact that the Legislature of any particular State
is in a state of dissolution at the time of such election. Such dissolution amounts
to 'vacancy' as contemplated by Art.71(4). The provisions of Art. 62 are
mandatory contended the Attorney-General and therefore the election must
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
37
be held. The Attorney-General emphasised that Art. 71 puts out of all contro-
versies any question relating to the validity of the constitution of the "electoral
college" under Article 54 or the validity of the election of the President because
of any vacancy in the electoral college for "whatever reasons", including non-
existence of a State Assembly by reasons of its dissolution. The mandatory provi-
sions of the Constitution regarding the circumstances in which and the time when
an election of the President must take place, particularly the provisions of clause (1)
of Article 56 and Article 62 cannot be ignored. In a country of the size of with
so many units constituting the Union of India, the Legislative Assembly of a State
may be dissolved, by the Governor under Article 174, or by the President under
Article 356, and as such the dissolution of the Assembly of some State or other
can be of constant occurrence. So Article 55 cannot be construed in such a
way as would hold up the election of the President for an indefinite period despite
the provisions of Clause 4 of Article 71 and the mandatory provisions of other
Articles of the Constitution, particularly Articles 56, 62 and 65.
Regarding Art.71(4) the Attorney-General contended that it has a "very
wide purport". The expression "any vacancy for whatever reason" does not admit
of any limitation on its purport or scope and the words "for whatever reason"
emphasises that the nature of magnitude or the reason for any such
vacancy is immaterial. In other words, vacancy arising out of dissolution of a
State assembly would be covered within the meaning of this clause.
Mr. T. SWAMINATHAN The Chief Election Commissioner, Mr. T.
Swaminathan, fully supported the stand of the Attorney-General on all the six
questions raised in the Reference. He submitted that where the Legislative Assembly
of any State is dissolved before the expiration of the term of the office of the
outgoing President under Art. 56(1), an election to fill the vacancy in the office of
the President has to be held and completed before the expiration of the term of
the outgoing President to enable the successor President to assume office on the
day following the expiration of the term of the outgoing President.
The Presidential electoral college in that case will consist of the elected
members of both Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative
Assemblies of States notwithstanding any vacancies in the electoral college conse-
quent on the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly of one or more States. The
electoral college is duly constituted notwithstanding the existence of any vacan-
cies amongst the members of the electoral college, whether they are consequent
on the existence of casual vacancies or upon the dissolution of the Legislative
Assembly of any State. On a true and correct interpretation of Articles 54, 55,
56, 62 and 71, the electoral college mentioned in Article 54 is to consist of the
elected members of both Houses of Parliament and elected members of the Legis-
lative Assemblies of the States as determined in the following manner
(1) Elected members of the House of the People - as mentioned in the First
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
(2) Elected members of the Council of States under Article 80(2) read with
the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution, and
(3) Elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States - as laid
down in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act and in the
case of Assemblies which have been dissolved after the 1971 census, as determined
by orders issued by the Delimitation Commission under the Delimitation Act, 1972.
The Commissioner further contended that the applicability of cl.(c) of
proviso to Art. 56(1) did not arise in view of the stand taken by him on the other
questions. The provisions of Art. 62(1) and (2) and N. B. Khare's case left no
doubt, in the opinion of the Commissioner, that the time prescribed in Art. 62
for completing the election of the new President is imperative and mandatory.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
38
SUPREME COURT CASES
The Commissioner also stated that the Gujarat Assembly on the basis of the
1971 census had 182 seats as against the 168 seats based on the 1961 census and
therefore unless the delimitation of constituencies and revision of the electoral
roll is completed no election could be held in the State.
Besides, in view of the primary importance of Art. 56, Art. 62(1) must
necessarily be also of primary importance in order to achieve the intention of the
Constitution-makers. This Constitutional provision operates independently and is
not circumscribed or conditioned by or dependent on any other provision of the
Constitution. Article 62(2) lays down a positive injunction.
On Art. 71(4) the Commissioner submitted that all types of vacancies amongst
members of the electoral college were intended to be provided for by Article 71(4).
In this regard three points were made
(1) This clause speaks of any vacancy among members of the electoral college
and not of the nature of the vacancy. The existence of the Legislative Assembly
of a State has no bearing or consequence on the provisions contained in this
Article or on the validity of the electoral college envisaged under Article 54.
(2) The vacancy might have been caused for whatever reason. This provi-
sion is of very wide purport and is significant for our present purpose.
(3) Consistently with the language used in Article 54, this clause also refers
to the electoral college and not to any elements or units constituting such an
electoral college.
JANA SANGH. On behalf of the intervener, Jana Sangh. its President
Shri L. K. Advani requested the Supreme Court to refuse to exercise its advisory
jurisdiction unless the terms of the reference were modified and the Government
"unreservedly commits itself" to abide by the Court's opinion. He stated that
"this reference had not been made by reasons of any bona fide doubt existing in
the mind of the Government". but with a view to securing judicial approval for
a "course of political action the Government has already decided on". The
Supreme Court has discretionary powers to decline to express its opinion in this
reference as per the law laid down in Re Kerala Education Bill and some other
cases in the past.
The Jana Sangh pleaded that the terms of the reference should be modified
as a vital issue had been "clearly" kept out. This vital question is not whether
the election would be valid or not in the absence of the Gujarat Assembly, but
whether the election would be valid or not if the Government. by its own acts
of omission or commission, denies to the representatives of Gujarat an oppor-
tunity of participating in the elections. It also objected to the "exclusion" of
Article 170 relating to the composition of Legislative Assemblies as also the
Delimitation Act, 1972, from the reference. This exclusion showed that the Govern-
ment was not interested in harmonising the provisions of Article 170 and
of the provisions of the Delimitation Act with the interpretation of other Articles of
the Constitution "but is interested in interpreting other articles of the Constitu-
tion in the context of provisions of Article 170 and/or the provisions of the
Delimitation Act".
In other words, a mala tide attempt has been made to exclude the Supreme
Court from expressing opinion on the provisions of Article 170 and the Delimita-
tion Act, lest the Supreme Court may give opinion that election of the Assembly
of the Gujarat State should be held on the basis of the earlier census in order
to comply with the provisions of the Articles 54, 55, 56 and 62 of the Constitution.
The Jana Sangh further contended that if Article 54 was interpreted to mean
that the elected members of such State Assemblies as are in existence alone form
the electoral college, it would be a violation of the federal structure of the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
39
Constitution. "On this reasoning, the electoral college will be complete even if
all the State Assemblies are dissolved and are not in existence at the time of the
election of the President and the two Houses of Parliament could elect the
President". Further, acceptance of this view would "enable the ruling party at
the Centre to subordinate the electoral process to the demands of political
expedience".
On Art. 71(4) it contended that it dealt with only casual vacancies and it
could not cover vacancy arising out of dissolution of assembly of a State. In
support the Parliamentary debates especially the statements of the then Law Minister,
Mr. A. K. Sen, were cited.
CONGRESS (O) The Congress (O), intervener, submitted that the Constitu-
tion has ensured that the President should have a more broadbased character and
representation than the Government at the Centre. This intention of the Constitu-
tion cannot be defeated by the ruling party by dissolving the legislature of a State.
In its view Article 55 of the Constitution provided that there should be
uniformity in the scale of representation of different States for the election of
the President. It also provided for securing this uniformity among States inter se
and parity between the States as a whole and the Union. This parity could not
possibly be achieved if one or more States remained totally unrepresented. Vacan-
cies in the electoral college for the Presidential election means only that certain
seats in an Assembly may be vacant but not the whole House.
SOCIALIST PARTY The Socialist Party, intervener, also urged that election
to the office of the President without the participation of members of the Gujarat
Legislature will be constitutionally invalid and against the preservation of the
federal structure of the Constitution and the basic principles of republicanism.
"The Supreme Court should not adopt a mechanical interpretation of the Constitu-
tion which would destroy the basic scheme of the Constitution".
The party has also contended that State Legislative Assemblies have been
conferred the right to be represented in the electoral college under Article 54 of
the Constitution and any denial of equal opportunity to the Gujarat Assembly to
participate in the election of the President would be against the basic principles
of republicanism.
In its view if one State or more than one State is not represented at the
election, the parity between the Union and States would be destroyed and des-
truction of this parity would be violative of Article 55(2) of the Constitution.
Even if one State is deprived of representation at this election, the Union will
enjoy not parity but superiority in relation to the States.
Under Art. 56(1) Proviso cl. (c) the President can validly continue in office
after the expiry of the period of his five year term in August this year. The
tenure of the successor to the present President will not be prejudiced because
he will continue for five years from the date on which he enters his office.
However, even without the President or the Vice-President, there can be no
constitutional vacuum for the office of the President because the Chief Justice or
the senior most Judge of the Supreme Court can officiate as President of India
under the President (Discharge of Functions) Act. 1969.
Under these circumstances elections to the Legislative Assembly for Gujarat
can be held within six months from August 24 this year to enable the members
to participate in the Presidential election.
MUSLIM LEAGUE The Indian Union Muslim League submitted that
dissolution of the Assembly in a State or States constitutes a vacancy of a unit
in the electoral college and precludes the holding of the Presidential election.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
40
SUPREME COURT CASES
The entire democratic method of holding Presidential election will be set at
naught if it is held that it is permissible to hold the election even though one or
more of the State Assemblies or the Lok Sabha stand dissolved, the League
contended.
The party submitted that Article 62(1) of the Constitution should be read
in a manner which would not destroy the right of the State or States Assemblies
as constituent unit of the electoral college.
Ordinarily, it contended, the President's election must be completed before
the expiration of the incumbent's term, but in the event of the non-existence of any
State Assembly, the aid of Article 62 cannot be taken to affect the basic provision
in Article 54 regarding the composition of the electoral college. To enable elec-
tions in Gujarat the President can continue to hold that office for a "very short
and reasonable" period. This will be constitutionally valid and make the constitu-
tion workable.
Argnments
Mr. NIREN DE: The Attorney-General, Mr. Niren De, submitted that the
Constitution dealt at length with the office of President and its importance. With-
out the President, the Constitution could not go on even for a moment, and the
whole constitutional machinery would fall.
He stated that the failure of the people of a State to have a stable govern-
ment could not prevent the other States in the Union from expressing their right
to elect the President. "It is not the fault of the people that they elected an
assembly in a federation of 21 units, which could not last."
Article 54 merely described the qualifications of the President's electors. It
was not necessary that all the legislative assemblies should be in existence for the
Presidential election to take place, he affirmed. The election could be held even
with the Lok Sabha dissolved. Any ambiguities in the language of Article 54
must be resolved by reference to the "dominant expression" of the Constitution
on the timing of the election. The timing provision should prevail if there were
to be any inconsistency between it and the provision describing the electoral col-
lege. The Houses of Parliament and assemblies did not have the right to vote
in a Presidential election. but only their members. The Presidential election
could be held so long as there was an electoral college. The electoral college itself
was a permanent body because the Rajya Sabha will always be in existence.
Mr. Niren De however assured the Court that such an extreme situation was not
likely to occur and that he had referred to the possibility only as an illustration.
He said that in any case the whole constitutional machinery would then come to
a standstill, not just the Presidential poll. The Constitution-makers could not
provide for such a situation.
In Art. 54 "both Houses of Parliament" is mentioned because members of
both the Houses have the qualification. Further "both" is used with respect to
Parliament because in the States only members of the assembly and not of the
legislative council are qualified to be members of the electoral college. On a
query from the Bench that if only Rajya Sabha members among MPs were parti-
De replied that the parity is between the States as a whole and Parliament. This
cipating, those who speak for the Union would be reduced in numbers, Mr. Niren
is not affected.
Since the Constitution provided that at the Presidential election there should
be, "as far as practicable" uniformity in the scale of representation of the different
States, this showed the Constitution-makers did contemplate a situation where there
would not be a State Legislative Assembly at the time of the poll.
The nature of federation was not such that its quintessence would be embodied
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
41
only in the Presidential poll provisions of the Constitution. If it was enough
for half of the States to ratify certain constitutional amendments, it showed the
Constitution did not envisage 100 per cent federalism.
Mr. Niren De submitted that Article 62, read with Article 56(1), embodied
"the dominant constitutional purpose and intent regarding the time when the
election of the President must be held". "If this be so any other Article in the
Constitution, if necessary, must bear interpretation to serve this dominant constitu-
tional purpose and intent". Article 54 in "essence and scope" merely prescribed
the qualifications required of the President's election. Likewise Article 55 in
"essence and scope" merely applied the formulate by which the electors having
the required qualification are assigned the number of votes.
Under Art. 56(1) Proviso cl. (c) the President would continue for only "some
time" if his successor because of illness, and like reasons could not enter office
immediately.
Regarding Art. 54, Mr. Niren De contended that if there should be any
ambiguity in language of Article 54 that ambiguity must necessarily be resolved
by referring to dominant intentions expressed in another Article regarding the
same subject matter." "If there should be any inconsistency or conflict between
Article 54 and Article 62 must necessarily prevail. And in any case it must be
subject to interpretation on principle of harmonisation".
In Art. 55 the words "as far as practicable" for securing uniformity show
that the framers had taken into account the possibility of non-existence of a State
Legislature at the time of the Presidential election.
Shri LAL NARAIN SINHA The Solicitor-General, Shri Lal Narain Sinha,
appearing on behalf of the Maharashtra Advocate-General submitted that there
was a direct conflict between Art. 54 and Art. 55 of the Constitution. The
Constitution in this regard was imperfect and would need to be amended to rectify
this. The language of Art. 62 was mandatory and pre-emptory. It did not admit
any exception or any excuse for its "disobedience". Also Art. 54 and Art. 62
were in direct and unresolvable conflict. Construing the Constitution as a whole,
taking into account the nature of the office of the President, the mandatory language
of Art. 62 read with Art. 56 should receive the interpretation which its explicit
language compelled and the Court should answer the various questions in the
manner suggested by the Attorney-General.
Further Article 71(4) shut out altogether any plea that the electoral college
was properly constituted only when there were no vacancies either in Parliament
or the State Assemblies. The bar on such a plea operated whether the vacancy
was casual or caused by the dissolution of a legislature or "for whatever reason".
Mr. F. S. NARIMAN The Additional Solicitor-General, Mr. F. S. Nariman,
arguing on behalf of the Election Commission, submitted that the dissolution of
the Gujarat Assembly did not mean that the people of Gujarat would not be parti-
cipating in the Presidential poll since their representatives in the Lok Sabha and
the Rajya Sabha would be on the electoral college. The Election Commission
would not be able to complete delimitation of constituencies for the Gujarat
Assembly elections to be held in time for a Presidential poll before August 24.
He further maintained that the electoral college is a permanent body which always
existed to meet a situation arising out of the expiry of the term of the President
or a casual vacancy arising out of the death, removal or resignation of a President.
The words "consisting of" as given in Art. 54 did not mean that the "electoral
college must consist of the prescribed number of members at a given point of
time" but only implied that "the electoral college cannot consist of anybody other
than those named in the Constitution".
Article 54 is 'timeless' as it makes ample provisions for the election of the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
42
SUPREME COURT CASES
President for all time to come. No element of time is involved and the concept
of time is 'alien' to Article 54.
He concluded that the electoral college as contemplated in the Constitution
did not mean that each and every member of the college must elect the President
but only that the President must be elected only from among the members of the
college and nobody else.
Mr. GOVIND SWAMINATHAN: The Advocate-General of Tamil Nadu
supported the Attorney-General and stressed that the electoral college was a continu-
ing body that came into existence at the first General Election in 1952. Vacan-
cies would not affect such a continuing corporate body.
He however contended that Presidential election should not be held if the
Lok Sabha or majority of the State Legislatures are dissolved mala fide. In such a
case, election of President by elected members of the Rajya Sabha alone would
not be in keeping with the objectives of Article 54. Article 71(4) could not include
within its scope "vacancies" arising out of dissolution of Assemblies or the Lok Sabha
made mala fide or "in colourable exercise of power or with an ulterior purpose".
He said the Presidential election should not be held if election to dissolved
bodies is "deliberately not conducted within a specified period".
Dr. L. M. SINGHVI: The Advocate-General of Rajasthan, also sup-
ported the Attorney-General and submitted that there should be an automatic end
of the President's term. He referred to the West German, French and American
Constitutions which fixed dates on which a new President took over from one
whose term had expired.
He submitted that Article 56(1) Proviso cl. (c) did not authorise the violation
of Article 62(1) which says that a new Presidential election shall be completed
before the expiration of the term of office of the incumbent President.
Dr. Singhvi further submitted that it was not necessary at this stage to go
into questions of dissolution of the Lok Sabha and all State assemblies at the time
of the Presidential poll. These questions could be answered when they arose.
Article 54 was only meant to identify the electorate and there was nothing
more to it. This Article recognised the individual status of the members of the
electoral college.
The power conferred on the President under Article 356 in the event of
failure of the constitutional machinery in States was also independent power and
not made subject to provisions in Article 54. The exercise of power under
Article 356 could not arrest the process set in motion for election of the President
as provided for in the mandatory provisions of Article 62.
OTHER LEARNED COUNSELS : Mr. M. M. Abdul Khader, Advocate-General
of Kerala, Mr. S. N. Kacker, Advocate-General of Uttar Pradesh, Mr. B. P. Singh,
Advocate-General of Bihar and Mr. M. Veerappa who appeared on behalf of the
Advocate-General of Karnataka supported the contentions of the Attorney-General.
Mr. C. L. LAKHANPAL: The learned Counsel for the Congress (O) ques-
tioned the compulsion to hold the election when a statute of Parliament provided for
the adjournment of a set poll and even a fresh poll in the event a candidate died,
a riot prevented the poll or a ballot box was tampered with. Was the timing of
the Presidential poll so mandatory that it be held "without a properly constituted
Electoral College". The Electoral college was incomplete if any Legislative
Assembly remained dissolved, he added. The Electoral College would not be
duly constituted if either House of Parliament or any State Legislative Assembly
went unrepresented.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
43
Article 54 had made the two Houses of Parliament and all the State Assem-
blies the constituents of the Electoral College so that the people of every State could
participate in the poll through their elected representatives. Article 62(1) timing
the Presidential poll came into operation only after the earlier articles on the con-
duct of the poll were fully satisfied.
According to Counsel Article 62 can only be mandatory and not directory if
other provisions are complied with. Article 62 does not become the governing
provision unless and until Articles 54, 55, 56 are first complied with. The essence
of these provisions is that a valid electoral college must exist before the Presidential
poll can be validly held. Sub-clause (2) of Article 62 lays down the time-limit of
six months. Article 62 is subject to the dominant Article 54.
Mr. Lakhanpal further contended that if the views of the Attorney-General
and the Election Commission were accepted, that would enable the political party
in power at the Centre to get its nominee "perpetually" elected by dissolving
Legislative Assemblies in States where other parties were in power.
Counsel argued that the same person could not continue to hold the office
of President beyond his term without a re-election as prescribed by Article 56(1).
Thus he must resign on the expiry of the term and since the resignation shall
cause a vacancy as contemplated in Article 62, the election must be held within
six months. But in no case could the election be held with one or more legis-
latures dissolved. As far as the post of President falling vacant he suggested that
the present incumbent should hand over the charge of office to the Vice-President.
Mr. Lakhanpal also submitted that it would be wrong to accept the argument
of the Government Counsel that under Article 54 members of the Electoral Col-
lege exercised their vote in the Presidential election in their individual capacity
and not as members of the respective legislatures. He asked if it were so, why
should the representatives from different States be entitled to cast a different quan-
tum of votes ?
Mr. BASHIR AHMED: The Counsel for the Muslim League submitted that
the public duties cast by the Constitution on officers were "directory and not
mandatory", and contended that so was the duty cast on the Election Commission
to hold the Presidential poll before the expiry of the incumbent's term.
Citing Nehru he stated that there could be no Electoral College with elected
members of only the "existing" legislatures as contended by the Attorney-General.
Further he submitted that there would be no constitutional breakdown if the
Presidential poll was postponed by a couple of months for holding elections to the
Gujarat Assembly, provided for the continuance of the President until his suc-
cessor entered office, there would still be a President.
Besides the 1961 constitutional amendment to provide for vacancies in Legisla-
ture did not contemplate a Presidential poll with only the "existing" Legislatures
represented on the Electoral College.
Mr. SANTOKH SINGH The Counsel for the Socialist Party submitted
that the issues before the Court involved the preservation of the federal structure
of India.
The federal principle that the Founding Fathers wrote into the Constitution
with Article 54 (Electoral College) was not a federal principle only for Legislative
Assemblies which "existed" at the time of the Presidential poll. If the word
"existing" Legislative Assemblies were to be read into Article 54, one would have
to read the same word into Article 368 which require the ratification of certain
constitutional amendments by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the
States. So the Presidential election could not be held when a State Legislature
or the Lok Sabha stood dissolved.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
44
SUPREME COURT CASES
Mr. L. K. ADVANI: The President of Jana Sangh argued that the Court
was not bound to give opinion and it was a "fit case" for refusal. According to
him the elections of Gujarat Assembly could be held.
Mr. Advani reiterated the submissions made in the written statement. He
objected that the government had not included in the reference the point that the
main hurdle to holding the Gujarat elections before August 24 was the constitutional
provision (Article 170) requiring delimitation of constituencies on the basis of the
latest census (1971) before a general election to a State Assembly is held.
He drew the attention of the Court to the fact that Article 79 said "there
shall be a Parliament" and Article 168 said "for every State there shall be a
Legislature", and affirmed that since India was a parliamentary democracy and
had not adopted a presidential form of government, these Articles were even more
important than Article 52 which said "there shall be a President". So "the logical
consequence of accepting the conclusion that the electoral college exists, whether
or not the Lok Sabha exists and whether or not Legislative Assemblies exist, is to
ignore Article 79 and Article 168".
Such an argument would invest in the Rajya Sabha immense powers not
conceived by the Constitution-makers he said. Regarding Art. 62 counsel sub-
mitted that Art. 62(1) was mandatory addressed to the authorities entrusted with
the task of holding the Presidential election as enshrined in the Constitution. "It,
however, does not impose an inflexible time constraint on the term of office of the
President."
Further counsel said that Art. 56(1) proviso cl.(c) applied to such a situation.
The Vice-President could not discharge the function of the President.
The Indian electoral college was unique in that different strands or tiers had
different voting strengths. Art. 55 "expressly states" this important facet of the
federal character of Parliament. Insistence on uniformity of States and parity
between the Union and the States was one of the cardinal facets of the federal
system, and Arts. 54 and 55 played a dominant role in preserving the federál
character of Parliament. Every single State has a right to give its opinion on
any amendment of the Constitution.
An electoral college was a "homogeneous" composition of the electors. Art. 54
conceived of a "multi-tier" electoral college consisting of several separate strands
of electors and every single tier must be there to make the electoral college a
"complete one". Every single tier of an electoral college was also imperative to
constitute a Legislative Assembly. The absence of a Legislative Assembly affected
the working of the Constitution. Absence of some of the Legislatures might make
a "world of difference" to the outcome of the results, and therefore the dissolution
of a Legislature could not be equated with the casual vacancies in the electoral
college.
Mr. Advani pleaded that election to the Gujarat Assembly could be held on
the basis of 1961 census. Dealing with Article 170 and the Delimitation Act at
length, he contended that the language in the Act was SO cautiously worded that
no elections could be postponed or held over merely on the ground of delimitation.
On the basis of this, the Court could advise the Government that elections in
Gujarat could be held on the basis of 1961 census.
Parliamentary democracy implied that power was derived from the people
and that bodies directly elected by them must have a say in the election of the
President. "If the Gujarat Assembly can be ignored, then the Lok Sabha can also
be excluded", he said. "That is the inexorable consequence of the reasoning
adopted by the other side. It will be a dangerous doctrine. It will strike at the
roots of Parliamentary democracy enshrined in the Constitution".
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL
45
ORDER OF REFERENCE
WHEREAS under Article 56(1) of the Constitution of India the
President is to hold office for a term of five years from the date on which
he enters upon his office ;
AND WHEREAS the term of office of the President of India expires
on the 24th day of August, 1974
AND WHEREAS under Article 62(1) of the Constitution of India
an election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office
of President shall be completed before the expiration of the term ;
AND WHEREAS under Article 54 of the Constitution of India
the President is to be elected by the members of an electoral college
consisting of - (a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament
and (b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States
AND WHEREAS the Gujarat State Legislative Assembly was dis-
solved on the 15th day of March, 1974
AND WHEREAS a general election for constituting a new Legis-
lative Assembly for the State of Gujarat can be held only after the
Assembly constituencies have been delimited afresh on the basis of the
1971 census under Article 170 of the Constitution of India and the
provisions of the Delimitation Act, 1972
AND WHEREAS it will be impossible to complete the general
election to the Legislative Assembly for the State of Gujarat before the
expiration of the term of office of the President of India as aforesaid,
namely, the 24th day of August, 1974
AND WHEREAS having regard to what is stated hereinbefore
doubts have arisen as to the true interpretation of the provisions contained
in Articles 54, 55, 56, 62 and 71 of the Constitution of India and, in
particular, Article 54 read with Article 71 (4) of the Constitution
AND WHEREAS in the circumstances, it appears to me that questions
of law hereinafter set out have arisen and are likely to arise and are of
such nature and of such public importance that it is expedient that the
opinion of the Supreme Court of India should be obtained thereon ;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon
me by clause (1) of Article 143 of the Constitution of India, I, Varahagiri
Venkatagiri, President of India, hereby refer the following question to the
Supreme Court of India for consideration and report thereon, namely :
(1) Whether on a true and correct interpretation of Articles 54, 55, 56,
62 and 71 of the Constitution of India the electoral college men-
tioned in Article 54 is to consist only of the elected members of
such of the Legislative Assemblies of the States as are in existence
at or before the expiration of the term of office of President under
Article 56(1) of the Constitution of India.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
46
SUPREME COURT CASES
(2) Whether on a true and correct interpretation of the provisions of
Article (4) of the Constitution of India, when the Legislative
Assembly or Assemblies of any State or States is or are dissolved
it will amount to a vacancy or vacancies having occurred in the
electoral college within the meaning of the said article.
(3) Whether in view of the provisions contained in, inter alia, Articles
54, 62(1) and 71 (4) of the Constitution of India election to the
office of President must be held before the expiration of the term
of the outgoing President notwithstanding the fact that at the time
of such election the Legislative Assembly or Assemblies of any
State or States is or are dissolved.
(4) Whether the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly or Assemblies
of any State or States precludes the holding of election to the office
of President.
(5) Where the Legislative Assembly or Assemblies of any State or States
is or are dissolved before the expiration of the term of office of the
outgoing President under Article 56(1) of the Constitution of India,
how and when is the election to fill the vacancy in the office of
President to be held and completed on a correct interpretation of
the relevant provisions of the Constitution of India to make the
Constitution of India workable regarding the office of President.
(6) Whether in the event of the election to the office of President not
being completed before the expiration of the term of office of
President under Article 62(1) of the Constitution, the President
can, notwithstanding the expiration of the term, continue to
hold office under clause (c) of the proviso to Article 56(1) of
the Constitution of India.
New Delhi,
Sd./- V. V. Giri
Dated the 30th day of April, 1974.
PRESIDENT OF INDIA
The Opinion of the Court was given by
RAY, C.J.-This Reference has been made by the President under
Article 143 (1) of the Constitution of India for the opinion of this Court
on certain questions of constitutional importance bearing upon the election
to fill the vacancy on the expiry of the term of office of the President on
August 24, 1974.
2. The Reference turns on the principal question as to whether
the election to fill the vacancy caused on the expiry of the term of office
of the President must be completed before the expiry of the term of office
notwithstanding the fact that the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Gujarat is dissolved.
3. Article 52 states that there shall be a President of India.
Article 56(1) states that the President shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. Article 60
states that every President before entering upon his office shall make
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL (Ray, C.F.)
47
and subscribe an oath or affirmation as mentioned therein. Article 62(1)
states that an election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the
term of the office of President shall be completed before the expiration
of the term. Article 56(1)(c) states that the President shall, notwith-
standing the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his suc-
cessor enters upon his office.
4. The fixed term of office mentioned in Article 56(1) as well as
the mandate in Article 62(1) that the election to fill a vacancy caused
by the expiration of the term of office shall be completed before the
expiration of the term reflects the dominant constitutional purpose and intent
regarding the time when the election of the President is to be held.
Further, the provision in Article 2(2) that an election to fill a vacancy
in the office of the President by reason of his death, resignation or removal
or otherwise be held as soon as possible after and in no case later than
six months from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy shows that
the time to hold an election to fill a vacancy is also mandatory in
character.
5. The completion of election before the expiration of the term
in the case of vacancy caused by the expiry of the term as well as filling
the vacancy by holding an election not later than six months from the
date of the occurrence of the vacancy in the other case does not contain
any provision for extension of time. By way of contrast reference may
be made to Article 83 where it is said that though the expiration of the
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the House the period
may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended
by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and
not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Procla-
mation has ceased to operate.
6. The interveners suggested that the word "otherwise" occurring in
Article 62(2) of the Constitution contemplates a case of filling a vacancy
occurring by the expiration .of the term but where such vacancy cannot
be filled up by completing the election before the expiration of the term
by reason of dissolution of the Assembly. The interveners submitted
that a vacancy could in such a case be filled up not later than six months
from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy. The submission of the
interveners is unsound. The word "otherwise" does not refer to a vacancy
caused by the expiration of the term of office for the obvious reason that
the same is the subject matter of Article 52(1). The marginal note to
Article 62 fully bears this out. Further, a President whose term has
expired can continue to hold the office only under Article 56 (1) (c)
until his successor enters upon his office. Article 56(1) (c) is comple-
mentary to Article (1). Here successor means a successor elected
before or even after the expiration of the term stated in Article 62(1) and
as fully explained later on.
7. The word "otherwise" may take in cases where, for example, a
President becomes disqualified to hold the office or where his election
is declared void, and, therefore, he cannot hold the office. In such cases,
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
48
SUPREME COURT CASES
an election is to be held not later than six months from the date of the
occurrence of the vacancy.
8. Article (1) provides that where the office of the President
by reason of his death, resignation or removal or otherwise becomes
vacant, the Vice-President shall act as President until the date on which
a new President elected to fill vacancy enters upon his office. Article 65 (1)
is complementary to Article 2(2). An election to fill a vacancy in
the office of the President for the reasons mentioned in Article 62(2)
obviously does not attract Article (1) (c). This is another reason
which establishes that the word "otherwise" used in relation to vacancy
in the office of the President under Article 62(2) cannot cover the case
of a vacancy in the office of the President by the expiration of the term.
Vacancy under Article 62 (2) does not enable the President to continue
in office.
9. The interveners suggested that Section 7 of the Presidential and
Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952 hereinafter referred to as the 1952
Act shows that an election to fill the vacancy in the office of the President
may not be completed before the expiration of the term. The interveners,
therefore, submitted that it could not be held that the completion of elec-
tion before the expiration of the term was a mandatory provision.
10. Section 7 of the 1952 Act states that if a candidate whose
nomination has been made and is found to be in order on scrutiny, dies
after the time fixed for nomination and a report of his death is received
by the Returning Officer before the commencement of the poll, the
Returning Officer shall, upon being satisfied of the fact of the death of
the candidate, countermand the poll and report the fact to the Election
Commission, and all proceedings with reference to the election shall be
commenced anew in all respects as if for a new election.
11. These provisions in Section 7 of the 1952 Act are to be consi-
dered along with Section 4 of the 1952 Act. Section 4(3) of the 1952
Act states that in the case of an election to fill the vacancy caused by the
expiration of the term of office of the President or Vice-President, the
notification under sub-section (1) shall be issued on, or as soon as conve-
niently may be after, the sixtieth day before the expiration of the term
of office of the outgoing President or Vice-President, as the case may be,
and the dates shall be SO appointed under the said sub-section that the
election will be completed at such time as will enable the President or
the Vice-President thereby elected to enter upon his office on the day
following the expiration of the term of office of the outgoing President
or Vice-President, as the case may be.
12. The 1952 Act indicates that the provisions contemplate the
completion of the election before the expiration of the term. Section 7
of the 1952 Act speaks of the contingency of death. In spite of the
countermanding of the election in the case of death of a person whose
nomination has been found in order it is provided that any other candi-
date whose nomination was valid at the time of the countermanding of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL (Ray, C.F.)
49
the poll will not be required to present a fresh nomination. Again, it is
provided that no person who has withdrawn his candidature before the
countermanding of the poll shall be ineligible for being nominated as a
candidate for the election. Therefore, it is the same process of Presiden-
tial election which was commenced under the Act for completion before
the expiration of the term. It is true that fresh nominations can be
presented by persons other than those whose nominations have been found
to be in order. That is only because people are given the choice for
presenting fresh nomination papers for candidates of choice because of
the new and unanticipated events, It is not entirely a fresh election. It
is in some respects a new election. It is in other respects a continuation
of the election which commenced but could not be completed because
of death.
13. In determining the question whether a provision is mandatory
or directory, the subject matter, the importance of the provision, the
relation of that provision to the general object intended to be secured
by the Act will decide whether the provision is directory or mandatory.
It is the duty of the Courts to get at the real intention of the Legislature
by carefully attending the whole scope of the provision to be construed.
"The key to the opening of every law is the reason and spirit of the law,
it is the animus imponentis, the intention of the law maker expressed in
the law itself, taken as a whole1".
14. If the completion of election before the expiration of the term
is not possible because of the death of the prospective candidate it is
apparent that the election has commenced before the expiration of the
term but completion before the expiration of the term is rendered impos-
sible by an act beyond the control of human agency. The necessity for
completing the election before the expiration of the term is enjoined by
the Constitution in public and State interest to see that the governance
of the country is not paralysed by non-compliance with the provision that
there shall be a President of India.
15. The impossibility of the completion of the election to fill the
vacancy in the office of the President before the expiration of the term
of office in the case of death of a candidate as may appear from Section 7
of the 1952 Act does not rob Article 62(1) of its mandatory character.
The maxim of law impotentia excusat legam is intimately connected with
another maxim of law lex non cogit ad impossibilia. Impotentia
excusat legam is that when there is a necessary or invincible disability to
perform the mandatory part of the law that impotentia excuses. The
law does not compel one to do that which one cannot possibly perform.
"Where the law creates a duty or charge, and the party is disabled to
perform it, without any default in him, and has no remedy over it, there
the law will in general excuse him." Therefore, when it appears that
the performance of the formalities prescribed by a statute has been ren-
dered impossible by circumstances over which the persons interested had
no control, like the act of God, the circumstances will be taken as a valid
1. Brett v. Brett, (1826) 3 Addam 210, 216.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
50
SUPREME COURT CASES
excuse. Where the act of God prevents the compliance of the words of
a statute, the statutory provision is not denuded of its mandatory character
because of supervening impossibility caused by the act of God. (See
Broom's Legal Maxims 10th Edition at pp. 162-163 and Craies on Sta-
tute Law 6th Ed. at p. 268).
16.
The effect of Article 2(1) was considered by this Court in
Narayan Bhaskar Khare V. The Election Commission of India2. Das,
C.J. spoke for the Constitution Bench of seven learned Judges. The
petitioner there made an application under Article 71 (1) of the Constitu-
tion invoking the jurisdiction of this Court to inquire into and decide
what had been described as a grave doubt in connection with the election
of the President and to direct the Election Commission not to proceed
with the polling which had been fixed for May 6, 1957 but to hold the
same after completing the elections to the Lok Sabha and the Legisla-
tures in all the States of the Indian Union including the Union territory.
One of the contentions in that case was that one of the petitioners was
a prospective candidate for election to the Lok Sabha from one of the
Punjab constituencies where election was yet to be held and he would
be prevented from exercising his right to vote for the election of the
President. This Court held that Article 62 of the Constitution required
that the election of the President must be completed within the time fixed
by it and this provision is conceived in the interest of the people in
general and is mandatory in character. The interveners submitted that
the observation of this Court in the Khare case (supra) about the peremp-
tory requirement to fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of the term
of office was obiter. That is not SO. Das, C.J. speaking of Article 62
said "it is necessary to bear in mind this clear mandatory provision of
the Constitution". That is the true position.
17. There is another important observation in the Khare case
(supra). It was contended there that the electoral college mentioned
in Article 54 must be constituted after elections in all States and Union
Territories are completed and should consist of all the elected members
falling within both the categories because the Presidential election could
not be held until the vacancies were filled up. Elections did not take
place in Himachal Pradesh. Elections in two Constituencies of the State
of Punjab also did not take place. It was held that the election process
could not be held up till after the expiry of the five years term because
it would involve non-compliance with the mandatory provisions of Article 62.
Das, C.J. referring to the electoral college said that if there are
vacancies in Parliament or in the Legislature of one or more States,
the election of the President required by Article 62(1) to be held before
the expiry of the term of the outgoing President cannot be held up until
the vacancies were filled up. This Court found that not holding the
election in Himachal Pradesh could not hold up the election of the President.
18. The term of office of the President is fixed. The election to
fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of the term is to be completed
2. 1957 SCR 1081 : AIR 1957 SC 694: 13 ELR 112.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL (Ray, C.F.)
51
before the expiration of the term. It is in that context that the outgoing
President notwithstanding the expiration of the term continues to hold
office under Article (1) until his successor enters upon office. The
successor can only enter upon his office after he takes the oath under Article
60. He can take oath only after the election. It is possible that the suc-
cessor cannot enter upon his office on the day following the expiration
of the term of office of the outgoing President for unavoidable reasons.
That is why Articles (1), 56(1) (c) and 62(1) are to be read together
to give effect to the constitutional intent and content that the election to
fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of the President is
to be completed before the expiration of the term.
19. The interveners submitted that the true character of Article 62
depended on Articles 54 and 55 of the Constitution. Article 54 states
that the President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college
consisting of (a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament
and (b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
The Constitution-makers may well have visualised that all legisla-
tive bodies should be in existence at the time of the Presidential election
and all elected members of such bodies should participate in that election.
But that is only an ideal. The realisation of this ideal is not practicable,
because of the likely vacancies in the legislative bodies due to death, dis-
qualification, resignation and the like.
20. Article 55 (1) states that as far as practicable, there shall be
uniformity in the scale of representation of the different States at the
election of the President. Article 55 (2) states that for the purpose of
securing such uniformity among the States inter se as well as parity
between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of votes which
each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of
each State is entitled to cast at such election shall be determined in a
manner set out in the sub-Article.
21. The interveners submitted that the units of the electoral
college were Houses of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies
of
States. The Jan Sangh submitted that the democratic character of the
Constitution demanded that there should be elected members of Legisla-
tive Assemblies of States to be entitled to cast votes at such election. It
was said that if States were denied such right, they would be denied repre-
sentation. It was also said that if States were denied the right
to cast votes at the election, the parity between the States and the Union
would be disturbed.
22. The members of electoral college mentioned in Article 54
are not both Houses of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies of the
States. The essence as well as scope of Article 54 is merely to prescribe
qualifications required for electors to elect President. The elected mem-
bers of both Houses of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies of
States are the only members of the electoral college.
23. The essence of Article 55 merely lies in the application of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
52
SUPREME COURT CASES
formulae whereby each elector having required qualifications under
Article 54 shall be entitled to exercise the number of votes in accordance
with Article 55. Neither Article 54 nor Article 55 has anything to do
either with the time of the election to fill the vacancy before the expira-
tion of the term or to prevent the holding of the election before the
expiration of the term by reason of dissolution of Legislative Assembly
of a State.
24. The electoral college as mentioned in Article 54 is indepen-
dent of the Legislatures mentioned in Article 54. None of the Legisla-
tures mentioned in Article 54 has for the purpose of that Article any
separate identity vis-a-vis the electoral college. The electoral college
compendiously indicates a number of persons, holding the qualifications
specified in the Article to constitute the electorate for the election of the
President and to act as independent electors.
25. Neither Article 54 nor Article 55 prescribes the circumstances
in which or the time when the election of the President shall take place.
Article 55 has no concern with the competence of the election of the
President because of the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly of a State.
Article 55(2) deals with the formulae for securing uniformity among the
States inter se and parity between States as a whole and the Union. It is
important to notice that parity is not between each State separately as
a unit on the one hand and the Union on the other but between the States
as a whole and the Union.
26. Article 5(1) states that as far as practicable, there shall be
uniformity in the scale of representation. It is indisputable that the uni-
formity among the States inter se and parity between the States as a whole
and the Union which are contemplated in Article 55 5(2) are not the same
thing as uniformity in the scale of representation of the different States
contemplated in Article (1). The words 'as far as practicable' in
Article (1) in relation to uniformity in the scale of representation of the
States are important. Article 55 (1) shows that the words 'as far as
practicable' indicate that in practice the scale of representation may not
be uniform because of the actual number of electors entitled at the date
of election to cast their votes. The actual number of electors at the date
of the election of the President may not be equal to the total number of
all the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and all Legislative
Assemblies of all States.
27. Article 55 indicates the methods of calculating as to how many
votes an elected member of the electoral college can cast at the Presidential
election. Article 55 has nothing to do with any vacancy in the electoral
college as mentioned in Article 71 (4), or a cesser of membership of the
electoral college by reason of a member not fulfilling the character of
elected member of both Houses of Parliament or of Legislative Assemblies
of States.
28. The words 'an electoral college consisting of in Article 54
mean that the electoral college shall consist of persons mentioned therein.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL (Ray, C.F.)
53
The words consisting of refer to the strength of the electoral college
The Houses of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies are mentioned
in Article 54 only for the purpose of showing the qualifications of members
of electoral college. The dissolution of the Assembly means that there
are no elected members of that dissolved Assembly. The electoral college
is always ready to meet the situation at the expiry of the term of office
or any vacancy caused by death, resignation or removal or otherwise.
The elected members of a dissolved Legislative Assembly of a State are
no longer members of the electoral college consisting of the elected members
of both Houses of Parliament and elected members of the Legislative
Assemblies of the States and are, therefore, not entitled to cast votes at
the Presidential election.
29. It was said by the interveners that Article 54 reflects the
democratic pattern of participation by the States in the choice of the
President and if a State were denied such a right, it would be undemocratic.
Recourse was taken to Article 368 to show that Articles 54 and 55 were
mentioned in the proviso to Article 368 and if any amendment of Articles
54 and 55 was required consent of the States was necessary. It was,
therefore, said by the interveners that Articles 54 and 55 read with
Article 368 would be a key to the interpretation of Article 62 that
no election of the President could be held without the representation of
elected members of Legislative Assemblies of the State where the Assembly
has been dissolved. These submissions on behalf of the interveners are
without substance.
30. Article 54 lays down the qualifications for membership of the
electoral college. The Gujarat State Assembly has been dissolved under
Article 174. As a result of the dissolution, there are no elected members
of the Legislative Assembly in a State. The electoral college consists
of elected members of State Assemblies. If the Legislative Assembly of
a State is dissolved, the members of that dissolved Legislative Assembly
do not fulfil the character of elected members of a State Assembly. It
will not only be undemocratic but also unconstitutional to deny the
elected members of both the Houses of Parliament as well as the elected
members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States the right to elect
the President in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution only
because the Assembly of a State is dissolved. The true meaning of
Article 54 is that such persons as possess the qualification of being
elected members of both Houses of Parliament and of Legislative Assemblies
of States at the crucial time of the date of election will be eligible
members of the electoral college entitled to cast vote at the election to
fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of the
President.
31. The submissions of the interveners that Article 62 will be
construed in the light of Articles 54, 55 and 368 are unsound. It
has always to be remembered that Constitution is "the revelation of great
purposes which were intended to be achieved by the Constitution as a
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
54
SUPREME COURT CASES
continuing instrument of Government. In Warburton V. Loveland', it has
been said that "no rule of construction can require that when the words
of one part of a statute convey a clear meaning, it shall be necessary to
introduce another part of a statute for the purpose of controlling or diminish-
ing the efficacy of the first part". Article 62 is the constitutional mandate
and other provisions like Articles 54, 55 subserve Article 62. The
Legislative Assemblies of the States are not members of the electoral
college. None of the Articles 368, 54, 55 can rob Article 62 of its
constitutional content. Article 62 stands by itself independent of any
other provision.
32. It is appropriate at this stage to refer to provisions contained
in Article 71 (4) of the Constitution. Article 71 (4) was introduced by
Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961. The provision in
Article 71(4) is that the election of a person as President or Vice-
President shall not be called in question on the ground of the existence
of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral
college electing him. Article 71 (4) was introduced after the decision
of this Court in the Khare case (supra). Das, C.J. said in the Khare case
(supra) that though there are vacancies in the Parliament or the State
Legislative Assemblies by reason of elections not having been held in
Himachal Pradesh and two Constituencies in the State of Punjab, the holding
of Presidential Election cannot be postponed. This Court in the Khare
case (supra) stated that doubts or disputes of that nature could be
canvassed only after the conclusion of the entire election. No opinion
was expressed in the Khare case (supra) as to whether a vacancy of the
type in that case in the electoral college could be a ground for calling
in question the election of the President. To remove all doubts, Article
71 (4) was introduced.
33. If as a result of dissolution of a Legislative Assembly of a
State. there are no elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a
State, a State will not have any elected member of a State Legislative
Assembly to qualify for the electoral college. It may be said on the analogy
of the observations in the Khare case (supra) that there are vacancies
in the electoral college by reason of the fact that there are no elected
members of the Legislative Assembly of a State where the Legislative
Assembly is dissolved. That matter will not be a ground either for
preventing the holding of the election on the expiry of the term of the
President or suggesting that the election to fill the vacancy caused by
the expiry of the term of the office of the President could be held
only after the election to the Legislative Assembly of a State where the
Legislative Assembly is dissolved is held.
34. Under Article 54 only elected members of both Houses of
Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies of the States are members of
the electoral college. The numerical strength of the electoral college will
be the total number of elected members of both Houses of Parliament
3, (1832) 2 D & C1 480 5 ER 499 (HL).
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL (Ray, C.F.)
55
and the Legislative Assemblies of the States. At any particular time
there may not be the full strength of the electoral college. At the relevant
date of the Presidential election if a person who was prior to that relevant
date an elected member of the Houses of Parliament or of the Legislative
Assemblies of the States and ceased to become an elected member of
any of the legislative bodies by reason of death or resignation or
disqualification or dissolution of the legislative body such a person would
not possess the qualification to be an elector. Article 71 (4) was really
introduced after the Khare case (supra) to shut out any challenge to
the election on the ground that there was any vacancy among members
of the electoral college. In view of the constitutional declaration or
exposition of Article 71 (4) it is manifest that the language is of wide
amplitude, viz., existence of any vacancy for any reason whatever among
the members of the electoral college. It will take in any case where
a person who as an elected member of the Houses of Parliament or the
Legislative Assembly of a State became entitled to be a member of the
electoral college but ceased to be an elected member at the relevant date
of the election and therefore became disentitled to cast vote at the election
and that vacancy among members of the electoral college was not filled up.
35. We refrain from expressing any opinion on the question which
has been posed during arguments as to what would be the position if
there is "mala fide dissolution" of a State Legislative Assembly or
Assemblies or if there is, after the dissolution of the Assembly or Assemblies,
a "mala fide refusal" to hold elections thereto within reasonable time
before the Presidential election because such a question does not arise
on the present Reference. Likewise, we refrain from expressing any
opinion on the effect of the dissolution of a substantial number of State
Legislative Assemblies before the Presidential election.
36. The intervener Jana Sangh submitted that the Reference should
be declined for four reasons. First, that the recital in the order of Reference
that election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Gujarat is
impossible is not correct. It was said that the election is possible. Second,
the vital question is not whether the Presidential election could be valid
or not in the absence of the Gujarat State Assembly but whether the
election of the President would be valid if the authority charged with
election by acts of omission or commission have not held the Gujarat
Assembly election. Third, the election to the State Assembly of Gujarat
could have been held on the basis of the 1961 census. Fourth, Article 143
stipulates a general doubt about the Constitution and not doubts of parties.
37. This Court is bound by the recitals in the order of Reference.
Under Article 143(1) we accept the statements of fact set out in the
reference. The truth or otherwise of the facts cannot be enquired or
gone into nor can this Court go into the question of bona fides or other-
wise of the authority making the reference. This Court cannot go behind
the recital. This Court cannot go into disputed questions of fact in
its advisory jurisdiction under Article 143(1).
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
56
SUPREME COURT CASES
38.
The Federal Court in Re The Allocation of Lands and Buildings
in a Chief Commissioner's Province4 a Reference under Section 213(1)
of the Government of India Act which is similar to Article 143 said
that though the terms of that section do not impose an obligation on
the Court, the Court should be unwilling to accept a Reference except for
good reasons. This Court accepted the Reference for reasons which
appeared to be of constitutional importance as well as in public interest.
39. In Re Kerala Education Bill5 Das, C.J. referred to the
Reference in Re The Allocation of Lands and Buildings (supra) and the
Reference in Re Levy of Estate Duty6 and the observations in both the
cases that the Reference should not be declined excepting for good reasons.
This Court accepted the Reference on the questions of law arising or
likely to arise. Das, C.J. in Re Kerala Education Bill (supra) said
that it is for the President to determine what questions should be referred
and if he does not have any serious "doubt" on the provisions, it is not
for any party to say that doubts arise out of them. In short, parties
appearing in the Reference cannot go behind the order of Reference
and present new questions by raising doubts.
40. On behalf of the intervener Jana Sangh reliance was placed
on Section 0(4) of the Delimitation Act, 1972 hereinafter referred to
as the 1972 Act. Broadly stated, the submission on behalf of the Jana
Sangh is that by reason of Section 10(4) of the 1972 Act election to the
Gujarat Legislative Assembly could be held on the basis of the 1961
census, and the existing electoral rolls.
41. The 1972 Act in Section 8 speaks of the readjustment of
number of seats. This readjustment is on the basis of the latest census
figures. The latest census is of 1971. The Delimitation Com-
mission has by order under Section 8 of the 1972 Act determined the
total number of seats to be assigned to the Gujarat State Assembly as 182.
The previous number was 168. Under Section 9 of the 1972 Act the
Commission shall distribute the seats in the Legislative Assembly to
single member territorial constituencies and delimit them on the latest
census figures. The Commission has published proposals for delimita-
tion and invited objections. The Commission has not yet made any order
determining the delimitation of Assembly constituencies.
42. The provisions contained in Article 170 repel the submission
that the election to the Gujarat Legislative Assembly can be held on the
basis of 1961 census. Article 170 provides that the Legislative Assembly
of each State shall consist of not more than five hundred, and not less
than sixty, members chosen by direct election from territorial constituen-
cies in the State. Each State shall be divided into territorial constituen-
cies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each consti-
tuency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, SO far as practicable,
4. 1943 FCR 20: AIR 1943 FC 13.
6. 1944 FCR 317: AIR 1944 FC 73.
5. 1959 SCR 995 AIR 1958 SC 956.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
IN RE PRESIDENTIAL POLL (Ray, C.F.)
57
be the same throughout the State. The expression "population" means
the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published. The 1971 census has been pub-
lished. Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats
and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be re-
adjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law
determine. The Delimitation Commission under the 1972 Act is engaged
in the division of the State into territorial constituencies.
43. It is apparent and there is nothing in Section 10(4) of the
1972 Act to the contrary which enjoins the Election Commission to hold
elections to the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly dissolved
after the census of 1971 according to the electoral rolls prepared of the
constituencies delimited on the basis of the census of 1961. It is evident
that under clause (2) of Article 170 read with the Explanation and
clause (3) of Article 170 elections to the Legislative Assembly after the
relevant figures of the population of the last preceding census have been
ascertained and published can only be held on that basis of the total
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the
division of each State into territorial constituencies readjusted by
the Election Commission under the 1972 Act. Now that the census
figures of 1971 have been published elections have to be held under
Article 170 only after delimitation of the constituencies has been made
in accordance with clauses (2) and (3) of Article 170.
44. When a notification under Section 8 of the 1972 Act has been
published by assigning 182 seats to the Gujarat Assembly which notifi-
cation under Section 10(2) of the 1972 Act has the force of law and
cannot be questioned in any court, elections to these 182 seats cannot
be held on the basis of the old electoral rolls because those electoral rolls
applied only to the 168 seats as fixed under the old Delimitation Act.
45. It is provided in Article 170 that the readjustment by the
Delimitation Commission shall not affect representation in the Legisla-
tive Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly. The
Legislative Assembly of the State of Gujarat has been dissolved. There-
fore. any election which has to be held to the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Gujarat can only be held after the Delimitation of constituen-
cies under the 1972 Act. Any Legislative Assembly of a State which is
to be composed after the 1971 census is to be in accordance with
Article 170. The contention of Jana Sangh is without substance.
46. On behalf of the intervener Socialist Party, it was said that
the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961 is unconstitutional.
We cannot go into that question in this Reference.
47. For the foregoing reasons we give the following answers
(1) Only such persons who are elected members of both Houses
of Parliament and the Legislative Assemblies of the States on the date
of the election to fill the vacancy caused by the expiration of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
58
SUPREME COURT CASES
the term of office of the President will be entitled to cast their votes at
the election.
(2) Subject to the aforesaid observation as to the effect of the dis-
solution of a substantial number of the Legislative Assemblies the vacan-
cies caused by the dissolution of an Assembly or Assemblies will be
covered by Article 71(4).
(3), (4) and (5). The election to the office of the President must be
held before the expiration of the term of the President notwithstanding
the fact that at the time of such election the Legislative Assembly of a
State is dissolved. The election to fill the vacancy in the office of the
President is to be held and completed having regard to Articles 2(1),
54, 55 and the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952.
(6) Article 56(1)(c) applies to a case where a successor as explained
in the foregoing reasons has not entered on his office and only in such
circumstances can a President whose term has expired continue.
(1974) 2 Supreme Court Cases 58
[Before D. G. Palekar, V. R. Krishna Iyer and R. S. Sarkaria, JJ.]
Civil Appeal No. 1792 of 1967
V. S. THIAGARAJA MUDALIAR
Appellant
Versus
BAVA C. CHOKKAPPA MUDALIAR
AND OTHERS
Respondents.
And
Civil Appeal No. 1793 of 1967
BRAHADEESWARAN SHANMUGHA
SUNDRAM
Appellant ;
Versus
BAVA C. CHOKKAPPA MUDALIAR
AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeals Nos. 1792 and 1793 of 1967t,
decided on February 14, 1974
Trusts and Trustees - Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1926 (Madras
Act No. 2 of 1927) - Section 84(b) - Question arising as to who out of a
number of members of trustee family was entitled to succeed to office of
hereditary trustee - Whether Religious Endowment Board can entertain such a dispnte
The management of the Ulthurai Kattalai of the temple of Sri Thyagarajaswami
at Tiruvarur was vested in two Mudaliar families. One was the Vadapathi-
mangalam family and the other the Bava family. The two families held the office
of the trusteeship by hereditary succession. One 'G' of the Bava family filed an
application under Section 84 of the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act,
Appeals by special leave from the Judgment and Order dated 23rd March, 1961 of the
Madras High Court in Civil Appeal No. 88 of 1958.