TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
500
SUPREME COURT CASES
that initially the express contract for supply of the goods was between the
defendants and Rahim. The fact whether Rahim acted as the plaintiff's agent
or
the defendants' is immaterial. What is clear is that the orders placed with
Rahim were in fact executed by the plaintiff by supply of goods to the defen-
dants. It was so done on account of the plaintiff from its own warehouse
as well as from Manavi's warehouse. Defendants by their clear conduct of
accepting the goods and never repudiating any of the numerous letters and
telegrams of the plaintiff demanding the money from them on the assertion
that the goods were despatched by the plaintiff and the defendants should
pay the money, clearly showed that a direct contract which in law is called an
implied contract by conduct was brought about between them. Whatever may
be the jural relationship between the plaintiff and Rahim, Rahim and the
defendants and in whatever manner he acted as a go-between man. between
the plaintiff and the defendants, what is clear is that eventually and finally
the supply of the goods by the plaintiff was to the defendants on its own account
and not on account of Rahim. The defendants clearly and unerringly accepted
the goods as such and became liable to pay the whole of the price directly to the
plaintiff. A part was paid and the liability to pay the balance was definitely
incurred by them.
13. For the reasons stated above, we hold that there is no substance
in this appeal. It is accordingly dismissed with costs.
(1978) 2 Supreme Court Cases 500
(BEFORE M. H. BEG, C.J. AND Y. V. CHANDRACHUD, P. N. BHAGWATI,
V. R. KRISHNA IYER, JASWANT SINGH, V. D. TULZAPURKAR AND
D. A. DESAI, JJ.)
CHARAN LAL SAHU
Petitioner ;
Versus
NEELAM SANJEEVA REDDY
Respondent.
Election Petition No. 1 of 1977, decided on February 15, 1978
Constitution of India - Articles 58 and 71 - Scope of
(Para 10)
Constitution of India - Article 71(3) (as introduced by the Constitution
39th Amendment Act, 1975) - Does not violate the basic structure of the
Constitution
(Para 11)
Practice and Procedure - Court or Tribunal constituted under enactment
if can question validity of the Act
(Paras 3, 12, 16 & 17)
Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election Act, 1952 - Sections 5B and
5C - Not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India
(Para 10)
Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election Act, 1952 - Sections 14 and
14A - Maintainability of election petition by person who does not satisfy re-
quirements of Sections 5B and 5C
(Paras 3, 12, 16 & 17)
Supreme Court Rules, 1966 - Order 23, Rules 6 and 7 and Order 39,
Rules 2 and 5 - Court to reject election petition in limine if no cause of action
disclosed or petitioner has no locus standi - Election - Election Petition
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
CHARAN LAL SAHU v. NEELAM SANJEEVA REDDY
501
The petitioner challenged the election of the respondent as President
of India under Section 14 of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections
Act, 1952. On the questions whether the petitioner had locus standi to main-
tain the petition in view of Section 5B and Section 5C and whether he could
challenge the validity of Sections 5B and 5C, dismissing the petition, the
Supreme Court
Held :
(1) Article 71 of the Constitution provides for matters relating to or
connected with the election of President or Vice-President. To carry out the
purposes of Article 71(1) which provided that Parliament may by law regulate
any matter relating to or connected with the election of President or Vice-
President including the grounds on which such election may be questioned,
the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election Act, 1952 was enacted by
Parliament. Section 5B(a) provides that for the nomination in the case of a
Presidential election there should be at least ten electors as proposers and ten
electors as seconders and Section 5C provides that the candidate shall deposit
a sum of Rs. 2500. In the present case admittedly the petitioner was not
nominated as provided by Section 5B nor had he deposited the sum of money
as required by Section 5C. His nomination paper therefore was rightly
rejected by the Returning Officer under Section 5E of the Act. (Paras 5A to 8)
(2) Article 58 provides for the qualifications or conditions for the eligi-
bility of the candidate. It has nothing to do with the nomination of a candi-
date. In the case of an election to such a high office as that of the President
of India it is reasonable to lay down the condition that a person who is allowed
to contest the election must have at least ten proposers and ten seconders.
The subject-matter of Sections 5B and 5C is completely covered by the provi-
sions of Section 71(1) and there is no conflict between that article and Arti-
cle 58. Sections 5B and 5C are not in conflict with Article 14 of the Consti-
tution. They apply to all persons who want to be candidates to the Presi-
dential election. Therefore, these provisions are valid.
(Para 10)
(3) Moreover, Article 71(3), which was introduced by the Constitution
Amendment of 1975, provides that the validity of any law providing for deciding
of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of
President or Vice-President and a decision of any authority or body under
such law shall not be called in question in any court. Unlike the case in
struck down Article 329A(4) of the Constitution on the ground that it violated
the basic structure of the Constitution, Article 71(3) does not affect the basic
structure. In exercise of its powers of amendment of the Constitution under
Article 368 Parliament could not exercise judicial power for decision of elec-
tion disputes pending before this Court. This Court struck down the provi-
sion in Indira Gandhi's case because it took away the jurisdiction of this Court
to decide disputes pending in appeal before it as Parliament had, after practi-
cally deciding these disputes, directed this Court to carry out what was laid
down in the form of a constitutional amendment. In the instant case, the
impugned amendment only refers to a law by which Parliament may regulate
matters connected with Presidential election including those relating to elec-
tion disputes arising out of such an election. It does not take away the juris-
diction of this Court to decide any matter which may be pending before it.
All it does is to provide that the validity of any law falling under Article 71 (1)
will not be called in question in any court. Inasmuch as this Court has been
constituted the authority or tribunal before which an election of the President
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
502
SUPREME COURT CASES
could be questioned, the effect of Article 71(3) is only to give effect to the general
principle that a court or tribunal functioning or exercising its jurisdiction under
an enactment will not question the validity of that very enactment which is
the source of its power
(Para 11)
(4) The effect of Sections 14(1), (2) and (3) and 14A(1) of the Act read
with Order 39, Rules 2 and 5 of the Rules of this Court is that the petition is
barred because the petitioner had not the required locus standi to maintain
it. The procedure contained in Part III of the Rules of this Court including
Order 23 relating to the institution of suits by plaints applies to proceedings
commenced by election petitions. Rule 6 provides that this Court after a com-
plaint has been presented, shall reject the plaint where it does not disclose a
cause of action or where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to
be barred by any law. On the basis of the principle in Nazir Ahmad V. King
Emperor, 1936 AIR PC 253(2), that where a mode for doing something is laid
down any other mode is necessarily prohibited, the petition is barred by the
provisions of law laying down the procedure for filing an election petition.
However, since it could be contended that where the petitioner is challenging
the very authority of the provisions which bar him from coming to the Court
he has locus standi to do so until his case is thrown out on the question of
validity, this Court has considered the validity of the various provisions
also.
(Paras 3, 12, 16 & 17)
347, explained.
and Nazir Ahmad V. King Emperor, AIR 1936 PC 253(2), referred to.
S-M/3799/C
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
BEG, C.J.--This is a petition under Section 14 of the Presidential and
Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the Act),
challenging the election of Shri Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy as a President of
India at the Presidential election held on July 19, 1977. Section 14 and the
relevant part of Section 14A of the Act read as follows :
14. (1) No election shall be called in question except by presenting
an election petition to the authority specified in sub-section (2).
(2) The authority having jurisdiction to try an election petition shall
be the Supreme Court.
(3) Every election petition shall be presented to such authority
in
accordance with the provisions of this Part and of the rules made by the
Supreme Court under Article 145.
14A. (1) An election petition calling in question an election may be
presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of
Section 18 and Section 19, to the Supreme Court by any candidate at such
election, or-
(1) in the case of Presidential election, by twenty or more electors
joined together as petitioners.
2. Among the rules made by this Court, Part VII, Order XXXIX
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
CHARAN LAL SAHU V. NEELAM SANJEEVA REDDY (Beg, C.J.)
503
contains rules relating to election petitions made under Part III mentioned in Sec-
tion 14(3) of the Act. Rule 2 of Order XXXIX lays down :
(2) An application calling in question an election shall only be by a peti-
tion made and presented in accordance with the provisions of this
Order.
Rule 5 of Order XXXIX provides :
(5)
The petition shall state the right of the petitioner under the Act to
petition the Court and briefly set forth the facts and grounds relied
on by him to sustain the reliefs claimed by him.
Rule 34 of Order XXXIX says :
(34) Subject to the provisions of this order or any special order or direc-
tions of the Court, the procedure on an election petition shall follow,
as nearly as may be, the procedure in proceedings before the Court
in the exercise of its original jurisdiction.
3. Thus, the procedure contained in Part III of the rules of this Court,
including Order XXIII relating to the institution of suits by plaints, applies to
the proceedings commenced by election petitions after reading the word "peti-
tion" for "plaint". Among these rules is Rule 6 which provides that this
Court, after the plaint has been presented to the Registrar and numbered,
shall reject the plaint "where it does not disclose a cause of action", or where
"the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law".
It is obligatory upon the Court to reject it outright and not to waste any more
time upon a plaint or petition if the provisions of law bar are shewn to bar
proceedings. Indeed, it is not even necessary to issue a notice to any opposite
party or parties in such a case. But, where the petition or plaint of the peti-
tioner is rejected, Order XXIII, Rule 7 requires that "the Court shall record
an order to that effect with the reasons for the order".
4. It is only after the issue and service of summons under Order XXIV
and the filing of a written statement under Order XXV that the question
of
framing issues need arise in a case. However, as notice was issued and an
affidavit in opposition was filed by Shri Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy himself in this
case where preliminary objections to the maintainability of the election peti-
tion were taken, and the petitioner asked for issues to be framed, this Court
framed issues on these preliminary objections. They were as follows :
(1) Has the petitioner a locus standi to maintain his election petition.
or, in other words, is he a duly nominated candidate in accordance with
provisions of Sections 5B and 5C of the Presidential and
Vice-Presidential Elections Act ?
(2) Is the petition maintainable ?
(3) Is it open to the petitioner to challenge the validity of Sections 5B
and 5C of the Act ?
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
504
SUPREME COURT CASES
(4) If so, are the two provisions mentioned in issue (3) valid ?
5. If, however, the petitioner could not get beyond the stage of the first
issue on his locus standi, it was no use considering other issues. In this case,
however, the four issues or questions in issue framed above are so inter-con-
nected that we propose to deal with them by means of a single judgment and
order stating our reasons for coming to the conclusion that this petition is
barred by the provisions of law so that it must be rejected on this ground.
We are also of opinion that it is neither open to the petitioner to challenge
the validity of Sections 5B and 5C of the Act nor are these provisions in any
way invalid. The petitioner went so far as to challenge the validity of the
constitutional amendment introduced in 1974 by which the jurisdiction of
any Court to question the validity of an Act made under Article 71(1) of the
Constitution was barred. The relevant constitutional provisions and the
provisions of the Act are set out below.
5A. Article 54 lays down as follows :
54. Election of President.-The President shall be elected by the
members of an electoral college consisting of-
(a) The elected members of both Houses of Parliament ; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the
States.
The manner of election of the President. in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote by secret
ballot, is provided for by Article 55 of the Constitution. The first three clauses
of Article 71 lay down as follows :
71. Matters relating to or connected with the election of a President
or Vice-President.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution.
Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or connected with
the election of a President or Vice-President, including the grounds on
which such election may be questioned :
Provided that the election of a person as President or Vice-President
shall not be called in question on the ground of the existence of any
vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral college
electing him.
(2) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the
election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided
by such authority or body and in such manner as may be provided for by
or under any law referred to in clause (1).
(3) The validity of any such law as is referred to in clause (1) and the
decision of any authority or body under such law shall not be called in
question in any Court.
6. To carry out the purposes of Article 71(1) of the Constitution the
Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election Act 1952 was enacted by Parlia-
ment. The grounds on which the election can be questioned as well as the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
CHARAN LAL SAHU V. NEELAM SANJEEVA REDDY (Beg, C.J.)
505
mode of questioning it were laid down by the Act. Section 14A of the Act
provides the only manner in which the election of a President can be called
in question by an election petition presented to the Supreme Court either by
a candidate or by 20 or more electors joined as petitioner.
7. Section 13(a) of the Act says :
"Candidate" means a person who has been or claims to have been duly
nominated as a candidate at an election.
The petitioner admits in his plaint that he was not duly nominated as provided
by Section 5B of the Act which enacts that each candidate shall
deliver to the Returning Officer at the place specified in this behalf in the
public notice issued under Section 5 a nomination paper completed in
the prescribed form and subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the
nomination, and
(a) in the case of Presidential election, also by at least ten electors as
proposers and at least ten electors as seconders.
Again, Section 5C provides that :
.A candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election
unless he deposits or causes to be deposited a sum of two thousand and
five hundred rupees.
8. Now, the petitioner also admits in his petition that he had not depo-
sited this sum of money as required by Section 5C of the Act. Thus, on the
very admissions in the petition or plaint, the petitioner was not a candidate
either duly nominated or one who could claim to be so nominated. Hence,
his nomination paper was rightly rejected by the Returning Officer acting under
Section 5E of the Act.
9. Now, the petitioner's contention is that Article 58 of the Constitution
lays down the qualifications for a candidate to be elected so that a law made
under Article 71(1) could not be in conflict with what is provided by Article 58,
which reads as follows :
(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds any
office of profit under the Government of India or Government of any
State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of
any of the said Governments.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President
or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
506
SUPREME COURT CASES
10. It is clear to us that Article 58 only provides the qualifications or
conditions for the eligibility of a candidate. It has nothing to do with the
nomination of a candidate which requires ten proposers and ten seconders.
We think that in the case of an election to such a high office as that of the
President of India, it is quite reasonable to lay down the condition that a person
who is allowed to contest the election as a candidate must have at least ten
proposers and ten seconders from amongst hundreds of electors who are
legislators. We think that the subject-matter of Sections 5B and 5C is com-
pletely covered by the provisions of Article 71(1) of the Constitution set out
above. We also think that there is no force in the contention that Sections 5B
and 5C of the Act are in conflict with Article 14 of the Constitution. The
conditions laid down in Sections 5B and 5C apply to all persons who want to
be candidates at a Presidential election without any discrimination. They
prima facie impose reasonable conditions to be observed by any person who
wants seriously to contest at a Presidential election. Hence, this provision
would be valid even apart from Article 71(3) of the Constitution.
11. When Article 71(3) of the Constitution was pointed out to the peti-
tioner, he contended that it was introduced by an amendment in 1974 which
was invalid. When we questioned the petitioner about the grounds of its
alleged invalidity, he maintained that it constituted an invasion of the basic
structure of the Constitution, and contended that this Court had invalidated
a similar amendment of the Constitution in the case of Shrimati Indira Nehru
Gandhi V. Raj Narain1. We think the provisions of the constitutional amend-
ment which was invalidated there cannot be said to be similar to Article 71(3)
of the Constitution. In Shrimati Indira Nehru Gandhi's case, this Court had
struck down Article 329A(4) of the Constitution mainly on the ground that
it violated the basic structure of the Constitution inasmuch as Parliament, in
exercise of its powers of amendment of the Constitution, under Article 368.
could not exercise a judicial power of decision of election disputes pending
before this Court. This Court had struck down a provision there which took
away the jurisdiction of this Court to decide disputes pending in appeals before
it, because Parliament had, after practically deciding these disputes, directed
this Court to carry out whatever was laid down in the form of a constitutional
amendment. This Court refused to accept as valid what amounted to an
adjudication or what displaced adjudication, without following any judicial
or quasi-judicial procedure, by resorting to what was essentially only a legislative
power lodged in Parliament. The basic structure of the Constitution, resting on
the doctrine of a separation of powers, seemed to have been shaken rather
rudely by Article 329A(4) which was, therefore, declared void. In the case
before us, the impugned amendment of the Constitution only refers to a law by
which Parliament may regulate matters connected with the Presidential elec-
tion including those relating to election disputes arising out of such an elec-
tion. It cannot be said to take away the jurisdiction of this Court to decide
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
CHARAN LAL SAHU v. NEELAM SANJEEVA REDDY (Beg, C.J.)
507
any matter which may be pending before this Court. All it does is to provide
that the validity of any law falling under Article 71(1) will not be called in
question in any Court. Inasmuch as this Court has been constituted the
authority of Tribunal before which the election of the President can be
questioned the effect of Article 71(3) is only to give effect to a well known
general principle which is applied by this Court that a Court or Tribunal func-
tioning or exercising its jurisdiction under an enactment will not question the
validity of that very enactment which is the source of its powers. This Court
functions here as an election tribunal set up under a law made by Parliament
under Article 71(1) of the Constitution. We are unable to see any force in the
attack upon the validity of either Section 5B or Section 5C of the Act or of the
amendment which introduced Article 71(3) of the Constitution.
12. The result of a careful consideration by us of the provisions men-
tioned above is that we think that, the procedure or manner for questioning the
Presidential election having been laid down, the petitioner must come within
the four corners of that procedure in order to have a locus standi to challenge
the Presidential election and to be able to maintain this petition. If he neither
is nor can claim to be a candidate, on assertions made by him in his petition
itself, he would be lacking the right to question the election of Shri Neelam
Sanjeeva Reddy as President of India. The effect of the provision of Sec-
tions 14(1), 14(2) and 14(3) and 14A(1) of the Act, read with Order XXXIX,
Rules 2 and 5 of the Rules of this Court, is that the petition before us is barred
because the petitioner has not got the required locus standi to maintain it.
13. For the foregoing reasons, we decide issues (1) to (4) against the
petitioner.
14. We may mention here that in State of Rajasthan V. Union of India²,
this Court had dismissed suits filed in this Court under Article 131 of the Consti-
tution on a preliminary point without framing issues. It was pointed out
there, by one of us (Beg, C.J.), that technically more correct order to pass in
these cases may have been to reject the plaints in limine under Order XXIII,
Rule 6 of the rules of this Court.
15. In the case before us, however, it is quite clear that the petition is
barred by the provisions of Section 14(1) and (3) read with Sections 5B and
5C and Section 14A of the Act and Order XXXIX, Rules 2 and 5 of the rules
of this Court framed under Part III mentioned in Section 14(3) of the Act.
16. We are also in complete and respectful agreement with the judgment of
a Constitution Bench of this Court given on October 14, 1974, on Election
Petition 1 of 1974 Charan Lal Sahu V. Fakruddin Ali Ahmed3, where, on a
precisely similar election petition by the very petitioner now before us against
the former President Shri Fakruddin Ali Ahmed, this Court had dismissed his
petition and rejected the very grounds now repeated before us. In that case
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
508
SUPREME COURT CASES
also the petitioner had assailed the validity of Sections 5B and 5C of the
Act and failed. The petition was dismissed in limine on a preliminary objec-
tion.
17. It could be urged relying upon the well-known principle laid down
in Nazir Ahmad V. King Emperor4 that, where a mode for doing something is
laid down, any other mode is necessarily prohibited, this petition is barred by
the provisions of law laying down the procedure for filing an election petition
and indicating who are entitled to maintain it. On such a view the petition
could be rejected under Order XXIII, Rule 6 of the rules of the Court. On the
other hand it could be said, where he is challenging the very validity of the
provisions which bar him from coming to the Court, that he has the locus
standi to do that until his case is thrown out on the question of validity. Con-
sequently, we think it safer in the case before us to hold that the petition is not
maintainable on the view taken by us.
18. Accordingly, we dismiss this petition but make no order as to costs.
(1978) 2 Supreme Courts Cases 508
(BEFORE R. S. SARKARIA AND P. S. KAILASAM, JJ.)
NIRMAL KUMAR KHANDELWAL
Petitioner ;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Criminal Writ Petition No. 1238 of 1978*, decided on May 1, 1978
Preventive Detention - COFEPOSA - Conservation of Foreign Ex-
change and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 - Section 8(f) -
Receipt of report of Advisory Board - Detention order not confirmed thereafter
within 3 months of initial detention - Detention beyond the initial 3 months
invalid
(Paras 8 & 9)
Constitution of India - Article 22(4) - Receipt of report of Advisory
Board - Detention order not confirmed thereafter within 3 months of initial
detention - Detention beyond the initial 3 months invalid
(Paras 8 & 9)
Section 8(f) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of
Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 (COFEPOSA) provides as follows :
"For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (4), and sub-clause (c)
of clause (7), of Article 22 of the Constitution -
(f) in every case where the Advisory Board has reported that
there is in its opinion sufficient cause for the detention of a person,
the appropriate Government may confirm the detention order and
continue the detention of the person concerned for such period as it
thinks fit and in every case where the Advisory Board has reported that
there is in its opinion no sufficient cause for the detention of the
person concerned, the appropriate Government shall revoke the
detention order and cause the person to be released forthwith."
4. 1936 AIR PC 253 (2) : 63 IA 372 163 IC 881 : 37 Cri LJ 897
Under Article 32 of the Constitution for the grant of a Writ of habeas corpus