this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
500
SUPREME COURT CASES
(1973) 1 Supreme Court Cases 500
(From Bombay High Court)
[BEFORE S. M. SIKRI, c. J. AND J. M. SHELAT, A. N. RAY, D. G. PALEKAR,
M. H. BEG, s. N. DWIVEDI AND I. D. DUA, Jj.]
NAGPUR IMPROVEMENT TRUST AND
ANOTHER
Appellants;
Versus
VITHAL RAO AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 2139 of 1968, decided on December 11, 1972
Constitution of India-Article 14-Reasonable classification by State-Tests
of ressonableness-Lawful object.
Constitution of Isdia-Article 14Determination of compensation for
acquisition of land by Improvement Trust-Whether a principle of compensation
different from Municipal Corporation or Government be formulated.
Constitution of India-Article 14-Classification based on kind of public
purpose-When permissible.
Constitution of India-Article 14-Existence of two statutes on land acquisition
-Compensation under either-Whether owner of land can claim protection of
Article 14.
Constitution of India-Article 14-Tax on unearned increment-Whether State
can legislate for introducing such tax in piece meal and not on whole State-Extent
of State's power.
Constitution of adia-Article 31(A)(1)(m)-Scope and applicability-Whether
provision applies to acquisities of land for building a city.
Town Planning-Nagper Improvement Trust Act, 1936-Comstitutionality-
Compensation for acquisition of land-Rate of compensation lower than that
payable If unquired under Land Acquisition Act, 1894-Whether act violates
Article 14-Acanisities and requisition.
Town Planning-Nagpar Improvement Trust Act, 1936-Section 17-A (as
inserted by Para 6 of the schedule)-Acquisition by Government for Improvement
Trust-Whether payment of cost to Government is necessary for vesting the land
in trust.
Held:
(i) (a) The State can make a reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation.
But the object itself should be lawful. The.object itself cannot be discrimina-
tory, or otherwise, for instance, if the object is to discriminate against one
section of the minority the discrimination cannot be justified on the
ground that there is a reasonable classification because it has rational
relation to the object sought to be achieved.
(Para 26)
(b) Different principles of compensation cannot be laid if the land is acquired
for or by an Improvement Trust or Municipal Corporation or the Govern-
ment, because as far as the owner is concerned it does not matter to him
whether the land is acquired by one authority or the other.
(Para 29)
It is equally immaterial whether it is one acquisition Act or another under
which the land is acquired. If the existence of two Acts enables the
State to give one owner different treatment from another equally situated,
the owner who is discriminated against, can claim the protection of
Article 14.
(Para 30)
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
NAGPUR IMPROVEMENT TRUST D. VITHAL RAO (Sikri, C. 7.)
501
Nandeshwar Prasad V. U. P. Government, AIR 1964 SC 1217 (1964) 3 SCR 425:
(1965) 1 SCJ 90 P. Vajravelu Mudalier V. Special Deputy Collector, Madras,
(1965) 1 SCR 614, 619: AIR 1965 SC 1017 (1964) 2 SCJ 703, relied on.
Article 14 confers an individual right and in order to justify a classification
there should be something which justifies a different treatment to this
individual right. Ordinarily a classification based on the public purpose
is not permissible under Article 14 for the purpose of determining com-
pensation. The position is different when the owner of the land himself
is the recipient of benefits from an improvement scheme, and the benefit
to him is taken into consideration in fixing compensation.
(Para 29)
(c) There is nothing to bar the State from taxing unearned increment if the
object is to deny owners the full benefit of increase of value due to develop-
ment of a town. Article 14, however, prohibits the expropriation of the
unearned increment of one owner while leaving his neighbour untouched.
If the object of the legislation is to tax unearned increment it should be
done throughout the State. The State cannot achieve this object piece meal
by compulsory acquisition of land of some owners leaving others alone.
(Paras 31 and 32)
P.
Vajrasein Mudalier v. Special Deputy Collector, Madras, (1965) 1 SCR 614, 619
AIR 1965 SC 1017 : (1964) 2 SCJ 703, relied on.
Balammal v. State of Madras, (1969) I SCR 90: AIR 1968 SC 1425 (1969)
1
SCJ 209, followed.
(ii) Article 31(A)(1)(a) has relevance to agrarian reforms and development. It
has nothing to do with acquisition of land for building of a capital of a
State.
(Para 35)
Appeal dismissed.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Sikri, C. J.-This appeal by certificate of fitness granted by the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, is directed against the
judgment of the High Court in Writ Petition No. 504 of 1967 filed under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, by Vithal Rao, respondent before
us, hereinafter referred to as the petitioner.
2. The petitioner was a tenant of some fields in village Binakhi in
Patwari Circle No. 10, Nagpur. He had applied to the Agricultural Lands
Tribunal under a local act for fixing the purchase price of the said fields.
On May 3, 1962, a notice was issued under Section 39 of the Nagpur
Improvement Trust Act, 1936, hereinafter referred to as the Improvement
Act. Section 39 of of this Act deals with the preparation, publication and
transmission of notice as to improvement schemes and supply of documents
to applicants.
3. On November 17, 1961 the Improvement Trust applied for sanction
of its scheme by the Government, and on January 9, 1965, the Government
sanctioned the scheme under Section 45 of the Improvement Act. On
February 28, 1966 proceedings were started before the Land Acquisition
Officer and on June 12, 1967 an award was passed by the Land Acquisition
Officer fixing the compensation at Rs. 45,910 for 44.19 acres of land
acquired.
4. On June 15, 1967, the petitioner filed the writ petition under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. In this petition the validity of
the Improvement Act was challenged on various grounds, one of the
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
502
SUPREME COURT CASES
grounds being that the Improvement Act was in violation of Article 14
of the Constitution inasmuch as it empowered the acquisition of lands
at prices lower than those which would have been payable if they had
been acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
5. The High Court held that as the acquisition is by the State in all
cases where the property is required to be acquired for the purposes of a
scheme framed by the Trust and such being the position, it is not permissible
without violating the guarantee under Article 14 of the Constitution for the
State to acquire any property under the provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act as amended by the Improvement Trust Act insofar as they relate to
the basis of determination and payment of compensation It must, therefore,
be held that the provisions of Paragraphs 10(2) and (10) (3) insofar as
they add a new clause (3) (a) to Section 23 and a proviso to sub-section (2)
of Section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act are ultra vires as violating the
guarantee of Article 14 of the Constitution.
6. In the result the petition was allowed, the award set aside, and the
matter was remanded to the- Land Acquisition Officer for determination of
compensation according to the law and in the light of the decision by the High
Court.
7. As the case was important, the High Court granted a certificate
under Article 132(1) and Article (1) of the Constitution.
8. Before we deal with the contentions of the learned counsel for the
appellant we may briefly examine the relevant provisions of the Improve-
ment Act. This Act came into force on December 25, 1936. It was passed
before the Government of India Act, 1935 came into force. The preamble
states
"Whereas it is expedient to make provision for the improvement
and expansion of the Town of Nagpur in the manner hereinafter
provided
9. Section 3 of the Act creates the Nagpur Improvement Trust as a
body corporate. Chapter IV of the Act deals with the Improvement
schemes. Section 26 provides for the matters which may be included in an
improvement scheme. One of the matters is "the acquisition by purchase,
exchange, or otherwise of any property necessary for or affected by the
execution of the scheme" Section 27 describes various types of improve-
ment schemes. They are: (a) a general improvement scheme ; (b) a re-building
scheme (c) a re-housing scheme; (d) a street scheme; (e) a deferred street
scheme (f) a development scheme; (g) a housing accommodation
scheme; (h) a future expansion or improvement scheme and (i) a drainage
or drainage including sewage disposal scheme.
10. The scheme in pursuance of which the lands in the present case
were acquired was a housing accommodation scheme. Section 39, as stated
above, provides for the issue of a notice after an improvement scheme has
been framed. Under Section 41, the Trust is obliged to serve a notice of
the proposed acquisition of land on certain persons. Section 43 enables the
Improvement Trust to abandon an improvement scheme, after considering
any objection, representation or statement of dissent received and after
hearing all persons, or to apply to the State Government for sanction to
the scheme with such modifications, if any, as the Trust may consider neces-
sary. The decision would be that of the Improvement Trust.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
NAGPUA IMPAOVEMENT TAUST 0. VITHAL aAO (Sikri, C. J.)
503
11. Section 44 gives wide powers to the Government to sanction with
or without modification or to refuse a sanction or to rerurn for consideration
any improvement scheme submitted to it under Section 43. Under Sec-
tion 45 the State Government is obliged to notify the sanction of an improve-
ment scheme. Section 46 enables the Trust to alter an improvement scheme
before it has been completed, subject to certain conditions.
12. Chapter V deals with the powers and duties of the Trust where
a scheme has been sanctioned. Chapter VI deals with acquisition and
disposal of land. Under Section 58 the Trust is enabled to acquire by
purchase, lease or exchange any land within the area comprised in a
sanctioned scheme. Section 59 deals with compulsory acquisition and may
be set out in full. It provides :
"59. The Trust may, with the previous sanction of the State
Government acquire land under the provisions of the Land Act, 1894,
as modified by the provisions of this Act, for carrying out any of the
purposes of this Act."
13. Section 60 says that "a Tribunal shall be constituted, as provided in
Section 62, for the purpose of performing the functions of the Court in
reference to the acquisition of land for the Trust, under the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894". Section 61 modifies the Land Acquisition Act in the following
words:
"For the purpose of acquiring land under the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894, for the Trust-
(a) the Tribunal shall except for the purposes of Section 54 of that
Act, be deemed to be the Court, and the President of the
Tribunal shall be deemed to be Judge thereunder;
(b) the Act shall be subject to the further modifications as indicated
in the Schedule
(c) the President of the Tribunal may summon witnesses and enforce
their attendance and may compel the production of documents,
by the same means, and so far as may be, in the same manner,
as is provided in case of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 and
(d) the award of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be the ward of the
Court under Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and shall be
final."
14. We need not deal with the provisions dealing with the constitution
of the Tribunal, remuneration of its members, etc.
15. Section 68 enables an owner to apply to the Trust requesting that
the acquisition of land not required for the purposes of a scheme may
be abandoned on his executing an agreement to observe conditions
specified by the Trust in respect of the development of the property
and to pay a charge to be calculated in accordance with sub-section (2)
of Section 69 of the Act. The Trust can abandon an acquisition without
requiring sanction of the Government.
16. The Schedule modifies the Land Acquisition Act in various respects.
The relevant modifications are these:
(1) After clause (e) of Section 3, the following clause shall be
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
504
SUPREME COURT CASES
deemed to be inserted, namely,-
"(ee) the expression 'local authority' includes the Trust consti
tuted under the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1936."
2. (1) The first publication of a notice of an improvement
scheme under Section 39 of the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1936,
shall be substituted for, and have the same effect as publication in the
official Gazette, and in the locality of, a notification under sub-section (1
of Section 4, except where a declaration under Section 4 or Section 6
has previously been made and is still in force.
(2) Subject to the provisions of Clauses 10 and 11 of this Schedule,
the issue of a notice under sub-section (4) of Section 32 of the Nagpur
Improvement Trust Act, 1936, in the case of land acquired under that
sub-section, and in any other case the publication of a notification
under Section 45 of the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1936, shall
b. substituted for, and have the same effect as a declaration by the
State Government under Section 6, unless a declaration under the
last mentioned section has previously been made and is in force.
3. The full-stop at the end of Section 11 shall be deemed to be
changed to a semi-colon, and the following shall be deemed to be added,
namely-
"and
(iv) the costs which, in his opinion, should be allowed to any
person who is found to be entitled to compensation and
who is not entitled to receive the additional sum of
fifteen per centum mentioned in sub-section (2) of Sec-
tion 23 as having been actually and reasonably incurred
by such person in preparing his claim and putting his case
before the Collector.
The Collector may disallow wholly or in part costs
incurred by any person, if he considers that the claim made
by such person for compensation is extravagant."
4.
5. (1) In sub-section (3) of Section 17 after the figure "24" the
words, figures, and letter "or Section 24-A" shall be deemed to be
inserted.
(2) To Section 17, the following shall be deemed, to be added,
namely:
"(5) When proceedings have been taken under this section for
the acquisition of any land, and any person sustains damage in
consequence of being suddenly dispossessed of such land, compensa-
tion shall be paid to such person for such dispossession."
17. Para 6 of the Schedule inserts Section 17-A. It reads:
"17-A. In every case referred to in Section 16 or Section 17,
Collector shall, upon payment of the cost of acquisition, make over-
charge of the land to the Trust and the land shall thereupon vest in the
Trust, subject to the liability of the Trust to pay any further costs which
may be incurred on account of its acquisition."
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
NAGPUR IMPROVEMENT TRUST v. VITHAL RAO (Sikri, C. J.)
505
18. Para 10 amends Section 23 thus
"10(1)
10(2) The full-stop at the end of sub-section (2) of Section 23 shall
be deemed to be changed to a colon, and the following proviso shall be
deemed to be added :
"Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any land
acquired under the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act, 1936,
except-
(a) buildings in the actual occupation of the owner or
occupied free of rent by a relative of the owner, and
land appurtenant thereto, and
(b) gardens not let to tenants but used by the owners as a
place of resort."
10(3) For the purposes of clause first of sub-section (1) of this
section-
(a) the market value of the land shall be the market value
according to the use to which the land was put at
the date with reference to which the market value is
to be determined under that clause
,
19. Another advantage which is said to accrue to these persons is
provided by Section 48-A, as inserted by Para 14. It reads
"48-A. (1) If within a period of two years from the date of the
publication of the declaration under Section 6 in respect of any land,
the Collector has not made an award under Section 11 with respect
to such land, the owner of the land shall, unless he has been to a
material extent responsible for the delay, be entitled to receive com-
pensation for the damage suffered by him in consequence of the
delay.
(2) The provisions of Part III of this Act shall apply so far as
may be, to the determination of the compensation payable under this
section.'
20. It would be seen that the effect of the modifications in two respects
is tremendous. First, the owner whose land is acquired under the Improve-
ment Act is paid compensation not according to the market value of the land
but the market value according to the use to which the land was put at
the date with reference to which the market value is to be determined in
that clause. In other words, if the land is being used for agricultural
purposes, even though it has a potential value as a building site, the potential
value is 10 be ignored The second respect in which the owner suffers if the
land is acquired under the Improvement Act is that he does not get a
solatium of 15% which he would have got if the land had been acquired
under the Land Acquisition Act. It is true that he has some minor advan-
tages which have been pointed out by the learned counsel but they have
no comparison in value to the loss suffered by virtue of the market value
being determined according to the use to which the land was being put or
the loss of 15% of the market value of the land.
21. The first point which was raised was : whether it is the State which
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
506
SUPREME COURT CASES
is the acquiring authority or it is the Improvement Trust which is the
acquiring authority, under the Improvement Act. It seems to us that it is
quite clear, especially in view of Section 17-A as inserted by Para 6 of the
Schedule, that the acquisition will be by the Government and it is only on
payment of the cost of acquisition to the Government that the lands vest in
the Trust. It is true that the acquisition is for the Trust and may be at its
instance, but nevertheless the acquisition is by the Government.
22. If this is so, then it is quite clear that the Government can acquire
for a housing accommodation scheme either under the Land Acquisition
Act or under the Improvement Act. If this is so, it enables the State
Government to discriminate between one owner equally situated from another
owner.
23. This Court held in Nandeshwar Prasad V. U. P. Government1 that the
fact that the lands could be acquired for a scheme under the Kanpur Urban
Development Act (U. P. Act VI of 1945) did not prevent the Government
from acquiring the lands for the same purpose under the Land Acquisition
Act (as amended by the Kanpur Act). We may mention that the Kanpur
Act amended the Land Acquisition Act by the Schedule for the purpose of
acquisition of land for the Board in a similar manner as in the Nagpur
Improvement Trust Act.
24. A similar point was abandoned in P. Vajravelu Mudaliar V. Special
Deputy Collector, Madras by Mr. Viswanatha Sastri in view of the above
decision of this Court in Kanpur case.
25. The question then arises whether the High Court is right in
holding that the impugned provisions were hit by Article 14 of the Constitu-
tion.
26. It is now well-settled that the State can make a reasonable
classification for the purpose of legislation. It is equally well-settled that
the classification in order to be reasonable must satisfy two tests (i) the
classification must be founded on intelligible differentia and (ii) the
differentia must have a rational relation with the object sought to be achieved
by the legislation in question. In this connection it must be borne in mind
that the object itself should be lawful. The object itself cannot be
discriminatory, for otherwise, for instance, if the object is to discriminate
against one section of the minority the discrimination cannot be justified on
the ground that there is a reasonable classification because it has rational
relation to the object sought to be achieved.
27. What can be reasonable classification for the purpose of determining
compensation if the object of the legislation is to compulsorily acquire land
for public purposes?
28. It would not be disputed that different principles of compensation
cannot be formulated for lands acquired on the basis that the owner is old
or young, healthy or ill, tall or short, or whether the owner has inherited
the property or built it with his own efforts, or whether the owner is a
politician or an advocate. Why is this sort of classification not sustainable?
Because the object being to compulsorily acquire for a public purpose, the
object is equally achieved whether the land belongs to one type of owner or
another type.
1. AIR 1964 SC 1217 (1964) 3 SCR 425:
2.
(1965) 1 SCR 614, 619: AIR 1965 SC
(1965) 1 SCJ 90.
1017 : (1964) 2 SCJ 703.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
NAGPUR 1MPROVEMENT TRUST v. VITHAL RAO (Sikri, C. J.)
507
29. Can classification be made on the basis of the public purpose for
the purpose of compensation for which land is acquired? In other words can
the Legislature lay down different principles of compensation for lands
acquired say for a hospital or a school or a Government building? Can the
Legislature say that for a hospital land will be acquired at 50% of the market
value, for a school at 60% of the value and for a Government building at
70% of the market value? All three objects are public purposes and as far
as the owner is concerned it does not matter to him whether it is one public
purpose or the other. Article 14 confers an individual right and in order to
justify a classification there should be something which justifies a different
treatment to this individual right. It seems to us that ordinarily a classifica-
tion based on the public purpose is not permissible under Article 14 for the
purpose of determining compensation. The position is different when the
owner of the land himself is the recipient of benefits from an improvement
scheme, and the benefit to him is taken into consideration in fixing compensa-
tion. Can classification be made on the basis of the authority acquiring the
land? In other words can different principles of compensation be laid if the
land is acquired for or by an Improvement Trust or Municipal Corporation
or the Goverment? It seems to us that the answer is in the negative because
as far as the owner is concerned it does not matter to him whether the land
is acquired by one authority or the other.
30. It is equally immaterial whether it is one Acquisition Act or
another Acquisition Act under which the land is acquired. If the existence
of two Acts could enable the State to give one owner different treatment from
another equally situated the owner who is discriminated against, can claim
the protection of Article 14.
31. It was said that if this is the true position the State would find
it
impossible to clear slums, to do various other laudable things. If this
argument were to be accepted it would be totally destructive of the protection
given by Article 14. It would enable the State to have one law for acquiring
lands for hospital, one law for acquiring lands for schools, one law acquiring
lands for clearing siums, another for acquiring lands for Government
buildings; one for acquiring lands in New Delhi and another for acquiring
lands in Old Delhi. It was said that in many cases, the value of the land
has increased not because of any effort by the owner but because of the
general development of the city in which the land is situated. There is no
doubt that this is so, but Article 14 prohibits the expropriation of the
unearned increment of one owner while leaving his neighbour untouched.
The neighbour could sell his land and reap the unearned increment. If the
object of the legislation is to tax unearned increment it should be done
throughout the State. The State cannot achieve this object piece meal by
compulsory acquisition of land of some owners leaving others alone. If the
object is to clear slums it cannot be done at the expense of the owners whose
lands are acquired, unless as we have said the owners are directly benefited
by the scheme. If the object is to build hospitals it cannot be done at the
expense of the owners of the land which is acquired. The hospital, schools
etc. must be built at the expense of the whole community.
32. It will not be denied that a statute cannot tax some owners of land
leaving untaxed others equally situated. If the owners of the land cannot
be taxed differently how can some owners be indirectly taxed by way of
compulsory acquisition? It is urged that if this were the law it will tie the
hands of the State in undertaking social reforms. We do not agree. There
is nothing in the Constitution which debars the State from bettering the lot of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
508
SUPREME COURT CASES
millions of our citizens. For instance there is nothing to bar the State from
taxing unearned increment if the object is to deny owners the full benefit of
increase of value due to development of a town. It seems to us, as we have
already said, that to accede to the contentions of the appellant and the States
would be destructive of the protection afforded by Article 14 of the Constitu-
tion. The States would only have to constitute separate acquiring bodies
for each city, or Division or indeed to achieve one special public purpose and
lay down different principles of compensation.
33. In P. Vajravelu Mudaliar V. Special Deputy Collector Madras (supra),
there were two Acts under which the land of an owner could be acquired.
The land could have been acquired for various schemes under the Land
Acquisition Act, referred to as the Principal Act, in the judgment, and the
Amending Act (The Land Acquisition (Madras Amendment) Act, 1961].
This Court observed
"The land could have been acquired for all the said purposes under
the Principal Act after paying the market value of the land. The
Amending Act empowers the State to acquire land for housing scheme
at a price lower than that the State has to pay if the same was acquired
under the principal Act."
The Court ex mined various justifications for the classifications which were
put forth by the State, and then concluded
"From whatever aspect the matter is looked at, the alleged
differences have no reasonable relation to the object sought to be
achieved. It is said that the object of the Amending Act in itself may
project the differences in the lands sought to be acquired under the two
Acts. This argument puts the cart before the house. It is one thing
to say that the existing differences between persons and properties have
a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved and it is to-
tally a different thing to say that the object of the Act itself created the
differences. Assuming that the said proposition is sound, we cannot
discover any differences in the people owning lands or in the lands on
the basis of the object. The object is to acquire lands for housing
schemes at a low price. For achieving that object, any land falling in
any of the said categories can be acquired under the Amending Act.
So, too, for a public purpose any such land can be acquired under the
Principal Act. We, therefore, hold that discrimination is writ large on
the Amending Act and it cannot be sustained on the principle of
reasonable classification. We, therefore, hold that the Amending Act
clearly infringes Article 14 of the Constitution and is void."
34. In Balammal and Others V. State of Madras3 in which the facts are
substantially similar, the Board constituted under the Madras City Improve-
ment Trust Act (Madras Act 16 of 1945), was authorised by virtue of Sec-
tion 71, with the previous sanction of the Government, to acquire land
under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for carrying out any
of the purposes of the Act which included Town Expansion Scheme (This
Section 71 is equivalent to Section 59 of the Improvement Act). For the
purpose of acquiring land for the Board under the Land Acquisition Act,
1894, Section 73 provided inter alia, that the said Act shall be subjected to
the modifications specified in the Schedule (This Section 73 corresponds to
Section 61 of the Improvement Act). The Schedule to the Act provided
3. (1969) 1 SCR 90: AIR 1968 SC 1425 (1969) 1 SCJ 209.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
NAGPUR IMPROVEMENT TRUST v. VITHAL RAO (Sikri, C. J.)
509
for modification in the Land Acquisition Act for certain specific purposes.
The Madras Act of 1945 as replaced by the Madras City Improvement
Trust Act (Madras Act 37 of 1950) made an important change inasmuch as
the result was that by the change persons whose lands were compulsorily
acquired under the Madras Act 37 of 1950 were deprived of the right to the
solatium which would be awardable if the lands were acquired under the
Land Acquisition Act. In this connection this Court observed
"But, in our judgment, counsel for the owners is right in contending
that sub-clause (2) of Clause 6 of the Schedule to Act 37 of 1950, insofar
as it deprived the owners of the lands of the statutory addition to the
market value of the lands under Section 23(2) of the Land Acquisition
Act is violative of the equality clause of the Constitution, and is on that
account void. If the State had acquired the lands for improvement of
the town under the Land Acquisition Act, the acquiring authority was
bound to award in addition to the market value 15% statutory under
Section 23(2) of Land Acquisition Act. But by acquiring the lands
under the Land Acquisition Act as modified by the Schedule to the
Madras City Improvement Trust Act 37 of 1950 for the Improvement
Trust which is also a public purpose the owners are, it is claimed,
deprived of the right to that statutory addition. An owner of land
is ordinarily entitled to receive the solatium in addition to the market
value for compulsory acquisition of his land, if it is acquired under the
Land Acquisition Act, but not if it is acquired under the Madras City
Improvement Trust Act. A clear case of discrimination which infringes
the guarantee of equal protection of the law arises, and the owners of
the lands which are compulsorily acquired must on the decisions of this
Court, be deemed invalid."
After reviewing some earlier cases, the Court held:
"We therefore, hold that Clause 6, sub-clause (2) of the Schedule,
read with Section 73 of Madras Act 37 of 1950 which deprives the
owners of the statutory right to solatium at the rate of 15% on the
market value of the lands, is invalid, and the owners of the lands are
entitled to the statutory solatium under Section 23(2) of the Land
Acquisition Act in consideration of compulsory acquisition of their
land."
35. The learned counsel was not able to satisfy us that the above case
was distinguishable. We are of the opinion that the case was rightly decided
and must govern this case. In this view of the matter, it is not necessary to
refer to all the cases referred to us at the Bar. We may mention that
Mr. Tarkunde also placed reliance on Article (A) (1) (a) of the Constitution.
It is now well settled that Article 31(A)(1)(a) has relevance to agrarian
reforms and development. It has nothing to do with acquisition of land for
building of a capital of a State.
36. In the result the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.