this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
856
SUPREME COURT CASES
two younger children and setting aside the judgment of the Letters Patent
Bench in this respect, restore that of the learned single Judge who in our
view, had correctly exercised his discretion under Section 25 of the Guardians
and Wards Act. The directions given by him with respect to access of the
parties to their children are also restored.
20. As regards alimony, no doubt, the Letters Patent Bench was, in our
opinion, not quite right in with-holding payment of the alimony already
fallen due and in arrears. But in view of the fact that the financial position
of the wife is far superior to that of the husband who according to his own
submission, has yet to establish himself in his profession, we do not consider it
just and proper to interfere with that order under Article 136 of the Constitu-
tion. With respect to the alimony, therefore, the appeal fails and is dismissed.
We also direct that the parties should bear their own costs throughout.
21. Before concluding we must also express our earnest hope, as was
done by the learned single Judge, that the two spouses would at least for the
sake of happiness of their own off-spring, if for no other reason, forget the
past and turn a new leaf in their family life, so that they can provide to their
children a happy, domestic home, to which their children must be considered
to be justly entitled. The requirement of indispensable tolerance and mental
understanding in matrimonial life is its basic foundation. The two spouses
before us who are both educated and cultured and who come from highly
respectable families must realise that reasonable wear and tear and normal
jars and shocks of ordinary married life has to be put up with in the larger
interests of their own happiness and of the healthy, normal growth and
development of their off-spring, whom destiny has entrusted to their joint
parental care. Incompatibility of temparament has to be endeavoured to be
disciplined into compatibility and not to be magnified by abnormal impulses
or impulsive desires and passions. The husband is not disentitled to a house
and a housewife, even though the wife has achieved the status of an economi-
cally emancipated woman; similarly the wife is not a domestic slave, but a
responsible partner in discharging their joint parental obligation in promoting
the welfare of their children and in sharing the pleasure of their children's
company. Both parents have, therefore, to co-operate and work harmoni-
ously for their children who should feel proud of their parents and of their
home, bearing in mind that their children have a right to expect from their
parents such a home.
(1973) 1 Supreme Court Cases 856
(Original Jurisdiction)
[BEFORE M. SHELAT, ACTING, a. J., AND K. S. HEGDE, A. N. RAY,
P. JAGANMOHAN REDDY, H. R. KHANNA, A. K. MUKHERJEA
AND Y. V. CHANDRACHUD, Jj.]
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR
Petitioner;
Versus
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Writ Petition No. 226 of 1972, decided on April 19, 1973
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SAREAR v. STATE OF W. B.
857
Preventive Detemtion-Maintenance of Internal Security Act, (26 of 1971)-
Section 17-A-Constitntional validity-Constitution of India-Article 22(7)(a).
Preventivo etention-Maintonance of Internal Security Act (26 of 1971)-
Sections 17-A and 10-Whether Section 10 applies to cases falling under Sections 17
and 17-A-Meoning of words "may be detaired" in Section 17-A(1)-Difference
resulting from operation of Section 17-A and Section 10 sido by side-Whether
amounts to discrimination by reason of Section 17-A(2)-Constitution of India-
Article 14.
Constitution of India-Article 141-Doctrino of Staro decinis-Whom earlior
decisions can be reviewed-Matte: involving rights of personal liberty-Whothor
fact that decision halding the deld for long time can be a deterront against its
recousideration-Roviow of A. K. Gopalan's caso.
Constitution of India-Articlo 22(4) and (7)-Theory of alternative power-
Validity of-Legislative intontion-Three distinct situations dealt under
cleuses (4) and (7).
Constitution of india-Articlo 22(7)(a)-Nature and Scope-Expression "the
circumatances under which, and the class or classes of cases in which"-Whether
word "and" used in conjunctivo or disjunctive sense-Meaning of words" cir-
comstances" and "class" or "clesses"-Whether clause (7)(a) is on exception to
claneo 4)(a).
Constitution of India-Article 22(4)(a) and (7)(a) and Schedule VII, List I,
Entry 9 and List III, Entry 3-Whether enumeration of heads in Entries 9 and 3
mean compliance of prescribing circumstances and classes of coses-Object of
heods in the entries-Whethor distinct from object of clause 7(a).
Provontivo Detention-Maintensnce of Internal Security Act (26 of 1971)-
Section 13 [as amonded by Section 6(6)(d) of Defence of India Act, 1971] and
Sections 3, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12-Constitutional validity-Not considered-Constitu-
tion of India-Articles 14, 19, 21 and 22.
Supreme Court-Practico and Procedure-Does not decide more than what is
necessary.
Held:
(i) Section 10 of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act opens with the words
"save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act". These words mean
that the section would apply only to cases not expressly provided for in the
Act, that is to say, it would not apply to cases falling under Sections 17
and 17-A which deal with cases "otherwise expressly provided" in the
Act.
The words "may be detained" are words enabling the authority to detain without
a board's opinion for the period there provided for, but are not words
giving a choice to the authority to apply Section 17-A(a) or not. Even if
the operation of Section 17-A and Section 10 side by side were to result in
any difference in the working of the Act, that difference would not seem to
amount to any discrimination by reason of the provision in Section 17-A(2)
to the effect that in the case of a person to whom sub-section (1) applies,
Section 10 shall be read subject to the modification, namely, that for the
words "within thirty days", the words "at any time prior to but in no
case later than three months before the expiration of two years" shall be
substituted. In this view, there is no question of discrimination or violation
of Article 14 as a result of any such discrimination. This conclusion is
clearly borne out by the combined effect of the non-obstante clause in the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
858
SUPREME COURT CASES
commencement of Section 17-A(1) and the qualifying words "save as
otherwise provided in this Act" in Section 10.
(Para 15)
Northern Indio Caterers Pot. Ltd. V. State of Punjab, (1967) 3 SCR 399: AIR 1967 SC
1581 : (1968) 1 SCJ 475; State of M. P. V. Thakur Bharat Singh, (1967) 2
SCR 454: AIR 1967 SC 1170: (1968) 1 SCJ 173; S. G. Ja Singhani V.
Union of India, (1967) 2 SCR 703: AIR 1967 SC 1427: (1967) 2 SCI 102;
Satwant Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam, (1967) 3 SCR 525: AIR 1967 SC
1836: (1968) 1 SCJ 178, referred to.
(ii) Where the matter involves the right of personal liberty, the fact that a decision
has held the field for a considerably long time should not by itself be a
deterrent against its reconsideration. Supreme Court will review its
earlier decisions if it is satisfied of its error or of the baneful effect which a
decision would have on the general interest of the public or if it "is
inconsistent with the legal philosophy of our Constitution", and in cons-
titutional matters Supreme Court will do more readily than in other
branches of law as perpetuation of an error would be harmful to public
interest. Nevertheless the court will have to bear in mind the accepted rule
that earlier decisions are not to be upset except upon a clear compulsion
especially when the legislature has acted upon, while enacting the
impugned provision.
(Para 27)
A. K. Gopalan V. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 88: AIR 1950 SC 27: 1950 SCJ 174:
51 Cri LJ 1383 R. C. Cooper V. Union of India, (1970) 3 SCR 530: (1970) 1
Cal 1, referred to.
Hengal Immunity Co Ltd. V. State of Bihar, (1955) 2 SCR 603: AIR 1955 SC 661 :
1955 SCJ 672 and Legat Remembrancer, State of W. B. V. Corporation of Calcutta,
(1967) 2 SCR 170: AIR 1967 SC 997, relied OR.
(iii) (a) The Constitution-makers accepted preventive detention as a necessary evil,
to be tolerated in a constitutional scheme which, otherwise, guaranteed
personal liberty in its well-accepted form.
(Para 29)
(b) The language of clauses (4) and (7) show that they deal with three
distinct situations: (1) where the activities and the persons likely to
perpetrate them, though connected with the subjects in the entries, are
of such a nature and consequence that three months' detention would meet
the situation; (2) where the activities and the persons likely to perpetrate
them are of such nature and consequence that they need a longer period of
detention but with the intercession of an advisory board, and (3) where
the activities and the persons likely to report to them are of such a nature
and consequence that the situations they create are such as require not only
a longer period of detention, but also the dispensation of intercession by
an advisory body. (Minority view of Mahajan, J., in. A. K. Gopalan V.
State of Madras, 1950 SCR 88: AIR 1950 SC 27: 1950 SCJ 174: 51 Cri LJ
1383, approved.)
(Para 34)
(c) If the theory of alternative power of Parliament either to enable a law
providing for a longer period but with the intercession of a Board or to
enact a law under clause (4) (b) read with clause (7)(b) of Article 22
providing also for a longer detention but without the intercession of a
board, were accepted clause (4)(a) would be totally nullified by clause (4)
(b), read with clause (7)(a). In other words, such a construction would
mean that though the Constitution-makers laid down a safeguard against a
law providing for a longer duration, they, in the very same hreath, nullified
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR U. STATE OF W. B.
859
that safeguard by generally empowering Parliament under caluse ()b),
read with clause (7)(a) to enact laws with longer period of detention
without the intercession of an advisory board. Surely, such an interpreta-
tion which nullifies one part of the same clause while interpreting its
another part has to be avoided. Further, if clause (4)(b), read with
clause (7)(a) was intended to override clause (4)(a) and the safeguard
required in a law providing for detention for a longer period, the Con-
stitution-makers would have confined clause (4)(a) only to laws made by
the State Legislatures and would not have applied it to Parliament as well.
The Constitution-makers in that case would have simply used in
clause 4)(b) and clause (7)(a) language such as "nothing contained in
clause (4)(a) shall apply to a law of preventive detention made by
Parliament."
Thus on a careful consideration of the language of clauses (4) and (7), the theory
of independent or alternative power of Parliament breaks down and cannot
be accepted, firstly, because the language of the two clauses does not bear
out such a construction, and secondly because the construction under which
clause (4)(b), read with clause (7) (a) lays down an exception to clause (4) (a)
barmonises both the clauses and brings out the true intention in enacting the
two clauses.
(Para 32)
(d) Circumstances would ordinarily mean situations or events extraneous to the
activities of a concerned person or a group of persons, such as riots,
disorders, tension, religious, racial, regional or linguistic or other such com-
motions, which might by their pre-existence accentuate the impact of such
activities effecting the security of the country or a part of it or the public
order. Class or classes of cases, on the other hand, relate to group or
groups of individuals, who by the nature of their activities fall under one
particular group or groups by their common or similar objective Or objec-
tives.
(Para 35)
The insertion of the expression "the circumstances under which, and the
class of cases in which" in clause 7(a) coupled with Parliament being the
only body which can enact such a law seems to suggeat that clause (7) (a)
is an exception to clause (4) (a) and it being such an exception, Parliament
alone is empowered to pass a law dealing with exceptional circumstances
and exceptional classes of cases.
(Para 33)
Clause (7)(a), thus, envisages Parliament to apply its mind and prescribe
specific situations and types of cases which require a drastic law dispensing
with the intervention of an advisory board on the ground that such
intervention would in such exceptional circumstances and in cases of
dangerous individuals would be cumbersome or unsafe. Reading
clauses )(a) and (7)( together, it is quite clear that intercession of an
independent body like the advisory board was regarded by the Constitu-
tion-makers as an essential safeguard against a jurisdiction primarily based
on a suspicion and apprehension, which could be dispensed with in
extraordinary circumstances and with regard to dangerous persons and
their apprehended activities specifically prescribed in the law made under
clause (7)(a). In this view, the meaning of the word 'and' in that clause
must be held to have its ordinary conjunctive sense, the context in that
clause also requiring not the opposite but its commonly understood
sense, requiring Parliament to prescribe both the circumstances and the
classes of cases in which only consideration by the board can be dispensed
with.
(Para 36'
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
860
SUPREME COURT CASES
There is no practical difficulty in prescribing specific circumstances under
which and the classes of cases which need dispensing with the intercession
of an advisory board.
(Para 37)
(e) The enumeration of the heads in the Entries 9 and 3 of Lists I and III of
the Seventh Schedule do not mean compliance of prescribing circumstances
and classes of cases mentioned in clause (7)(a). The difficulty in equating
enumeration in verbatim of the heads of legislation permissible under
the two entries in Lists I and III with both the circumstances and the
classes of cases is that though the activities of persons thought necessary for
detention may vary in degrees of their impact depending upon the
situations existing at the time, all of them, irrespective of their degree
of intensity and impact, would be clubbed together so as to treat them
equally in a law under clause (7)(a). In such a case even activities,
which would not justify the dispensation of the safeguard of an advisory
board as against those which need such dispensation, would be
treated equally, with the result that in respect of all activities and all
situations Parliament would be enabled to dispense with the safeguard of
th^ intervention of an advisory board. There would then be no use of
having clause (4)( if its requirement can be avoided by a law which
simply sets out the subjects or some of them from the two entries.
(Para 34)
The subjects or heads set out in the legislative entries were intended to
delineate to bounds within which the legislatures can pass detention laws.
The purposes of these entries and of clause (7) (a) are distinct that of the
entries to lay down the topics in respect of which legislation can be
made and that of clause (a) to distinguish the ordinary from the
exceptional to which only the salutary safeguard provided by clause (4) (a)
would not apply. Mere repetition of the subjects or topics of legislation
from the entries would not mean prescribing either the circumstances or
the classes of cases to which only, as against the rest of the individuals
and their activities, the safeguard of intercession of an independent body
would not apply. The law under clause (7)(a) would, as compared to
the one to which clause (4)(a) would apply, to a drastic law and the
presumption would be that such a.drastic law would apply to exceptional
circumstances and exceptional activities expressly and in precise terms
prescribed.
(Para 35)
(f) Section 17-A of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, has failed to
comply with the requirement of clause (7)(a), and has, therefore, to be
declared as being inconsistent with that clause.
(Para 38)
P. L. Lakhanpal V. Union of India, (1967) 1 SCR 433: AIR 1967 SC 908 :
(1967) 2 SCJ 278: and Rex V. Halliday, 1917 AC 260, referred.
(iv) Following the accepted practice that there is no need to decide more
than what is necessary the Supreme Court did not consider the questions
of constitutional validity of Section 13 [as amended by Section 6(6)(
of the Defence of India Act, 1971] and Sections 3, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
and also the contention that the maximum period of detention prescribed
by the amended Section 13 and by Section 17-A(2)(d) of the Maintenance
of Internal Security Act did not satisfy Article 22(7)(b) since the period
fixed by Parliament therein is three years or until the expiry of the
Defence of India Act, whichever is later, an event uncertain as no one
can anticipate when the emergency would be terminated.
(Para 39)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR U. STATE OF W. B. (Sheiai, Acting C. J.)
861
A. K Gopalan V. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 88: AIR 1950 SC 27: 1950 SCJ 174:5 51
Cri LJ 1383, majority view oterruied.
Northern India Caterers Private Ltd. V. State of Punjab, (1967) 3 SCR 399: AIR 1967 SC
248, referres to.
Petition allowed.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Shelat, Acting C. J. At all material times the petitioner was an
employee of the Government of West Bengal in the Collectorate of Hooghly
District. He was arrested on January 29, 1972 pursuant to the order of
detention, dated January 25, 1972 passed by the District Magistrate, Hooghly
under Section 3(2) read with Section 3(1) of the Maintenance of Internal
Security Act, 26 of 1971. The said order was passed "with a view to prevent-
ing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public
order". He was served with the grounds of detention on that very day.
The said grounds of detention were in connection with certain incidents
alleged to have taken place on April 25, 1971, September 14, 1971,
October 12, 1971 and January 19, 1972, as set out therein.
2. Before the said order was issued, the petitioner and six others, also
Government employees in Hooghly Collectorate, were prosecuted for their
alleged parts in the first two incidents on the basis of the first information
report, dated September 14, 1971, under Section 143/506 of the Penal Code.
On March 29, 1972, they were discharged by the Magistrate on a final report
of the police, dated March 10, 1972. Pursuant to the said order of deten-
tion, the petitioner was detained and is still in Hooghly jail.
3. The mother of the petitioner thereafter filed an application No. 318
of 1972 in the High Court of Calcutta under Section 491 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. In that application the petitioner's detention was
challenged only on two grounds, namely, vagueness of the grounds of deten-
tion and their irrelevance. On May 29, 1972, the High Court dismissed
the said application. The present petition is more comprehensive and for
the first time challenges the validity of several provisions of the Act.
4. The record before us shows that all the steps required under the
Act have been taken and complied with in the time and manner prescribed
by the Act. No objection, therefore, to the petitioner's detention on that
ground can be validly taken. The petitioner's case was referred to the
Advisory Board constituted under the Act, which reported that there was
sufficient cause for his detention. On April 15, 1972, the State Government,
on receipt of the said report, confirmed the order of detention under
Section 12(1) and directed that detention to continue for three years from
the date of detention. The said order of confirmation was duly communi-
cated to the detenu. The petitioner thereafter made his representation to
the State Government on August 10, 1972, that is to say, several months
after reference of his case to the Board and the said order of confirmation.
The said representation was not considered by the State Government as by
that time this writ petition had already been filed and was pending before
this Court.
5. The order of detention has been challenged in the petition on the
following grounds
(1) that the grounds of detention were vague;
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
862
SUPREME COURT CASES
(2) that there was no nexus between the grounds and maintenance
of
public order;
(3) that they were mechanically framed without the detaining
authority applying his mind
(4) that the order was mala fide and passed for collateral purpose,
namely, to victimise the active members of the State Co-ordina-
tion Committee of which the petitioner was one
(5) that Section 6(6) (d) and (e) of the Defence of India Act, 42 of
1971 increasing the detention period from 12 months to 3 years
by the amendment of Section 13 of the Act has treated equally
citizens of India and foreigners and has thereby violated
Article 14;
(6) that the said order of confirmation providing three years' detention
was ultra vires Article 22.
The District Magistrate by his counter-affidavit denied all the grounds of
challenge to the validity of the said order.
6. On October 24, 1972, the petitioner applied for urging additional
grounds of challenge and on liberty being granted to amend, the petition was
amended. Stated briefly, the additional grounds challenged the validity of
Sections 3, 5, 8, 11, 12 and 13 of the Act on the grounds of their being
unreasonable restrictions and as violating Articles 14, 19, 21 and 22 by reason
of those provisions failing to provide an impartial authority to consider a
detenu's representation, and the means to challenge the materials on which
the order is made, the materials placed by the authority before the advisory
board and the report of the board based on such materials before government
confirmed the detention.
7. The hearing of the case started before the Constitution Bench on
November 17, 1972 and was heard on that day and again on November 21,
1972 and December 1, 1972. It seems that a contention was then raised as to
the validity of Section 17-A of the Act which provides for a period of detention
for 21 months without consulting an advisory board, which question, the
Bench thought, required reconsideration of the decision in Gepalan V. State of
Madras. The Constitution Bench thought, therefore, that the case should be
referred to a larger bench, and that is how this case has come up before us
for disposal.
8. The Act was passed on July 2, 1971. Its long title shows that
it
was passed to provide for detention for the purpose of maintenance of internal
security and matters connected therewith. Section 3(1) (a) empowers the
Central and the State Governments to make an order detaining a person, if
satisfied with respect to such person that it is necessary to do so with a view
to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to (i) the defence
of India, the relations of India with foreign powers, the security of India,
or (ii) the security of the State, or the maintenance of public order, or (iii)
the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community. Sub-
section (2) authorises the exercise of the power of detention under sub-section
(1) (a) by certain officers named therein, inter alia, district magistrates,
with respect to matters set out in Section 3(1) (a) (ii) and (iii). Section 5
confers power on the appropriate government to remove a person detained
under Section 3 from one place of detention to another whether within or
1. 1950 SCR 88: AIR 1950 SC 27: 1950 SCJ 174.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARRAR U. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
863
outside the State. Section 6 provides that such an order shall not be invalid
on the ground that the concerned person is detained in a jail outside the juris-
diction of that Government or the officer making the order. Section 8 provides
for the communication of grounds for detention to the detenu ordinarily with-
in five days, and in exceptional cases within 15 days from the date of detention.
Section 9 provides for the constitution of advisory boards. Section 10 pro-
vides that, save as otherwise provided for in the Act, the appropriate Govern-
ment shall within 30 days from the date of detention refer every case to the
advisory board. Under Section 11, the advisory board has to give its report
to the Government within ten weeks from the date of detention. Sub-sec-
tion (4) of Section 11 disentities the detenu to appear by any legal practitioner
before the board and makes the proceedings before and the opinion of the
board confidential. Section 12 provides that if the board is of opinion that
there is sufficient reason for the detention, the Government may confirm the
order and continue such detention for such period as it thinks fit. In case
the opinion is that there is no such sufficient cause, the Government has
to revoke the detention order. Section 13 provides that the maximum period
of detention shall be 12 months from the date of detention. Section 17
provides that a foreigner, in respect of whom a detention order is passed, may
be detained without obtaining the opinion of the advisory board for a longer
period than three months, but not exceeding two years in any of the classes of
cases, or under any of the circumstances thereinafter set out in sub-clauses (a)
to (d) of sub-section (1), namely, where a foreigner enters or attempts to
enter India or is found with arms, ammunition or explosives, or where a
foreigner enters or attempts to enter a notified area or is found therein in
breach of Section 3 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961, or where
such a foreigner enters or attempts to enter in an area adjoining the borders
of India specified under Section 139 of the Border Security Forces Act, 1968
without a travel document, or where the Central Government has reason to
believe that such a foreigner commits or is likely to commit an offence
under the Official Secrets Act, 1923. Section 17 thus lays down classes of
cases in or circumstances under which foreigners can be detained for a period
longer than three months without reference to an advisory board.
9. Article 19(1) guarantees the rights of freedom of speech and expres-
sion of assembly, to form associations and unions to move freely throughout
India, to reside and settle in any part of India and to practice any profession,
occupation, trade or business, subject to reasonable restrictions which may be
imposed by law as provided by clauses (2) to (6) thereof. Article 21 guarantees
protection of life and liberty, the deprivation of which is not punishable,
except in accordance with procedure established by law. Article 22, by its
clauses (1) and (2) guarantees that no person can be detained in custody
without his being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for his arrest
and without being furnished with an opportunity to consult and be defended
by a legal practitioner of his choice, and his being produced before the nearest
magistrate within 24 hours from his arrest. No such person can be detained
for more than that period without the authority of a magistrate. Clause (3)
of Article 22, however, makes clauses (1) and (2) inapplicable to a person
arrested and detained under a law providing for preventive detention. But
clause (4) provides that no law providing for preventive detention shall
authorise detention for a period longer than three months unless (a) an
advisory board has reported before the expiration of three months that there
is sufficient cause for such detention, or (b) such person is detained in
accordance with a law made by Parliament under clause (7) (a) and (b).
10. Clause (7) provides that Parliament may by law prescribe: (a) the
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
864
SUPREME COURT CASES
circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases in which, a
person may be detained for a period longer than three months under any
law providing for preventive detention without obtaining the opinion of an
advisory board in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of
clause (4) ; (b) the maximum period for which any person may in any class or
classes of cases be detained under any law providing for preventive detention.
Parliament under Entry 9 of List I of the Seventh Schedule can pass such a
law for reasons connected with defence, foreign relations or the security of
India, and concurrently with State legislatures under Entry 3, List III for
reasons connected with the security of the State, the maintenance of public
order or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community.
11. On December 3, 1971, the President issued a proclamation of
emergency under Article 352 of the Constitution. On December 4, 1971,
Parliament enacted the Defence of India Act, 42 of 1971. The Act was
passed in view of the grave emergency which then existed as proclaimed by
the President, and to provide for special measures to ensure public safety and
interest, the defence of India and civil defence, for trial of certain offences
and for matters connected therewith. Section 2(3) of the Act provided that
it would remain in force during the period of operation of the proclamation
of emergency and for six months thereafter. By Section 6, the Act
introduced amendments in several Acts, one amongst them being the
Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971. Clause (d) of sub-section (6) of
Section 6 amended Section 13 of the Act by adding after the words therein
"from the date of detention", the words and figures "or until the expiry of the
Defence of India Act, 1971, whichever is later". By clause (e) of sub-
section (6) of Section 6, a new section, Section 17-A was inserted in the Act.
The new section reads as follows :
"17-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
provisions of this Act, during the period of operation of the Proclamation
of Emergency issued on the 3rd day of December, 1971, any person
(including a foreigner) in respect of whom an order of detention has
been made under this Act, may be detained without obtaining the
opinion of the Advisory Board for a period longer than three months,
but not exceeding two years from the date of his detention in any of the
following classes of cases or under any of the following circumstances,
namely-
(a) where such person had been detained with a view to prevent-
ing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the
defence of India, relations of India with foreign powers or
the security of India or
(b) where such person had been detained with a view to prevent-
ing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the
security of the State or the maintenance of the public
order.
(2) In the case of any person to whom sub-section (1) applies,
Sections 10 to 13 shall have effect subject to the following modifications,
namely,
(a) in Section 10, for the words 'shall, within thirty days', the
words 'may, at any time prior to but in no case later than
three months before the expiration of two years' shall be
substituted
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR U. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
865
(b) in Section 11,
(i) in sub-section (1) for the words 'from the date of deten-
tion', the words 'from the date on which reference is
made to it' shall be substituted
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words 'the detention of the
person concerned', the words 'the continued
detention of the person concerned' shall be
substituted
(c) in Section 12, for the words 'for the detention', in both the
places where they occur, the words 'for the continued
detention' shall be substituted
(d) in Section 13, for the words 'twelve months', the words
'three years' shall be substituted'.'
12. The new section, Section 17-A effectuates three main changes :
(1) by its non-obstente clause overrides the other provisions of the Act, (2)
a person may be detained in a class or classes of cases or under the circum-
stances set out in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of its sub-section (1) without
obtaining the opinion of an advisory board for a period longer than three
months, but not exceeding two years from the date of detention, that is to
say, no opinion of an advisory board need now be obtained for 21 months
from the date of detention, the first three months of the detention being
permissible without such opinion even before the insertion of Section 17-A;
and (3) the maximum period of detention of such a person can be three
years or until the expiry of the Defence of India Act, 1971 whichever is later.
These changes have been brought about by Parliament exercising power
contained in clause (4) (b) read with clause 7(a) and (b) of Article 22. The
power is exercised in respect of classes of cases and circumstances relating to
all the heads under Entries 9 and 3 of Lists I and III of of the Seventh
Schedule, except one, viz., maintenance of essential supplies and services, in
respect of which Parliament has the power to pass preventive detention laws.
13. Counsel for the petitioner challenged the validity of the provisions
of the Act and the detention order mainly on the following grounds-
(1) that the amendments introduced in the Act by Section 6(6)(d) and
(e) are violative of Article 22(4), (5) and (7)
(2) that Section 10, both prior to and after its amendment,
contravenes Article 22(4)
(3) that Section 6(6)(d) and (e) of the Defence of India Act
contravenes Article 14;
(4) that the maximum period prescribed by the amendment to
Section 13 by Section 6(6) (d) of the Defence of India Act and
by the new Section 17-A(2)(d) is ultra vires the powers of
Parliament since it amounts to punitive and not preventive
detention
(5) that Sections 3, 5, 8, 11 and 12 of the Act are violative of
Articles 14, 19 and 21 on the ground that they are unreason-
able restrictions and are not saved by any of the sub-clauses of
Article 19(1) ; and
(6) that the amendments brought about in them by Section 6(6) (d)
and (c) of the Defence of India Act cannot breathe life in them
as they were non est, by reason only of the subsequent
proclamation of emergency.
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
866
SUPREME COURT CASES
These contentions fall under two parts: (1) relating to the provisions as they
stood before the amendments, and (2) relating to the amendments introduced
in the Act by the Defence of India Act, Section 6(6) (d) and (e). As regards
the first part, the arguments were that
(i the Act was invalid as the restrictions placed thereby on the
fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14,19(1)(a) to (d)
and (g), 21 and 22 were not saved by sub-clauses (2),(3),(4)
and (6) or Article 19(1);
(ii) Section 3 of the Act insofar as it empowers the detention of
a person on subjective satisfaction, and not on any objective
assessment of the truth of allegations made against him, imposes
an unreasonable restriction on his several rights guaranteed by
Article 19(1);
(iii) Section 8, which obliges the authority to furnish to the detenu the
grounds of detention and confers on him the right to make a
representation does not provide for its consideration by an
independent and impartial body, is bad
(iv) Section 12 is bad as government can, contrary to principles of
natural justice, confirm detention for a period longer than
three months on the strength of an advisory board's report
without giving any opportunity to the detenu to know the
contents of such a report and to controvert it ;
(v) the provisions of the Act are discriminatory insofar as they
drastically curtail the liberty of a detenu without his having
safeguards available to a person proceeded against under
Sections 107 to 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
14. As stated above, Section 17-A authorises detention on the ground of
prejudicial acts in relation to :(a) defence of India, relations with foreign
powers and security of India, and (b) security of the State and maintenance
of public order only. Counsel argued that by the use of the words "may be
detained" in the first part of the section an unguided discretion has been
conferred on the detaining authority whether to take action under the more
drastic provisions of this section or under Section 3(1) read with Sections 10
to 13, even though the activities in respect of which action is taken are in
both the cases of the kind set out in (a) and (b) above. In support of this
argument, counsel relied on the decisions of this Court in Northern India
Caterers Private Ltd. V. Punjab, State of M. P. V. Thakur Bharat Singh," S. G.
Faisinghani V. Union of India, Satwant Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam,
Assistant Passport Officer, Government of India, New Delhi.
15. The contention, however, is not borne out by the provisions of
Sections 10 and 17-A(1) and (2). In the first place, Section 10 opens with
the words "save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act". These words
mean that the section would apply only to cases not expressly provided for in
the Act, that is to say, it would not apply to cases falling under Sections 17 and
17-A which deal with cases "otherwise expressly provided" in the Act. In
the second place, the words "may be detained" in Section 17-A(1) go with
the words which follow them, namely, "without obtaining the opinion
2. (1967) 3 SCR 399: AIR 1967 SC
4. (1967) 2 SCR 703 : AIR 1967 SC
1581 : (1968) 1 SCJ 475.
1427 (1967) 2 SCJ 102.
3. (1967) 2 SCR 454: AIR 1967 SC
5. (1967) 3 SCR 525: AIR 1967 SC
1170: (1968) 1 SCJ 173.
1836: (1968) 1 SCJ 178.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR v. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. 3.)
867
of the advisory board" and in "any of the following classes of cases or
under any of the following circumstances-" The words "may be
detained", no doubt, enable the authority to detain a person with-
out obtaining the opinion of an advisory board for a period longer
than three months, but not exceeding two years in the cases therein set out.
The words ''may be detained" thus are words enabling the authority to
detain without a board's opinion for the period there provided for, but are
not words giving a choice to the authority to apply Section 17-A(a) or not.
Even if the operation of Section 17-A and Section 10 side by side were to
result in any difference in the working of the Act, that difference would not
seem to amount to any discrimination by reason of the provision in Sec-
tion 17-A(2) to the effect that in the case of a person to whom sub-section (1)
applies Section 10 shall be read subject to the modification, namely, that for
words "within thirty days", the words "at any time prior to but in no case later
than three months before the expiration of two years" shall be substituted.
In this view, there is no question of discrimination or violation of Article 14
as a result of any such discrimination. This conclusion is clearly borne out
by the combined effect of the non-obstante clause in the commencement of
Section 17-A(1) and the qualifying words "save as otherwise provided in this
Act" in Section 10.
16 But the more important challenge to the validity of Section 17-A
was as regards its incompatibility with and the non-compliance of the
requirements of Article 22(7). The argument was twofold (1) that on a
proper reading of Article 22(4), (5) and (7), clause (7) was an exception to
the rule laid down in clauses (4) and (2) that consequent upon such a
construction of clause (7), that is, as an exception to clause (4), that clause
did not generally empower Parliament to enact a law, on the subjects set
out in Entries 9 and 3 of Lists I and III respectively, without the safeguard
provided by clause (4), namely, of obtaining an opinion of an impartial body,
like the advisory board. On the contrary, that clause authorises Parliament to
enact a detention law in exceptional class or classes of cases and in exceptional
circumstances specifically prescribed by such a law. The contention was
that Section 17-A did not comply with such a requirement of clause (7)
inasmuch as enumeration of the subjects or heads in Section 17-A, except
that with respect to maintenance of essential supplies and services, would not
mean prescribing class or classes of cases and circumstances as provided by
clause (7).
17. Three questions would emerge from this contention: (1) whether
clause (7) is an exception to the rule laid down in clause (4) (2) whether
Parliament's power to enact a detention law is limited by the requirements
laid down in clause (7); and (3) whether setting out verbatim the heads
or subjects or some of them upon which Parliament can enact such a law
would mean compliance of the requirements of clause (7).
18. These very questions were considered in one form or another in
Gopalan V. State of Madres (supra), in connection with Section 12 of the Preven-
tive Detention Act, 1950. The validity of that section was impugned on the
ground of its not having complied with the requirements laid down in
clause (7), firstly, because the section merely enumerated the heads or
subjects, except one, namely, maintenance of essential supplies and services,
upon which under Entries 9 and 3 of Lists I and III respectively Parliament
could enact a detention law and not the class or classes or cases and the
circumstances in which detention, without the board's opinion, could be
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
868
SUPREME COURT CASES
ordered, and secondly, because it failed to comply with both the require-
ments, the word 'and' in that connection being used conjunctively and not
disjunctively. Section 3(1) of that Act authorised the Central or the State
Government to detain a person, (i) if it was satisfied that his detention was
necessary to preventing him from acting prejudicially to (a) to the defence
of India, her relations with foreign powers, the security of India; or (b) the
security of the State or the maintenance of public order, or (c) the
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community, or (ii) with
reference to a foreigner to regulate his continued presence in India, or to
make arrangements for his expulsion from India. Section 9 required the
appropriate Government to place the case of the person detained under
Section 3(1) before the advisory board within six weeks from the date of
detention only in cases: (1) where the order was made on apprehension that
the detenu was likely to act prejudicially to the maintenance of essential
supplies and services, and (2) where it was made against a foreigner under the
two heads stated above. Section 12 of the Act provided that a person could
be detained without obtaining the board's opinion for a period longer than
three months, but not exceeding one year from the date of the detention in
the following classes of cases, or to any of the following circumstances,
namely, where such a person has been detained with a view to preventing
him from acting prejudicially to (a) the defence of India, relations with
foreign powers, the security of India, and (b) the security of the State or the
maintenance of public order. Section 12(2), however, provided for a review
by the appropriate Government in consultation with a. person who is or has
been or is qualified to be appointed a judge of a High Court. Such a provision
for a review and the intercession of an independent and impartial person
reduced to a certain extent the rigour of Section 12(1). No such review,
which would be of a quasi-judicial nature, (see Lakhanpal V. Union of India),
is provided for in the impugned Section 17-A.
19. The majority Court, consisting of Kania, C. J., and Patanjali
Sastri, Mukherjea and Das, JJ., (as they all then were) rejected both the
contentions, holding, firstly, that the word 'and' meant in the context 'or',
which meant that it was enough if Parliament, under Article 22(7)(a),
prescribed either the circumstances or the classes of cases in which a person
might be detained for a period longer than three months without reference
to an advisory board, and secondly, that matters referred to in Section 12
constituted sufficient description of circumstances or classes of case$ so as to
comply with the requirements of Article 22(7)(a), and that therefore, the
section was not open to any constitutional challenge.
20. The minority Court consisting of Fazl Ali and Mahajan, JJ. (as
the latter then was) accepted the petitioner's contention in both its aspects
and held that the word 'and' meant the conjunctive and not the disjunc-
tive, and that therefore, the impugned provision had to specify both the
classes of cases and the circumstances in which detention for a longer period
could be directed without a board's opinion. They also held that the
expressions "class or classes of cases" and "the circumstances" would not
mean merely the heads or the subjects on which a detention law was permis-
sible under clause (7) (a).
21. Kania, C. J., held that the word 'and' in clause (7) (a) meant that
the power of preventive detention beyond three months may be exercised,
either for the circumstances in which or the class or classes of cases in which a
6. (1967) 1 SCR 433: AIR 1967 SC 908 : (1967) 2 SCJ 278.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR U. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
869
person was suspected to be doing the objectional things mentioned in Sec-
tion 12. According to him, "the use of the word 'which' twice in the first
part of the sub-clause read with a comma put after each shows that the
legislature wanted these to be read as disjunctive and not conjunctive".
(126-127) Patanjali Sastri, J. (as he then was) also construed the word 'and'
as meaning that Parliament may prescribe either the circumstances or the
classes of cases or both and held that Section 12 provided both, for, to say
that persons likely to act prejudicially to the defence of India may be
detained beyond three months was at once to prescribe a class of persons
who and the circumstances under which persons could be detained for the
longer period. (216) Mukherjea, J. (as he then was) thought that clause (7) (a)
laid down an enabling provision and Parliament, if it so chose, could pass a
law in terms of the same. "Where an optional power is conferred on certain
authority to perform two separate acts, ordinarily it would not be obligatory
to perform both it may do either if it so likes" (282) Das, J (as he then
was) also felt that Parliament "was not obliged under clause (7) to prescribe
both circumstances and classes, and in any case has in fact and substance
prescribed both, particularly as in some cases circumstances and classes
of
cases may conceiveably coalesce." (330-331) The approach, on the other
hand, of the minority judges was that clause (4) of Article 22 laid down a
general rule and clause (7) was an exception thereto. Read in that light,
clause (7) meant that Parliament could dispense with an advisory board,
but that if it did, it had to prescribe the circumstances and the classes
of cases, and therefore, the word 'and' in that sub-clause could not be read
as 'or'. (175-176; and 235).
22. As regards the expression "the circumstances under which and the
class or classes of cases in which" a person could be detained for a longer
period than three months, Kania, C. J., observed that circumstances ordina-
rily meant events or situations extraneous to the actions of the individual
concerned, while a class of cases meant determinable groups based on the
actions of the individuals with a common aim or idea. He, however, held
that the assumption that Entry 9 in List I and Entry 3 in List III were
incapable of being considered as circumstances or classes of cases was untena-
ble, and therefore, there was no reason why the words of those entries could
not be used in Section 12 so as to comply with the requirement of
clause (7)(a). (127-128) Patanjali Sastri, J., thought that clause (4) and
(7) were independent clauses and could not be corelated so as to characterise
clause (7) as a proviso or exception to clause (4), and that to read them as a
rule and an exception was against their language and structure. He also
thought that clause (7) dealt with preventive detention, a purely protectional
measure, which must necessarily proceed in all cases on suspicion or
anticipation as distinct from proof, (Rex V. Halliday3), and that in
such laws it would be impossible to mention the various circum-
stances or to enumerate various classes of cases exhaustively for which a
person should be detained for more than three months except in broad
outline. (214) According to him, sufficient guidance could be given by
broadly indicating the general nature of the prejudicial activities which a
person is likely to indulge in. He observed that he failed to see why enume-
ration of five out of the six subjects on which a detention law was permissible
under the two entries could not be said to comply with the requirements of
clause (7) (a). "I fail to see", he said, "why this could not be regarded as
a broad classification of cases or a broad description of circumstances where
Parliament considers longer detention to be justifiable". (215)
7. 1917 AC 260 at 275.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
870
SUPREME COURT CASES
23. While Kania, C. J., and Patanjali Sastri, J., were thus satisfied
that the requirement of clause (7)(a) would be complied with by the mere
enumeration of the subjects in the entries or some of them, Das, J., and
Mukherjea, J., do not appear to express their satisfaction in so forthright a
language. This is clear from the following passages:
"It is true that circumstances ordinarily relate to extraneous things,
like riots, commotions, political or communal or some sort of abnormal
situation and it is said that the framers of the Constitution had in mind
some such situation when the advisory board might be done away with.
It is also urged that they had in mind that the more dangerous types of
detenus should be denied the privilege of the advisory board. I am free
to confess that prescription of specific circumstances or a more rigid and
definite specification of classes would have been better and more
desirable. But that is crying for the ideal. The Constitution has not
in terms put any such limitation
(per
Das,
J.,
at
331-332).
"I am extremely doubtful", said Mukherjea, J., "whether the
classification of cases made by Parliament in Section 12 of the Act
really fulfils the object which the Constitution had in view. The basis
of classification has been the apprehended acts of the persons detained
described with reference to the lists as said above. Five out of the six
heads have been taken out and labelled as classes of cases to which the
protection of clause (4) (a) of the article would not be available. It is
against commonsense that all forms of activities connected with these
five items are equally dangerous and merit the same drastic treatment.
The descriptions are very general and there may be acts of various
degrees of intensity and danger under each one of these heads". (281)
Although he thought that Section 12 was not framed with due regard to the
object which the Constitution had in view, he held that he was unable to say
that the section was invalid as being ultra vires the Constitution.
24. Fazl Ali, J., on the other hand, held: (1) that clause (4) laid down
a general rule and clause (7) engrafted an exception to it, and that it was
never intended that Parliament could treat the normal as the abnormal, or
the rule as an exception (2) that the circumstances to be prescribed must be
special and extraordinary and the class or classes of cases must be of the same
nature. The Constitution never contemplated that Parliament should
mechanically reproduce all or most of the categories in the legislative entries
almost verbatim and not to apply its mind to decide in what circumstances
and in what class or classes of cases the advisory board should be
dispensed with; (3) that even if clauses (4) and (7) were treated as alterna-
tives and not as a rule and an exception, a law under clause (7) (a) would be
an exceptionally drastic law and such a law must be intended for an
exceptional situation and not for all the situations which would fall under the
heads in the entries, under which a detention law is permissible. It followed,
therefore, that class or classes of cases and the circumstances must be of a
special nature to require legislation which dispenses with the safeguard of an
advisory board. (173-176) Mahajan, J., (as he then was) held that if
clause (7) were regarded as an independent clause or an alternative to
clause (4), clause (4) would be rendered nugatory and such a construction
would amount to the Constitution saying in one breath that a detention law
cannot provide for detention for a period longer than three months without
reference to an advisory board and in the same breath saying that Parliament,
if it SO chose, can do so in respect of or any of the subjects mentioned in the
lists. If that was so, it would have been wholly unnecessary to provide such
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR U. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
871
a safeguard in the Constitution on a matter which seriously affected personal
liberty. On the construction of clause (7), he held that the Constitution
recognised varying scales of duration of detention with the idea that this
would vary with the nature of the apprehended act, detention for a period
of three months in ordinary cases, detention for a longer period with inter-
vention of a board in more serious cases, and detention for a longer period
than three months without the intercession of a board for still more dangerous
class or classes and for acts committed in grave situations. (238-239)
25. About a month before the Supreme Court delivered its judgment
in Gopalan's case (supra), the High Court of Calcutta in Sitendra Narain Ray
Choudhury V, The Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal,8
Ref 1 of 1950) had decided by a majority that setting out five out of the
six heads in the entries in Section 12 of the 1950 Act was sufficient compliance
of the requirements under clause (4) (b) read with clause (7) (a) of Article 22.
26. Counsel for the petitioner canvassed for the reasoning given by
Fazl Ali and Mahajan, JJ., while the learned Attorney-General contended
that the reasoning in the judgments of the majority judges was in consonance
with clauses (4) and (7) of Article 22. He commended the following proposi-
tions for our acceptance
(1) The Constitution authorises preventive detention and makes
specific provisions for it in Articles 22(4) to (7) ;
(2) The heads in respect of which preventive detention can be ordered
are carefully and deliberately made in Entries 9 and 3 of
Lists 1 and III
(3) The Constitution provides two separate and independent situations
where preventive detention can be directed, namely, the
ubstantive part of clause (4) (a) and clause (4) (b) read with
clause (7) (a) and (b) ;
(4) Except for the enabling power in clause (7) (a) both Parliament
and State legislatures are competent to make preventive
detention laws under Eentry 3 of List III
(5) So far as clause (7) of Article 22 is concerned, it is an enabling
clause and provides for two situations in which a law under
that clause can be made by Parliament alone In other words,
these two situations are independent of each other and are not
conditions precedent.
The learned Attorney-General argued that what clause (7) (o) provides is that
Parliament may prescribe the circumstances or prescribe class or classes of
cases for which a person can be detained for more than three months without
reference to an advisory board. In other words, the clause is an enabling
clause authorising Parliament (1) to prescribe the circumstances under which
a person may be detained for a period longer than three months de hors the
advisory board; and (2) to prescribe the class or classes of cases etc. In this
sense Parliament can do either of the two, and therefore, though clause (7) (a)
uses the word 'and', that word is used in the disjunctive and not in
conjunctive sense. 'Circumstances', according to him, mean the heads or
subjects set out in the two legislative entries, and the expression "class or
classes of cases" means incidents or activities but is not related to individuals
or group or groups of individuals.
8. ILR (1954) I Cal 1.
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
872
SUPREME COURT CASES
27.
The learned Attorney-General finally urged the fact, which all of
us are too well conscious of, that the majority decision in Gopalan's case (supra),
has stood for such a long time that it should not be disturbed unless there are
strong and manifest reasons to do so. Counsel for the Petitioner, on the
other hand, argued that the majority decision was contrary to the scheme
and the terms of Article 22. Since the matter involves the right of personal
liberty, the fact that the decision has held the field should not by itself be a
deterrent against its reconsideration. The principles upon which such
reconsideration would be resorted to have been explained by this Court in
a number of decisions, of which we need remind ourselves of two only, The
Bengal Immunity Co., Ltd. V. State of Bihar,' and The Legal Remembrancer, State of
West Bengal V. The Corporation of Calcutta. The decisions
have
laid
down
that this Court would review its earlier decisions if it is satisfied of its
error or of the baneful effect such a decision would have on the general
interest of the public or if it "is inconsistent with the legal philosophy of
our
Constitution," and that in constitutional matters this Court would do so more
readily than in other branches of law as perpetuation of an error would be
harmful to public interests. Indeed, the inhibition of the doctrine of Starede-
cisis is in this case partly reduced by the fact that despite the majority decision
in Gopalan's case (supra), upholding the validity of the impugned Section 12
of the Act of 1950, and presumably in deference to the minority views, that
section was removed from the Act the very next year by the Preventive
Detention (Amendment) Act, 1951. Further, the major premise in the
majority decision that Article 22 was a self-contained code and that therefore
the provisions of a law permitted by that Article would not have to be
considered in the light of the provisions of Article 19 was disapproved in
R. C. Cooper V. The Union of India Nevertheless, we have to bear in mind
the accepted rule that earlier decisions are not to be upset except upon a
clear compulsion especially when the legislature has acted upon, as perhaps
Parliament did, while enacting the impugned Section 17-A.
28. Article 19(1) in the first instance, guarantees the several freedoms,
well accepted in all democratic systems, subject of course to the power of the
State to impose reasonable restrictions in public interest and public good.
Article 21 then guarantees the equally well accepted safeguard against
arbitrary deprivation of life and personal liberty save in accordance with
procedure established by law, thereby ensuring government by law and not
by men. Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 22 again lay down the well-accepted
rule that a person detained in custody shall be expeditiously informed of the
grounds of his arrest and guarantee his right to the assistance of a legal
practitioner of his choice and the necessity of his having to be produced
before a magistrate thus securing a judicial as against a legislative or an
executive sanction for his arrest.
29. The non-applicability of clauses (1) and (2) provided by clause (3)
of Article 22 in the case of an enemy-alien and a person detained under a
preventive detention law was provided for, as is notorious, as a sequel to the
tragic incidents and the danger to both the internal and external security of
the country following the partition. Clause (3) consequently was inserted
as an exception to the rule laid down in clauses (1) and (2) of Article 22.
There can be no doubt whatsoever that the Constitution-makers accepted
preventive detention as a necessary evil, to be tolerated in a constitutional
9. (1955) 2 SCR 603: AIR 1955 SC
1967 Cri LJ 950.
661 : 1935 SCJ 672.
10. (1967) 2 SCR 170: AIR 1967 SC 997
248.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH BARKAR v. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
873
scheme which, otherwise, guaranteed personal liberty in its well-accepted
form. Having thus recognised the necessity of preventive detention laws,
the Constitution-makers first delineated in clear and precise terms certain
heads or subjects in respect of which only Parliament by itself and concur-
rently with State legislatures was empowered to enact detention laws under
Entries 9 and 3 of Lists I and III respectively. Secondly, they provided
in
clause (4) that no such law shall authorise detention of a person for a period
longer than three months unless (a) an advisory board with persons of judicial
training has reported tha there is sufficient cause for detention; or (b) a
person is detained in accordance with a Parliamentary statute passed under
clause (4) (b) read with clause (7) (a) and (b). These provisions clearly indi-
cate that ordinarily preventive detention can only be for a period of three
months only. If a law, however, provides for detention for a longer period,
it can only do so with the intercession of an impartial, independent body,
viz., an advisory board. Sub-clause (b) of clause (4), however, pro-
vides that a detention for a longer period than three months can be had,
if a person is detained under a law made by Parliament under clause (7)(a)
and (b). Clause (4) thus lays down two situations in which the rule O.
three months detention can be relaxed (1) where the intercession of an
advisory board is provided, and (2) where Parliament has enacted a law
under clause (7) (a) and (b). The proviso to sub-clause (a) of clause (4) lays
down that even where there is intercession of the board, detention cannot be
in any event for more than the maximum period prescribed in the law in
question under clause (7). Reading clause (4) thus in its entirety, the plain
meaning of the language used there is clear. It first lays down the ordinary
rule of detention being only for three months and then provides two excep-
tions to it, viz. (a) detention for a longer period if intercession of an advisory
board is provided for, and (b) where Parliament acts under clause (7)( and
(b), subject in both the cases to the maximum period provided in the law
under consideration. It will be seen that sub-clause (a) of clause (4) is not
restricted to Parliamentary Statutes, while sub-clause (b) is and applies
to an Act passed by Parliament alone.
30. We next go to clause (7). That clause by its sub-clause (a)
provides:
"Parliament may by law prescribe-
(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases
in which, a person may be detained for a period longer
than three months without the opinion of an Advisory
Board in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (b)
of clause (4)."
Two alternative constructions of clause (7)(a) were suggested before us.
The learned Attorney-General submitted that clauses (4) and (7) should.be
read together, and if so read, they mean two independent powers (1) to
make a law providing for longer detention with the provision for an advisory
board, and (2) to make a law providing for a longer detention without an
advisory board. He argued that, therefore, the powers were independent
or alternative and there was no question of clause (7) (a) being an exception
to clause (4) (a). Secondly, he argued that the words "may by law prescribe"
in clause (7) (a) meant that that sub-clause was an enabling provision which
authorised Parliament: (i) to prescribe the circumstances under which, and
(ii) the class or classes of cases in which a person can be detained for a longer
period without the intervention of an advisory board. Since the Constitution
enables Parliament to perform two things, it has the power to do either of
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
874
SUPREME COURT CASES
them and therefore the word 'and' there used has to be read in the context
as having been used in the disjunctive sense. [Maxwell on Interpretation of
Statutes (11th ed.) 229]. On the other hand, the contention on behalf of the
petitioner was that clause (4) (a) laid down a safeguard that there has to be
the intervention of a board in all cases where the law provides for detention
for a period longer than three months except in the case when Parliament
chooses to exercise its power under clause (7) (a).
31. In determining which of these constructions is correct, it is necessary
to consider first the nature and scope of clause (4) (a). Under that clause,
no law, whether passed by Parliament under Entry 9 of List I and or by
Parliament and the State Legislatures under Entry 3 of List III can authorise
longer detention than three months unless it provides for the intercession of
an advisory board. Clause (4) (a) thus lays down a limitation on the legis-
lative power conferred on both the Central and State legislatures while
exercising their power under the said entries. The position then is that
although Parliament and the State Legislatures have the power to make
detention laws under any of the six topics or subjects enumerated in the two
entries, clause (4) (a) first provides that a law passed by either of them cannot
provide detention for a period longer than three months. It next lays down
that if such a law provides detention for a period longer than three months,
it can do so only if it includes the safeguard of the intercession of an advisory
board, which the Constitution was anxious enough to see that it contained
persons who were or would be qualified to hold the position of a High Court
judge.
32. Whereas sub-clause (a) of clause (4) applies to legislation enacted
by both Parliament and the State Legislatures, sub-clause (b) applies only to
laws made by Parliament. Sub-clause (b) provides that the limitation placed
on the power of Parliament under sub-clause (a) is not to apply to a law
made by Parliament under clause (7) (a) and (b). If the theory of alternative
power of Parliament either to enable a law providing for a longer period but
with the intercession of a Board or to enact a law under clause (4) (b) read
with clause (7) (b) providing also for a longer detention but without the
intercession of a board, were accepted clause (4) (a) would be totally
nullified by clause (4) (b) read with clause )(a). In other words, such a
construction would mean that though the constitution-makers laid down a
safeguard against a law providing for a longer duration, they, in the very
same breath, nullified that safeguard by generally empowering Parliament
under clause (4) (b) read with clause (7) (a) to enact laws with longer period
of detention without the intercession of an advisory board. Surely, such an
interpretation which nullifies one part of the same clause while interpreting
its another part has to be avoided. Further, if clause (4) (b) read with
clause (7) (a) was intended to override clause (4) (a) and the safeguard
required in a law providing for detention for a longer period, the Constitution-
makers would have confined clause (4) (a) only to laws made by the State
Legislatures and would not have applied it to Parliament as well. The
Constitution-makers in that case would have simply used in clause (4) (b) and
clause (7) (a) language such as "Nothing contained in clause (4) (a) shall apply
to a law of preventive detention made by Parliament". The acceptance of
the theory of alternative power of Parliament means that whereas State laws
providing longer detention would require the intercession of an advisory
board, laws passed by Parliament, though providing for longer detention,
would not. It is impossible to conceive that such a result could have been
intended by the Constitution-makers, who were careful enough to provide
for the intervention of an impartial and an independent body in laws whether
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR v. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
875
made by Parliament or State Legislatures providing for detention for longer
period than three months. On an analysis of the two clauses 1 ) and (7),
the
conclusion is inescapable that what they provide is (a) that ordinarily,
detention provided by a preventive detention law should not be for a period
longer than three months; (b) that if, however, such a law does provide for
a longer period than three months, it must provide for the intercession of an
advisory body ; and (c) that situations may arise when in certain classes of
cases Parliament alone should be empowered to enact a law which provides
for a longer detention even without the intercession of an advisory board.
On a careful consideration of the language of clauses (4) and (7), the theory
of independent or alternative power of Parliament breaks down and cannot
be accepted, firstly, because the language of the two clauses does not hear
out such a construction, and secondly, because the construction under which
clause (4) (b) read with clause (7)(a) lays down an exception to clause (4) (a)
harmonises both the clauses and brings out the true intention in enacting the
two clauses.
33. The next question is what kind of a law which can provide for a
longer duration of detention and at the same time can dispense with the
advisory board is permissible under clause (7)(a). Such a law has to be one
passed by Parliament and has to be one which prescribes "the circumstances
under which, and the class or classes of cases in which", a person may be
detained for a longer period than the one contemplated by clause (4), i.e.,
three months and without the requirement of an advisory board. The expres-
sion "the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases" evoked
a controversy in Gopalan's case (supra) which resulted in difference of opinion
between the majority and the minority judges. That controversy practically
in the same terms was repeated before us, one side contending that enumera-
tion of the heads or subjects in the two entries on which a law of detention
can be made would sufficiently comply with the requirement of clause (a),
and the other side contending against such a meaning being given to the
aforesaid expression. In deciding that controversy, one broad consideration
at once arises and that is that the circumstances and the classes of cases
mentioned in clause (7) (a) are not limited to any one or more of the subjects
set out in the two entries in respect of which a detention law can be made.
If the contention that enumeration of these subjects would satisfy the
requirement of clause (7) (a) were to be right, a Parliamentary law can
enumerate all the six subjects in the two entries and provide detention for
a longer period for reasons connected with all of them. Both the Preventive
Detention Act, 1950 and the impugned Act excepted the subject of main-
tenance of essential supplies and services, but in the absence of any restrictive
language in that respect in clause (7) (a), they need not have done so. That
means that Parliament can pass a law dispensing with the advisory board
by merely stating therein all the heads or subjects in the two entries. If
that were done, the safeguard provided in clause (4) (a) can be rendered
totally infructuous. If that was the intention, clause (7) (a) need not have
been framed in an elaborate language as has been done and it would have
been sufficient to provide that nothing in clause (4) (a) shall apply to a law
passed by Parliament which sets out the subjects in the entries or any one
or more of them. Why did the Constitution-makers consider it necessary to
provide in clause (7) (a) that the law must prescribe the circumstances and
the classes of cases? The insertion of such an expression coupled with
Parliament being the only body which can enact such a law seems to
suggest that clause (7) (a) is an exception to clause (4) (a) and it being such
an exception, Parliament alone is empowered to pass a law dealing with
exceptional circumstances and exceptional classes of cases. If enumeration
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
876
SUPREME COURT CASES
of the heads in the entries were to mean compliance of prescribing circum-
stances and classes of cases, Parliament would in such a law be dealing with
all situations and all classes of cases from the lowest to the most extraordinary
or abnormal and not with some only requiring a treatment different from
that envisaged by clause (4)(a). In such a case, clause (4) (a) would again
be rendered nugatory, for, Parliament can, by enumerating verbatim the
heads or subjects set out in the entries, do away with the requirement of
clause (4) (a). Could that have been the intention in enacting clause (7) (a) ?
It clearly could not have been so intended for the simple reason that
deprivation of personal liberty even for a period longer than three months,
ordinarily considered to be sufficient, required, according to clause (4)(a), at
least the safeguard of an impartial body against executive action of a
drastic kind.
34. The difficulty in equating enumeration in verbatim of the heads
of legislation permissible under the two entries in Lists I and III with both
the circumstances and the classes of cases is that though the activities of
persons thought necessary for detention may vary in degrees of their impact
depending upon the situations. existing at the time, all of them, irrespective
of their degree of intensity and impact, would be clubbed together so as
to treat them equally in a law under clauses (7) (a). In such a case even
activities, which would not justify the dispensation of the safeguard of an
advisory board as against those which need such dispensation, would be
treated equally, with the result that in respect of all activities and all
situations Parliament would be enabled to dispense with the safeguard of the
intervention on an advisory board. What use would then be of having
clause (4) (a) if its requirement can be avoided by a law which simply sets
out the subjects or some of them from the two entries? As Mahajan, J.,
pointed out in Gopalan's case (supra) the language of clauses (4) and (7) show
that they deal with three distinct situations: (1) where the activities and the
persons likely to perpetrate them, though connected with the subjects in the
entries, are of such a nature and consequence that three months' detention
would meet the situation; (2) where the activities and the persons likely to
perpetrate them are of such nature and consequence that they need
a longer period of detention but with the intercession of an advisory board,
and (3) where the activities and the persons likely to resort to them are of
such a nature and consequence that the situations they create are such as
require not only a longer period of detention, but also the dispensation of
intercession by an advisory body. In times of severe emergency when the
security of the country or part of it is threatened, for instance, not only
detention for a longer period might become necessary but the intervention
of an advisory body to which information of a vital nature would have to
be disclosed might be regarded both as inconsistent with the safety of the
country or the community as well as cumbersome. Such situations may
arise not merely in cases involving the security of the nation or part or parts of
it but may arise in connection with the rest of the subjects in the entries.
Sabotage of essential supplies and services would in given circumstances be
as dangerous as activities involving danger to the security of the State and/
or public order.
35. Circumstances would ordinarily mean situations or events
extraneous to the activities of a concerned person or a group of persons,
such as riots, disorders, tensions, religious, racial, regional or linguistic or
other such commotions, which might by their pre-existence accentuate the
impact of such activities affecting the security of the country or a part of it
or the public order. Class or classes of cases, on the other hand, relate to
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR v. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. F.)
877
group or groups of individuais, who by the nature of their activities fall
under one particular group or groups by their common or similar objective or
objectives. The subjects or heads set out in the legislative entries were
intended to delineate the bounds within which the legislatures can pass
detention laws. The purposes of these entries and of clause (7) (a) are
distinct; that of the entries to lay down the topics in respect of which
legislation can be made and that of clause (7) (a) to distinguish the ordinary
from the exceptional to which only the salutary safeguard provided by
clause (4) (a) would not apply. Mere repetition of the subjects or topics
of legislation from the entries would not mean prescribing either the circum-
stances or the classes of cases to which only, as against the rest of the
individuals and their activities, the safeguard of intercession of an indepen-
dent body would not apply. The law under clause (7) (a) would, as com-
pared to the one to which clause (4) (a) would apply, be a drastic law and
the presumption would be that such a drastic law would apply to exceptional
circumstances and exceptional activities expressly and in precise terms
prescribed.
36. If clause (7) (a) were construed to permit mere enumeration of the
subjects in respect of which there is power to enact preventive detention laws,
all those subjects can be set out verbatim, in which event clause (4) (a) would
be rendered otiose. An act prejudicial to the maintenance of essential
supplies and services, e.g. possession of controlled or rational food articles
in excess of statutory limits, would be equated for treatment with an act
prejudicial to the security of India or of a State. On the other hand, an act
sabotaging, for instance, lines of supplies and communication in times of an
emergency, prejudicial to the maintenance of essential supplies and services
would be equated with an act prejudicial to maintenance of public order in
one locality or affecting a section of the community. Clause (7) (a), thus,
envisages Parliament to apply its mind and prescribe specific situations and
types of cases which require a drastic law dispensing with the intervention
of an advisory board on the ground that such intervention would in such
exceptional circumstances and in cases of dangerous individuals would be
cumbersome or unsafe. Reading clauses (4)(a) and (7) (a) together, it
is
quite clear that intercession of an independent body like the advisory board
was regarded by the Constitution-makers as an essential safeguard against a
jurisdiction primarily based on suspicion and apprehension, which could be
dispensed with in extraordinary circumstances and with regard to dangerous
persons and their apprehended activities specifically prescribed in the law
made under clause (7) (a). In this view, the meaning of the word 'and' in that
clause must be held to have its ordinary conjunctive sense, the context in
that clause also requiring not the opposite but its commonly understood
ense, requiring Parliament to prescribe both the circumstances and the
classes of cases in which only consideration by the board can be dispensed
with.
36. In Gopalan's case (supra) Patanjali Sastri, J., (as he then was)
expressed the view that in such a matter as preventive detention which by
ts nature depended on the likelihood of certain apprehended acts it would
be impossible for Parliament to exhaustively set out the circumstances or
he classes of cases which a law under clause (7) (a) would be made. The
difficulty felt by Patanjali Sastri, J., was sought to be answered by
Fazl Ali, J., (p. 178) by referring to Regulation 18-B of the British Defence
of the Realm Regulations, 1939, as and by way of a concrete illustration
where activities and circumstances of a more dangerous type could be
:lassified from the rest. Regulation 18-B laid down the following classes of
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
878
SUPREME COURT CASES
cases where the Secretary of State could direct preventive detention-
(1) if the Secretary of State has reasonable cause to believe any
person to be of hostile origin or association
(2) if the Secretary of State has reasonable cause to believe any
person to have been recently concerned in acts prejudicial to
the public safety or the defence of the realm or in the prepara-
tion or instigation of such acts
(3) if he has reasonable cause to believe any person to have been or
to be a member of, or to have been or to be active in the
furtherance of the objects of any such organisation mentioned
and
(4) if he has reasonable cause to believe that the recent conduct of
any person for the time being in an area or any words recently
written or spoken by such a person expressing sympathy with
the enemy, indicates or indicate that that person is likely to
assist the enemy.
Mahajan, J., (as he then was), likewise, referred to the classification of the
prejudicial activities set out in Rule 34(6) of the Defence of India Rules,
1939. Such a classification of acts is also to be found in Rule 36(6) of the
Defence of India Rules, 1971. Section 3(2) of the West Bengal (Prevention
of Violent Activities) Act, 19 of 1970, similarly, classifies certain activities as
falling within the expression "acting in any manner prejudicial to the
security of the State or the maintenance of public order". That provision
runs as follows:
"(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression 'acting in
any manner prejudicial to the security of the State or the maintenance
of public order' means-
(a) using, or instigating any person by words, either spoken or
written, or by signs or by visible representations or other-
wise, to use, any lethal weapon-
(i) to promote or propagate any cause or ideology, the
promotion or propagation of which affects, or is likely
to affect, adversely the security of the State or the
maintenance of public order or
(ii) to overthrow or to overawe the Government established
by law in India.
X
X
(b) committing mischief, within the meaning of Section 425 of
the Indian Penal Code, by fire or any explosive substance
on any property of Government or any local authority or
any corporation owned or controlled by Government or
any University or other educational institution or on any
public building, where the commission of such mischief
disturbs, or is likely to disturb, public order; or
(c) causing insult to the Indian National Flag or to any other
object of public veneration, whether by mutilating,
damaging, burning, defiling, destroying or otherwise, or
instigating any person to do so.
(d) committing, or instigating any person to commit, any offence
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SAMBHU NATH SARKAR V. STATE OF W. B. (Shelat, Acting C. J.)
879
punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprison-
ment for a term extending to seven years or more or any
offence under the Arms Act, 1959 or the Explosive Sub-
stances Act, 1908, where the commission of such offence
disturbs, or is likely to disturb, public order; or
(e) in the case of a person referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of
Section 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
committing any offence punishable with imprisonment
where the commission of such offence disturbs, or is likely
to disturb, public order."
These examples are sufficient to dispel fear of any practical difficulty in
prescribing specific circumstances under which and the classes of cases which
need dispensing with the intercession of an advisory board.
38. In our opinion, clause (4) (a) of Article 22 lays down a rule to
which clause (4) (b), read with clause (7) (a) is an exception. Upon that view
clause (7) (a) must be construed as a restriction on Parliament's power of
making preventive detention laws in the sense that it can depart from the
rule laid down in clause (4) (a) and dispense with reference of cases to an
advisory board only by a law which prescribes both the circumstances under
which, and the class or classes of cases in which, a person may be detained
for a period longer than three months without obtaining the opinion of an
advisory board in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of
clause (4). With great respect to the distinguished judges who formed the
majority in Gopalan's case (supra), we are not able to concur in their views on
the construction of clause (4) (b) and clause (7) (a) of Article 22. Section 17-A
of the Act, in our opinion, has failed to comply with the requirement of
clause (7) (a), and has, therefore, to be declared bad as being inconsistent
with that clause.
39. In Gopalan's case (supra) the majority court had held that Article 22
was a self-contained Code and therefore a law of preventive detention did
not have to satisfy the requirements of Articles 19, 14 and 21. The view
of Fazl Ali, J., on the other hand, was that preventive detention was a
direct breach of the right under Article 9(a) (d) and that a law providing
for preventive detention had to be subject to such judicial review as is
obtainable under clause (5) of that Article. In R. C. Cooper V. Union of
India (supra), the aforesaid premise of the majority in Gopalan's case (supra)
was disapproved and therefore it no longer holds the field. Though Cooper's
case (supra) dealt with the inter-relationship of Article 19 and Article 31, the
basic approach to construing the fundamental rights guaranteed in the
different provisions of the Constitution adopted in this case held the major
premise of the majority in Gopalan's case (supra) to be incorrect. In view
of
this constructional position, counsel for the petitioner and for the intervener
made submissions on Section 13 of the Act as amended by Section 6(6) of
the Defence of India Act as being in violation of Article 14 and also on
Sections 3, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the Act even as they stood before the
enactment of Section 6(6)(d) of the Defence of India Act on the ground
that those provisions were not reasonable restrictions and were therefore void
and the subsequent declaration of emergency and the enactment of
Section 6(6) (d) could not breathe life into those provisions which were
already void. Counsel also contended that the maximum period of
detention prescribed by the amended Section 13 and by Section 17-A(2)(d)
did not satisfy Article 22(7)(b) since the period fixed by Parliament therein
is three years or until the expiry of the Defence of India Act, whichever is
TM
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
880
SUPREME COURT CASES
later, an event uncertain as no one can anticipate when the emergency would
be terminated. However, in the view we have taken of Section 17-A of
the Act we need not go into them as in accordance with the practice followed
by this Court we need not decide more than what is necessary. We, there-
fore, do not express any views on the aforesaid contentions raised by counsel.
It is, therefore, enough for us to declare Section 17-A as not having satisfied
the requirements laid down in clause (7) (a) of Article 22 and therefore bad.
40. The consequence is that the petition succeeds and we direct that
the petitioner be released forthwith from his detention.
THE END