this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. v. STATE OF MYSORE
23
20. The matter can be looked at from a different angle. As we have
already indicated, by virtue of Section 5(5) of the Act No. 9 of 1964, the
substituted sub-section (5-A) was deemed to have been in the Mysore General
Sales Tax Act always. The only limit on the power of a Legislature to
create a fiction is that it should not transcend its power by its creation. The
limitation on the power of the Legislature of Mysore in 1964, when it enacted
Act No. 9 of 1964, was that on the sale of declared goods it could not have
imposed sales-tax at a rate higher than that specified in Section 15 of the
Central Sales Tax Act as it stood then. There was no limitation on its power
to impose tax on the turnover of sales of textiles before April 1, 1958, when
they were not declared goods.
21. The question whether after April 1, 1958, when textiles became
declared goods, the rate of tax as provided in the Schedule to the Mysore
General Sales Tax Act, 1957, as amended, would stand modified in view of
Section i5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, does not arise for considera-
tion before us and so we express no opinion on that aspect.
22. We dismiss the appeals with costs. There will be only one hearing
fee.
1972(1) Supreme Court Cases 23
(From Mysore High Court)
[BEFORE S. M. SIKRI C. J. AND J. M. SHELAT, A. N. RAY, I. D. DUA,
S. O. ROY, D. G. PALEKAR AND G. K. MITTER, JJ.]
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. ETC.
Appellents ;
Versus
STATE OF MYSORE AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeals Nos. 2002 to 2005 and 2104 to 2017 of 1968 , decided on
November 1, 1971
Contract-Whether transactions subjected to statutory controls still to be
deemed as contract-Mutual assent and freedom to contract under regulatory
statutes discussed.
Sales Tax-Mysore Sales-tax Act 1957-Sections 2(k) and "sale"-
Meaning-Supply and distribution subjected to statutory control whether still sale
-Restricted freedom of contract-Mutual Assent-Whether present to constitute
sale.
Sales Tax-Mysore Sales Tax Act 1957 (as amended by Mysore Act 11 of 1961)
-Adding serial No. 11-A in the third schedule-Imposition of tax on purchase
of
sugarcane by factories-Myaore Sugarcane (Regulation of Distribution) (Munira-
bad) Order, 1966-Whether valid.
Constitution of India-Article 14-Levy of tax in different States at different
rates-Whether discriminatory
Sales Tax-NatureNeed not be collected by dealer-Liability to pay tax
unaffected by non-collection from purchasers.
+Appeals from the Judgment and Order, dated April 16, 1968, of the Mysore High
Court in Writ Petitions Nos. 2225 of 1967, 29 to 31 of 1968, 2208 of 1967 and 32 to 34 of
1968, respectively.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
24
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
The following points were argued before the Supreme Court:
(a) There was no mutual assent by and between the appellants and the growers
of the sugarcane, and therefore, there was no purchase and sale of sugar-
canc.
(b) The appellants are not dealers within the meaning of Section 2(k) of the
Mysore Sales Tax Act.
(c) The levy of tax on purchase of sugarcane at different rates in different States
was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Held:
(i) Statutory orders regulating the supply and distribution of goods by and
between the parties under Control Orders in a State do not absolutely
impunge on the freedom to enter into contract. Legislative measures or
statutory provisions fixing the price, delivery, supply, restricting areas for
transactions are all witbin the realm of planning economic needs ensuring
production and distribution of essential commodities and basic necessities
of community. The recent trends in these legal rules delimit the variety of
structure of rights and duties which individuals may create by such acts
and transactions. The complexity of modern activities and the consequent
difficulty of providing for every eventuality have shaken fervour for freedom
of contract as there was during the nineteenth century. The economic
environment has changed. The individual freedom is to be reconciled
with adequate performance by the Government of its functions in a highly
organised society. Delimiting areas for transactions or parties or denoting
price for transactions are all within the area of individual freedom of
contract with limited choice by reason of ensuring the greatest good for
the greatest number of achieving proper supply at standard or fair price
to eliminate the evils of hoarding and scarcity on the one hand and availa-
bility on the other.
(Para 38)
(ii) The parties choose the term of delivery. They have choice of obtaining a
supply exceeding 95% of the yield. They can stipulate for a price higher
than the minimum. They can have terms for payment in advance as well
as in cash. A grower may not cultivate and may not have any yield. A
factory may be closed or wound up, and may not buy any sugarcane.
A
factory can reject goods on inspection. A combination of all these features
indicate that the parties entered into agreement with mutual assent
and with volition for transfer of goods in consideration of price.
The transactions amount to sales within the meaning of the yeore
Sales Tax Act.
(Para 44)
(iii) The commodity may be converted into another saleable commodity or it may
be used as an ingredient in the manufacture of a commodity. Therefore,
the factories which bought sugarcane could be said to carry on the business
of buying and selling sugarcane and the factories are dealers within the
meaning of the Mysore Sales Tax Act.
(Para 44)
(iv) It is indisputable that all the factories in Mysore have been treated equally.
Different rates in different States are explicable on various grounds. The
quantity available, the conditions of agriculturists, the number of factories
will all have distinctive features. Therefore, there can be no infraction of
Article 14 of the Constitution.
(Para 45)
(u) The appellants cannot impeach the imposition of levy of sale-tax on the
ground that the appellants could not collect from the purchasers of sugar
the purchase tax paid by the appellants on purchase of sugarcane. (Para 47)
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
25
Diamond Sugar Mills V. State of U. P., (1961) 3 SCR 242: AIR 1961 SC 652 Chitter
Breweries Ltd. V. Inland Revenue Commr., (1927)96 LJKB 735: 43 TLR 476; Kirkness (Inspector
of Taxes) v. John Hudson & Co., 1955 AC 696, referred.
State of Madras V. Gannon Dunkerlay & Co., 1959 SCR 379 : AIR 1958 SC 560; Tata
Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. V. State of Bihar, 1958 SCR 1355 AIR 1958 SC 452, explained.
New India Sugar Mills V Commr. of Sales-tax, Bihar, 1963 Supp 2 SCR 459: AIR 1963
SC 1207, distinguished.
Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd. V. State of Madras, (1968) 1 SCR 479: AIR 1968 SC
478 Andhra Sugars Ltd. V. State of A. P., (1968) 1 SCR 705 AIR 1968 SC 599 ; State of
Rajasthan V. Karam Chand Thapar, (1969)1 SCR 861: AIR 1969 SC 343 Ridge Nominees Ltd. V.
Indian Rev. Commr., 1962 Ch 376 State of A. P. V. Abdul Bakshi, (1964) 7 SCR 664: AIR
1965 SC 531, relied upon.
Appeals dismissed.
Advocates who appeared in this case:
G. Vasantha Pai, G. L. Sanghi, P. C. Bhartari and B. Datta,
for Appellants
and F. B. Dadachanji, O. C. Mathur and Ravinder Narain,
(In all appeals)
Advocates of M/s. J. B Dadachanji & Co.
V. S. Desai, Senior Advocate (S. S. Favali and R. B. Datar,
for Respondents
Advocates, with him)
(In all Appeals).
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Ray, J.-These appeals are by certificate against the judgment and
order, dated April 16, 1968, of the High Court of Mysore dismissing the
applications of the appellants under Article 226 of the Constitution for writs,
orders and directions prohibiting the respondent-State of Mysore and the
Commissioner for Commercial Taxes at Bangalore from levying or taking
proceedings to levy any purchase-tax on purchase of sugarcane from the
grower or from collecting or taking any proceedings for recovery of any such
tax with or without penalty from the appellants. The appellants also asked
for orders, writs and directions for refund of several sums of money collected
as and for purchase-tax.
2. The appellants are the India Sugars and Refineries Ltd. and the
Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. The India Sugars and Refineries Ltd. is situa-
ted at Hospet in Bellary District in Mysore and the Salar Jung Sugar Mills
Ltd. is situated at Munirabad in Raichur District in Mysore.
3. The appellant, the India Sugars and Refineries Ltd. in four applica-
tions now Civil Appeals Nos. 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2014 of 1968 impeached
the demand and collection made against the appellant for large sums of
money as and for purchase-tax and penalty on the purchase of sugarcane
from the growers for the period April 1, 1962 to June 30, 1967 and further
asked for refund of large sum of money collected as purchase-tax.
4. The appellant Salar fung Sugar Mills Ltd. in four applications now
Civil Appeals Nos. 2003, 2004, 2005 and 2002 of 1968 asked for similar orders
and directions in respect of the period July 1, 1963 to June 30, 1967.
5. In the fifties practically all the States in which sugarcane was
grown for the purpose of manufacturing sugar used to levy cess on
sugarcane brought into the premises of sugar factories. This Court in
Diamond Sugar Mills V. State of U. P., 1 held that Section 3 of the U. P.
1. (1961) 3 SCR 242 AIR 1961 SC 652.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
26
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
Sugarcane Cess Act, 1956 which empowered the Governor of the State to
impose cess on entry of sugarcane into the premises of a factory did not fall
within Entry 52 of List II and as there was no entry in the State List or in
the Concurrent List in which the said Act could fall, it was beyond the legis-
lative competence of the State Legislature. The decision of this Court was
given on December 13, 1960. The Sugarcane Cess (Validation) Act, 1961
was passed by Parliament validating the imposition of collection of cess on
sugarcane under several State enactments before the commencement of the
Validation Act of 1961.
6. The Mysore State Legislature imposed tax on purchase of sugarcane
purchased by sugar factories. By Mysore Act No. 11 of 1961 which came
into force on October 1, 1961, sugarcane was included at Serial No. 11-A,
in the Third Schedule to the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957. The relevant
provision in the Mysore Act is as follows
"11-A. Sugarcane
Purchased by the last
fifteen per cent."
dealer in the State
liable to tax under
this Act.
7. As a result of the amendment the appellants were subjected to levy
of tax on purchase of sugarcane.
8. The appellants raised three principal contentions. First, there was
no mutual assent by and between the appellants and the growers of sugar-
cane in regard to supply of sugarcane by the growers and the acceptance
by the factories and therefore there was no purchase and sale of sugarcane.
Secondly, the appellants are not dealers within the meaning of Section 2(k)
of the Mysore Sales Tax Act. Third, the levy of tax on purchase of sugar-
cane at different rates in different States was discriminatory and in violation
of Article 14.
9. In order to appreciate the rival contentions on the first ground as to
whether there was a purchase or sale of sugarcane the relevant legislation
has to be looked into and facts and circumstances have to be ascertained for
finding out as to what the actual transaction was.
10. In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955, the Central Government on August 27, 1955, made
the Sugarcane Control Order, 1955. The Central Government was empo-
wered by Clause 3 of the Sugarcane Control Order, 1955 to fix the minimum
price of sugarcane to be paid by purchasers of sugar. Sale or purchase
of
sugarcane at a price lower than the price fixed under Section 3 was pro-
hibited. The Central Government, however, could fix an additional price
under certain circumstances and contingencies. Clause 4 of the Order of
1955 gave the Government power to prohibit or restrict or otherwise regulate
export of sugarcane from any area for supply to different factories and also
to direct that no jaggery or sugar shall be manufactured from sugarcane
except under and in accordance with the conditions specified in a licence
issued in that behalf.
11. On October 4, 1963, in exercise of the powers conferred by Sec-
tion 3 of the Defence of India Act, 1962 the Central Government introduced
Rule 125-B to the Defence of India Rules. Rule 125-B inter alia stated that
if the Central Government was of opinion that it was necessary or
expedient for regulating or increasing the supply of sugarcane or for securing
the equitable distribution of sugarcane the Central Government could pass
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
(1)sac] SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. v. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, J.)
27
orders to reserve areas where sugarcane was grown for a factory; determine
the quantity of sugarcane which a factory would require for crushing during
a year; fix with respect to any specified sugarcane grower in a reserved area
the quantity or percentage of sugarcane grown by such grower for supply to
the factory concerned; require a factory to enter into an agreement with
the grower to purchase the quantity of sugarcane so determined and further
direct that no sugarcane shall be exported from a reserved area except under
and in accordance with a permit issued by the Central Government.
12. On September 26, 1963 sugar was notified under Rule 125-B of the
Defence of India Rules as a thing essential to the life of the community.
On October 7, 1963 the Central Government directed that the powers
conferred by Rule 125-B of the Defence of India Rules shall be exercised
by the State Government.
13. In this background the Mysore Government on November 14,
1963 in exercise of the powers conferred by Rule 125-B of the Defence
of India Rules brought into existence the Mysore Sugarcane (Regulation of
Supply) Order, 19 In Schedule I of the Order factories were specified and
reserved areas were enumerated in the said Schedule for supply of sugarcane
to the specified factory and the sugarcane growers in the reserved areas were
to `supply 95 per cent. of sugarcane grown to the factory concerned.
Every factory to which supply of sugarcane was to be made was
required to enter into an agreement with each sugarcane grower to purchase
the quantity of sugarcane determined. Purchase of sugarcane by power
crusher or for manufacture of Gur, Shakkar, Gul, jaggery, Rab or Khandasari
sugar was prohibited. Export of sugarcane from a reserved area was also
prohibited except under permit. Contravention of the Mysore Sugarcane
Control Order was made punishable by forfeiture of property in respect of
which there was a contravention. The Mysore Sugarcane Control Order,
1963 specified the India Sugars and Refineries Ltd. as the factory and enu-
merated the areas reserved for supply of sugarcane to the specified factory.
It may be stated here that the Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. was also specified
in the Schedule and it remained specified until 1965 when the Mysore Sugar-
cane Munirabad Order, 1965 was made as specially applicable to Salar Jung
Sugar Mills Ltd.
14. On February 14, 1964, in exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, the Central Government amen-
ded the Sugarcane Control Order, 1955. Clause 4 of the Sugarcane Control
Order, 1955 was amended and substituted by a new clause. The new
Clause 4 conferred powers on the Central Government to reserve areas where
sugarcane was grown for a factory, determine the quantity of sugarcane
which the factory would require for crushing during the year, fix with res-
pect to any specified sugarcane grower in a reserved area the quantity or
percentage of sugarcane grown by such grower which such grower would
supply to the factory concerned; require the sugarcane grower and the
factory to enter into an agreement for supply and purchase of the quantity
of sugarcane so determined. Clause 4 as amended further provided that
every sugarcane grower or factory to whom the order applied would be
bound to supply or purchase the quantity of sugar covered by the agreement
entered into and wilful failure on the part of anyone would constitute a
breach of the provisions of the said Order.
15. On February 20, 1964, in exercise of the powers conferred by
Clause 6 of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955, the Central Government
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
28
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
directed that the powers conferred on the Central Government by Clause 4
of the said Order, shall be exercisable by the State Governments of Andhra
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Maha-
rashtra, Mysore, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal
and the Chief Commissioner of Pondicherry.
16. On January 15, 1965, the Mysore Government in exercise of the
powers conferred by Clause 4 of the Sugarcane Control Order, 1965 as
amended and read with the notification, dated February 20, 1964, made
the Mysore Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply) (Munirabad) Order, 1965.
The Mysore Sugarcane (Munirabad) Order of 1965 in Clause 2(c) defined
factory to mean the premises of the appellant Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd.
at Munirabad. In Schedule I of the Mysore Sugarcane (Regulation of
Supply) (Munirabad) Order, 1965 the area reserved for supply of sugarcane
to the factory was enumerated setting out the names of the villages. The
Mysore Sugarcane Order, 1955 determined the crushing capacity of the appel-
lant Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. to be 1,000 tons per day on the quantity
of sugarcane required by the factory during the crushing season to be
1,50,000 tons. The order further stated that the factory was to secure the
quantity of sugarcane from the area specified in Schedule I and the quantity
of sugarcane to be supplied by each grower was fixed at 95 per cent. of the
sugarcane grown by the grower. Every sugarcane grower and the factory
concerned were required to enter into an agreement to supply or purchase
the quantity of sugarcane determined under Clause 4. Export of sugarcane
from reserved area was prohibited. The Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply)
Order, 1963 in so far as it related to matters provided for in the Mysore
Sugarcane (Munirabad) Order, 1965 was repealed. Thereafter, the Mysore
Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply) Order, 1963 applied to the India Sugars
and Refineries Ltd. and the Mysore Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply)
(Munirabad) Order, 1965 applied to the Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd.
17. On July 16, 1966, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 the Central Government made the
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 and repealed the Sugarcane (Control)
Order, 1955. Under the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 'factory' means
any premises including the precincts thereof in any part of which sugar is ma-
nufactured by vacuum pan process, 'price' means the price or the minimum
price fixed by the Central Government from time to time delivered at the
gate of the factory or sugarcane purchasing centre and 'reserved area' means
any area where sugarcane is grown and reserved for a factory in terms of the
Order. Clause 3 of the 1966 Sugarcane Control Order dealt with minimum
price of sugarcane fixed by the Central Government having regard to (a)
cost of production of sugarcane, (b) the return to the grower from alternative
crops on the general trend of prices of agricultural commodities, (c) availabi-
lity of sugar to the consumer at a fair price, (d) the price at which sugar
produced from sugarcane is sold by producers of sugar, and (e) the recovery
of sugar from sugarcane. Purchase and sale of sugarcane at a price lower
than that fixed was prohibited. The price of sugarcane became payable 14
days from the date of delivery. Additional price for sugarcane could also
be fixed under Clause 5. Under Clause 6 of the Order the Central Govern-
ment could reserve area where sugarcane is grown for the factory having
regard to the crushing capacity of the factory, the availability of sugarcane
in the reserved area and the need for production of sugar and also determine
the quantity of sugarcane required by the factory for crushing during any
year and fix the quantity to be supplied by a grower to the factory. The
grower and the factory were required to enter into an agreement for supply
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
(1)sac]
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. v. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, F.)
29
or purchase of sugarcane. Export of sugarcane from any reserved area was
prohibited.
18. In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause 6 of the Sugarcane
(Control) Order, 1966 the Mysore Sugarcane (Regulation of Distribution)
(Munirabad) Order, 1966 was made by the Government of Mysore repeal-
ing the Mysore Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply) (Munirabad) Order, 1965.
The 1966 Sugarcane (Munirabad) Order was in relation to the appellants
Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. Clause 3 of the Order dealt with the crushing
capacity of the factory being 1,000 tons per day and the quantity of sugar-
cane required for the factory during the year was determined to be 1,50,000
tons. The appellant's factory was to secure the quantity of sugarcane deter-
mined under Clause 3(2) from the areas specified in Schedule I being the
reserved areas for supply of sugarcane to the factory. The sugarcane growers
in the reserved area were to supply 95 per cent. of the sugarcane grown by
them to the factory. The sugarcane grower and the factory were required
to enter into an agreement for supply and purchase of sugarcane.
19. Counsel on behalf of the appellants contended that there was no
sale and purchase of sugarcane by reason of want of mutual assent and
further that the entire transaction was only by operation of statutes, and at
no stage there was any element of freedom to buy or sell. It was said that
under the statutes these consequences emerged. First, the price was fixed.
Secondly, the sugarcane grower was required to deliver sugarcane and the
factory was required to receive supply only from the sugarcane grower in the
reserved area. Thirdly, the quantity of supply by the sugarcane grower,
namely, 95 per cent. of the produce was fixed. Fourthly, the quantity of
sugarcane required by the factory was fixed at 1,50,000 tons a year. Fifthly,
the grower in the reserved area could not export sugarcane to any place or
person outside the area. Sixthly, it was said that entering into agreement
between the grower and the factory for supply and purchase of sugarcane
was under the statute.
20. Counsel for the State on the other hand contended that the tran-
saction was in essence and substance purchase and sale and there was mutual
assent between the parties as to the transactions. It was said that a grower
after he had grown sugarcane at the commencement of the cultivation season
might bargain for a price higher than the minimum price. Again, if the
factory did not agree to pay higher price the grower might not elect to grow
sugarcane or even allow his land to lie fallow. The factory might agree to pay
a price higher than the minimum price in order to provide sufficient induce-
ment to growers for higher yield. Strong reliance was placed by counsel for
the State on the agreement entered into between the growers and the factory
as decisive of purchase and sale. As to the agreement it was said on behalf
of the State that to ensure a well phased supply of sugarcane to the factory
the latter might enter into an agreement with the growers even before they
would plant sugarcane. The dates of delivery were to be agreed upon
between the parties. The growers according to the State might ask for
advance payment of price in cash or in the form of seedlings, fertilisers and
the like. Factories could ask for more than 95 per cent. of the yield.
21. At all relevant times sugarcane was declared to be an essential
commodity. The various orders were made for regulating the supply of
sugarcane to the factories having regard to the crushing capacity of the
factory, the availability of sugarcane in the area and the need for production
of sugarcane. This co-ordination between production and distribution of
TruePrint™ source: Supreme Court Cases,  2024 Eastern Book Company. The text of this version of
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
30
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
sugarcane on the one hand and production and distribution of sugar
on the other hand together as complementary to each other in regard
to the requirements of basic ingredient. The carving out of areas for
production and distribution of sugarcane is necessary to preserve continuity
of supply and to prevent shortage and defective distribution. The regula-
tion of supply of sugarcane by fixing the minimum price is an application of
the principle of utilitarianism which receives the approbation and goodwill
of both the grower and the factory so that the grower is assured of an
economic competitive return and the factory is also assured of not being
scared by soaring and fluctuating price to thwart and impede production
and manufacture of sugar.
22. Counsel for the appellants extracted the famous dictum of Sir
Henry Maine and submitted that the orders in the present case were retro-
grade step and the clock was put back by reversing the historical evolution
from status to contract. What was emphasized by counsel for the appellants
was as follows The various Orders had the- effect of bringing into existence
the status of delivery by the growers and acceptance by the factory of sugar-
cane as a result of the statutory orders and there was no area of bargain.
There was no element of will. There was no aspect of assent. The entire
transaction was nothing but a regimentation of pattern of automatic supply
and acceptance. The grower was bound to deliver. The factory was bound
to accept. Neither party could move out of the apron strings of the statutes.
23. This Court in State of Madras V. Gannon Dunkerlay and Co. (Madras)
Ltd.,' in dealing with the assessment of Gannon Dunkerlay and Co. to sales
tax on the value of the materials used in the execution of building contracts
within the taxable turnover of the company held that the building contract
was one entire and indivisible transaction and there was no separate indivi-
dual sale of the building materials comprised in the construction. It was
said by this Court that in a building contract the agreement between the
parties was that the contractor should construct the building according to the
specifications contained in the agreement and in consideration therefor receive
payment as provided therein, and in such an agreement there was. neither
a contract to sell the materials used in the construction nor did the property
pass therein as movable. The reason why counsel for the appellants relied
on the decision in Gannon Dunkerlay and Co. case (supra) was in support of the
proposition that the word 'sale' occurring in Entry 54 in List II was to be
interpreted in the sense in which the word 'sale' is used in the Indian Sale of
Goods Act. This Court in Gannon Dunkerlay and Co. case (supra), referred to
the meaning of the word 'sale' in various treatises like Blackstone's Commen-
tary, Benjamin on Sale, Halsbury's Laws of England and held relying on the
meaning given by Benjamin on Sale that the four elements required in a
sale were first, that the parties must be competent to contract; secondly,
there should be mutual assent; thirdly, property in the thing is to be trans-
ferred and, fourthly, the price in money is to be paid. Counsel for the
appellants contended that the element of mutual assent was lacking in the
present cases.
24. In M/s. New India Sugar Mills Ltd. V. The Commissioner of Sales Tax,
Bihar, a question arose as to whether the despatches of sugar to the Province
of Madras by dealers in accordance with the directions issued by the
Controller under the Sugar and Sugar Products Control Order, 1946 was
2. 1959 SCR 379: AIR 1958 SC 560.
3. 1963 Supp 2 SCR 459 AIR 1963 SC 1207.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. V. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, J.)
31
liable to be taxed as a sale. This Court in the majority opinion held that
the despatches of sugar under the directions of the Controller were not the
result of any contract of sale because there was no offer by the dealers to the
State and no acceptance by the State. The dealer was held to be compelled
to carry out the directions of the Controller and there was no volition.
Intimation by the State of its requirement of sugar to the Controller or
communication of the allotment order to the dealer assessee was held not to
amount to an offer. The minority view in that case was that there was a sale of
sugar and consent could be express or implied and as long as the parties carried
on trade under controls at fixed price they must be deemed to have agreed
to such a price there must be an implied contract with an implied offer and
an implied acceptance. The decision of this Court in the case of Gannon
Dunkerlay and Co. (supra), was referred to in the New India Sugar Mills case
(supra) for the meaning of the word 'sale'.
25. The majority view in the case of New India Sugar Mills Ltd. (supra),
was on the reasoning that the pre-requisite to a sale was a contract of sale
which was to be had between the parties. The Province of Madras intimated
its requirements to the Controller. The Controller called upon the manufac-
turing units to supply sugar to the Province. It was held that the Controller
did not act as an agent of the Province to purchase goods but that he acted
in exercise of his statutory authority. Therefore, there was no offer by the
Province to purchase sugar and there was no acceptance of offer by the
manufacturer. The ratio was that there was no privity between the manufac-
turer and the Province. The minority view in that case was that there
might be compulsion in both buying and selling but a compelled sale might
nevertheless be a sale. Hidayatullah, J., for the minority view said "the
affairs of the world are very complicated and sales are not always in their
elementary forms. Due to short supply or maldistribution of goods, controls
have to be imposed. There are permits, price controls, rationing and shops
which are licensed. Can it be said that there was no sale because mutuality
is lost on one account or another ? It was not said in the case of Tata Iron
and Steel Co. Ltd. V. The State of Bihar, which was a case of control, that
there was no sale. The entry should be interpreted in a liberal spirit and
not cut down by narrow technical considerations. The entry in other words
should not be shorn of all its content to leave a mere husk of legislative
power. For the purposes of legislation such as on sales tax it is only necessary
to see whether there is a sale express or implied. Such a sale was not found in
forward contracts and in respect of materials used in building contracts.
I
am of opinion that in these transactions there was a sale of sugar for a price
and the tax was payable".
26. Could a company which supplied steel products to various persons
in the State of Madras at the instance of the Steel Controller exercising
powers under the Iron and Steel (Control) of Production and Distribution
Order, 1941 be assessed to sales tax on those transactions. This was the
question in Indian Steel and Wire Products Ltd. V. State of Madras.5 Clause 5
of the Order in the Madras case stated that "no producer or stockholder shall
dispose of or agree to dispose of or export or agree to export from British
India any iron or steel except in accordance with the conditions contained or
incorporated in a general or special written order of the Controller".
Clause 10-B of the Order stated that "the Controller may, by a written order
require any person holding stock of iron and steel, acquired by him otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of Clause 4 to sell the whole or any
4.
1958 SCR 1355 AIR 1958 SC 452.
5. (1968) 1 SCR 479: AIR 1968 SC 478.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
32
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
part of the stock to such person or class of persons and on such terms and
conditions as may be specified in the Order." Clause 4 of the Order
dealt
with acquisition and stated that "no person shall acquire or agree to acquire
any iron or steel from a producer or a stock-holder except under the authority
of and in accordance with the conditions contained or incorporated in a
general or special written order of the Controller". The company contended
that the parties to whom the goods were to be supplied, the price which was
to be paid, the manner in which goods were to be transported and the mode
in which payment was to be made were all determined by the Controller and
therefore the transfers were not sales because of compulsion and lack of agree-
ment. Hegde, J., speaking for the Court referred to the observations in
Cheshire and Fifoot Law of Contract (6th Ed.) at p. 22 and said "Law in-
variably imposed some restrictions on freedom of contract. But due to change
in political outlook and as a result of economic compulsions, the freedom of
contract is now being confined gradually to narrower and narrower limits.
It would be incorrect to contend that because law imposes some restrictions
on freedom to contract, there is no contract at all. So long as mutual assent
is not completely excluded in any dealing, in law it is a contract". The
transactions were held to be sales because the date for supply of goods, the
time for payment and the independent arrangement between the parties for
transport predicated the basis of mutual assent.
27. The Andhra Pradesh Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Pur-
chase) Act, 1961 come up for consideration before this Court in Andhra Sugars
Ltd. and Another, etc. V. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others. A sugar factory
had to buy sugarcane from cane growers in conformity with the directions of
Cane Commissioner. The State Government by notification had power to
tax purchases of sugarcane for use, consumption or sale in a sugar factory.
The sugar factories challenged the validity of the Act empowering the Govern-
ment to tax purchases of sugarcane in those instances because the factories
were compelled to buy cane from the sugarcane growers and they were bound
to enter into agreements in prescribed terms and conditions and to buy sugar-
cane in conformity with instructions issued by the Cane Commissioner under
the Act and areas were declared as the factory zone for supply of cane to a
factory, the factory was bound to purchase quantity of cane grown in that
area and offered for sale as might be determined by the Cane Commissioner,
the cane growers were prohibited from supplying or selling cane to any
factory or person otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the
Schedule. This Court on reading the provisions of the Act and the Rules
framed thereunder found that a cane grower in a factory zone was free to
sell or not to sell his sugarcane to the factory. The contention of the factories
was that if the grower offered to sell the factory was bound to enter into
agreement on prescribed terms and conditions and therefore the factories were
compelled by law to buy cane from the growers and the purchases were not
made under agreements.
28. Bachawat, J., speaking for the Court in the Andhra Sugars case
(supra), said that the decision in the New India Sugar Mills Ltd. case (supra),
was not to be treated as an authority for the proposition that there can be
no contract of sale under compulsion of a statute. The offer of a cane
grower to sell was a free consent and the compulsion of law was not coercion
as defined in Section 15 of the Indian Contract Act, 1892. The agreement
inspite of the compulsion of law was said to be neither void nor voidable. A
cane grower made an offer directly to the factories. The factory accepted it.
6. (1968) 1 SCR 705: AIR 1968 SC 599.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
(1)sca] SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. v. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, F.)
33
The parties signed an agreement. There was privity of contract between
the parties. It was therefore a contract of sale and purchase though the buyer
was obliged to give his assent under compulsion of a statute.
29. In the case of Andhra Sugars Ltd. case (supra), this Court referred to
the whittling down of the laisser faire concept in a Social Welfare State by
emphasising the public interest to control unfair competition and combination.
It was said "The cane-growers scattered in the villages had no real bargain-
ing power. The factory owners or their combines enjoyed a near monopoly
of buying and could dictate their own terms. In this unequal contest
between the cane growers and the factory owners, the law stepped in and
compelled the factory to enter into contracts of purchase of cane offered by
the cane growers on prescribed terms and conditions".
30. The Colliery Control Order, 1945 empowered the Central Govern-
ment to fix price at which coal might be sold by colliery owners. The colliery
owners were prohibited from selling or agreeing to sell or offering to sell coal
at a price different from the price fixed in that behalf. Where a colliery
owner signified to the Deputy Coal Controller (Distribution) n writing his
willingness to sell direct to consumers and an allotment was nade by the
Deputy Controller to a consumer for such direct sale, the coal was to be
delivered to the consumer at the price fixed under Clause 4 of the Order.
The Central Government was authorised to issue from time to time such
directions as it thought fit to any colliery owner regulating the disposal of his
stocks of coal or of the expected output of coal in the colliery during any
period including directions as to the grade, size and quantity of coal which
might be disposed of and persons or class or description of persons to whom
coal should or should not be disposed of The order further provided that
no person shall acquire or purchase any coal from a colliery, and no colliery
owner or his agent shall despatch or agree to despatch or transport any coal
from the colliery except under the authority and in accordance with the
conditions contained in a general or special authority of the Central Govern-
ment.
31. The Colliery Coal Control Order, 1945, came up for consideration
in State of Rajasthan and Another V. Messrs. Karam Chand Thappar and Bros.
Ltd.? Under a contract with Equitable Coal Company, Karam Chand
Thappar and Bros. Ltd. acquired the monopoly right to supply coal on
behalf of the collieries in Rajasthan and sold coal as the agent of the
Equitable Coal Company. Karam Chand Thappar and Bros. entered into
an agreement with the State of Rajasthan to supply coal to the Rajasthan
Government. The Company contended that the supply of coal to the State
of Rajasthan did not constitute sale as the supply was controlled by the
Colliery Control Order, 1945 and even if there was a sale it would be inter-
State sale. It was held that the Colliery Control Order super-imposed upon
the agreement between the parties the rate fixed and the elements necessary
to render turnover from sale of goods liable to sales tax, namely, competency
of parties, mutual assent of the parties, passing of property in the goods
supplied to the purchaser and payment or promise of payment of price were
present in the transaction. In the Rajasthan case (supra) it was noticed that
when the goods supply of which is controlled by statutory orders are delivered
pursuant to contract of sale the principle of the decision in the case of
New India Sugar Mills Ltd. (supra) has no application. Shah, J., speaking
for the Court in the Rajasthan case said that there was an agreement of sale
7. (1969) 1 SCR 861 AIR 1969 SC 343.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
34
SUPKEME COURT CASES
[1972
between the parties competent to contract and in pursuance of the agreement
of sale property in the goods supplied passed to the purchaser for price
agreed to be paid. The transaction was, therefore, one of sale of goods
within the meaning of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act.
32. The U. P. Wheat Procurement (Levy) Order, 1959 was made for
maintaining and securing equitable distribution and availability of wheat at
fair prices. By Clause 3(1) of the Order "every licensed dealer shall sell to
the State Government at the controlled prices 50 per cent. of the wheat held
in stock by him at the commencement of this Order." Again by Clause 3(2)
licensed dealer ''is directed to sell to the State Government 50 per cent. of
wheat purchased by him every day with the date of the commencement of
this Order and until such time as the State Government otherwise directs".
The Order enjoins the licensed dealer to deliver the quantities specified
in sub-clause (1) of Clause 3 either to the Controller or to such other person
as may be authorised by the Controller to take delivery on his behalf. The
Enforcement Officer had power to find out whether the dealer was carrying
out the obligation. The U.P Wheat Procurement Order was challenged
in Messrs. Chitter Mal Narain Das V. Commissioner of Sales Tax,5 on the ground
that there was no contract between the licensed dealer and the State pursuant
to which goods were sold within the meaning of the U. P. Sales Tax Act.
It was held that the obligation to deliver wheat arose out of the statute and
there was no volition of the licensed dealer. The source of the obligations
to deliver the goods and pay for them was said to be not in consensus but in
the statutory order. It was said that the order did not "envisage any
consensual agreement" and it did "not require the State to enter into even an
informal agreement". It was said "On the date of the commencement of the
U. F Wheat Procurement (Levy) Order, upon the licensed dealer was
imposed a liability to deliver half the quantity of wheat on hand, and he
had also to supply to the State Government 50 per cent. of the quantity of
wheat procured or purchased by him every day beginning with the date of
commencement of the Order. If he failed to carry out the obligation he was
liable to be penalised. To ensure that he carried out his obligation his
premises were liable to be searched and his property sequestered (sic). The
Order ignored the volition of the dealer".
33. The meaning of the word 'compulsory sale' came up for considera-
tion in three English decisions. These are Newcastle Breweries Ltd. V.
Inland Revenue Commissioners® and Kirkness (Inspector of Taxes) V. John Hudson
&
Co. Ltd.10 and Ridge Nominess Ltd. V. Inland Revenue Commissioners. 11
34. In Newcastle Breweries Ltd. case (supra), the question was whether a
sum awarded to the company by way of compensation for a quantity of rum
requisitioned by the Admirality under the Defence of the Realm Regula-
tions was a profit arising from its trade or business. The company contended
that it was not, because the compensation represented the compulsory taking
by the Crown of a part of the capital of the company, and, therefore, the
compensation was not a profit from the business. It was held by Rowlatt, J.,
the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords that the cost of the rum was
treated as an out-going of the business and if raw rum had been voluntarily
sold the price would have come into computation of profits and the circum-
stance that the sale was compulsory made no difference.
35.
In the case of John Hudson & Co. Ltd. (supra) the wagons owned by
8.
10.
1955 AC 696.
9. (1927) 96 LJKB 735: 43 TLR 476.
11.
1962 Ch 376.
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
(1)sac]
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. 0. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, J.)
35
the company were on January 1, 1948, under requisition by the Minister of
Transport under the powers contained in Regulation 53 of the Defence
Regulations, 1939. On the same day the property in these wagons was vested
in the British Transport Corporation by virtue of Section 29 of the Transport
Act, 1947. Section 30 of the Transport Act provided compensation to the
owner of the wagons. The amount of compensation determined in accordance
with the provisions of the Transport Act was substantially higher than the
written down value of the wagons for the purpose of income-tax allowances
in respect of wear and tear as appearing in the company's books. On these
facts a balancing charge under Section 17 of the English Income Tax Act,
1945, was made on the company. The amount represented the excess of the
original cost over the written down value. The company appealed against
the balancing charge to the Commissioners for the Special Purposes of the
Income-tax Act who determined the question in favour of the Crown.
Upjohn, J., reversed their determination. The Court of Appeal and the
House of Lords upheld his decision.
36. The decision in the case of John Hudson & Co. Ltd. (supra), turned
on the meaning of the provisions of Section 17 of the English Income-tax
Act, 1945, as to whether the company's wagons were sold within the meaning
of that section. Viscount Simonds, L. C. said that the wagons were not
sold and it would be a grave misuse of language to say that they were sold.
under the English Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845, central or local
authorities have powers of compulsory acquisition and these powers are com-
monly referred to as powers of compulsory purchase and the transaction
is some time referred to as a compulsory sale. The word 'sale' in the
English Income-tax Act without some context to aid the inclusion
of compulsory sale within the meaning of the word 'sale' in the Income-
tax Act was held not to apply to include a case of compulsory acquisition.
The operation of the Transport Act in that case was held to be different from
that of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845, because the Transport
Act did not have the elements which in some degree assimilate a compulsory
sale to a sale simpliciter. These compulsory sales under the English Lands
Clauses Consolidation Act place the parties in a position to negotiate and
apart from the power of compulsion in the background they were like an
ordinary vendor and purchaser.
37. The consensus between vendor and purchaser which is involved
in the natural meaning of the word 'sale' came up for consideration in the
recent decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of Ridge Nominees Ltd.
(supra), Ridge Securities made an offer to purchase from the stockholders
of another company Gresham the whole of the stock of that company. The
offer was conditional upon acceptance before a certain date. A document of
transfer of 440 shares in Gresham was made by Mrs. Rita Bell in considera-
tion of £ 891 paid by Ridge. The question was whether the document was
properly described as a conveyance or transfer on sale of any property within
the meaning of the English Stamp Act, 1891. Section 209 of the English
Companies Act, 1948, conferred power on an agent to execute an instrument
of transfer on a dissenting shareholder's behalf. The offer made by Ridge
Company to purchase shares in Gresham company was conditional upon
acceptance by the holders of not less than 90 per cent. of the issued capital
of Gresham. In fact, more than 90 per cent. in value did accept the offer.
Mrs. Rita Bell was one of those who did not think it fit to accept it. There-
upon Ridge Company invoked powers and provisions of Section 209 of the
English Companies Act. The transfer of the shares of Mrs. Bell was
not executed by her but pursuant to the powers given by Section 209
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
36
SUFREME COURT CASES
[1972
of the English Companies Act by some one on her behalf. Mrs. Bell was not
an assenting but a dissenting shareholder. Her shares were transferred by
virtue of the powers given to the transferee company by the Act. It is in
that context that the question was whether the conveyance or transfer was
sale of any property. The contention was that there could not be a sale
because the essential element of mutual assent was absent. The Court of
Appeal held that the instrument must be regarded as a transfer of sale.
Lord Evershed, M. R. said that by the machinery created by the Companies
Act and the statutory authority given by the Act to the agent to execute
transfer on Mrs. Bell's behalf "it has in truth brought into being that which
ex facie in all its essential characteristics and effect is, and becomes, a
transfer on sale of Mrs. Bell's stock". Danckwerts, L. J. in the same case
said about the transfer of shares. "It seems to me that a sale may not
always require the consensual element mentioned in Benjamin on Sale,
8th Edn. p. 2, and that there may, in truth, be a compulsory sale of property
with which the owner is compelled to part for a price against his will. The
effect of the statute in such a case is to say that the absence of the transferor's
consent does not matter and the sale is to proceed without it".
38. These decisions establish that statutory orders regulating the supply
and distribution of goods by and between the parties under Control Orders
in a State do not absolutely impinge on the freedom to enter into contract.
Legislative measures or statutory provisions fixing the price, delivery, supply,
restricting areas for transactions are all within the realm of planning
economic needs ensuring production and distribution of essential commodities
and basic necessities of community. The recent trends in these legal rules
delimit the variety of structure of rights and duties which individuals may
create by such acts and transactions. The complexity of modern activities
and the consequent difficulty of providing for every eventuality have
shaken fervour for freedom of contract as there was during the nineteenth
century. The economic environment has changed. The individual freedom
is to be reconciled with adequate performance by the Government of its
functions in a highly organised society. Delimiting areas for transactions
or parties or denoting price for transactions are all within the area of
individual freedom of contract with limited choice by reason of ensuring
the greatest good for the greatest number by achieving proper supply at
standard or fair price to eliminate the evils of hoarding and scarcity on the
one hand and availability on the other.
39. In the present case, the parties are certain. The parties are
defined, namely, that the sugarcane grower is delivering and supplying and
the factory is accepting the goods. The property in the goods is transferred
from the grower to the factory. The transaction is not a gift nor an
exchange nor a hypothecation nor a loan. There is consideration for the
transfer. Counsel for the appellants contended that there was no mutual
assent because the price was fixed, the quantity for supply and delivery was
determined, the parties had no choice to go to strangers or outsiders in the
open market. In Benjamin on Sale, 8th Ed. at page 68 the law as to
mutual assent is stated as this. "The assent need not as a general rule be
express. It may be implied from their language or from their conduct;
may be signified by a nod or a gesture, or may even be inferred from silence
in certain cases; as if a customer takes up wares off a tradesman's counter
and carried them away and nothing is said on other side, the law presumes
an agreement of sale for the reasonable worth of the goods. But the assent
must in order to constitute a valid contract, be mutual and intended to bind
both sides. It must also co-exist on the same amount of time". The assent
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. V. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, J.)
37
must be mutual and bind both sides. The proposal by one man must be
accepted by another and this acceptance must be unconditional. The
assent must be communicated to the other party or some act must be done
which the other party has expressly or impliedly offered to treat as a com-
munication. Judged by these standards in the forefront exists the agreement
between the parties in the present case. The statutory orders required
parties to enter into agreement. The parties did in fact enter into agree-
ments. The agreement contains intrinsic evidence that the growers agreed
to sell and the factory agreed to buy goods.
40. Counsel for the appellants contended that mutual assent in the
present case would not be free but compulsory and the parties would have no
choice in the matter and therefore there would be no sale. The most
common place illustration of supply and acceptance of goods resulting in
sale under the present conditions is furnished by the present system of sale
of rationed goods. There are ration shops in particular areas. Ration
cards are distributed to residents in that area. The owners of these cards
are required to go to the particular shop mentioned in the card for supply of
rationed articles. Price is also regulated by the Rationing Order. There-
fore the parties, the price, the shop, the supply and the acceptance of goods
in accordance with the provisions of the Rationing Order are all regulated.
When one presents a ration card to the shop and the shop owner delivers
the rationed articles and the holder of the ration cards accepts them and
pays the price, there is indisputably a sale. Counsel for the appellants said
that choice was left with the ration card-holder to go to the shop or not to
go there at all but the parties had no choice in the present case whether
the factory would or would not enter into agreement. In the present case
both the factory and the sugarcane grower have some choice in the matter.
The factory owner and the grower might not have occasion to enter into
agreements at all. The factory may be closed. The grower may not grow
sugarcane. The grower might not tender the goods. The factory owners
might not accept delivery. The choice of the parties is there as in ordinary
sales. The position of the factory owner vis-a-vis the sugarcane grower
is either that factory will be shut and closed down or the factory will have to
be kept running and for that supply will have to be taken from the sugarcane
growers. This may be comparable to undertaking a journey by rail or air
with no choice as to the medium.
41. The agreement between the factory owner and the sugarcane
grower furnishes the guide to ascertain the real character of the transaction
between the parties. These are the features. The factory agrees to buy.
The grower agrees to sell. It is true that 95 per cent. of the sugarcane
will be sold. The parties have the choice to increase the quantity above
95 per cent. The quantity to be bought and sold is cultivated or to be
cultivated by the grower. The delivery is to be at the factory. Delivery
will be in such lots, on such dates and at such time as shall be agreed
upon. The mode of delivery may also be within the scope of agreement.
The price will be the controlled price. The grower can bargain for higher
price. The sugarcane grower can ask for payment in advance. Payment may
be in cash or in kind. The sugarcane will be accepted after inspection. There
is scope for rejection of goods. Various columns in the agreement indicate
the villages where sugarcane is to be cultivated, the names of the varieties
of sugarcane to be cultivated. The last two columns are estimated quantity
offered to be delivered and the period of delivery. All these features
indicate with unerring accuracy that there is offer, inspection, and appropria-
tion of goods to the contract. The goods will be accepted by the factory
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
38
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
after inspection and price will be paid on delivery. The mutual assent is not
only implicit but is also explicit.
42. Another feature in the agreements in the present case is that the
goods are unascertained. The agreements speak of inspection of
goods. Inspection and appropriation of unascertained goods indicates
not only freedom in the formation but also in the performance
of contracts. Unascertained goods are distinct from specific or ascertained
goods in the sense that future goods include goods not yet in existence or
goods in existence but not yet acquired by the seller. It is safe to say that
future goods for purposes of passing of property can never be specific.
Future goods if and when sufficiently identified might be specific goods.
Unascertained goods are not defined by the Sale of Goods Act but they
fall into three main categories. First, goods to be manufactured or grown
by the seller which are necessarily future goods. Second, generic goods,
for example, 100 tons of sugarcane or the like which must also be future
goods where the seller does not own sufficient goods of the description in
question to appropriate to the contract. The third category is an unidenti-
fied part of a specific whole, for example, 1,000 tons of sugarcane out of a
particular lot of 5,000 tons of sugarcane. In the present case, sugarcane
was to be grown by the grower. Delivery was to be made thereafter.
The goods were to be inspected and then paid for. Therefore, in the present
case, it would be a sale of unascertained goods. Under Section 23 of the
Indian Sale of Goods Act when there is a contract of sale of unascertained
goods no property in the goods is transferred to the buyer unless and until the
goods are ascertained. Then again, under Section 23 of the Indian Sale
of Goods Act where there is a contract for the sale of unascertained or future
goods by description when the goods of that description and in a deliverable
state are unconditionally appropriated to the contract, either by the seller
with the assent of the seller, the property in the goods thereupon passes to
the buyer. It is this unconditional appropriation which will pass the property.
Again, under Section 23 of the Indian Sale of Goods Act where
the seller delivers the goods ,to the buyer or to a carrier or other
bailee for the purpose of transmission to the buyer and does not reserve
the right of disposal he is deemed to have unconditionally appropriated
the goods to the contract. Therefore, in the present case the goods were
to be ascertained by identification, delivery, inspection and unconditional
appropriation.
43. These foregoing features indicate that the transactions in the
present case constituted sale within the meaning of sale in Section 2(+)
of
the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957. Sale is defined in Section 2(t) as
follows:
'sale' with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions
means every transfer of the property in goods by one person to another
in the course of trade or business for cash or for deferred payment or
other valuable consideration, but does not include a mortgage,
hypothecation, charge or pledge."
44. The Control Orders are to be kept in the forefront for appreciating
the true character of transactions. It is apparent that the area is restricted.
The parties are determined by the order. The minimum price is fixed.
The minimum quantity of supply is also regulated. These features do
not complete the picture. The entire transaction indicates that the parties
agree to buy and sell. The parties choose the terms of delivery. The
parties have choice with regard to obtaining supply of a quantity higher
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
SALAR JUNG SUGAR MILLS LTD. v. STATE OF MYSORE (Ray, J.)
39
than 95 per cent. of the yield. The parties can stipulate for a price higher
than the minimum. The parties can have terms for payment in advance
as well as in cash. A grower may not cultivate and there may not be any
yield. A factory may be closed or wound up and may not buy sugarcane.
A factory can reject goods after inspection. The combination of all
these features indicates that the parties entered into agreement with mutual
assent and with volition for transfer of goods in consideration of price.
Transactions of purchase and sale may be regulated by schemes and may
be liable to restrictions as to the manner or mode of sale. Such restrictions
may become necessary by reason of co-ordination between production and
distribution in planning the economy of the country. The contention of
the appellants fails. The transactions amount to sales within the meaning
of the Mysore Sales Tax Act.
45. The second contention on behalf of the appellants was that the
factories were not dealers within the meaning of the Mysore Sales Tax Act.
Dealer is defined in Section 2(k) of the Mysore Sales Tax Act of 1957
as follows
'Dealer' means any person who carries on the business of buying,
selling, supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether
for cash or for deferred payment or for commission remuneration or
other valuable consideration and includes-
(i) X
X
(ii) X
X
X
(iii) X
X
(iv)
X
(o) a person who sells goods produced by him by manufacture or
otherwise."
It was contended that the factory was a manufacturer of sugar and paid
excise duty on sugar to the Central Government and sugar was item 34 of
the Second Schedule and therefore no tax was payable by a dealer who is
a manufacturer of sugar. The purchase of sugarcane was said to be for
manufacture of sugar and not for resale of sugarcane and therefore the
tax which is levied on the dealer will not fall on the appellants on the
purchase of sugarcane. The High Court held relying on the decision of
this Court in State of Andhra Pradesh V. Abdul Bakshi and Bros., 12 that if a person
carries on the business of buying or selling a commodity it is not necessary
that he should sell the same commodity to become a dealer. The com-
modity may be converted into another saleable commodity or it may be
used as an ingredient in the manufacture of a commodity. Therefore,
the factories which bought sugarcane could be said to carry on the business
of buying and selling sugarcane and the factories are dealer within the
meaning of the Mysore Sales Tax Act.
46. The third contention on behalf of the appellants was that the
levy of 15 per cent. purchase tax on the sugarcane on the appellants was
in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as the rates were
different in different States. It is an indisputable feature in the present
appeals that all the factories in Mysore have been treated equally. Different
rates in different States are explicable on various grounds. The quantity
available, the conditions of agriculturists, the number of factories will
12. (1964) 7 SCR 664 : AIR 1965 SC 531.
®
this judgment is protected by the law declared by the Supreme Court in Eastern Book Company V. D.B.
40
SUPREME COURT CASES
[1972
all have distinctive features. Therefore, there can be no infraction of
Article 14 of the Constitution.
47. It was also said on behalf of the appellants that tax on purchase
of sugarcane could not be collected by the appellants as tax. The High
Court relying on the decision in Tata Iron and Steel Company V. State of Bihar,
said that the mere circumstances that the appellant could not collect from
the purchasers of the sugar the amount the factories had paid as purchase-
tax on sugarcane would not alter the nature or quality of tax. This Court
in the case of Tata Iron and Steel Company (supra) said "This is further
made clear by the fact that the registered dealer need not, if he so pleases or
chooses, collect the tax from the purchaser and sometimes by reason of compe-
tition with other registered dealers he may find it profitable to sell his goods
and to retain his old customers even at the sacrifice of the sales-tax. This
also makes it clear that the sales-tax need not be passed on to the purchasers
and this fact does not alter the real nature of the tax which, by the express
provisions of the law, is cast upon the seller" It therefore follows that the
appellants cannot impeach the imposition or levy of sales-tax on the ground
that the appellants could not collect from the purchasers of sugar the purchase-
tax paid by the appellants on purchase of sugarcane.
48. Another contention was raised on behalf of the appellants that
the authorities had not taken into account the varying rates of tax on
purchase of sugarcane levied by differet States while computing the cost
of production of the sugar in different States and fixing different selling
prices of sugar. The High Court rightly did not entertain this contention
because there were no materials to support the contention.
49. For these reasons, the appeals fail and are dismissed with costs.
There will be one set of hearing fees.
1972(1) Supreme Court Cases 40
(From Labour Court, Delhi)
[BEFORE C. A. VAIDIALINGAM AND P. JAGANMOHAN REDDY, JJ.]
MANAGEMENT OF THE FEDERATION OF INDIAN
CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
Appellant;
Versus
THEIR WORKMAN, SHRI R. K. MITTAL
Respondent.
Civil Appeal No. 244 of 1967t, decided on November 15, 1971
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)-Section 2(k), 2(j), 2(g) and 2(s)-
Principles applicable for determining whether the activities of an undertaking are
such as would justify it being treated as an "industry" for the purposes of an indus-
trial dispute under the Act-Reliance cannot bs placed on cases under Income-tax
Act relating to exemption of charitable institutions with commercial activities-
Charitable institutions with commercial activities can fall within the definition of
industry'-Exemptions to charitable institutions under Section 32(5) of Payment
of Bonus Act not relevant to construction of Section 2(j).
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)-Section 2(j)-Whether the Federa-
tion of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry is an "Industry"-Whether
13. 1958 SCR 1355: AIR 1958 SC 4520.
Appeal by Special leave from the Award, dated November 22, 1966, of the Labour
Court, Delhi in Industrial Dispute No. 33 of 1966.