(1964) 2 SCJ 51
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE B.P. SINHA, C.J. AND S.K. DAS, P.B. GAJENDRAGADKAR, A.K.
SARKAR, K.N. WANCHOO, M. HIDAYATULLAH, K.C. DAS GUPTA, J.C. SHAH AND
N. RAJAGOPALA AYYANGAR, JJ.)
Sea Customs Act, S. 20(2), Re
Special Reference No. 1 of 1962*, decided on May 10, 1963
Advocates who appeared in this case:
C.K. Daphtary, Solicitor-General of India, H.N. Sanyal, Additional
Solicitor-General of India (G.N. Joshi and R.H. Dhebar, Advocates, with
them), for Union of India;
D. Narasa Raju, Advocate-General for the State of Andhra Pradesh
(T.V.R. Tatachari, Advocate, with him), for State of Andhra Pradesh;
B.C. Barua, Advocate-General for the State of Assam (Naunit Lal,
Advocate, with him), for State of Assam;
Mahabin Prasad, Advocate-General for the State of Bihar (S.P. Varma,
Advocate, with him), for State of Bihar;
A.V. Viswanatha Sastri, Senior Advocate (J.B. Dadachanji, O.C.
Mathur and Ravinder Narain, Advocates of J.B. Dadachanji and Co., with
him), for State of Maharashtra;
J.M. Thakore, Advocate-General for the State of Gujarat (K.L. Hathi,
Advocate, with him), for State of Gujarat;
D. Sahu, Advocate-General for the State of Orissa (K.L. Hathi,
Advocate, with him), for State of Orissa;
V.P. Gopalan Nambyar, Advocate-General for the State of Kerala
(Sardar Bahadur, Advocate, with him), for State of Kerala;
A Ranganadham Chetty, Senior Advocate A.V. Rangam, Advocate,
with him), for State of Madras;
G.R. Ethirajulu Naidu, Advocate-General for the State of Mysore (R.
Gopalakrishnan, Advocate, with him), for State of Mysore;
S.M. Sikri, Advocate-General for the State of Punjab (S.K. Kapur and
Gopal Singh, Advocates, with him), for State of Punjab;
G.C. Kasliwal, Advocate-General for the State of Rajasthan (S.K.
Kapur, V.N. Sethi and K.K. Jain, Advocates, with him), for State of
Rajasthan;
B. Sen, Senior Advocate (M.K. Banerjee and P.K. Bose, Advocates,
with him), for State of West Bengal;
M. Adhikari, Advocate-General for the State of Madhya Pradesh (I.N.
Shroff, Advocate, with him), for State of Madhya Pradesh;
K.S. Hajela, Senior Advocate (C.P. Lal Advocate, with him), for State
of Uttar Pradesh.
The Opinion of the Court was delivered by
B.P. SINHA, C.J. The main question, on this reference by the
President of India under Article 143(1) of the Constitution, depends
upon the true scope and interpretation of Article 289 of the Constitution
relating to the immunity of States from Union taxation. On receipt of
the reference notices were issued to the Attorney-General of India and
to the Advocates-General of the States. In pursuance of that the case of
the Union Government has been placed before us by the learned
Solicitor-General and that of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Maharashtra, Mysore,
Orissa, Punjab and West Bengal was presented to us by their respective
counsel. On the date the hearing of this case started, an application
was made on behalf of the State of Uttar Pradesh also to be heard, but
no statement of case had been put in on behalf of that State, and as no
grounds were made out for condoning the delay, we refused the
application.
The reference is in these terms
"Whereas sub-section (i) of Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act,
1878 (Act 8 of 1878), provides for the levy of customs duties on
goods imported or exported by sea to the extent and in the manner
specified in the said sub-section;
And whereas sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the said Act applies
the provisions of sub-section (1) of that section in respect of all
goods belonging to the Government of State and used for the
purposes of a trade or business of any, kind carried on by, or on
behalf of, that Government, or of any operations connected with such
trade or business as they apply in respect of goods not belonging to
any Government;
And whereas it is proposed to amend sub-section (2) of Section
20 of the said Act so as to apply the provisions sub-section (i) of
that section in respect of all goods belonging to the Government of a
State; irrespective of whether such good are used or not for the
purposes set out in the said sub-section (2) as at present in force;
And, whereas sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Central Excises and
Salt Act, 1944 (Act 1 of 1944), provides for the levy of duties of
excise on all excisable goods other than salt which are produced or
manufactured in India and a duty on salt manufactured in, or
imported by land into, any part of India in the manner specified in
the said sub-section;
And whereas sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 of the said Act applies
the provisions of sub-section (1) of that section in respect of all
excisable goods other than salt which are produced or manufactured
in India by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State and used for
the purposes of a trade or business of any kind carried on by or on
behalf of, that Government, or of any operations connected with such
trade or business as they apply in respect of goods which are not
produced or manufactured by any Government;
And whereas it is proposed to amend sub-section (1-A) of Section
3 of the said Act so as to apply the provisions of sub-section (1) of
that section in respect of all excisable goods other than salt which
are produced or manufactured in India by, or on behalf of, the
Government of a State, irrespective of whether such goods are used
or not for the purposes set out in the said sub-section (1-A) as at
present in force;
And whereas it is proposed to introduce in Parliament a Bill, the
draft of which is annexed hereto and marked 'Annexure', to amend
for the purpose aforesaid sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Sea
Customs Act, 1878 (Act 8 of 1878) and sub-section (1-A) of Section
3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, (Act 1 of 1944);
And whereas Governments of certain States have expressed the
view that the amendments as proposed in the said draft of the Bill
may not be constitutionally valid as the provisions of Article 289 read
with the definitions of "taxation" and 'tax' in clause (28) of Article
366 of the Constitution of India preclude the Union from imposing or
authorising the imposition of any tax, including customs duties and
excise duties, or in relation to any property of a State except to the
extent permitted by clause (2) read with clause (3) of the said
Article 289;
And whereas the Government of India is on the other hand
inclined to the view-
(i) that the exemption from Union taxation granted by clause
(1) of Article 289 is restricted to Union taxes on the property of a
State and does not extend to Union taxes in relation to the
property of a State and that clauses (2) and (3) of that article
have also to be construed accordingly;
(ii) that customs duties are taxes on the import or export of
property and not taxes on property as such and further that excise
duties are taxes on the production or manufacture of property and
not taxes on property as such; and
(iii) that the Union is not precluded by the provisions of Article
289 of the Constitution of India from imposing or authorising the
imposition of customs duties on the import or export of the
property of a State and other Union taxes on the propertv of a
State which are not taxes on property as such;
And whereas doubts have arisen as to the true interpretation and
scope of Article 289 of the Constitution of India and, in particular, as
to the constitutional validity of the amendments to the Sea Customs
Act, 1878 (Act 8 of 1878) and the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
(Act 1 of 1944) as proposed in the aforesaid draft Bill;
And whereas in view of what has been hereinbefore stated, it
appears to me that the questions of law hereinafter set out have
arisen and are of such a nature and are of such public importance
that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court of
India thereon;
Now, therefore, in excercise of the powers conferred upon me by
clause (1) of Article 143 of the Constitution of India, I, Rajendra
Prasad, President of India, hereby refer the following question to the
Supreme Court of India for consideration and report of its opinion
thereon;
(1) Do the provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution
preclude the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition
of, customs duties on the import or export of the property of
a
State used for purposes other than those specified in clause (2) of
that article?
(2) Do the provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution of India
preclude the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition
of, excise duties on the production or manufacture in India of the
property of a State used for purposes other than those specified in
clause (2) of that article?
(3) Will sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act,
1878 (Act 8 of 1878) and sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (Act 1 of 1944) as amended by
the Bill set out in the Annexure be inconsistent with the
provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution of India?"
New Delhi sd
Dated 19-4-1962 Rajendra Prasad
President of India."
Annexure
DRAFT BILL
A
Bill
Further to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and the Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the th year of the Republic of
India as follows:
"1. Short title.- This Act may be called the Sea Customs and
Central Excises (Amendment) Act, 19,-
2. Amendment of Section 20, Act 8 of 1878.- In Section 20 of
the Sea Customs Act, 1878 for sub-section (2) the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:-
'(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of
all goods belonging to the Government as they apply in respect of
goods not belonging to the Government.'
3. Amendment of Section 3, Act 1 of 1944.- In Section 3 of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, for sub-section (1-A) the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
(1-A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect
of all excisable goods other than salt which are produced or
manufactured in India by, or on behalf of, the Government as
they apply in respect of goods which are not produced or
manufactured by the Government.'"
2. It has been argued on behalf of the Union of India that clause (1)
of Article 289 properly interpreted would mean that the immunity from
taxation granted by the Constitution to the States is only in respect of
tax on property and on income, and that the immunity does not extend
to all taxes; the clause should not be interpreted so as to include
taxation in relation to property; a tax by way of import or export duty is
not a tax on property but is on the fact of importing or exporting goods
into or out of the country; similarly, an excise duty is not a tax on
property but is a tax on production or manufacture of goods; though
the measure of the tax may have reference to the value, weight or
quantity of the goods, according to the relevant provisions of the
statute imposing excise duty, in essence and truly speaking import or
export duties or excise duty are not taxes on property, including goods,
as such, but on the happening of a certain event in relation to goods,
namely, import or export of goods or production or manufacture of
goods; the true meaning of Article 289 is to be derived not only from
its language but also from the scheme of the Indian Constitution
distributing powers of taxation between the Union and the States in
and the context of those provisions; Articles 285 and 289 of the
Constitution are complementary and the true construction of the one
has a direct bearing on that of the other; those articles have to be
construed in the background of the corresponding provisions of the
Government of India Act 1935, Sections 154 and 155; clause (2) of
Article 289 is only explanatory and not an exception to clause (1) in the
sense that the entire field of taxation covered by clause (1) is also
covered by the terms of clause (2); as Parliament has exclusive power
to make laws with respect to trade and commerce with foreign
countries and with respect to duties of customs, including export duties
and duties of excise on certain goods manufactured or produced in
India, the Union is competent to impose or to authorise the imposition
of custom duties on the import or export of goods by a State which may
be its property or excise duty on the production or manufacture of
goods by a State; if clause (1) of Article 289 were to be interpreted as
including the exemption of a State in respect of customs duties or
excise duty, it will amount to a restriction on the exclusive competence
of Parliament to make laws with respect to trade and commerce - a
restriction which is not warranted in view of the scheme of the
Constitution; that the term "taxation" has been used in a very wide
sense, as per Article 366(28); the wide sweep of that expression has to
be limited with respect to the words "property" or "income"; the
juxtaposition of the words "property" and "income" in clause (1) of
Article 289 would show that the exemption of the States from Union
taxation was only in respect of tax on property and tax on income; in
other words, the exemption granted by Article 289(1) is in respect
of
property taxes properly so called in the sense of taxes directly on
property; a tax on property means a tax in respect of ownership,
possession or enjoyment of property, in contradistinction to customs
duties and duties of excise, which in their true meaning are not taxes
on property but only in relation to property, on a particular occasion;
clause (2) of Article 289 of the Constitution shows clearly that trade or
business carried on by States will be liable to taxation; by clause (3) of
Article 289 Parliament has been authorised to legislate as to what trade
or business would be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government
and which, therefore would not be subject to taxation by the Union; any
trade or business not so declared by Parliament will be within the
operation of clause (2) i.e. liable to Union taxation.
3. On the other hand, it is argued on behalf of the States that in
interpreting Article 289 of the Constitution, on which the answer to the
question referred by the President depends, it has to be borne in mind
that our Constitution does not make a distinction between direct and
indirect taxation; that trade and commerce and industry have been
distributed between the Union and the States; that the power of
taxation is different from the power to regulate trade and commerce;
that the narrower construction of the article, contended for and on
behalf of the Union, will seriously and adversely affect the activities of
the States and their powers under the Constitution; that a comparison
and contrast between the terms of Section 155 of the Government of
India Act and those of Article 289 of the Constitution would clearly
emphasize that the wider meaning contended for on behalf of the
States should be preferred; that the legislative practice in respect of
excise and customs duties is a permissible guide to the interpretation
of the article in question and would support the wider construction, and
that even on a narrower construction, insisted upon by the Union,
customs duties and duties of excise affect property and are, therefore,
within the immunity granted by Article 289(1); properly construed
Article 289(1) grants complete immunity from all taxation on any kind
of property; and any kind of tax on property or in relation to property is
within the immunity; therefore, the distinction sought to be made on
behalf of the Union between tax on property and tax in relation to
property is wholly irrelevant; clause (2) of Article 289 is not
explanatory, as contended on behalf of the Union, but is an exception or
in the nature of a proviso to clause (1) of the article; clause (2) really
carves out something which is included in clause (1) and similarly
clause (3) is an exception to clause (2) and carves out something which
is included in clause (2).
4. It should be noted that all the States which were represented
before us were agreed in their contention, as set out above, except the
State of Maharashtra. The learned counsel for the State of Maharashtra
agreed with the contention on behalf of the Union that there was a clear
distinction between tax on property and excise duties; In other words,
excise duty is not within the immunity granted by clause (1) of Article
289, which is in the nature of an exception to the general power of a
State to regulate trade and commerce and its right to tax, and as such
it should be very strictly construed. But he supported the other States
insofar as they contended that duties of import and export were within
the exemption granted by clause (1) of Article 289.
5. It will thus be seen that whereas the Union is for interpreting
clause (1) of Article 289 in the restricted sense of the immunity being
limited to a direct tax on property and on the income of a State, the
States contend for an all-embracing exemption from the Union taxes
which have any relation to or impact on State property and income. In
spite of this wide gulf between the two view points, both are agreed
that the, terms "property", "income" and "tax" have been used in their
widest sense. They are also agreed that the immunity granted to the
Union in respect of its property by Article 285 corresponds to the
immunity granted to the States by Article 289, and that, therefore, the
term "property" "taxation" and "tax" have to be interpreted in the same
comprehensive sense in both the articles. It will be noticed that
whereas not only the term "property" but also "income" occurs in Article
289, in Article 285 the term "income" is not used apparently because
the Constitution-makers were aware of the legal position that tax on
"income" (as distinct from agricultural income) is exclusively in the
Union List and was so even before the advent of the Constitution. It
was agreed, and it is manifest that the terms of Articles 285 and 289
are very closely parallel to those of Sections 154 and 155, respectively,
of the Government of India Act, 1935 (25 and 26 Geo. VC. 42), except
for the differences in expression occasioned by the change in the
constitutional position and the integration of the Indian States after
1947. The language of the two parallel provisions may be set out below
in order to bring out the points of similarity and contrast:
Government of India Act.
Constitution of India.
S. 154 : Property vested
Art. 285. (1) The pro-
in His Majesty for
perty of the Union
purposes of the Go-
shall, save in so far
vernment of the
as Parliament may by
Federation shall, save
law otherwise provide,
in so far as any Fede-
be exempt from all
rat law may other-
taxes imposed by a
wise provide, be ex-
State or by any
empt from all. taxes
Authority within
a
imposed by, or by
State.
any authority within,
a Province or Federa-
(2) Nothing in clause
ted State;
(1) shall, until Par-
liament by law other-
Provided that, until
wise provides, pre-
any Federal law
vent any authority
otherwise provides,
within a State from
any property so ves-
levying any tax on
ted which was im-
any property of the
mediately before the
Union to which such
commencement of
property. was imme-
Part III of this Act
diately before the
liable, or treated as
commencement of this
liable, to any such
Constitution liable or
tax, shall, so long as
treated as liable, so
that tax continues,
long as that tax con-
continue to be liable,
tinues to be levied in
or to be treated as
that State.
liable, thereto.
S. 155-(1) Subject
as
Art.
289.
(1)
The
pro-
hereinafter provided,
perty and income of
the Government of a
a State shall be ex-
Province and the
empt from Union
Ruler of a Federated
taxation.
State shall not be
liable to Federal taxa-
(2) Nothing in clause
tion in respect of
(1) shall prevent the
lands or buildings
Union from imposing,
situate in British
or authorising the
India, or income
imposition of any tax
accruing, arising or
to such extent, if any
received in British
as Parliament may by
India :
law provide in respect
of a trade or business
Provided that-
of any kind carried on
by, or on behalf of
(a) where a trade or
the Government of a
business of any kind
is carried on by or on
State, or any opera-
tions connected there-
behalf of the Gevern-
ment of a Province in
with, or any property
any part of British
used or occupied for
India outside that
the purposes of such
trade or business, or
Province or by a
Ruler in any part of
any income accuring
British India, nothing
or arising in connec-
tion therewith.
in this sub-section
shall exempt that
Government or Ruler
(3) Nothing in clause
from any Federal
(2) shall apply to
taxation in respect of
any trade or business,
that trade or business,
or to any class of
trade or business
or any operations con-
which
Parliament
nected therewith, or
may by law declare
any income arising in
to be incidental to the
connection therewith,
ordinary functions of
or any property occu-
pied for the purposes
government.
thereof;
(b) nothing in this sub-
section shall exempt
a Ruler from any Fede-
ral taxation in respect
of any lands, buildings
or income being his
personal property or
personal income.
(2) Nothing in this Act
affects any exemption
from taxation enjoy-
ed as of right at the
passing of this Act
by the Ruler of an
Indian State in res-
pect of any Indian
Government securities
issued before that
date.
6. It will thus appear that both Section 154 and Article 285 set out
above speak only of "property" and lay down that property vested in
the Union shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any
authority within a State, subject to one exception of saving the pre-
existing taxes on such property until Parliament may by law otherwise
provide. Similarly, whereas Section 155 of the Government of India Act
exempts from federal taxes the Government of a Province in respect of
lands or buildings situate in British India or income accruing, arising or
received in British India, Article 289(1) says "the property and income
of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation". Section 156 aforesaid
has two provisos (a) and (b); (a) relating to trade or business of any
kind carried on by or on behalf of the Government of a Province, and
(b) which is not relevant, relating to a Ruler. It will be seen that
"income" is repeated in both the provisions, but what was "lands or
buildings" has become simply "property" in Article 289(1).
7. The question naturally arises why "income" was at all mentioned
when it is common ground that "income" would be included in the
generic term "property". It was suggested on behalf of the Union that
the juxtaposition of the terms "property" and "income" of a State which
have been declared to be exempt from Union taxation would indicate
that the tax from which they were to be immune was tax on "property"
and on "Income" i.e. in both cases a direct tax, and not an indirect tax,
which may be levied in relation to the property of a State, namely,
excise duty, which is a tax on the manufacture or production of goods
and customs duty which is a tax on the event of importation or
exportation of goods.
8. Before dealing with the argument on either side, whether the
restricted meaning attributed to the words of Article 289(1) on behalf
of the Union, or the wider significance claimed for those words on
behalf of the States, was intended by the Constitution-makers, it is
necessary to bear in mind certain general considerations and the
scheme of the constitutional provisions bearing on the power of the
Union to impose the taxes contemplated by the proposed legislation.
Neither the Union non the States can claim unlimited right as regards
the area of taxation. The right has been hedged in by considerations of
respective powers and responsibilities of the Union in relation to the
States, and those of the States in relation to citizens or inter se, or in
relation to the Union. Part XII of the Constitution relates to "Finances
etc." At the very outset Article 265 lays down that no tax shall be levied
or collected except by authority of law. That authority has to be found
in the three lists in the Seventh Schedule, subject to the provisions of
Part XI which deals with the relations between the Union and the
States, particularly Chapter I relating to legislative relations and
distribution of legislative powers, with special reference to Article 246.
Under that article the legislature of a State has exclusive powers to
make laws with respect to the matters enumerated in List II and
Parliament and the legislature of a State have powers to make laws
with respect to the matters enumerated in List 111 (the Concurrent List,
and notwithstanding those two lists, Parliament has the exclusive
power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in
List I (the Union List). Parliament also has power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List with respect
to any part of the territory of India which is not included in a State. By
Article 248 Parliament has been vested with exclusive power to make
laws with respect to any matters not enumerated in the State list or the
Concurrent list, including the power of making a law imposing a tax not
mentioned in either of those lists. It is not necessary to refer to the
extended power of legislation vested in Parliament in abnormal
circumstances, as contemplated by Articles 249, 250 and 252. In short,
though the States have been vested with exclusive powers of legislation
with respect to the matters enumerated in List 11, the authority of
Parliament to legislate in respect of taxation in List I is equally
exclusive. The scheme of distribution of powers of legislation, with
particular reference to taxation, is that Parliament has the exclusive
power to legislate imposing taxes on income other than agricultural
income (Entry 82); duties of customs including export duties (Entry
83); duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or
produced in India, except alcoholic liquors for human consumption and
opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, which by
Entry 51 of List 11 is vested in the State legislature (Entry 84). It is not
necessary to refer to the other taxes which Parliament may impose
because they have no direct bearing on the questions in controversy in
this case. Similarly, the State Legislatures have the power to impose
taxes on agricultural income (Entry 46), taxes on lands and buildings
(Entry 48) and duties of excise on alcoholic liquors and opium, etc.
manufactured or produced in the State and countervailing duties at the
same or lower rates on similar goods manufactured or produced
elsewhere in India (Entry 51). It is also not necessary to refer to other
heads of taxes which are contained in the State List. It would, thus
appear that whereas all taxes on income other than agricultural income
are within the exclusive power of the Union, taxes on agricultural
income only are reserved for the States. All customs duties, including
export duties, relating as they do to transactions of import into or
export out of the country are within the powers of Parliament. The
States are not concerned with those. They are only concerned with
taxes on the entry of goods in local areas for consumption, use or sale
therein, covered by Entry 52 in the State list. Except for duties of
excise on alcoholic liquors and opium and other narcotic drugs, all
duties of excise are leviable by Parliament. Hence, it can be said that,
by and large, tax on income, duties of customs and duties of excise are
within the exclusive power of legislation by Parliament.
9. Those exclusive powers of taxation, as aforesaid vested in
Parliament, have to be correlated with the exclusive power of
Parliament to legislate with respect to trade and commerce with foreign
countries; import and export duties across customs frontiers; definition
of customs frontiers (Entry 41); inter-State trade and commerce (Entry
42). As the regulation of trade and commerce with foreign countries, as
also inter-State, is the exclusive responsibility of the Union, Parliament
has the power to legislate with respect to those matters, along with the
power to legislate by way of imposition of duties of customs in respect
of import and export of goods as also to impose duties of excise on the
manufacture or production in any part of India in respect of goods other
than alcoholic liquors and opium, etc. referred to above. Further, the
imposition of customs duties or excise duties may be either (1) with a
view to raise revenue or (2) to regulate trade and commerce, both in
land and foreign, or (3) both to regulate trade and commerce and to
raise revenue. If therefore Article 289(1) completely exempts all
property of the States from all taxes the power of Parliament to
regulate foreign trade by the use of its power of taxation would be
seriously impaired and this consideration will have to be kept in mind
when interpreting Article 289(1).
10. There is another general consideration which has also to be
borne in mind in view of the provisions contained in Part XII of the
Constitution. Though various taxes have been separately included in
List I or List II and there is no overlapping in the matter of taxation
between the two Lists and there is no tax provided in the Concurrent
list except stamp duties (Item 44), the constitution embodies an
elaborated scheme for the distribution of revenue between the Union
and the States in Part XII, with respect to taxes imposed in List I. The
scheme of the Constitution with respect to financial relations between
the Union and the States, devised by the Constitution-makers is such
as to ensure an equitable distribution of the revenue between the
Centre and the States. All revenues received by the Government of
India normally form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, and all
revenues received by the Government of a State shall form part of the
Consolidated Fund of the State. This general rule is subject to the
provision of the Chapter I of Part XII in which occur Articles 266 to 277.
Though stamp duties and duties of excise on medicinal and toilet
preparations which are covered by the Union List are to be levied by the
Government of India, they have to be collected by the States within
which such duties are leviable and are not to form part of the
Consolidated Fund of India but stands assigned to the State which has
collected them (Article 268). Similarly, duties and taxes levied and
collected by the Union in respect of Succession Duty, Estate Duty,
Terminal Taxes on goods and passengers carried by railway, sea or air,
taxes on rail fares and freights, etc. as detailed in Article 269 shall be
assigned to the States and distributed amongst them in accordance
with the principles of distribution as may be formulated by
Parliamentary legislation, as laid down in clause (2) of Article 269.
Article 270 provides that taxes on income, other than agricultural
income shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and
distributed between the Union and the States. The taxes and duties
levied by the Union and collected by the Union or by the States as
contemplated by Articles 268, 269 and 270 and distributed amongst
the States shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
Further excise duties which are levied and collected by the Government
of India and which form part of the Consolidated Fund of India may
also be distributed amongst the States, in accordance with the
principles laid down by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of
Article 272. Express provision has been made by Article 273 in respect
of grants-in-aid of the revenue of the States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa
and West Bengal in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds
of export duty on jute and jute products. Further a safeguard has been
laid down in Article 274 that no bill or amendment which imposes or
varies any tax or duty in which States are interested or which affects
the principles of distribution of duties or taxes amongst the States as
laid down in Articles 268-73 shall be introduced or moved in either
House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President.
Parliament has also been authorised to lay down that certain sums may
be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year by way of
grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as it may determine to be
in need of assistance. This aid may be different for different States,
according to their needs, with particular reference to schemes of
development for the purposes indicated in Article 75(1).
11. Provision has also been made by Article 280 for the appointment
by the President of a Finance Commission to make recommendations to
the President as to the distribution amongst the Union and the States
of the net proceeds of taxes and duties as aforesaid, and as to the
principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenue of the
States out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
12. It will thus appear that Part XII of the Constitution has made
elaborate provisions as to the revenues of the Union and of the States,
and as to how the Union will share the proceeds of duties and taxes
imposed by it and collected either by the Union or by the States.
Sources of revenue which have been allocated to the Union are not
meant entirely for the purposes of the Union but have to be distributed
according to the principles laid down by Parliamentary legislation as
contemplated by the articles aforesaid. Thus all the taxes and duties
levied by the Union and collected either by the Union or by the States
do not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India but many of those
taxes and duties are distributed amongst the States and form part of
the Consolidated Fund of the States. Even those taxes and duties which
constitute the Consolidated Fund of India may be used for the purposes
of supplementing the revenues of the States in accordance with their
needs. The question of the distribution of the aforesaid taxes and duties
amongst the States and the principles governing them, as also the
principles governing grants-in-aid of revenues of the States out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, are matters which have to be decided by a
high powered Finance Commission, which is a responsible body
designated to determine those matters in an objective way. It cannot,
therefore, be justly contended that the construction of Article 289
suggested on behalf of the Union will have the effect of seriously and
adversely affecting the revenues of the States. The financial
arrangement and adjustment suggested in Part XII of the Constitution
has been designed by the Constitution-makers in such a way as to
ensure an equitable distribution of the revenues between the Union and
the States, even though those revenues may be derived from taxes and
duties imposed by the Union and collected by it or through the agency
of the States. On the other hand, there may be more serious difficulties
in the way of the Union if we were to adopt the very wide interpretation
suggested on behalf of the States. It will thus be seen that the powers
of taxation assigned to the Union are based mostly on considerations of
convenience of imposition and collection and not with a view to allocate
them solely to the Union; that is to say, it was not intended that all
taxes and duties imposed by the Union Parliament should be expended
on the activities of the Centre and not on the activities of the States.
Sources of revenue allocated to the States, like taxes on land and other
kinds of immovable property, have been allocated to the States alone.
The Constitution-makers realised the fact that those sources of revenue
allocated to the States may not be sufficient for their purposes and that
the Government of India would have to subsidise their welfare activities
out of the revenues levied and collected by the Union Government.
Realising the limitations on the financial resources of the States and the
growing needs of the community in a welfare State, the Constitution
has made, as already indicated, specific provisions empowering
Parliament to set aside a portion of its revenues, whether forming part
of the Consolidated Fund of India or not, for the benefit of the States,
not in stated proportions but according to their needs. It is clear,
therefore, that considerations which may apply to those Constitutions
which recognise water-tight compartments between the revenues of the
federating States and those of the federation do not apply to our
Constitution which does not postulate any conflict of interest between
the Union on the one hand and the States on the other. The resources
of the Union Government are not meant exclusively for the benefit of
the Union activities; they are also meant for subsidising the activities of
the States in accordance with their respective needs, irrespective of the
amounts collected by or through them. In other words, the Union and
the States together form one organic whole for the purposes of
utilisation of the resources of the territories of India as a whole.
13. Bearing the scheme of our Constitution in mind let us now turn
to the words of Article 289 and also its complementary article, namely,
Article 285. The contention on behalf of the Union is that when Article
289 provides for exemption of the property and income of a State from
Union taxation, it only provides for exemption from such tax as may be
levied directly on property and income and not from all Union taxes,
which may have some relation to the property or income of a State. On
the other hand, the contention on behalf of the States is that when
Article 289(1) provides for exemption of the property and income State
from Union taxation, it completely exempts the property and income of
a State from all Union taxation of whatsoever nature it may be. So far
as exemption of income is concerned, there is no serious dispute that
the exemption there is with respect to taxes on income other than
agricultural income (Item 82, List 1), for the simple reason that the
only tax provided in List I with respect to income is in Item 82 of List I.
The dispute is mainly with respect to taxes on "property" Now this fact
in our opinion has an important bearing on the nature of taxation of
"property" which is exempt under Article 289(1). If the income of a
State is exempt only from taxes on income, the juxtaposition of the
words "property and income" in Article 289(1) must lead to the
inference that property is also exempt only from direct taxes on
property. But it is said that there is no specific tax on property in List I
and it is therefore contended on behalf of the States that when property
of a State was exempted from Union taxation, the intention of the
Constitution-makers must have been to exempt it from all such taxes
which are in any way related to property. Therefore, it is urged that the
exemption is not merely from taxes directly on property as such but
from all taxes which impinge on property of a State even indirectly, like
customs duties, or export duties or excise duties. It is true that List
I
contains no tax directly on property like List 11, but it does not follow
from that that the Union has no power to impose a tax directly on
property under any circumstances. Article 246(4) gives power to
Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the
territory of India not included in a State notwithstanding that such
matter is a matter enumerated in the State List. This means that so far
as Union territories are concerned Parliament has power to legislate not
only with respect to items in List I but also with respect to items in List
11. Therefore, so far as Union territories are concerned, Parliament has
power to impose a tax directly on property as such. It cannot therefore
be said that the exemption of States' property from Union taxation
directly on property under Article 289(1) would be meaningless as
Parliament has no power to impose any tax directly on property. If a
State has any property in any Union territory that property would be
exempt from Union taxation on property under Article 289(1). The
argument therefore that Article 289(1) cannot be confined to tax
directly on property because there is no such tax provided in List I
cannot be accepted.
14. Now the words in Article 289, confining ourselves to "property",
are that "the property of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation".
It is remarkable that the word "all" does not govern the words "Union
taxation" in Article 289(1). It does not provide that the property of a
State shall be exempt from all Union taxation. The question therefore is
whether when Article 289 provides for the exemption of State property
from Union taxation, it only provides for exemption from that kind of
Union taxation which is a tax directly on property. It is true that Article
289(1) does not specifically say that the property of a State shall be
exempt from Union taxation on property. It may however be properly
inferred that that was the intention if one looks to the language of
Article 289(2). That clause mainly deals with income accuring or arising
to a State from trade or business carried on by it. At the same time it
provides that where the State is carrying on a trade or business nothing
in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing any tax to such
extent as Parliament may by law provide in respect of any property
used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, and the
authority thus given to Parliament to tax property used or occupied in
connection with trade or business can only refer to a tax directly on
property as such, which is used or occupied for business, the tax being
related to the use or occupation of the property. The meaning will be
clearer if we look to Article 285. Clause (1) of that article provides that
the property of the Union shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by a
State or by any authority within a State. Prima facie the use of the
words "all taxes" in clause (1) would suggest that the property of the
Union would be exempt from all taxes of whatsoever nature, which a
State can impose. But if one looks to clause (2) of Article 285 the
nature of taxes from which the property of the Union would be exempt
is clearly indicated as a tax on property. Clause (2) provides that
"nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides,
prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax on any
property of the Union to which such property was immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as liable, so
long as that tax continues to be levied in that State". It will in our
opinion be permissible in view of clause (2) to read clause (1) of Article
285 when it speaks of all taxes as relating to taxes of the nature of
taxes directly on property. We have already pointed out, when dealing
with the general considerations which should govern the interpretation
of Article 289(1) that the power of the Union would be crippled if Article
289 is interpreted as exempting the property of a State from all Union
taxes. We have also pointed out that even though the taxes may be
collected and levied by the Union, there are provisions in Part XII for
the assignment or distribution of many Union taxes to the States. There
are also provisions for grants-in-aid by the Union from the Consolidated
Fund of India to a State. In these circumstances it would in our opinion
be in consonance with the scheme of the Constitution relating to
taxation to read Article 289(1) as laying down that the property and
income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation on property and
income. There is in our opinion better warrant for reading these words
"on property and income" after the words "Union taxation" in Article
289(1) in view of the scheme of our Constitution relating to taxation
and also the provisions of Part XII thereof than to read the word "all"
before the words "Union taxation" in that clause. The effect of reading
the word "all" before the words "Union taxation" would in our opinion be
so serious and so crippling to the resources, which the Constitution
intended the Union to have, as to make it impossible to give that
intention to the words of clause (1) of Article 289. On the other hand,
the States would not be so seriously affected if we read the words "on
property and income" after the words "Union taxation" in Article 289
(1), for unlike other Constitutions there is provision in Part XII of our
Constitution for assignment or distribution of taxes levied and collected
by the Union to the States and also for grants-in-aid from the Union to
the States, so that the burden which may fall on the States by giving a
restrictive meaning to the words used in clause (1) of Article 289 would
be alleviated to a large extent in view of the provisions in Part XII of
the Constitution for assignment and distribution of taxes levied by the
Union to the States and also for grants-in-aid from the Union to the
States.
15. Further it must not be forgotten that Articles 285 and 289 are
successors of Sections 154 and 155 of the Government of India Act,
though there are differences in detail between them, in particular
clause (2) of Article 285, which corresponds to the proviso to Section
154 seems in our opinion to make it clear by the change in the
language, that clause (1) of Article 285 when it speaks of all taxes is
referring to taxes on property of which clause (2) definitely permits
continuance provided such property of the Union immediately before
the commencement of the Constitution was liable or was treated as
liable to such tax. As to Article 289(1), a change has been made in the
words, for Section 155(1), which corresponded thereto, provided that
the Government of a Province shall not be liable to Federal taxation in
respect of lands or buildings. Article 289 on the other hand refers not
only to lands and buildings but to all property of a State, whether
movable or immovable and exempts it from Union taxation. Even so we
find no warrant for interpreting clause (1) of Article 289 as if it exempts
all property of a State from all Union taxation. We are therefore of
opinion reading Article 289 and its complementary Article 285 together
that the intention of the Constitution-makers was that Article 285
would exempt all property of the Union from all taxes on property levied
by a State or by any authority within the State while Article 289
contemplates that all property of the States would be exempt from all
taxes on property which may be liveable by the Union. Both the articles
in our opinion are concerned with taxes directly either on income or on
property and not with taxes which may indirectly affect income or
property. The contention therefore on behalf of the Union that these two
articles should be read in the restricted sense of exempting the
property or income of a State in one case and the property of the Union
in the other from taxes directly either on property or on income as the
case may be, is correct.
16. In this connection, it is pertinent to refer to certain decisions of
the High Court of Australia, the Supreme Court of Canada, and the
Privy Council bearing on the construction of similar, though not
identical, provisions in the Constitutions of Australia and Canada.
17. The corresponding provisions of the Canadian Constitution are
contained in Sections 91, 92 and 125 of the British North America Act,
1867 (30-31 Vict. Chapter 3). The relevant portion of Section 91 is as
follows:
"It shall be lawful for the Queen to make laws for the peace,
order and good Government of Canada, in relation to all matters not
coming within the classes of subjects by this Act assigned
exclusively to the legislatures of the Provinces; and for greater
certainty, but not so as to restrict the generality of the foregoing
terms of this section, it is hereby declared that (notwithstanding
anything in this Act) the exclusive legislative authority of the
Parliament of Canada extends to all matters coming within the
classes of subjects next hereinafter enumerated; that is to say:
*
*
*
(2) The regulation of Trade and Commerce;
(3) The raising of money by any mode or system, of taxation."
18. Section 92 provides for exclusive powers of the Province
including direct taxation within the Province in order to the raising of
revenue for Provincial purposes.
Section 125 is in these terms:
"No lands or property belonging to Canada or any Province shall
be liable to taxation."
It will thus be seen that the above-quoted section runs very parallel to
the provisions of Article 289(1) of our Constitution. These provisions of
the Canadian Constitution have come up for consideration before the
Supreme Court of Canada, as also before the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council on a number of occasions. In the case of the Attorney-
General of The Province of British Columbia V. Attorney-General of the
Domination of Canada the question arose whether; the Province of
British Columbia could import liquors into Canada for the purposes of
sale, pursuant to the provisions of the Government Liquor Act (11 Geo.
V, C. 30) without payment of customs duties imposed by the Dominion
of Canada. It was argued, as has been argued before us, that the word
"tax" was wide enough to include the imposition of customs duties, and
that the word "property" in Section 125 included property of all kinds.
The answer given by the Dominion was that customs duties did not
constitute taxes within the meaning of the expression used in Section
125 but were merely in the nature of regulation of trade and commerce,
and secondly, assuming that customs duties were included in the
expression "taxation", they did not constitute taxation on property. It
was also contended on behalf of the Dominion that the word "taxation"
in Section 125 was not intended to comprehend customs duties
inasmuch as the prohibition indicated by the section was intended to be
reciprocal prohibition and did not extend as regards the Dominion to
indirect taxation. The Supreme Court of Canada, by majority judgment,
upheld the decision of the Exchequer Court of Canada, which had held
that the import by the Province was liable to pay import duty to the
Dominion. Thus the contention raised on behalf of the Dominion was
accepted that customs duties were not taxes imposed on property as
such but were levied on the importation of certain goods into Canada as
a condition of their importation.
19. This decision of the Supreme Court was challenged before the
Privy Council, by special leave. The judgment of the Privy Council is
reported in Attorney-General of British Columbia V. Attorney-General of
Canada The Privy Council upheld the decision appealed from and held
that import duties imposed by the Dominion upon alcoholic liquors
imported into Canada by the Government of British Columbia for the
purposes of trade was valid. The Privy Council based its decision on a
consideration of the whole scheme of the Canadian Constitution under
which the Dominion had the power to regulate trade and commerce
throughout the Dominion, and held that "Section 125 must therefore
be so considered as to prevent the paramount purpose thus declared
being defeated". The Privy Council further observed that "the true
solution is to be found in the adaptation of Section 125 to the whole
scheme of Government which the statute defines". The ratio decidendi
in the case just mentioned fully supports the contention raised on
behalf of the Union in the present case and the interpretation of Article
289(1) must also be adapted to the whole scheme of the Constitution.
20. Turning now to the Constitution of Australia and the relevant
cases decided by the High Court of Australia, it is necessary to set out
the relevant part of Section 51 of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act, 1900 ( and 64 Vict. chapter 12):
"The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to
make laws for the peace, order and good Government of
Commonwealth with respect to-
(i) Trade and Commerce with other countries and among the
States;
(ii) Taxation; but so as not to discriminate between the States
or parts of States."
This closely follows that part of Section 91 of the British North America
Act, which has vested the Federal Parliament with the exclusive power
to legislate in respect of such trade and commerce and taxation in
respect thereof. Section 114 of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution grants immunity from taxation in the following terms:
"A State shall not, without the consent of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth, raise or maintain any naval or military Force, or
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to the
Commonwealth nor shall the Commonwealth impose any tax on
property of any kind belonging to a State."
This corresponds to the provision of Section 125 of the Canadian
Constitution and Articles 285 and 289 of our Constitution, which have
laid down the provisions as to exemption from taxation. The question of
the interpretation of those provisions of the Australian Constitution
came before the High Court of Australia in the case of Attorney-General
of New South Wales V. Collector of Customs for New South Wales3 In
this case an action was brought by the State of New South Wales to
recover the amount of customs duties realise by the Collector of
Customs in respect of certain steel rails imported by the plaintiff from
England for use in the construction of the railways of the State. The
State claimed that those rails were not liable to customs duties on the
ground that they were the property of the Government and as such
exempt from customs duties by virtue of Section 114 of the
Constitution. The majority of the Court decided that the imposition of
customs duties being a mode of regulating trade and commerce with
other countries as well as of exercising the taxing power, the goods
imported by a State Government were subject to the customs laws of
the Commonwealth. They also laid it down that the levying of the
duties of customs is not an imposition of a tax on property within the
meaning of Section 114 aforesaid. The Court added that even if the
words of the section were capable of bearing that comprehensive
meaning, that; was not the only or necessary meaning and should be
rejected as inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution
conferring upon the Commonwealth exclusive power to impose duties of
customs and to regulate trade and commerce. Isaacs, J., came to the
same conclusion though on somewhat different grounds. In the result,
the Court unanimously held, though not for the same reasons, that the
goods imported by the State were liable to import duty. The High Court
held that the words "impose any tax" might be capable of application to
duties of customs. But it pointed out that the levying of customs duties
was not within the comprehension of the expression "imposition of a
tax on property". It also pointed out, that customs duties were imposed
in respect of goods and in a sense "upon" goods, even as the
expression Stamp Duties, Succession Duties and other forms of indirect
taxes are said to be taxes on deeds and other real or personal property.
The Court recognised the legal position that customs duties are not
really taxation upon property but upon operations or movements of
property.
21. These authorities based on the interpretation of analogous
provisions in the Canadian and Australian Constitutions fully support
the contention raised on behalf of the Union that customs duties are not
taxes on property but are imposts by way of conditions or restrictions
on the import and exports of goods, in exercise of the Union's exclusive
power of regulation of trade and commerce read along with the power
of taxation and that the general words of the exemption have to be
limited in their scope so as not to come into conflict with the power of
the Union to regulate trade and commerce and to impose duties of
customs.
22. It is next urged on behalf of the States that even if Article 289
(1) only exempts the property of the States from tax directly on
property, the levy of excise on goods under Item 84 of List I is a tax on
property and therefore no excise can be levied on goods belonging to
States and manufactured by them. It is further urged that duties of
customs including export duties under Item 83 of List I are equally
duties on the goods imported or exported and therefore the property of
the State must be exempt under Article 289(1), both from excise
duties, and from duties of customs including export duties. This raises
the question of the nature of duties of excise and customs. This
question with respect to excise duties was considered by this Court in
the case of Amalgamated Coalfields Ltd. V. Union of India4. After
considering the previous decisions of the Federal Court In re : The
Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor and Lubricant Taxation Act5.
Province of Madras V. Budhu Paidanna and of Judicial Committee
of
the
Privy Council in Governor-General-in-Council V. Province of Madras this
Court observed as follows at p. 1287:
"With great respect, we accept the principles laid down by the
said three decisions in the matter of levy of an excise duty and the
machinery for collection thereof. Excise duty is primarily a duty on
the production or manufacture of goods produced or manufactured
within the country. It is an indirect duty which the manufacturer or
producer passes on to the ultimate consumer, that is, ultimate
incidence will always be on the consumer. Therefore, subject always
to the legislative competence of the Taxing Authority, the said tax
can be levied at a convenient stage so long as the character of the
impost, that is, it is a duty on the manufacture or production, is not
lost. The method of collection does not affect the essence of the
duty, but only relates to the machinery of collection for
administrative convenience."
23. This will show that the taxable event in the case of duties of
excise is the manufacture of goods and the duty is not directly on the
goods but on the manufacture thereof. We may in this connection
contrast Sales Tax which is also imposed with reference to goods sold,
where the taxable event is the act of sale. Therefore, though both
excise duty and Sales Tax are levied with reference to goods, the two
are very different imposts; in one case the imposition is on the act of
manufacture or production while in the other it is on the act of sale. In
neither case therefore can it be said that the excise duty or Sales Tax is
a tax directly on the goods for in that event they will really become the
same tax. It would thus appear that duties of excise partake of the
nature of indirect taxes as known to standard works on economics and
are to be distinguished from direct taxes like taxes on property and
income.
24. Similarly in the case of duties of customs including export duties
though they are levied with reference to goods, the taxable event is
either the import of goods within the customs barriers or their export
outside the customs barriers. They are also indirect taxes like excise
and cannot in our opinion be equated with direct taxes on goods
themselves. Now, what is the true nature of an import or export duty?
Truly speaking, the imposition of an import duty, by and large, results
in a condition which must be fulfilled before the goods can be brought
inside the customs barriers i.e. before they form part of the mass of
goods within the country. Such a condition is imposed by way of the
exercise of the power of the Union to regulate the manner and terms on
which goods may be brought into the country from a foreign land.
Similarly an export duty is a condition precedent to sending goods out
of the country to other lands. It is not a duty on property in the sense
of Article 289(1). Though the expression "taxation", as defined in
Article 366(28), "includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether
general or local or special", the amplitude of that definition has to be
cut down if the context otherwise so requires. The position is that
whereas the Union Parliament has been vested with exclusive power to
regulate trade and commerce, both foreign, and inter-State (Entries 41
and 42) and with the sole responsibility of imposing export and import
duties and duties of excise, with a view to regulating trade and
commerce and raising revenue, an exception has been engrafted in
Article 289(1) in favour of the States, granting them immunity from
certain kinds of Union taxation. It therefore becomes necessary so
to
construe the provisions of the Constitution as to give full effect to both,
as far as may be. If it is held that the States are exempt from all the
taxation in respect of their export or imports, it is not difficult to
imagine a situation where a State might import or export all varieties of
things and thus nullify to a large extent the exclusive power of
Parliament to legislate in respect of those matters. The provisions of
Article 289(1) being in the nature of an exception to the exclusive field
of legislation reserved to Parliament, the exception has to be strictly
construed, and therefore, limited to taxes on property and only income
of a State. In other words, the immunity granted in favour of States
has to be restricted to taxes levied directly on property and income.
Therefore, even though import and export duty or duties of excise have
reference to goods and commodities, they are not taxes on property
directly and are not within their exemption in Article 289(1).
25. We may in this connection refer to the Attorney-General for
British Columbia V. Kingcome Navigation Co. Ltd. to bring out the
essence of duties of customs and excise which were held by the Privy
Council to be in their essence trading taxes as distinguished from direct
taxes.
26. But it is contended on behalf of the States that in the scheme of
our Constitution no distinction has been made between direct and
indirect tax and therefore this distinction is not relevant to the present
controversy. It is true that no such express distinction has been made
under our Constitution; even so taxes in the shape of duties of customs
(including export duties) and excise, particularly with a view to
regulating trade and commerce insofar as such matters are within the
competence of Parliament and are covered by various entries in List I to
which reference has already been made, cannot be called taxes on
property; they are imposts with reference to the movement of property
by way of import or export or with reference to production or
manufacture of goods. Therefore even though our Constitution does
not
make a clear distinction between direct and indirect taxes, there is no
doubt that the exemption provided in Article 289(1) from Union
taxation to property must refer to what are known to economists as
direct taxes on property and not to indirect taxes like duties of customs
and excise which are in their essence trading taxes and not taxes on
property.
27. It is also contended on behalf of the States that the narrower
construction suggested on behalf of the Union would very seriously and
adversely affect activities of the States. This argument does not take
into account the more serious consequences that would follow if the
wider interpretation suggested on behalf of the States were to be
adopted. For example, a State may decide to embark upon trade and
commerce with foreign countries on a large scale in respect of different
commodities. On the interpretation put forward by the States, the
Union Parliament would be powerless to regulate such trade and
commerce by the use of the power of taxation conferred on it by Entry
83 of List I, thus largely nullifying the exclusive power of Parliament to
legislate in respect of international trade and commerce, including the
power to tax such trade. Trade and commerce with foreign countries,
export and import across the customs frontiers and inter-State trade
and commerce are all within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Union
Parliament. This Court naturally will not adopt a construction of Article
289(1) which will lead to such a startling result as to nullify the
exclusive power of Parliament in these matters.
28. Lastly, it is urged on behalf of the States, that Section 20 of the
Sea Customs Act was recast and amended by Act 45 of 1951 and that
sub-section (2) thereof has borrowed most of its words from the
provisions of clause (2) of Article 289, and therefore, Parliament itself
had understood clause (2) of Article 289 in the sense in which the
States are contending that it should be interpreted. But that in our
opinion does not conclude the matter, for we have to construe the
provisions of the Constitution in their proper setting and we are entitled
to come to the conclusion that Parliament may not have been correct in
so interpreting the words of clause (2) of Article 289.
29. For the reasons given above, it must be held that the immunity
granted to the States in respect of Union taxation does not extend to
duties of customs including export duties or duties of excise. The
answer to the three questions referred to us must, therefore, be in the
negative. Let the opinion of this Court be reported to the President
accordingly.
S.K. DAS, J. In exercise of the powers conferred upon him by
clause (1) of Article 143 of the Constitution, the President of India has
referred three questions of law to this Court for consideration and a
report of its opinion thereon. These questions are:
(1) Do the provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution preclude
the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of, customs
duties on the import or export of the property of a State used for
purposes other than those specified in clause (2) of that article?
(2) Do the provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution of India
preclude the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of,
excise duties on the production or manufacture in India of the
property of a State used for purposes other than those specified in
clause (2) of that article?
(3) Will sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act,
1878 (Act 8 of 1878), and sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (Act 1 of 1944) as amended by
the Bill set out in the annexure be inconsistent with the provisions of
Article 289 of the Constitution of India?
31. We have had the advantage of very full arguments on these
questions. The learned Solicitor-General of India has put forward the
point of view on behalf of the Union of India. Several States were
represented before us by their Advocates-General or other counsel.
Except for the State of Maharashtra which has taken a stand somewhat
akin to that of the Union of India, there is a sharp conflict between the
States and the Union as to the answers to be given to the three
questions. We shall presently refer in greater detail to the points of
conflict but it may be generally stated that except for the State of
Maharashtra, the States have taken the stand that under Article 289 of
the Constitution the property of a State is exempt from the imposition
of customs duties and excise duties except to the extent permitted
under clause (2) of the said article. The Union of India has taken the
stand that the amplitude of power given to the Union legislature to
impose duties of customs (Entry 83 of List I of the Seventh Schedule)
and duties of excise (Entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule) can be
cut down only by a very strict interpretation of Article 289 and that
strict interpretation is that clause (1) of Article 289 is confined to a
property tax only, namely, a tax the goods as such and not on their
importation or exportation or on their production and manufacture, and
looked at from that point of view Article 289 of the Constitution does
not give any protection to a State in the matter of customs duties and
excise duties.
32. It is necessary perhaps to say something at this stage about the
constitutional background against which the questions fall for
consideration. The Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878) was enacted in
March 1878 in order to consolidate and amend the law relating to the
levy of sea customs-duties. The Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1
of 1944) was enacted in February 1944 to consolidate and amend the
law relating to central duties of excise and to salt. The Government of
India Act, 1915 (5 and 6 Geo. 5, C. 61) was a consolidating measure
repealing and re-enacting the numerous Parliamentary Statutes to
relating the administration of British India which had been passed
between the years 1770 and 1912. This Act was amended in certain
minor respects by the Government of India Amendment Act, 1916 (6
and 7 Geo. 5, C. 37) which also contained certain substantive provisions
not incorporated in the principal Act. It 1919 the Act again underwent
amendment by the passing of the Government of India Act, 1919 (9
and 10 Geo. 5, C. 101) which was enacted for the purpose of bringing
into effect the Indian constitutional reforms based on what is commonly
known as the Montagu-Chelmsford Report. Section 45 of the Act of
1919 provided that amendments made by that Act and the Act of 1916
be incorporated in the text of the Government of India Act, 1915, and
that that Act as so amended be known as the Government of India Act.
This Government of India Act constituted an Indian legislature
consisting of two Chambers, namely, the council of States and the
Legislative Assembly. This legislature had the power to make laws for
all persons, for all courts and for all places and things within British
India and had also the power to repeal or alter any laws which were in
force in any part of British India Prior to the Government of India Act,
1935 (26 Geo. V C. 2) the dominion and authority of the Crown, which
extended the whole of British India, was derived from many sources, in
part statutory in part prerogative, the former having their origin in Acts
of the British Parliament and the latter in rights based upon conquest,
cession or usage some of which were directly acquired while others
were enjoyed by the Crown as successor to the rights of the East India
Company. The Secretary of State for India was the Crown's responsible
agent for the exercise of all authority vested in the Crown in relation to
the affairs of India. But the superintendence, direction and control of
the civil and military government of India was declared by the
Government of India Act to be vested in the Governor-General-in-
Council; while the government or administration of the Governors' and
Chief Commissioners' Provinces vested respectively in the local
governments.
33. The Government of India Act, 1935 introduced a dual system of
Government in the shape of autonomous Provinces and a Federation;
two sets of legislatures were set up, one Federal legislature and the
other Provincial Legislature. In the Seventh Schedule were given three
Lists, Federal Legislative List called List I, Provincial Legislative List
called List 11 and the Concurrent legislative list called List 111.
Legislative power was distributed amongst the legislatures in
accordance with those lists. Duties of custom, including export duties
came within Item 44 of List I and duties of excise on tobacco and other
goods manufactured or produced in India except alcoholic liquors,
opium etc. came within Item 45. The Indian legislature amended the
Sea Customs Act, 1878 as also the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
from time to time in exercise of the powers which it had either under
the Government of India Act, 1919, or the Government of India Act,
1935. The Indian Independence Act, 1947 created the Dominion of
India as from August 15, 1947 and the Secretary of State for India as
the Crown's responsible agent for Indian affairs disappeared from the
Indian constitutional scene. The Constitution of India came into force
on January 26, 1950. This Constitution envisaged India as a Sovereign
Democratic Republic viz. a Union of States but the scheme of the
Government of India Act, 1935 with regard to distribution of legislative
powers between Parliament, which is the Union legislature, and the
State Legislatures was continued. The Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution contains three lists, Union List called List I, State List
called List 11, and Concurrent List called List 111. Entry 83 of List I
relates to duties of customs including export duties and Entry 84
relates to duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or
produced in India except alcoholic liquors, opium etc. The distribution
of legislative powers and the legislative relations between the Union
and the States are controlled by various articles, namely, Articles 245
to 258, in Chapter I of Part XI of the Constitution. We may indicate
here briefly the constitutional position that in normal circumstances
Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in List I, and the legislature of any State has
exclusive power to make laws for any such State with respect to any of
the matters enumerated in List 11; both Parliament and the legislature
of a State have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List III.
34. Under Article 245 of the Constitution, the power of Parliament as
also of the legislature of a State to make laws is subject to the
provisions of the Constitution. Some of these provisions are contained
in Article 285 and Article 289 which occur in Chapter I of Part XII of the
Constitution. This Part deals with several subjects, such as Finance
(Chapter 1), Borrowing (Chapter 11) and Property, Contracts etc.
(Chapter III). We may now read Article 289:
"289. (1) The property and income of a State shall be exempt from
Union taxation.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing,
or authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as
Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of
any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or
any operations connected therewith, or any property used or
occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income
accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or
to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law
declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government."
The interpretation of this article is the main subject for consideration in
this reference.
35. Soon after the coming into force of the Constitution, Section 20
of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 which stated what goods would be
dutiable under the Act, was amended by the Union legislature by Act
45 of 1951. The amendment took the shape of inserting a sub-section
in Section 20, sub-section (2), which said that the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall apply in respect of goods belonging to the Government
of a State and used for the purpose of a trade or business of any kind
carried on by, or on behalf of, that Government or of any operations
connected, with such trade or business as they apply in respect of
goods not belonging to any Government. A similar amendment was
made in Section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 by
inserting sub-section (1-A) in that section. That sub-section said that
the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to all excisable goods other
than salt which are produced or manufactured in India by, or on behalf
of a Government of a State (other than a Union territory) and used for
the purposes of a trade or business of any kind carried on by or on
behalf of that Government, or of any operations connected with such
trade or business as they apply in respect of goods which are not
produced or manufactured by any Government. It is obvious that these
two amendments were intended to bring the Sea Customs Act, 1878
and the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 into harmony with Article
289 of the Constitution. In 1962 the Union Government introduced a
draft Bill in Parliament further to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878
and the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. We may quote two clauses
of this draft Bill in order to appreciate how this reference has come to
be made to this Court. These two clauses are clauses 2 and 3 of the
draft Bill which run:
"2. Amendment of Section 20, Act 8 of 1878, - In Section 20 of
the Sea Customs Act, 1878, for sub-section (2) the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:
'(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of
all goods belonging to the Government as they apply in respect of
goods not belonging to the Government.
3. Amendment of Section 3, Act 1 of 1944, - In Section 3 of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, for sub-section (1-A) the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
(1-A) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall apply in respect of
all excisable goods other than salt which are produced or
manufactured in India by, or on behalf of, the Government as
they apply in respect of goods which are not produced or
manufactured by the Government.'"
This draft Bill gave rise to a controversy and the Governments of certain
States expressed the view that the amendments proposed in the draft
Bill would not be constitutionally valid as the provisions of Article 289
read with the definitions of "taxation" and "tax" in clause (28) of Article
366 of the Constitution preclude the Union from imposing or
authorising the imposition of any tax, including customs duties and
excise duties, on or in relation to any property of a State, except to the
extent permitted by clause (2) read with clause (3) of the said Article
289. The Union Government was, however, of the view that the
exemption from Union taxation granted by clause (1) of Article 289 was
restricted to Union taxes on the property of a State and did not extend
to Union taxes in relation to the property of a State; therefore, customs
duties being taxes on the import or export of goods and not on goods
as such and excise duties being taxes on the production or manufacture
of goods and not on goods as such did not come within the protection
of clause (i) of Article 289. This conflict of views gave rise to doubts as
to the true interpretation and scope of Article 289 of the Constitution
and in particular, as to the constitutional validity of the amendments
proposed in the draft Bill. This led the President to refer the three
questions stated above to this Court for consideration and a report of its
opinion thereon.
36. In one of the very earliest references made to the Federal Court
(In re The Central Provinces and Berar Sales of Motor Spirit and
Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938 (Central Provinces and Berar Act 14 of
1938) under Section 213 of the Government of India Act, 1935 (which
5
corresponded to Article 143 of the Constitution), Gwyer, C.J., observed
that the Rules which would apply to the interpretation of other statutes
would apply equally to the interpretation of a constitutional enactment,
but their application must be conditioned of necessity by the subject-
matter of the enactment itself, namely, the nature and scope of the Act
itself which is a Constitution, "a mechanism under which laws are to be
made and not a mere Act which declares what the law ought to be". He
said that this was especially true of a Federal Constitution, with its nice
balance of jurisdictions. We recognise that a broad and liberal spirit
must inspire those whose duty it is to interpret an organic instrument
which sets up a constitutional machinery, a machinery meant to control
the life of a nation, to embody its ideals, and facilitate the realisation of
such ideals for the present and the future; this does not however imply
that those whose duty it is to interpret the Constitution are free to
stretch or pervert the language of the enactment in the interests of any
legal or constitutional theory or even for the purpose of supplying
omissions or of correcting supposed errors.
37. Keeping these principles in mind let us consider the problem
before us by an examination of the relevant articles of the Constitution
bearing on that problem. The crux of the problem is the true scope and
effect of Article 289 of the Constitution which we have quoted earlier.
Clause (1) of Article 289 states that the property and income of a State
shall be exempt from Union taxation. Now, Article 66(28) says in clear
terms that unless the context otherwise requires, the expression
"taxation" includes the imposition of any tax or impost whether general
or local or special and the word "tax" shall be construed accordingly.
We shall presently consider the question whether the context of Article
289 requires a different meaning to be given to the word "taxation".
But let us first see what happens if we read Article 289(1) by
substituting for the expression "taxation" the words which Article 366
(28) says the expression "taxation" includes. Clause (1) of Article 289
will then read as follows:
"The property and income of a State shall be exempt from the
imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or special
by the Union."
There can be no manner of doubt that customs duty or excise duty is
an impost within the meaning of Article 366(28), and this the learned
Solicitor-General has not contested. If therefore Article 289(1) is
interpreted with the key furnished by Article 366(28), then it seems to
us that however broad and liberal a spirit may inspire those whose duty
it is to interpret the article, it would be impossible to stretch or pervert
the language of the article which in the clearest of terms says that the
property and income of a State shall be exempt from any impost,
whether general or local or special, by the Union.
38. So far as the property of the Union is concerned the counterpart
of Article 289 is Article 285 which reads:
"(1) The property of the Union shall, save insofar as Parliament
may by law otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by
a State or by any authority within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax
on any property of the Union to which such property was
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution liable or
treated as liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in that
State."
Now, the words of Article 285(1) are still more clear and emphatic. It
says that the property of the Union shall, save insofar as Parliament
may by law otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by a
State or by any authority within a State. The expression "all taxes"
must mean all taxes whether they be on property or in relation to
property. Neither in Article 289(1) nor in Article 285(1) do we see any
restricting words which would cut down the full meaning of the
expression "taxation" in Article 289 or "all taxes" in Article 285. The
distribution of legislative power under Article 245 is in express terms
subject to the provisions of the Constitution. The result therefore is that
Parliament cannot legislate to take away the exemption given by Article
289(1), nor can a State Legislature legislate to take away the
exemption given by Article 285(1). If one follows the principles of
interpretation to which we have earlier referred, the plain effect of
Articles 245. 285(1), 289(1) and 366(28) appears to be this : under
Article 285(1) the property of the Union shall be exempt from all taxes
imposed by the State or by any authority within a State, save insofar as
Parliament may by law otherwise provide; the property and income of a
State shall be exempt from Union taxation save insofar as clause (2) of
Article 289 allows or authorises the imposition of any tax on the
property of a State.
39. Let us now consider whether the context of Article 289 or any of
the other articles in the Constitution requires that a different meaning
should be given to the expression "taxation" or "taxes" in Article 289(1)
or Article 285(1).
40. The learned Solicitor-General has emphasised the use of the
words "property" and "income" in Article 289 and has further submitted
that the word "income" was not necessary in Article 285(1) and has not
been mentioned there, because "taxes on income other than
agricultural income" is an item in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution and a State, or an authority within a State, has no
legislative competence to impose a tax on income. From the use of the
two words "property" and "income" in clause (1) of Article 289, the
learned Solicitor-General has argued that the intention of the makers of
the Constitution must have been to restrict clause (1) to a direct tax on
property or income that is, a tax on property as such or a tax on income
as such. He has elaborated this argument in this way : as "income shall
be exempt from tax" means that income shall be exempt from income
tax, in the same way the expression "property shall be exempt from
tax" means that property shall be exempt from property tax. In other
words, he contends, that the word "property" must control the word
"taxation" and must be interpreted as modifying the comprehensive
connotation of the word "taxation".
41. We are wholly unable to accept this line of argument as correct.
The learned Solicitor-General has indeed conceded that the word
"property" in clause (1) of Article 289 has a comprehensive connotation
and refers to all property and assets of a State. Article 294 which
occurs in the same Part of the Constitution states that as from the
commencement of the Constitution all property and assets which
immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty for
the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and all
property and assets which immediately before such commencement
were vested in his Majesty for the purposes of the Government of each
Governor's Province shall vest respectively in the Union and the
corresponding State. It is clear therefore that in the Constitution the
word "property" is used in a comprehensive sense to include all assets,
movable or immovable. Apart from those assets which vested in the
Union or a State at the commencement of the Constitution, the Union
or a State may acquire new assets. This is also provided for in Articles
296 to 298 of the Constitution. Therefore, in both Articles 285 and 289
the word "property" means all property and assets which vested in the
Union or a State at the commencement of the Constitution and all
property and assets which may thereafter be acquired by the Union or a
State. In clause (1) of Article 289 the subject of the sentence is
"property and income" and the predicate is "shall be exempt from
Union taxation". Grammatically, the clause can only mean this : all
property and income of a State shall be exempt from all taxation by the
Union, giving the word "taxation" its comprehensive meaning, required
by Article 366(28). It is necessary to emphasise here that the word
"property" used in the sentence is not used as a word qualifying the
word "taxation"; rather it is used as a subject which gets the benefit of
exemption from Union taxation. One can understand that when one
says that State income shall be free from Union tax he means that such
income shall be free from Union income tax, particularly when there is
only one legislative item with regard to a tax on income (other than
agricultural income) which is Entry 82 in List 1. But we fail to appreciate
how the word "property" can be used as qualifying the word "taxation"
and thereby the ambit of its comprehensive connotation. The Union
power of taxation on or in relation to property of various kinds ranges
over a wide field; see Entries 82 to 92-A, of the Constitution. Why then
should the use of the word "property" in Articles 285 and 289 refer only
to those items which enable the imposition of a direct tax on property
and not to others? We find no legitimate ground for such restriction in
the context of Article 289. Such a restriction would, in our opinion, be
clearly against the plain language of the article.
42. The learned Solicitor-General has conceded that Articles 285(1)
and 289(1) are analogous and complementary articles and bear the
same meaning. In Articles 285(1) the word "income" does not occur,
but the word property occurs. It states that the property of the Union
shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State etc. We fail to see
how in Article 285(1) the word "property" can be taken to qualify and
cut down the expression "all taxes" occurring therein. It should be
obvious that the expression "all taxes" means all taxes, and the clear
intention as expressed in Articles 285(1) is that the property of the
Union shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any
authority within a State, including even a tax on agricultural income
derived from Union property. It is worthy of note here that the items in
List 11 which deal with taxes or duties which can be imposed by a State
Legislature are those contained in Items 46 to 62 thereof. Some of
these items are indeed taxes on property as such, e.g., Item 49, "taxes
on lands and buildings"; Item 56, "taxes on goods and passengers
carried by road or on inland waterways"; Item 57, "taxes on vehicles,
whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads etc.";
and Item 58, "taxes on animals and boats" Some other items are
in
relation to property, but are not on property as such; e.g., Item 51,
"duties of excise on the manufacture or production of alcoholic liquors
for human consumption manufactured in the State and countervailing
duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods manufactured or
produced elsewhere in India": Item 52, "taxes on the entry of goods
into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein"; and Item 54,
"taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers"; and
Item 55, "taxes on advertisement other than advertisements published
in the newspapers". If the argument of the learned Solicitor-General is
correct, then the property of the Union will be exempt from such taxes
imposed by a State, or by an authority within a State, as are property
taxes, that is, taxes on property as such, but not exempt from taxes
which are on the manufacture or production of goods, entry of goods
sale or purchase of goods etc. This would mean that the expression "all
taxes" occurring in Article 285(1) would lose its meaning, and we must
read the article as though when the Constitution-makers used the
expression "all taxes", they meant some taxes only and not all taxes. It
is to be noticed that under Article 366(28) the word "tax" has also to be
construed in the same comprehensive way as the word "taxation". It is
necessary to state here that fortunately for us, neither under the
Government of India Act, 1935 nor under our present Constitution, is it
necessary to examine the niceties of distinction between direct and
indirect taxation, as no such division exists in the Government of India
Act, 1935 or in the Constitution. There are several taxes like taxes on
luxuries or trade while can be indirect; and some taxes like succession
duties (and even excise) have in part been assigned to both.
In M.P.V. Sundararamier and Co. V. State of Andhra Pradesh this
Court observed that our Constitution was not written on a tabula rasa;
and that a Federal Constitution had been established under the
Government of India Act, 1935, and though that has undergone
considerable change by way of repeal, modification and addition, it still
remains the framework on which the present Constitution is built. On
an analysis of the subjects in List I and List II of the Seventh Schedule
of the Constitution, this Court observed:
"The above analysis - and it is not exhaustive of the Entries in
the Lists - leads to the inference that taxation is not intended to be
comprised in the main subject in which it might on an extended
construction be regarded as included, but is treated as a distinct
matter for purposes of legislative competence. And this distinction is
also manifest in the language of Article 248, clauses (1) and (2), and
of Entry 97 in List I of the Constitution."
The distinction is between the main subject of legislation and a tax in
relation thereto; the main subject of legislation figures in one group
and a tax in relation thereto is separately mentioned in a second group,
but no distinction is drawn between direct and indirect; taxation. There
are several taxing items in List I and List 11 which will take in both
direct and indirect taxation. In re The Central Provinces and Berar Sales
of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation. Act, 1938 (Central Provinces
and Berar Act 14 of 1938) Sulaiman, J., after referring to the Canadian
Constitution as embodied in the British North America Act, 1867 and
the Australian Constitution as embodied in the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act, 1900 observed that unlike those
Constitutions the Government of India Act, 1935 did not make any
distinction between direct and indirect taxation and in the matter of
legislative competence the ultimate incidence of the tax was not
necessarily a crucial test and there was no justification for adopting any
such principle as that certain classes of duties which were to be
regarded as direct had been assigned to the Provinces, and other
classes regarded as indirect had been reserved for the Federation (see
the observations at p. 73). As in the Government of India Act, 1935, so
also in our Constitution the distinction for purposes of legislative
competence is between the main subject of legislation and a tax in
relation thereto.
43. If this be the correct position, then it is impossible to accept the
argument advanced on behalf of the Union that the word "property" in
clause (1) of Article 289 or clause (1) of Article 285 makes a distinction
between direct and indirect taxation, namely, a tax on property as such
and a tax in relation to property.
44. If we examine clauses (2) and (3) of Article 289 and clause (2)
of Article 285, the position becomes still more clear. It seems clear to
us that clause (2) of Article 289 carves out an exception to clause (1) in
the sense that it states that nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the
Union from imposing or authorising the imposition of any tax to such
extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or
business of any kind carried on, by or on behalf of, a Government of a
State, or any operations connected therewith, or any property used or
occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income
accruing or arising in connection therewith. Clause (3) says that
nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business or to any
class of trade or business which Parliament may by law declare to be
incidental to the ordinary functions of Government. Clause (2) creates
an exception to clause (1) and clause (3) creates an exception upon an
exception. The broad distinction drawn in these two clauses is between
trading or business activities of the Government of a State and its
governmental functions. In respect to its trading or business activities a
tax may be imposed and if any property is used or occupied for the
purpose of trade or business, it is liable to tax. If however the trade or
business is declared by Parliament to be incidental to the ordinary
functions of a Government, the exemption given by clause (1) will
operate and clause (2) will not defeat that operation. The combined
effect of clauses (1), (2) and (3) appears to be this : under clause (1)
the property and income of a State is exempt from Union taxation;
clause (2) however says that the income of a State derived from
commercial activities or the property of a State in respect of a trade or
business of any kind carried on by or on behalf of a Government of a
State or any operations connected therewith or any property used or
occupied for the purpose of such trade or business shall not be immune
from Union taxation; under clause (3) however Parliament may by law
declare, any trade or business or any class of trade or business of a
States to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government and if
Parliament so declares clause (2) will not apply and the operation of
clause (1) will not be arrested. What is a governmental function or what
is a trading or business function is not always easy to determine. Thus
in Australia, activities of the Government have been held to be
"industrial" even though nothing is charged for services, e.g. municipal
road construction, harbour dredging, piloting and ferries. Our
Constitution avoids this difficulty by empowering Parliament to declare
by law that any trade or business carried on by a State shall not come
within the scope of clause (2) of the article but shall be deemed to be
"incidental to the ordinary functions of Government". Upon such
declaration no taxation by the Union of such trade or business or
property or income connected therewith will be possible. This seems to
us to be the true effect of the three clauses of Article 289.
45. If clause (1) of Article 289 has a restricted meaning as is
contended for by the learned Solicitor-General on behalf of the Union,
then the distinction drawn between trading or business activities on
one hand and governmental functions on the other in clause (2) and
clause (3) of Article 289 loses its full significance; for clauses (1) and
(2) distinguish between trading and other functions and clauses (2)
and (3) distinguish between ordinary trading and trading which is really
governmental function. If all that the Union is prevented from doing is
to put a tax on property as such, what was the purpose of drawing a
distinction between the trading 'or business activities of Government
and its governmental functions? If the tax is to be levied on property as
such, then obviously there cannot be any impost on a trading or
business activity, as for example, on the production or manufacture of
goods etc. Why was it necessary then to make a reference to trading or
business activities or operations in clauses (2) and (3) of Article 289? It
would have been enough merely to say that property used or occupied
in connection with a trade or business will be liable to a tax, but not
other property. But the ambit of clause (2) is much wider than the
mere use or occupation of property in connection with trade or
business. It has reference to trading or business activities, such as, the
production and manufacture of goods, transportation of goods etc. Why
was it necessary for the Constitution-makers to refer to such trading or
business activities in clause (2) if all that they had in mind in clause
(1) was a direct tax on property? In our opinion, the learned Solicitor-
General has given no satisfactory explanation with regard to this aspect
of the case. He suggested at first that clause (2) was not an exception,
but merely explanatory of clause (1). It is difficult to understand why
there should be a reference to business or trading activities in clause
(2) if the entire intendment was to confine the exemption to a direct
tax on property. The learned Solicitor-General then said that even if
clause (2) was an exception, it was an exception only in the matter of
property tax. That would mean that only the last portion of clause (2)
which refers to property used or occupied for the purpose of trading or
business activities of a State Government has any significance and not
the other parts which relate to trading or business activities, such as,
production or manufacture of goods etc.
46. We have noticed earlier that the amendments which Parliament
itself made in 1951 in Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 and
Section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 by inserting two sub
-sections thereto showed that Parliament understood clause (2) of
Article 289 as creating an exception to clause (1). Those two
amendments, sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act,
1878 and sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt
Act, 1944, draw a distinction between the trading activities of the
Government of a State and its governmental functions; no exemption is
given in respect of goods belonging to a State and Government and
used for the purpose of a trade or business of any kind carried on by or
on behalf of that Government or of any operations connected with such
trade or business, but exemption is granted in respect of other goods
belonging to Government.
47. If, therefore, we look to the context of Article 289, particularly
clauses (2) and (3) thereof, it becomes manifest that there is nothing
in Article 289 which restricts the comprehensive meaning to be given to
the word "taxation" in Article 289). Similar is the position with regard
to clause (2) of Article 285. That again creates an exception to clause
(1) of Article 285 and saves any tax on any property of the Union to
which such property was immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution liable or treated as liable to tax so long as that tax
continues to be levied in that State.
48. One very serious objection to the contention of the learned
Solicitor-General, an objection which appears to us to be almost fatal, is
that in the taxing entries in List I (from Entry 82 to Entry 92-A) there is
no entry which would enable the Union to impose a tax on property as
such, that is, a direct tax on property as property, in the sense
suggested by the learned Solicitor-General for his interpretation of
Article 289(1). There are, however, entries in List 11 to some of which
we have referred earlier, which would enable the State Legislature to
impose a direct tax on property, such as, "lands and buildings" and
"animals and boats" etc. If the learned Solicitor-General is right in his
contention, then the only tax from which the property of a State can
claim exemption under clause (1) of Article 289 is "property tax" to be
imposed by the Union, and yet under the legislative entries in List I the
Union cannot impose a "property tax" on State property at all. To this
aspect of the case the reply of the learned Solicitor-General has been
two-fold; he has first referred us to Entry 89 (terminal taxes on goods
and passengers carried by railway, sea or air Entry 86 (taxes on the
capital value of the) assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of individuals
and companies) and Entry 97, the residuary entry; secondly, he has
referred us to Article 246(4) under which Parliament has power to make
laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India not
included in a State notwithstanding that such matter is a matter
enumerated in the State List. His argument is that the Union can
impose a property tax under any of the aforesaid three entries;
secondly under Article 246(4) the Union can impose a property tax on
State property if that property is situate in a territory not included in a
State. It appears to us that the argument does not really meet the
objection raised on behalf of the States. Entry 86 relates to capital
value of the assets of individuals and companies and has nothing to do
with State property, for the State is neither an individual non a
company. Entry 89 relates to a terminal tax which is essentially
different from a property tax in the sense contended for by the learned
Solicitor-General. We find it difficult to believe that the exemption
given by clause (1) of Article 289 was meant as a safeguard against the
exercise of power under the residuary entry. Apart from that, we have
considerable doubt if the residuary entry will take in a "property tax"
when there are entries relating to such tax in List 11. It would be a case
of much ado about nothing if the Constitution solemnly provided for an
exemption against property tax' on State property only for such rare
cases as are contemplated in Article 246(4), the situation of State
property in territory not included in a State. Such situation would be
very rare, and could have hardly necessitated a solemn safeguard at
the inception of the Constitution when the States were classed under
Part A or Part B of the First Schedule. If the wider interpretation of
clause (1) of Article 289 is accepted, such property would also be
exempt from Union taxation except in cases covered by clause (2) of
the article. We find it difficult to accept the contention that clause (1)
of Article 289 was meant only for cases covered by Article 246(4); for
that would be the result of the interpretation canvassed for on behalf of
the Union.
49. We proceed now to consider the problem from three other
aspects : (1) against the background of similar provisions in the
Government of India Act, 1935; (2) in the light of the scheme under
the Constitution of the financial relations between the States and the
Union; and (3) the distribution of taxing powers between the States
and the Union.
50. As to the Government of India Act, 1935 the relevant provisions
are contained in Sections 154 and 155. They read as follows (so far as
relevant for our purpose):
"154. Property vested in His Majesty for purposes of the
government of the Federation shall, save insofar as any Federal law
may otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by, or by
any authority within a Province or Federated State:
Provided that, until any Federal law otherwise provides, any
property so vested which was immediately before the
commencement of Part 111 of this Act liable, or treated as liable,
to any such tax, shall, so long as that tax continues, continue to
be liable, or to be treated as liable, thereto.
155.(1) Subject as hereinafter provided, the Government of a
Province and the Ruler of a Federated State shall not be liable to
Federal taxation in respect of lands or buildings situate in British
India or income accruing, arising or received in British India:
Provided that-
(a) where a trade or business of any kind is carried on by or
on behalf of the Government of a Province in any part of British
India outside that Province or by a Ruler in any part of British
India, nothing in this sub-section shall exempt that
Government or Ruler from any Federal taxation in respect of
that trade or business, or any operations connected therewith.
or any income arising in connection therewith, or any property
occupied for the purposes thereof;
(b)
*
(2) *
51. Before the Government of India Act, 1935 the scheme of
Government was essentially unitary though there were local legislatures
with limited powers. For the purpose of distinguishing the functions of
the local Governments and local legislatures of Governors' Provinces
from the functions of the Governor-General-in-Council and the Indian
legislature, subjects were classified in relation to the functions of
Government as Central and Provincial subjects in accordance with the
Lists set out in Schedule I of the Devolution Rules made under Sections
45-A and 129-A of the Government of India Act, 1919. All Government
property then vested in His Majesty for the purpose of the Government
of India and there was no necessity for any special provision granting
immunity to that property from taxation. The Government of India Act,
1935 introduced a dual system of Government. Part 111 of the
Government of India Act, 1935 came into force on April 1, 1937.
Properties belonging to the Crown and in existence prior to that date
were governed by the general law enunciated by the courts. Judicial
opinion was however not uniform. In some cases it was held that
statutes imposing duties of taxes bind Government unless the very
nature of the duty or tax is such as to be inapplicable to Government.
On the other hand, in some cases it was held that the law was the
same in India as in England, where the principle of immunity of Crown
property from taxation followed from the prerogative that the Crown
was not bound by any statute unless expressly named. When the dual
system of Government was first introduced by the Government of India
Act, 1935 the question of immunity of taxation of property of one
Government by the other arose.
52. The doctrine of Immunity of Instrumentalities was propounded
by the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of Mculloch V.
Maryland to mean that when two separate Governments are
established as in a Federal Constitution, each with a limited
jurisdiction, the power of each Government shall be construed as being
under an implied limitation that it shall be so exercised as not to impair
the functions allotted to the other Government. Hence, any incidental or
indirect interference with the functions of the Federal Government
would make a State legislation bad even though the legislation might
relate to a subject allotted to the State Legislature and conversely. It
was held that a State could not tax the agencies or instrumentalities of
the Federal Government and a similar limitation would apply as regards
the Federal legislature. This doctrine has had many vicissitudes of
fortune in the decisions of the courts in America. We do not think that it
is necessary to deal with the history of those vicissitudes.
53. The Government of India Act, 1935 as also the Constitution of
1950 contained provisions which accepted the principle with a limited
application as regards the exemption from mutual taxation, in Sections
154 and 155 of the Act of 1935 and Articles 285 and 289 of the
Constitution. In the words of the Judicial Committee in Webb V.
Outrim it may be stated that the very inclusion of the aforesaid
provisions shows that the question of interference on the part of the
Federal and State powers as against each other was not left to an
"implied prohibition or limitation" but the provisions themselves define
the extent of the immunity. Outside those provisions the State and
Union legislatures have the full power to legislate on the matters
included within their respective Lists, subject always to the other
provisions of the Constitution.
54. Like Articles 285 and 289 of the Constitution, the aforsaid
Sections 154 and 155 are complementary to each other and provide for
the mutual exemption of the property of the Federation and the
Provinces from taxation imposed by the other : this is consistent with
the general practice of federal constitutions to exempt the Governments
of the units from Federal taxation, that being part of a reciprocal
arrangement under which the Federal Government also is exempt
taxation by the several units (see Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 302,
Column 523 and 524). One noticeable feature of the two sections is
that whereas Section 154 speaks of the "property vested in His Majesty
for the purpose of the Federation" so as to include movable property
also (see Bell V. Municipal Commissioner of Madras2 Section 155
which confers exemption on the property of the "units" is confined to
lands and buildings. The result would be that movable property
belonging to the Federation would be exempt from duties like octroi
which might be levied under the Provincial law, while goods of the
Provincial Governments and "units" would be subject to the customs
and excise duties levied by the Federal Government. Income from
commercial undertaking and operations in the nature of trade carried
on by the units, so long as they are confined within the territory of that
unit is not liable to Federal income tax. This in short, was the scheme of
Sections 154 and 155 of the Government of India Act, 1935. Now, if
Sections 154 and 155 of the Government of India Act, 1935 are
contrasted with articles 285 and 289 of the Constitution, one noticeable
difference strikes one at once. The expression "lands and buildings" in
Section 155 is changed to "property" in Article 289; in other words, the
Union and the States are practically put on the same footing so far as
exemption from taxation of one by the other is concerned. Both Articles
285 and 289 mention "property" in a comprehensive sense, and the
distinction between movable property and immovable property drawn
in Section 3, 154 and 155 is done away with. The inevitable conclusion
is that the Constitution-makers consciously made the departure. They
must have been aware of the distinction made in Sections 154 and 155
and also of the interpretation of courts that "property" in Section 154
was used in a comprehensive sense so as to get exemption for the
property of the Federation from all Provincial taxation. With that
knowledge they used the word "property" in Article 289 and put State
"property" on a par with union "property". It is impossible to accept in
these circumstances the contention that the word "property" or the
juxtaposition of the words "property and income" in Article 289 was
intended to qualify the word "taxation" and thereby the plain meaning
of the language used.
55. Now, as to the financial relations between the Union and the
States. Chapter I of Part XII contains provisions which control and
govern these relations. Put briefly, the scheme is that there is a
distribution of revenues between the Union and the States, even
though the collection may be made in some cases by the State and in
other cases by the Union; some taxes collected by the Union are
assigned to the States (Article 269); some taxes levied and collected
by the Union are distributed between the Union and the States (Articles
270 and 272); there are provisions for grants in aid of the revenues of
some States, in which jute is extensively grown, in lieu of assignment
of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export duty on jute and
jute products (Article 273); there are also provisions for grants in aid of
the revenues of such States as Parliament may determine to be in need
of assistance (Article 275), etc. These provisions indicate clearly that
there is an attempt at adjustment on a financial integration so that
neither the Union nor the States may be starved for want of financial
resources to carry on the essential and expending activities of a welfare
State. We do not see in these provisions any determining consideration
which would bear upon the exemption granted to Union property by
Article 285 and that granted to State property by Article 289. We fail to
see how a restricted meaning given to the aforesaid two articles will
facilitate the financial adjustment referred to in the earlier articles in
the same chapter or how it will retard the said adjustment if a wider
meaning is given to them. We repeat that Articles 285 and 289 must
be construed on their own terms, and it is not open to us to pervert or
change the language used therein unless there are compelling reasons
to be gathered from other relevant articles of the Constitution. We find
no such compelling reasons in the other articles of Part XII which deal
with the financial relations between the States and the Union.
56. We have earlier referred briefly to the distribution of legislative
power between the States and the Union. We have also pointed out that
so far as the taxing powers are concerned, the legislative entries in the
Seventh Schedule make a distinction, for purposes of legislative
comepetence, between the main subject of legislation and a tax in
relation thereto. Taxes on income other than agricultural income (Entry
82), duties of customs including export duties (Entry 83), and duties of
excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced in India
except alcoholic liquors for human consumption, opium, hemp and
other narcotic drugs (Entry 84) are in List 1. Therefore, under Article
246 Parliament alone has power to make laws imposing the aforesaid
taxes. This power, it has been argued on behalf of the Union, will be
seriously curtailed if a wider meaning is give to Article 289. We do not
think that this argument is any answer to the problem based before us.
The power to make laws given to parliament is subject to the provisions
of the Constitution. Article 289 is one of such provisions. Therefore, it is
no answer to the problem to say that if a wider meaning is given to
Article 289, it will curtail the powers of Parliament. If Article 289 in its
true scope and effect is capable of bearing only the wider meaning,
then it must control the power of Parliament. Article 245 says so in
express terms.
57. Another argument on this aspect of the case is that the Union
has exclusive power to regulate trade and commerce with foreign
countries, import and export across customs frontiers, and definition of
customs frontiers (Entry 41 of List I) and inter-State trade and
commerce (Entry 42 of the same List), and the power to regulate trade
and commerce with foreign countries or inter-State trade includes the
power to regulate by imposing customs duties or duties of excise. This
power, it is contended, will be very seriously affected if the exemption
from taxation given by Article 289 is held to extend to customs duties
and excise duties in respect of goods imported or exported by a State
or goods produced or manufactured by a State. We are not impressed
by the argument. The power to control trade and commerce with
foreign countries and inter-State trade is with the Union and in exercise
of that power the Union can impose regulatory measures on the
activities of a State. We are familiar now with control measures like the
Import Control Order, Essential Supplies Act, etc. Through these
regulatory measures the Union can carry into effect its power of control,
and under Article 302 Parliament may by law impose such restrictions
on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State
and another or within any part of the territory of India as may be
required in the public interest. Under Article 256 the executive power of
every State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws
made by Parliament, and the executive power of the Union shall extend
to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the Union
Government to be necessary for that purpose. Under Article 257 the
executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede
or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the
Union Government can give necessary directions in the matter to the
State Government. So far as trade and commerce with the State is
concerned, the State has power to make laws (Entry 26 of List 11). We
think, therefore that nothing serious is likely to happen, either with
regard to foreign trade or inter-State trade, if we hold on the terms of
Article 289 that State property is exempt from Union taxation including
customs duties or excise duties. Such an interpretation is not likely to
result in any interference with the power of control which the Union
undoubtedly has over foreign trade or inter-State trade.
31. The contention that the Union has the power to regulate trade by
imposition of customs duties and that power would be annulled if the
State has immunity from them in respect of things imported or
exported by it seems to us to be fallacious. The Union's power to
legislate to regulate foreign trade contained in the legislative list is
subject to the provisions of the Constitution one of which is contained
in Article 289(1 Therefore in the case of a conflict between Article 289
(1) and the legislative power to regulate foreign trade, the former must
prevail. The Union therefore cannot in view of Article 289(1) impose a
customs duty on things imported by the State and seek to justify it as
an exercise of its power to regulate foreign trade. Then, again it seems
to us that as stated in M.P.V. Sundararamier and Co. 9 case an item in
the legislative list not giving expressly the power of taxation does not
confer such a power. It would follow that the power in List I to regulate
foreign trade cannot be exercised by imposition of a tax. That has to be
done otherwise and without the imposition of a tax.
32. It is to be remembered that a striking feature of our
Constitution, which perhaps distinguishes it from some other
Constitutions, is its attempt to harmonise the interests of the individual
with those of the community and the interests of a State with those of
the Union. Our Constitution does not set up the States as rivals to one
another or to the Union. Each is intended to work harmoniously in its
own sphere without impediment by the other, with an overriding power
to the Union where it is necessary in the public interest. It is a nice
balance of jurisdiction which has worked satisfactorily so far and, it is to
be hoped, will continue to so work in times to come with good sense
prevailing on all sides. We are not prepared to say that the exemption
given to State property from Union taxation by Article 289 conflicts in
any way with the power of control which the Union has over foreign
trade or inter-State trade or disturbs the balance of jurisdictions
referred to above. It is to be remembered in this context that under
clause (2) of Article 289) the trading activities of a State and property
used for such trading activities cannot claim any exemption from Union
taxation, unless Parliament declares by law that the trading activities
are incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.
33. We have so far dealt with the problem on the relevant articles of
our Constitution. It may be helpful now to consider how a similar
problem under other Federal Constitutions has been dealt with by the
courts.
34. It is necessary here to strike a note of warning. Each
Constitution must be interpreted on its own terms and in its own
setting of history, geography and social conditions of the country and
nation for which the Constitution is made; a decision on a constitutional
problem having an apparent similarity with a problem arising under a
different Constitution may not be a sure guide as a solution of the
problem. Basically, the problem must be solved on the terms of the
Constitution under which it arises. Remembering this warning we turn
first to certain Canadian decisions on which the learned Solicitor-
General has relied. The vital core of a federal constitution, it is said, is
the division of legislative powers between the central authority and the
component States or provinces. In Sections 91 to 95 of the British
North America Act, 1867 the main lines of this division in Canada were
set forth. In Section 92 certain classes of subjects were enumerated
and the provinces were given exclusive power to make laws in relation
to matters coming within these classes of subjects. The opening para of
Section 91 gave the Dominion power "to make laws for the peace, order
and good government of Canada in relation to all matters not coming
within the classes of subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the
legislatures of the Provinces". That is to say, the residue of powers not
expressly given to the Provinces was reserved to the Dominion. The
section then proceeded with a specific enumeration of twenty-nine
classes of subjects, illustrating but not restricting the scope of the
general words used earlier in the section. Section 125 said, "No lands or
property belonging to Canada or any province shall be liable to
taxation". In Attorney-General of British Columbia V. Attorney-General
for Canada3 the facts were these. The Government of the province of
British Columbia in the exercise of its powers of control and sale of
alcoholic liquors embarked on the business of dealing in alcoholic
liquors and found itself under the necessity of importing "Johnnie
Walker Black Label" whiskey; it claimed it was exempt from payment of
the usual customs duties imposed by the Dominion Parliament and
rested its claim on Section 125. The Supreme Court of Canada held by
a majority decision that the levying of customs duties on the goods in
question was not "taxation" on "property" belonging to a province
within the purview of Section 125. The ratio of the decision,
as
expressed by Duff, J., was that customs duties as an instrument for
regulation of external trade came within the second enumerated head
under Section 91; and customs duties when levied for the purpose of
raising a revenue were, speaking broadly and in the general view
of
them, taxes on consumable commodities, taxes on consumption; while
the taxation of capital, of assets, of property was a very different
matter. Duff, J. then said:
"Our first duty in construing the section is, of course, to ascertain
the ordinary and grammatical meaning of the words but it is with the
ordinary and grammatical meaning of the words in the setting in
which they are found and as applied to the subject-matter that we
are concerned. What the section is dealing with is not taxation in
general but the liability of "property" to "taxation" and the word
taxation when used in this association has, I think prima facie a
much less comprehensive import than that which would be ascribed
to it standing by itself or in some other connections."
It is pertinent to note here that the Canadian Constitution did not
contain a key to the word "taxation" as is contained in Article 366(28)
of our Constitution. It was permissible, therefore, in the setting of the
Canadian Constitution to draw a distinction between "taxation of
property" and the "levying of customs duties" for purposes of raising
revenue. Our Constitution says in express terms that, "taxation"
includes the imposition of any tax or in impost whether general, local
or
special. It is reasonable to think that the makers of our Constitution
were aware of the distinction between the more comprehensive and
less comprehensive meaning that can be attached to the word
"taxation" and deliberately chose to mention expressly the more
comprehensive meaning in the, interpretation article, instead of leaving
it to judicial determination one may well speculate if the decision in
Canada would have been the same if there were such a provision in the
Canadian Constitution and if, as Duff, J. said, our first duty in
construing a provision is to ascertain the ordinary and grammatical
meaning, of the words used. The aforesaid decision of the Supreme
Court was approved by the Privy Council in Attorney-General of British
Columbia V. Attorney-General of Canada. Referring to Section 125 of
the British North America Act, Lord Buck master said:
"Taken alone and read without consideration of the scheme of the
statute, this section undoubtedly creates a formidable argument in
support of the appellant case. It is plain, however, that the section
cannot be regarded in this isolated and disjunctive way. It is only a
part of the general scheme established by the statute with its
different allocations of powers and authorities to the Provincial and
Dominion Government. Section 91, which assigns powers to the
Dominion, provides, among other things, that it shall enjoy exclusive
legislative authority over all matters enumerated in the Schedule,
included among which are the regulation of trade and commerce and
raising of money by any mode or system of taxation. The imposition
of customs duties upon goods imported into any country may have
many objects; it may be designed to raise revenue or to regulate
trade and commerce by protecting native industries or it may have
the, two-fold purpose of attempting to secure both ends : in either
case it is a power reserved to the Dominion. It has not indeed been
denied that such a general power does exist, but it is said that a
breach is created in the tariff wall, which the Dominion has the
power to erect, by Section 125, which enables goods of the Province
or the Dominion to pass through, unaffected by the duties. But
Section 125 cannot, in Their Lordships' opinion, be so regarded. It is
to be found in a series of sections which, beginning with Section
102, distribute as between the Dominion and the Province certain
distinct classes of property, and confer control upon the Province
with regard to the part allocated to them. But this does not exclude
the operation of Dominion laws made in exercise of the authority
conferred by Section 91. The Dominion have the power to regulate
trade and commerce throughout the Dominion, and, to the extent to
which this power applies, there is no partiality in its operation.
Section 125 must, therefore, be so considered as to prevent the
paramount purpose thus declared from being defeated."
It is obvious that the observations made by Lord Buckmaster have
reference to the special characteristics of the Canadian Constitution,
particularly the paramountcy of Dominion Power to regulate trade and
commerce throughout the Dominion to which Section 125 was made to
yield. The scheme of our Constitution is different; (1) the legislative
power of Parliament is expressly subject to other provisions of the
Constitution; (2) the power to regulate trade and commerce is assigned
both to the Union and the States; and (3) there is a distinction"
between the main subject of legislation and a tax in relation thereto.
We are not emphasising the fact that in Section 91 of the British North
America Act, 1867 occurs the expression "notwithstanding anything in
this Act", because that expression may be said to relate to the
enumeration of subjects rather than to Section 125. In our view the
decision turned upon the peculiar characteristics of the Constitution
under which the problem arose and is no safe guide for the
interpretation of our Constitution. It may perhaps be added that if the
Canadian case fell to be decided under our Constitution, clause (2) of
Article 289 would have given an adequate answer to the problem, for a
State can claim no exemption in respect of its business activities and
when British Columbia imported whiskey to embark on a business of
alcoholic liquors, it would not claim any exemption under clause (1) of
Article 289.
35. We now turn to certain Australian decisions. Speaking generally,
the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1900 creates a
federation which resembles the United States in the manner in which
powers are assigned to the Federal Government with a residue in the
States or the people. It resembles the Canadian Constitution in the
attempt to adapt the machinery of responsible government to a federal
system, but differs from the Canadian and our Constitution in the
division of powers. As regards the Commonwealth, Section 51 contains
a list of thirty-nine enumerated powers with which it is vested. It says
inter alia that, subject to the Constitution, the Parliament shall have
power to make laws for the peace, order and good Government of the
Commonwealth with respect to-
(i) Trade and commerce with other countries, and among the
States; and
(ii) Taxation, but so as not to discriminate between the States or
parts of States.
Section 52 defines the cases in which the power of the Commonwealth
is to be exclusive. As regards the State, the broad principle of the
division is found in Section 107 which in effect says that the powers of
the States are left unaffected by the Constitution except insofar as the
contrary is expressly provided; subject to that each State remains
sovereign within its own sphere. Now, Section 114 of the
Commonwealth of Australia Act, 1900 says:
"A State shall not, without the consent of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth, raise or maintain any naval or military force, or
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to the
Commonwealth, non shall the Commonwealth impose any tax on
property of any kind belonging to a State."
36. The decision on which the learned Solicitor-General has placed
the greatest reliance is Attorney-General of New South Wales V.
Collector of Customs for N.S.W.. That was a case in which an action
was brought by the Attorney-General of New South Wales to recover
from the Collector of Customs for New South Wales a particular sum
being the amount of duties of Customs demanded by the defendant
upon the importation into the Commonwealth of certain steel rails, and
paid under protest by the Government of the State of New South
Wales. The rails in question were purchased in England by the State for
use in the construction of the railways of the State. On their arrival at
the port of Sydney the defendant claimed that they were liable to
customs duties. The State disputed its liability to pay duty and
deposited the amount claimed under protest. A case was stated for the
opinion of the High Court of Australia on two main questions : (1)
whether the provisions of the Customs Act, 1901 and the Customs
Tariff 1922, affected the Crown as representing the community of New
South Wales: and (2) whether the steel rails were exempt from duty bv
virtue of Section 114 of the Constitution. So far as the first question
was concerned Griffith, C.J. said that it was concluded by the decision
in King V. Sutton14. So far as the second question was concerned, the
majority of Judges held that customs duties whether capable or not of
being included in the word "tax", are not a tax upon property in the
sense in which that expression is used in Section 114. Isaacs, J. held
that duties of customs, as ordinarily understood and as enacted in the
Customs Act were imposed on the goods themselves, and, therefore,
"on property" within the meaning of Section 114, but they did not come
within the meaning of the word "tax" as used in that section and the
Constitution generally. Griffith, C.J. not only drew a distinction between
direct and indirect taxation but also held that Section 114 applied only
to property within the limits of the Commonwealth and did not apply to
goods in process of coming within those limits. He further held that the
power to impose taxation conferred by Section 51 (ii) as well as the
power to regulate importation conferred by Section 51 (i) were
paramount and unlimited and a construction which would make the
words of Section 114 consistent with giving full effect to the plain
intention of Section 51 should be preferred. He proceeded on the
footing that the words of Section 114 were capable of two
constructions. Then he observed:
"There is no doubt that in some contexts the words 'impose any
tax' might be capable of application to duties of customs. Non is
there any doubt that the word "taxation" in Section 51 (ii) includes
the levying of duties of customs. But these duties are nowhere in the
Constitution described as a 'tax', unless the use of the word
"taxation", in Section 51 (ii) is such a description of them; nor is the
levying of them ever spoken of as the imposition of a tax on
property. Section 86 speaks of 'the collection and control of duties of
Customs and of Excise'. Sections 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, all
speak of the 'imposition' of duties of Customs. Such duties are life
imposed in respect of goods and in one sense, no doubt, 'upon'
goods, which is only another way of saying that the word 'upon' is
sometimes used as synonymous with 'in respect of'. In the same
way the word 'upon' or 'on' is used colloquially in speaking of stamp
duties, succession duties, and other forms of indirect taxation, as
taxes on deeds, etc. or on real, and personal property. Yet it is
recognised that these forms of taxation are not really taxation upon
property but upon operations or movements of property."
37. Higgins, J. based his decision on a somewhat different ground.
He said that he could not confidently take the ground that a customs
duty could not be a tax within the meaning of the word "tax" in Section
114. He said that Section 114 did not use the expression "tax of any
kind", but spoke of "any tax on property of any kind belonging to a
State". He derived the idea of ownership as the crucial test by reason of
the use of the expression "property of any kind belonging etc." The
learned Judge observed:
"The prohibition as to State taxation was, no doubt, suggested by
the British North America Act, Section 125. But by substituting the
word "property" for 'lands or property', the intention - if it was the
intention - to confine the prohibition to what are known as 'property
taxes' has been somewhat obscured. Property is, by the Constitution,
subject to be taxed at the instance of the State as well as of the
Commonwealth Customs taxation is solely a matter for the
Commonwealth (Section 90). Taxes of retaliation, as between the
States and the Commonwealth, are possible as to property taxes;
but are impossible as to Customs taxes. But whatever may have
been the motive which led to this express prohibition, in addition to
the prohibition which this Court has held to be implied from the
nature of the Constitution as to the taxation of State or
Commonwealth agents, the phraseology is such as to point to
taxation of property as property as being the subject of this express
prohibition. 'A State shall not, without the consent of the Parliament
or the Commonwealth impose any tax on property of any kind
belonging to the Commonwealth, nor shall the Commonwealth
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to a State'."
38. We are of the view that the considerations which led the learned
Judges to the conclusion at which they arrived are not considerations
which are available to us under our Constitution. We are dealing with
an exemption clause under Article 289(1); that exemption clause has
to be interpreted with the key furnished by Article 366(28). Under our
Constitution the word "taxation" has been defined by the Constitution
itself and we are not free to give a different meaning to the word so as
to make a distinction between direct and indirect taxation, or between
taxation on property within the limits of the Commonwealth and
property in the process of coming within those limits; nor are we are
free to make a distinction between a tax on property and a tax in
respect of property. It is further significant that Section 114 of the
Commonwealth of Australia Act, 1900 uses the expression "tax, on
property". Our exemption clause in Article 289 uses a different
phraselogy which does not qualify the word "tax" in any way, but says
that the property and income of a State shall be exempt from any tax
or impost whether general, local or special to be imposed by the Union.
Even in the matter of Section 114 of the Commonwealth of Australia
Act, 1900 there was a difficulty in drawing the distinction between
property and the importation of property, because of the use of Section
114 of the expression "of any kind" in Section 114. This difficulty is
pointed out by Nicholas in The Australian Constitution (2nd Edn., p.
143). He says:
"The solution was found in distinguishing between property and
the importation of property, and between duties and taxation as
those terms are used in the Constitution. Both distinctions involved
some difficulties, for Section 114 uses the words "of any kind" and
the only express authority to impose duties is to be found in Section
51 (ii). The policy thus sanctioned has not been approved in all
States alike. States have been compelled to pay duties on imported
materials, including locomotives of a type not made in Australia, so
that the proceeds of their loans have been reduced for the benefit of
the Commonwealth revenue and the power of exemption has not
been used where it might have been (Report of the Royal
Commission, p. 361)."
39. Apropos the Australian case it may perhaps be pointed out that
under our Constitution the "taxing power" is treated as different from
the "regulatory power". Again, as we have stated earlier, the
classification between "direct" and "indirect" taxes has not been
adopted by our Constitution. Moreover the problem which falls for our
consideration under Article 289 is not one which has to be examined
from the point of view of legislative power. The problem before us is
really the extent of the immunity or exemption granted by Article 289.
In Attorney-General for Saskatchewan V. Canadian Pacific Railway
Company the question arose of construing an exemption granted to
15
the Canadian Pacific Railway Company by clause 16 of a contract
between the Canadian Government and the said company. The
exemption clause provided inter alia that "the Canadian Pacific Railway,
and all stations and station grounds, workshops, buildings, yards and
other property etc. shall be forever free from taxation by the Dominion,
or by any province hereafter to be established, or by any municipal
corporation therein". The Province of Saskatchewan was constituted in
1905 and in purported compliance with its obligations under the
aforesaid exemption clause, the Dominion Parliament provided in
Section 24 of the Saskatchewan Act of 1905 that "the powers hereby
granted to the said Province shall be exercised subject to the provisions
of clause 16 of the contract". The Canadian Pacific Railway Company
raised the question that it was free from business tax imposed by the
City Act, 1947, of Saskatchewan by reason of the exemption clause.
Before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council it was argued on
behalf of the Province of Saskatchewan that the exemption was limited
to taxes imposed upon the owner in respect of the ownership of the
property liable to taxation, but the exemption did not extend to taxes
levied upon the company in of it business of operating it. Dealing with
this argument the Judicial Committee said:
"While the language of clause 16 is that the property shall be
'forever free from taxation' by any Province thereafter to be
established, it is said that to tax the company in respect to the use
of the property (itself a term of the exemption), is not to tax the
property and that that alone is prohibited."
Their Lordships construed the exemption on its own terms and held
that a tax upon the owner in respect of the use of the property was as
much within the exemption as a tax on the property itself. In our view
the exemption clause in Article 289 must similarly be construed on its
own terms. We further consider that no question of paramountcy of
legislative power arises in that connection.
40. On behalf of the States, except the State of Maharashtra which
has supported the stand of the Union in the matter of excise duties
only, it has been very strongly contended before us that for the purpose
of the exemption clause in Article 289 nothing turns upon the
distinction between a tax on property as such and a tax in relation to
property. Both affect property and if property is to be free from Union
taxation, it makes no difference whether the tax is on; the ownership or
possession of property or is on its production or manufacture or its
importation or exportation. A large number of decisions were cited
before us as to the true nature of customs duties and excise duties.
There are a number of decisions of this Court where it has been held
that a duty of excise is a tax on goods produced or manufactured in the
taxing country; similarly customs or export duty is a duty imposed on
goods which are the subject of importation or exportation. This is also
clear from the provisions relating to "draw back" in the matter of
customs duties and refund rules in the matter of excise duty. We
consider it unnecessary to examine these decisions in detail for the
purpose of the problem before us. It is enough to point out that in
order to determine whether an impost, be it a tax, duty or fee, falls
under one item or the other of the Legislative Lists in the Seventh
Schedule, it may be necessary to examine the nature of the tax, duty or
fee. As the Judicial Committee pointed out in Governor-General-in-
Council V. Province of Madras16 a duty of excise is primarily a duty
levied on a manufacturer or producer in respect of the commodity
manufactured or produced; it is however a tax on goods, to be
distinguished from a tax on sales or the proceeds of sales of goods; the
two taxes, the one levied on the manufacturer in respect of his goods,
the other on a vendor in respect of his sales may in one sense overlap.
But in law there is no overlapping, the taxes being separate and
distinct imposts. But, as we have said earlier, the problem before us is
not the nature of the impost but rather the extent of the immunity
granted by Article 289 of the Constitution. The extent of that immunity,
as we have indicated earlier, really depends on the true scope and
effect of Articles 245, 285, 289 and 366(28) of the Constitution. In the
matter of the extent of the immunity the distinction between a tax on
property as such or in relation to property is really of no materiality. A
tax on property as such and a tax in relation to property both affect
property and if the true scope and effect of the articles which we
have mentioned is that State property, must be exempt from
imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or special, by
the Union, then the distinction drawn between a tax on property as
such and a tax in relation to property loses its significance.
41. For the reasons given above our opinion is that the answers to
the three questions referred to this Court must be in the affirmative
and against the stand taken by the Union.
M.
HIDAYATULLAH, J. - As a result of a proposal to introduce in
Parliament a Bill to amend Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878
(Act 8 of 1878) and Section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
(Act 1 of 1944) with a view to applying the provisions of these two Acts
to goods belonging to the State Governments, the President of India
has been pleased to refer under Article 143 of the Constitution, three
questions for the opinion of this Court to ascertain if the proposed
amendments would be constitutional. These questions are:
'(1) Do the provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution preclude
the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of, customs
duties on the import or export of the property of a State used for
purposes other than those specified in clause (2) of that article?
(2) Do the provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution of India
preclude the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of,
excise duties on the production or manufacture in India of the
property of a State used for purposes other than those specified in
Clause (2) of that article?
(3) Will sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act,
1878 (Act 8 of 1878), and sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (Act 1 of 1944) as amended by
the Bill set out in the Annexure be inconsistent with the provisions of
Article 289 of the Constitution of India?"
44. The sections of the two Acts as they stand today provide for the
levy of customs duties and duties of excise on all goods belonging to a
State but only if used for purposes of trade or business of any kind
carried on by or on behalf of that Government, or of any operations
connected with such trade or business, as they apply in respect of
goods not belonging to any Government. These two sections as at
present read:
"20. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, customsduties shall be
levied at such rates as may be prescribed by or under any law for the
time from being in force, on-
(a) goods imported or exported by sea into or from any
customs-port from or to any foreign port;
(b) opium, salt or salted fish imported by sea from any
customs-port into any other customs-port;
(c) goods brought from any foreign port to any customs-port,
and, without payment of duty, there transhipped for, or thence
carried to, and imported at, any other customs-port; and
(d) goods brought in bond from one customs-port to another.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all
goods belonging to the Government of a State and used for the
purposes of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on
behalf of, that Government, or of any operations connected with such
trade or business as they apply in respect of goods not belonging to
any Government.
Explanation.- In this sub-section 'State' does not include a Union
territory'.
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may
be prescribed duties of excise on all excisable goods other than salt
which are produced or manufactured in India and a duty on salt
manufactured in, or imported by land into, any part of India as, and
at the rates, set forth in the First Schedule.
(1-A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all
excisable goods other than salt which are produced or manufactured
in India by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State other than a
Union territory and used for the purposes of a trade or business of
any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, that Government, or of any
operations connected with such trade or business as they apply in
respect of goods which are not produced or manufactured by any
Government.
*
*
* 11
The proposal is to amend the two sections as follows:
Amendment of Section 20, Act 8 of 1878 "In Section 20 of the
Sea Customs Act, 1878, for sub-section (2) the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of
all goods belonging to the Government as they apply in respect of
goods not belonging to the Government.'"
Amendment of Section 3, Act 1 of 1944 "In Section 3 of the
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, for sub-section (1-A) the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
(1-A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect
of all excisable goods other than salt which are produced or
manufactured in India by, or on behalf of, the Government as
they apply in respect of goods which are not produced or
manufactured by the Government.'"
45. The question is one of great importance not only to the States
but also to the Union. What the Union wishes to do is to put the State
Governments on its taxpayers, list, not only in respect of their trading
activities but also in respect of their governmental functions. If the
Constitution does not prohibit it there can be no doubt about the
power. The sole question thus is whether the Constitution has not
prohibited this by Article 289 to which reference will be made
presently.
46. Our Republic is composed of States with their own Governments.
These Governments possess and exercise their own powers like any
other Government. Then there is the Union Government which within its
own sphere is supreme but its supremacy is not a general or undefined
supremacy. It is in certain respects curtailed to give supremacy to the
State Governments. One such curtailment is to be found in Article 289
(1) and the only question that can really arise is to what extent does
that restriction go?
47. We are concerned here with the taxing power of Parliament
which admittedly extends to the levying of duties of customs including
export duties (Entry 83 List I, 7th Schedule) and duties of excise on
tobacco and other goods manufactured in India except those expressly
mentioned in the entry (Entry 84, ibid). In addition to the powers of
taxation, Parliament has exclusive regulatory power over "trade and
commerce with foreign countries; import and export across customs
frontiers" (Entry 41, ibid) and also over "inter-State trade and
commerce" (Entry 42 ibid). The power derived from these entries is
plenary and can only be the subject of restraint if the Constitution so
provides. Under Article 245, this power is expressly stated to be subject
to the provisions of the Constitution. By Article 246, which divides the
subject-matter of laws to be made by Parliament and by the
legislatures of the States, exclusive power, is given to Parliament in
respect of matters enumerated in the Union List. Similarly exclusive
power is conferred on State Legislatures in respect of matters
enumerated in the State List. There is a third list called the "Concurrent
List" and it contains matters over which Parliament and the legislatures
of the States have power to make laws. Inconsistency between the laws
is avoided by Article 254 which makes the law made by Parliament,
whether before or after the law made by the State Legislature, to
prevail over the latter. In addition to these provisions Parliament has
power to make laws for the territory of India not included in a State
even on matters enumerated in the State List and also exclusive power
to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the
concurrent or the State Lists. This, in brief, is the scheme of legislative
relations and the distribution of legislative power under our
Constitution. The three Lists contain entries which enable the raising of
money by way of taxes, duties and fees. The taxation entries are to be
found in the Union and State Lists only. There are only two entries in
the Concurrent List which deal with (a) stamp duties other than duties
or fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including rates of
stamp duties (Entry 44, Concurrent List) in and (b) fees in respect of
any of the matters in that List but not including fees taken in any court
(Entry 47, ibid). The other two lists contain entries which enable the
Union and the States to impose taxes, duties and fees to raise revenue
for their respective purposes. These entries, as far as human ingenuity
could achieve, attempt to make a clear-cut and fair division. There is an
elaborate procedure for distribution of the proceeds of some of the
taxes raised by the Union among the States to finance their activities
but we are not presently concerned with it.
48. The powers of taxation being plenary except insofar as the
exercise of the power could be said to trench upon the exclusive
domain outlined and demarcated in a rival list, there was a danger in
the dual form of Government, which has been adopted in our Republic,
of one Government taxing another whether to start with or as a
retaliatory measure. Such a possibility had earlier been envisaged by
other Federal Constitutions either expressly or as an implication of the
dual form and immunity of some kind had been conferred in respect of
property, etc. between the respective Governments. Our Constitution
has also made provision in that behalf. Those provisions are to be found
in Parts XII and XIII. The latter part has been the subject of much
anxious thought recently in this Court, and it provides for freedom of
trade, commerce and intercourse within the territory of India. Articles
285-89 of Part XII provide for immunity from tax in certain other
circumstances. Of these, Article 286, which involves restrictions on the
imposition of tax on the sale and purchase of goods, has been before
this Court on many occasions and need not be considered. Article 285
provides for exemption of the property of the Union from State taxes,
and Article 289, for exemption of property and income of a State from
Union taxation. We are primarily concerned with Article 289 in this
reference. Articles 287 and 288 provide for special exemption from
taxes on electricity in certain cases and are not relevant to the present
purpose.
49. Putting aside Articles 286, 287 and 288, I set out below Articles
285 and 289:
"285. (1) The property of the Union shall, save insofar as
Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes
imposed by a State or by any authority within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise;
provides, prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax
on any property of the Union to which such property was
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution liable or
treated as liable, so long as that tax continuous to be levied in that
State.
289. (1) The property and income of a State shall be exempt from
Union taxation.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing,
or authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as
Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of
any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or
any operations connected therewith, or any property used or
occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income
accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or
to any class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law
declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government."
These are the provisions of the Constitution which the President of
India has in mind in making this reference to determine whether the
proposed extension of customs and excise duties to all goods belonging
to the State Governments, imported or exported in the one case and
manufactured or produced in the other, would not offend Article 289.
50. It may be mentioned at this stage that under the Government of
India Act, 1935, Sections 154 and 155 also provided for similar
immunity, but these sections were slightly differently worded. I quote
these sections for further comparison:
"154. Exemption of certain public property from taxation.-
Property vested in His Majesty for purposes of the Government of the
Federation shall, save insofar as any Federal law may otherwise
provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by, or by any authority
within, a Province or Federated State:
Provided that, until any Federal law otherwise provides, any
property so vested which was immediately before the
commencement of Part III of this Act liable, or treated as liable, to
any such tax, shall, so long as that tax continues, continue to be
liable, or to be treated as liable, thereto.
155. Exemption of Provincial Governments and Rulers of
Federated States in respect of Federal taxation.-(1) Subject as
hereinafter provided, the Government of a Province and the Rulen of
a Federated State shall not be liable to Federal taxation in respect of
lands or buildings situate in British India or income accruing arising
or received in British India;
Provided that-
(a) Where a trade or business of any kind is carried on by or on
behalf of the Government of a Province in any port of British India
outside that Province or by a Ruler in any part of British India,
nothing in this sub-section shall exempt that Government or Ruler
from any Federal taxation in respect of that trade or business, or
any operations connected therewith, or any income arising in
connection therewith, or any property occupied for the purposes
thereof;
(b) nothing in this sub-section shall exempt a Rulen from any
Federal taxation in respect of any lands, buildings or income being
his personal property or personal income.
(2) Nothing in this Act affects any exemption from taxation
enjoyed as of right at the passing of this Act by the Ruler of Indian
State in respect of any Indian Government securities issued before
that date."
51. As I have said already, dual Government in a Federation requires
the protection of one Government from taxation by the other. In the
United States of America, there is no specific provision but such an
immunity is held to be implied in the nature of dual Government. In
Canada, Section 125 of the British North America Act, 1867, provides:
"No lands or property belonging to Canada or any Province shall
be liable to taxation."
In the Australian Constitution, which, one of its framers (Mr Justice
Higgins) described as a "pedantic limitation" of the American
Constitution, Section 114 provides:
"A State shall not without the consent of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth, raise or maintain any naval or military Force, or
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to the
Commonwealth, non shall the Commonwealth impose any tax on
property of any kind belonging to a State."
Even in Constitutions which are comparatively recent, like those of
Argentina and Brazil, we find similar provisions. Article 32 of the
Constitution of Brazil provides:
"The Union, the States and the Municipalities are forbidden-
*
*
*
(c) to tax goods, income or services of each other."
52. In the arguments before us at which the Solicitor-General of
India for the Union and Advocates-General of some of the States and
other learned counsel assisted, two distinct lines of thought were
discernible. One line was to rely upon certain American, Canadian and
Australian decisions where restrictions under the respective
Constitutions were either upheld or negatived, and then to reason from
analogy. The other line was to take the words of the Constitution and to
see what the Constitution has meant to say. These two lines represent
the classic approach to the interpretation and construction of a written
Constitution. Cooley explained the difference between them
(Constitutional Limitations, p. 97) by saying that interpretation "is the
art of finding out the true sense of any form of words; that is, the sense
which their author intended to convey", while construction is "the
drawing of conclusions, respecting subjects that lie beyond the direct
expression of the text, from elements known from and given in the
text; conclusions which are in the spirit, though not within the letter of
the text". With a written Constitution, such as we have, the task in
most cases must be one of interpretation, but where the language of
the Constitution suggests that what was previously passed upon by the
Superior Courts of other countries in parallel matters has obviously
been taken as a guide, one may have to go a little further than the text
to find out what was being sought to be achieved and what was being
avoided. I am aware that in Webb V. Outtrim 1. Lord Halsbury observed
that it was impossible to say of the framers of the Australian
Constitution what their supposed preferences were. I am also conscious
of the fact that the Indian Constitution is a document framed by the
Indian people for the Indian people. In interpreting the Constitution,
one must not completely cast off the moorings to the text of the
Constitution and drift into alien seas. I may say, however, that there
are indications in the Constitution itself of compelling force which show
that the framers were desiring to avoid some of the implications of
these rulings of the Superior Courts of the United States, Canada and
Australia. The observations of these learned Courts have been pressed
into service by counsel before us, as they form the historical
background of the provisions of our Constitution. I also find
it
convenient to deal with them first as they prepare us to understand our
own Constitution. Perhaps by seeing the problem in other settings and
environments, one is able to see it better in one's own.
53. I shall begin with the United States of America, because the
doctrine had its first beginnings there. In the United States, the
immunity of one Government from taxation by the other arose as an
indispensible implication of the dual system. It had its roots in what Mr
Justice Frankfurter described as a "seductive cliche" of Chief Justice
Marshall in McCulloch V. Maryland10 that the power to tax involves the
power to destroy by the tax. But the doctrine was more than a mere
cliche; it was stated by Chief Justice Marshall to be fundamental to dual
Government. Let me recall his words:
"If we measure the power of taxation residing in a State, by the
extent of sovereignty which the people of a single State possess, and
can confer on its Government we have an intelligible standard,
applicable to every case which the power may be applied. We have a
principle which leaves the power of taxing the people and property of
a State unimpaired, which leaves to a State the command of all its
resources, and which places beyond its reach, all those which are
conferred by the people of the United States on the Government of
the Union, and all those means which are given for the purpose of
carrying those powers into execution. We have a principle which is
safe for the States, and safe for the Union. We are relieved, as we
ought to be, from clashing sovereignty; from interfering powers;
from a repugnancy between a right in one Government to pull down
what there is an acknowledged right in another to build up from the
incompatibility of a right in one Government, to destroy what there
is a right in another to preserve. We are not driven to the perplexing
inquiry, so unfit for the judicial department, what degree of taxation
is the legitimate use and what degree may amount to the abuse of
the power."
The Chief Justice, therefore, concluded in these famous words:
"The Court has bestowed on this subject its most deliberate"
consideration. The result is a conviction that, the States have no
power, by taxation or otherwise, to retard, impede, burden or in any
manner control, the operations of the Constitution laws enacted by
Congress to carry into execution the powers vested in the general
Government. This is we think, the unavoidable consequence of that
supremacy which the Constitution has declared."
This doctrine had early dissenters and chief among them was Mr Justice
Bradley who described it as founded on a fallacy which would lead to
mischievous consequences. Collector V. Day17 Mr Culloch case involved
a State tax which was really discriminatory against the operations of a
national bank and could have been decided without laying down any
such proposition. But the doctrinewas accepted and it grew and grew.
It took in not only the property and activities of a Government within
its protection but also all means, agencies and instrumentalities by
which Government acts. It was only after many years that the reach of
the doctrine began to be curtailed. In the Panhandle Oil Co. V.
Missippi18 Mr Justice Holmes did away with the cliche by the trenchant
observation "the power to tax is not the power to destroy while this
Court sits". But it was only the increasing dissents which led to the
overthrow of a good dozen cases in Graves V. New York
54. I need not enter into the history of the process by which the
doctrine was curtailed. | shall refer to that part only which has
withstood the attrition to which the doctrine was subjected. In the
State of South Carolina V. U.S. a case relied upon by the States to
explain Article 289), the State had taken over the business of selling
intoxicating liquors in the exercise of its sovereign powers. The
dispensing and selling agents of the State were charged, under a
Federal Revenue Statute, an excise licence tax which was imposed on
all sellers of intoxicating liquors. It was held that the agents were not
protected by the doctrine because they were doing business and not
carrying on functions of Government. Mr Justice Brewer gave the reason
in these words:
"Mingling the thought of profit with the necessity of regulation
may induce the State to take possession, in like manner, of tobacco,
oleomargarine and all other objects of internal revenue tax. If one
State finds it thus profitable other States may follow, and the whole
body of internal revenue tax be thus stricken down."
Mr Justice Brewer pointed out that in this way control of all public
utilities, of gas, of water and of the rail-road systems would pass to the
States and the States would become owner of all property and business
and then what would the States contribute to the revenues of the
nation? He held that the tax was not imposed on any property
belonging to the State, but was a charge on a business before any
profits were realized therefrom, or in other words, upon the means by
which that property was acquired but before it was acquired. In that
case, the distinction between State as a trader and State as
Government was made. This distinction was emphasized later in Ohio V.
Helvering where it was observed:
"When a State enters the market place seeking customers it
divests itself of its quasi sovereignty pro tanto and takes on the
character of a trader so far at least, as the taxing power of the
Federal government is concerned."
In subsequent cases, this distinction between governmental functions
and functions as a trader was preserved. The term "governmental
functions" was further qualified by the words "strictly", "essential" or
"usual". It was even said that these functions must be those in which
State Governments must be "traditionally engaged", otherwise they
would not be able to withdraw from the taxing power of the general
Government. A certain amount of strictness in the application of the
doctrine was noticeable in the University of Illinois V. U.S.A.
22
In
that
case, the University imported scientific apparatus for use in one of its
departments. Customs duties were exacted which were paid under
protest, the University claiming to be an instrumentality of the State of
Illinois, discharging a governmental function. The Tariff Act of 1922,
under which the impost was made, was an Act to provide revenue, to
regulate commerce with foreign countries, and to encourage the
industries of the U.S.A. Relying on Gibbons V. Ogden it was pointed
out in the case that the power to regulate was plenary and exclusive
and its exercise could not be limited, qualified or impeded to any extent
by State action and that there was a denial to the States to lay imports
or duties on imports and exports without the consent of the Congress
(Articles, 110, 2). It was, therefore, laid down that the principle of
duality did not touch regulation of commerce with foreign countries. It
was argued that the Tariff Act laid a tax and the tax fell upon an
instrumentality. It was conceded that it might be so, but it was pointed
out that the imposition of customs duties could be for purposes of
regulation and that the provisions took into account foreign trade and
regulated it and revenue was incidental and the protection did not go
beyond-governmental functions. Chief Justice Hughes then observed:
"The fact that the State in the performance of State functions may
use imported articles does not mean that the importation is a
function of the State Government independent of federal power.
*
*
"To permit the States or their instrumentalities to import
commodities for their own use, regardless of the requirements
imposed by the Congress would undermine, if not destory, the single
control which it was one of the dominant purposes of the
Constitution to create. It is for the Congress to decide to what extent
if at all, the States and their instrumentalities shall be relieved of the
payment of duties on imported articles."
55. The regulatory aspect of taxes on commerce was again recently
the subject of discussion in the United States Supreme Court in what is
popularly called the "soft drink case". Natural mineral waters in the
State were bottled and sold and it was held by majority that a non-
discriminatory tax on all persons was payable by the Government of the
State because in selling mineral waters, even though a part of the
natural resources of the State, it was not carrying on a governmental
function and the tax did not affect its sovereignty. Mr Justice
Frankfurter said:
"Surely the power of Congress to lay taxes has impliedly no less a
reach than the power of the Congress to regulate commerce. There
are of course State activities and State owned property that partake
of uniqueness from the point of view of inter-governmental relations.
These inherently constitute a class by themselves. Only a State can
own a State house; only a State can get income by taxing. These
could not be included for purposes of federal taxation in any abstract
category of tax payers without taxing the State as a State. But so
long as Congress generally taps a source of revenue by whomsoever
earned and not uniquely capable of being earned only by a State, the
Constitution of the United States does not forbid it merely because
its incidence falls also on a State. If Congress desires, it may of
course leave untaxed enterprises pursued by States for the public
good while it taxes such enterprises organised for private ends."
56. Mr Justice Frankfurter rejected as untenable such criteria as
"proprietary" against "governmental" activities of the States or
"historically sanctioned activities of Government" or "activities
conducted mostly for profit", and found "no restriction upon Congress
to include the States in leving a tax exacted equally from private
persons upon the same subject-matter". Mr Justice Rutledge did not
agree with the last extension but chose not to differ. Chief Justice
Stone, with whom Justices Read, Murphy and Burton agreed, pointed
out that in the United States the cases were divisible into two parts -
those in which there was taxing of property, income or activities of the
State, and those in which the tax was laid on agents and
instrumentalities of the State, which tax was said to impede or cripple
indirectly the State. They held that the distinction between
governmental and proprietary interests was untenable, and agreed that
a non-discriminatory tax could sometimes be laid on the State,
provided it did not affect its sovereignty, but the essence of the matter
was not that the tax was non-discriminatory but because unduly
interfered with the performance of the State's functions of Government.
Holding, therefore, that the tax in question there did not curtail the
State Government in its functions, it was pointed out that the
Constitution could not be read to give "immunity to the State's mineral
water business from federal taxation" or to deny to the federal
government power to levy the tax Mr Justice Jackson took no part but
Justices Douglas and Black entered a powerful dissent. The opinion was
based on the theory that the taxing power of either Government if
exercised against the other was likely to affect the cost of its operation
and "if the federal Government can place the local Governments on its
tax collector's list, then, capacity to serve the needs of their citizens is
at once hampered or curtailed".
57. From the above analysis of the American case (and all of them,
were within the ken of our Constituent Assembly), we gather that the
immunity now does not extend to agents, means or instrumentalities as
it
did previously, and that it does not extend to any trading or business
activity of the State even though the trading involves natural resources
(though it is conceded that the Congress may excuse trading in a
suitable case). It extends to the property of the State owned as State
but not in the course of trading. The marginal cases are those where
the tax which is laid, interferes unduly with the State as a State, and it
is held by narrow majority that except for such marginal cases, the
States are not immune. The contention on behalf of some of the States
is that the distinction made by Brewer, J., in the South Carolina case6
has been preserved in the scheme of Article 289, and if import and
export are in the discharge of essential governmental functions, there
must be exemption from customs duty but not if there is trading.
Similarly, it is contended that there is exemption from excise duty
based on the same or similar considerations. In other words, the claim
is that our Constitution reproduces in its broad features the doctrine as
understood in the United States till the time of the framing of our
Constitution.
58. There can be no doubt that the broad features of Article 289
correspond to the American doctrine as understood before our own
Constitution was framed. Article 289 grants an exemption from taxation
to the property and income of the States. What that comprehends I am
leaving over for discussion till after I have touched upon the Canadian
and Australian Constitutions and referred to cases decided in
connection therewith. Article 289, however, quite clearly limits the
exemption against taxation in such a way as to make the trading
activities of the States and the property used or occupied for the
purposes of such trade or business, liable to taxation. This follows
indubitably from clause (2). Without attempting to expound
exegetically the words of that clause and its relation to clauses (1) and
(3), I find it sufficient to say that clause (2) puts outside the exemption
granted by clause (1) all trading activities of the State and property
used in that connection. The force of the opening words "Nothing in
clause (1)' does not make clause (2) an exemption to clause (1). These
words emphasize that the existence of the power declared by clause (2)
is really unaffected by clause (1). This is the trend of opinion in the
U.S.A., as I have pointed out. The same opening words are repeated in
clause (3) and the final words "incidental to the ordinary functions of
Government" show that even trading can be regarded, if Parliament so
declares by law, as "incidental to the ordinary functions of
Government". This is again recognized in the U.S.A. where statutes
sometimes include special exemptions in favour of the trading activities
of the States.
59. It follows, therefore, that the general outline of Article 289 is
based upon the American pattern that the property and income of the
States are not to be taxed, that trading is not an ordinary function of
Government though Parliament may by law declare that any trade or
business or any class of trade or business is incidental to functions of
Government.
60. So far I have dealt with the general pattern only and traced its
similarity to the American doctrine. It may be pointed out even at this
stage that there is no immunity in respect of the agents or
instrumentalities of Government in our Constitution. The exemption is
in respect of the "property and income of a State". The force of these
words appears from other cases under the Canadian and Australian
Constitutions. I shall deal with Australia first, because the leading case
under that Constitution was decided before the leading case under the
Canadian Constitution.
61. I have already quoted Section 114 of the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act. The material portion of it may be reproduced
here:
"A State shall not
impose any tax on property of any kind
belonging to the Commonwealth, nor shall the Commonwealth
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to the State."
The doctrine of immunity of instrumentalities as an implied prohibition
in the Constitution was held in applicable to Australian Constitution by
the Supreme Court of Victoria before the High Court was constituted
but the High Court in the first case applied the doctrine. See D, Emden
V.
Pedder24.
It is hardly necessary to trace the history of the doctrine as
it was rejected in what is called the Engineers case25 It was, however,
held in D, Emden V. Pedder10 that section 114 only referred to "tax on
property" as such and was a prohibition different from that contained in
the American Doctrine. The matter came to a head in two cases in
1908. In King V. Suttom26 a quantity of wire netting purchased in
England and imported into the Commonwealth by the Government of
New South Wales was landed at port of Sydney. Without any entry
having been made or passed and without the permission of the
customs officers, it was removed under the executive authority of the
State. The Customs Authorities proceeded against the defendant under
Sections 36 and 236 of the Customs Act of 1901. It was held that the
Customs Act, 1901, was a valid exercise of the exclusive power of the
Commonwealth conferred by Sections 52 (ii), 86 and 90 of the
Constitution Act to impose, collect and control duties of customs and
excise, and the Act applied to goods imported by the Government of a
State just as it applied to private persons and the goods which were
subject to the control of the Customs Authorities under section 30 could
not be removed contrary to the provisions of the Act. On the following
day, the High Court delivered judgment in the Attorney-General of New
South Wales V. Collector of Customs3 in which Section 114 was
considered. That was an action brought to recover from the defendant
the amount of customs duties demanded and paid under protest in
respect of the importation into the commonwealth of certain steel rails
by the Government of the State of New South Wales. The rails were
purchased in England and were shipped to the Secretary for Public
Works of the State. At that time the current of authority in Australia
was in favour of applying the American doctrine of immunity of
instrumentalities as laid down by the High Court in D'Emden V.
Pedder though in that case, it was already held that Section 114 dealt
with "tax on property and it was a very different matter. The State
sought the protection of Section 114, It was held that the doctrine had
no application to powers expressly granted, to the Commonwealth
which by their very nature involved control of some operations of the
State Government and one such grant was the power to make laws with
respect to external trade. It was further held that the imposition of
customs duties being a mode of regulating trade and commerce with
other countries as well as an exercise of the taxing power, the right of
the States to import goods must be subject to the Commonwealth
power. The Commonwealth power was said to flow from Section 51 [(i)
and (ii)] which read:
'51. The Parliament shall, subject to the Constitution, have power
to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the
Commonwealth with respect to; -
(i) Trade and commerce with other countries, and among the
States.
(ii) Taxation; but so as not to discriminate between States or
part of States".
In this connection, one other section may be quoted:
"55. Tax Bill.-Laws imposing taxation shall deal only with the
imposition of taxation, and any provision herein dealing with any
other matter shall be of no effect.
Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing duties of customs
or of excise, shall deal with one subject of taxation only; but laws
imposing duties of customs shall deal with duties of customs only,
and laws imposing duties of excise shall deal with duties of excise
only."
62. In deciding that the State Government was required to pay
customs duties on import by it, the provisions of Section 114
notwithstanding, the learned Judges gave widely different reasons.
Those reasons were pressed into service in the arguments before us,
and I shall briefly notice them. Chief Justice Griffith found antinomy in
the power of taxation and regulation conferred by Section 51 on the one
hand and the exemption granted by Section 114 on the other, and held
that if a construction was possible which would harmonise the two,
it
was to be preferred. The learned Chief Justice, therefore, examined the
scheme of the Constitution Act and found that though the word
"taxation" in Section 51 (ii) included customs duties, the latter were not
described as "tax" in the Constitution or as "tax on property". He held
that customs duties were a tax on the movement of goods and the
word "tax" in Section 114 could not be held to include customs duties
because the section mentioned a tax "on property" "belonging to a
State". He was of opinion that such property must be within the
geographical boundaries of the State and customs duties being
collected at the confines of the State were collected before the goods
became the property of the State. He concluded, therefore, that the
levying of duties of customs on importation was not an imposition of
the tax upon property within the literal meaning of Section 114, and
even if it was, the section must be differently construed in the light of
the general provisions of the Constitution Act. Barton and O' Connor,
JJ., in separate judgments followed the same line of thought Higgins,
J., pointed out that before the prohibition applied, taxation of property
must be "as property". His conclusion may be stated in his own words:
"I prefer to base my judgment on the ground which I have stated.
I cannot, confidently, take the ground that customs duty cannot be a
tax within the meaning of the word 'tax' in Section 114. It is true
that 'duties of customs' and 'duties of excise' are the usual
expressions; but phraseology, such as is used in Section 55, shows
that the Constitution treats the imposing of such duties as being the
imposing of taxes. 'Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing
duties of customs or excise, shall deal with one subject of taxation
only'. However the fact that Section 114 uses the mere word 'tax' -
not 'tax of any kind' although it speaks of 'property of any kind' -
strengthens the view that the framers of the section could not have
had customs duties in their minds at the time. They lay the
emphasis on the thought on ownership - 'property of any kind
belonging' etc." (p. 855).
Isaacs, J., on the other hand, held that duties of customs as ordinarily
understood or in the Customs Act, were imposed on the goods
themselves and were, therefore, "on property" within the meaning of
Section 114, but did not come within the meaning of "tax" as used in
that section and the Constitution generally. He cited certain authorities
to show that though the word "taxation" when used to confer on
Government a power, might carry the amplest meaning, being a
generic word, the word tax might or might not be as wide in meaning
when used in some other context. The learned Judge found that the
word "tax" was used only in Section 114 and did not carry the wide
meaning, and coupled with the word "property" could not be read to
include customs duties.
This decision of the Australian High Court was strongly relied
upon by the learned Solicitor-General. It will, however, be seen that the
construction of words used in Section 114 is so intimately connected
with the scheme and language of the other parts of the Constitution Act
as to be of little assistance to us. The words "tax" and "taxation" were
not defined in the Australian Constitution, whereas they are in our own.
Further, the distinction between "tax" and "taxation" with all due
respects is somewhat difficult to apprehend. | can only say in the words
of Cassels, J., in a Canadian case to which I shall refer presently that:
"I agree with the Attorney-General for British Columbia in his
statement before me as to the difference between taxation and a
tax. As the Attorney-General states 'I am not relying very strongly
upon that phase of the argument'. He thinks the distinction is rather
subtle and thin, so do 1."
We shall soon see that the Privy Council did not rely upon this
distinction when this case was cited before it.
64. The decision in the Australian case lays down certain general
propositions which may be stated. It recognizes that customs duties
have the dual aspect of raising revenue and of regulating external
trade. This proposition, of course, is valid. It was also accepted in the
American cases to which I have already referred and also in the Privy
Council case from Canada to which I shall make reference. It also
decided that the word "taxation" is sufficiently wide to take in customs
duties. This was laid down by Isaacs, J., and cannot be said to be
dissented from by the other learned Judges. This proposition is hardly
necessary as an aid to construction of our Constitution which uses the
word "taxation", as I pointed out during the course of arguments only,
in Article 289, and defines the term:
"366. (28) "taxation" includes the imposition of any tax or impost,
whether general or local or special, and 'tax' shall be construed
accordingly."
This gets over the difficulty felt in Australian case generally and
particularly by Higgins, J., in the extract I have made from his
judgment. The fact that the word "taxation" is used in one place only in
our Constitution saves us from the task of examining the context
because the definition would become a dead letter if it were not used in
that place in the sense defined. As regards the scheme of the
Australian Constitution, there is some similarity in that the powers of
taxation conferred by Section 51 of the Australian Constitution Act on
Parliament are subject to the provisions of that Constitution just as
they are in our Constitution but unlike those conferred by the
Constitution of Canada. I shall refer to these points which were used in
arguments when I deal with our Constitution. I shall now refer to the
Canadian case relied upon by the learned Solicitor-General.
65. Before dealing with the Canadian precedent or the decision on
appeal by the Judicial Committee, I find it necessary to refer to a few
cases in which the Privy Council explained the general scheme of the
British North America Act and the principles on which that Act is to be
construed, particularly Sections 91-95 of the Act, which deal with the
powers of legislation in the Dominion and their distribution between the
Domination Parliament and the legislatures of the Provinces. Without
having those principles before one, there is a danger of
misapprehending the implications of the cases relied upon by the
learned Solicitor-General. It is not necessary to reproduce Sections 91
and 92 in their entirety beyond the opening words which have a direct
bearing upon the problem decided in the Privy Council case. Section 91,
insofar as material to our purpose, reads:
"91. It shall be lawful for the Queen, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate and House of Commons, to make laws for the
peace, order, and good Government of Canada, in relation to all
matters not coming within the classes of subjects by this Act
assigned exclusively to the legislatures of the provinces; and for
greater certainty, but not so as to restrict the terms of this section, it
is hereby declared that (notwithstanding anything in this Act) the
exclusive legislative authority of the Parliament of Canada extends to
all matters coming within the classes of subjects next hereinafter
enumerated, that is to say,-
Then follows an enumeration of twenty-nine classes of subjects.
*
*
And any matter coming within any of the classes of subjects
enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to come within the
class of matters of a local or private nature comprised in the
enumeration of the classes of subjects by this Act assigned
exclusively to the legislatures of the provinces."
Section 92 is as follows:
"In each province the legislature may exclusively make laws in
relation to matters coming within the classes of subjects next
hereinafter enumerated, that is to, say,-
Then follows an enumeration of sixteen classes of subjects."
In dealing with the general scheme of the Act, the Board in Citizens
Insurance Company of Canada V. William Persons and Queen Insurance
Company V. Williams Persons pointed out that the scheme was to
give primacy to the Dominion Parliament in cases of conflict of power
not withstanding anything in the Act and explained how the
exclusiveness of the spheres of the two legislatures was intended to
work. The position was again summed up the next year in Russel V.
Queen the report of which is to be found in the same Vol. at p. 829.
Again, in Tennant V. Union Bank of Canada8 it was held that Section
91 (No. 15) of the British North America Act gave the Dominion
Parliament power to legislate over every transaction within the
legitimate business of a banker, notwithstanding that the exercise of
such power interfered with property and civil rights in the province
(Sections 92, 20, 13) and conferred upon the bank privileges as a
lender which the provincial law did not recognize. The decision was
rested once again on the doctrine of paramountcy of Dominion
Parliament notwithstanding anything in the Act so long as it did not fall
within the exclusive power of the Provincial Legislature under Section
91. Lord Watson observed:
11
But Section 91 expressly declares that, "notwithstanding
anything in this Act', the exclusive legislative authority of the
Parliament of Canada shall extend to all matters coming within the
enumerated classes; which plainly indicates that the legislation of
that Parliament, so long as it strictly relates to these matters, is to
be of paramount authority. To refuse effect to the declaration would
render nugatory some of the legislative powers specially assigned to
the Canadian Parliament."
66. This primacy of Dominion Parliament was in all matters
legislative subject, of course, to what was assigned exclusively to the
Provincial Legislatures. But the primacy of Parliament of Canada was
untrammelled by anything elsewhere to be found in the same Act.
67. From the above citations, it is obvious that the general scheme
of the British North America Act assigns certain subjects to the
exclusive and plenary power of the Dominion Parliament, and certain
other subjects exclusively to the Provincial Legislatures. By Section 91,
the Imperial Parliament has unequivocally placed everything not
assigned to the local legislatures within the jurisdiction of the Dominion
Parliament notwithstanding anything in the Act. The British North
America Act thus has to be construed as a whole and with reference
first to the exclusive domain of the Provincial Legislatures, next with
reference to the paramountancy of the Dominion Parliament and the
general scheme of the Act. Unless a matter falls within Section 92 and
does not fall within Section 91, the action of the Dominion Parliament is
subject to no restraint by anything elsewhere to be found in the Act.
68. We are now in a position to consider the case so strongly relied
upon by the learned Solicitor-General. To understand that case, the
facts must be seen first. It was a test case by way of an action by the
Crown in the right of the Province to have it declared that it could
import liquor into Canada for purposes of sale without paying customs
duties imposed by the Crown in the right of the Dominion of Canada by
virtue of the Customs Act of Canada. The action of the Province of
British Columbia was based on the provisions of Government Liquor Act
which was declared intra vires by the Privy Council in Canadian Pacific
Wine Company Limited V. Tuley29 Before the Exchequer Court, the
following admission of facts was filed by the Attorney-General of
Columbia:
"It is hereby admitted, for all purposes of this action, that the
case of 'Johnnie Walker' 'Black label' whiskey, which was purchased
and consigned to H.M. King George V in the right of the province of
British Columbia care of Liquor Control Board, Victoria B.C. as
alleged in para 1 of the Statement of the claim filed herein, was so
purchased and consigned to meet the requirements of the
Government Liquor Stores established in British Columbia under the
Government Liquor Act Chapter 30 of the States of British Columbia,
1921 and for the purpose of sale at the said Government Liquor
Stores pursuant to the provisions of the said Act."
The contention on the side of the Province was that Section 125 of the
British North America Act, which provides "No lands or property
belonging to Canada or any Province shall be liable to taxation" gave
protection against the customs duty. The contention on the side of the
Dominion was that the whiskey was not imported for purposes of
Government but for trade. It was pointed out that under Section 118,
large sums were payable by the Dominion to the Provinces and
reference was also made to Sections 122, 123 and 124, under which
customs and excise laws as also certain other dues were to continue
until altered by the Parliament of Canada. British Columbia was not a
part of the Dominion to start with. It was admitted into the Dominion
under Section 146 of the British North America Act on May 16, 1871, by
an order of Her Majesty in Council. Section 7 of the Order provided that
the existing customs tariff and excise duties would continue in force in
British Columbia for sometime. The Dominion Act under which the
customs duty was sought to be levied provided as follows:
"The rates and duties of customs imposed by this Act, or the
customs tariff or any other law relating to the customs, as well as
the rates and duties of customs heretofore imposed by any Customs
Act or Customs Tariff or any law relating to the Customs enacted and
in force at any time since the first day of July 1867, shall be binding,
and are declared and shall be deemed to have been always binding
upon and payable by His Majesty, in respect of any goods, which
may be hereafter or have been heretofore imported by or for His
Majesty whether in the right of His Majesty's Government of Canada
or His Majesty's Government of any Province of Canada, and whether
or not the goods so imported belonged at the time of importation to
His Majesty; and any and all such Acts as aforesaid shall be
construed and interpreted as if the rates and duties of customs
aforesaid were and are by express words charged upon and made
payable by His Majesty.
Provided, however, that nothing herein contained is intended to
impose or to declare the imposition of any tax upon, or to make or to
declare liable to taxation, any property belonging to His Majesty
either in the right of Canada or of a Province."
69. In the Exchequer Court, Cassells, J., based his decision on the
fact that the whiskey was imported not for any governmental purpose
but for trade. He, therefore, rejected the claim of the Province following
Mr Justice Brewer's dictum in the South Carolina case20 and referred to
two cases of the Privy Council, Farnell V. Bowman30 and Attorney-
General of the Strait Settlement V. Wemyss31 in which it was stated
that "if a State chooses to embark upon private business in competition
with other trades, they should be liable just as other persons engaging
in trade". The Australian case of Attorney-General of New South Wales
V. Collector of Customs3 was referred to but was not followed.
70. An appeal was taken to the Supreme Court of Canada. The
report of the decision is found in Attorney-General of the Province of
British Columbia V. Attorney-General of the Dominion of Canada 
It
was argued on behalf of British Columbia that in Section 125, British
North America Act, the word "taxation" included the imposition of
customs duties and the word "property" included movable property of
all kinds and not merely property as may be incidental to the
administration of the Provincial Government. On behalf of the
Dominion, it was contended that customs duties did not come within
"taxation" but were merely in the nature of regulations of trade and
commerce, and further this was not "taxation on property", and
Attorney-General of New South Wales V. Collector of Customs3 was
relied upon.
71. The Court consisted of five learned Judges and they delivered
separate judgments. Iddington, J., destined to go into the question
whether the word "taxation" would or would not include customs
duties. He held that Section 125 was in a chapter which dealt with
lands and property and thus was confined to property as was
mentioned there or in the 3rd and 4th Schedules, and concluded that in
view of this context and the nature of the powers given by Nos. 2 and 3
of Section 91, the power to demand customs duties must be upheld.
Anglin, J., held on the authority of Attorney-General of New South
Wales V. Collector of Customs3 that Section 125 could not have been
intended to give exemptions of this kind, and that customs duties were
not only taxes but were also regulatory and were imposed rather on
movement across the border than on the goods themselves and were
thus not a tax "on property" in Canada. Mignault, J., followed a similar
line. Duff, J., entered into a more detailed discussion of the scheme of
the British North America Act. He observed that it was a fundamental
part of the scheme of Confederation to give amplest authority in
relation to external trade exclusively to the Dominion and customs
duties were an instrument of regulation. He, therefore, held that the
theory of Dominion primacy must on such a construction of Section 125
postulate a power of disallowance of any thing which would weaken
that control and primacy. He also held that "taxation" in relation to
property was less comprehensive in significant than "taxation"
simpliciter and though customs duties were taxes on commodities in
one sense, they were not "taxes on property" as used in Section 123
where the word "property" was used in the sense of distribution of
"lands and property between the Dominion and the Provinces. Brodeur,
J., held that customs duties in Canada both regulated add raised
revenue and the Act under which they were levied laid them "on or
upon goods", and this attracted Section 125.
72. All these reasons were of course pressed into service in the
arguments before us. I shall now address myself to the Privy Council
judgment on appeal from the Supreme Court. The Privy Council did not
express any opinion on these reasons.
73. Lord Buckmaster referred to the width of Section 125 but
pointed out that it could not be read in an isolated and disjunctive way.
It was to be read as a part of the general scheme of the Constitution
Act by which the Dominion was to enjoy exclusive legislative authority
over matters enumerated in Section 91 which included regulation of
trade and commerce and raising of money by any mode or system of
taxation. He pointed out that customs duties had these dual functions
and whether it was the one function or the other or both, the Dominion
alone had the power. The claim of the Provinces that though the
Dominion had the power to erect a tariff wall, the Provinces could make
a breach in it by virtue of Section 125 through which the goods could
pass unaffected by the customs duties, was not accepted, because
Section 125 was a part of a group of sections which distributed
property between the Dominion and the Provinces and gave control to
the Provinces over properties allocated to them. This did not affect
authority conferred by Section 91, which power extended to regulation
of trade and commerce throughout the Dominion and irrespective of the
area of its operation. Lord Buckmaster, therefore, held that this purpose
was paramount and Section 125 must not be read to defeat it. In other
words, the primacy of Dominion Parliament in the matter of regulation
of external trade and commerce and taxation of this type was held to
be unaffected by Section 125. Lord Buckmaster referred to Attorney-
General of New South Wales V. Collector of Customs3 but did not apply
it and observed that "the true solution is to be found in the adaptation
of Section 125 to the whole scheme of Government" which the British
North America Act defined.
74. The Canadian decisions are based upon the scheme of the British
North America Act which gives paramountcy to the Dominion
Parliament which was unaffected by Section 125 which found place in a
group of sections dealing with the distribution of property between the
Dominion and the Provinces.
75. Now, the arguments in the present case follow the lines taken in
the cases I have reviewed. It is contended for the Union that the
exclusive power to levy duties of customs and regulation of external
trade belongs to Parliament that customs duties both raise revenue and
regulate, that they are not "taxes" much less "taxes on property", and
Article 289 must be interpreted to preserve the exclusive and plenary
power of Parliament. On the other side, it is contended that clauses (2)
and (3) indicate that the right of Parliament is to tax the trading
activities of State Governments but to leave free their ordinary
functions as the Governments of the States, and the prohibition in
clause (1) of Article 289 is absolute subject only to what is expressly
excluded by clause (2). To understand the arguments and to see how
the precedents of other countries serve us to understand our
Constitution, I shall first analyse the scheme of taxation under our
Constitution.
76. To begin with, it is a matter for reflection whether the word
"property" in Article 289 excludes property imported from foreign
countries which has to bear a tax before it can enter the territory of
India. The article bans taxation of property belonging to the
Government of a State. If by property is meant only that property
which is within the geographical limits of a State, then, property
outside those limits and seeking to enter the State across customs
frontiers may have to bear customs duty. Similarly, if customs duties
do not come within the word "taxation", the article is again ineffective
to save the property of the State Governments. The Union claims that
customs duty is neither "taxation" nor a "tax on property" It is a tax on
the movement of goods across the customs frontier and the protection
given by Article 289(1) does not apply. The scheme of the Constitution
clearly shows that neither claim of the Union can be upheld.
77. The Union List does not include any tax which in the technical or
popular sense can be said to be "property tax" or a tax laid on property
as property. These tax entries begin at No. 82 which is "taxes on
income other than agricultural income". Then follow Nos. 83 and 84
which deal with duties of customs and duties of excise. It is these
entries which are the subject of controversy. If these are not to be
regarded as taxes on "property", then, no other tax can be remotely
connected with the property of the State in the sense suggested by the
learned Solicitor-General. Nos. 85 and 86 deal with companies, and
Nos. 87 and 88 with death duties. In extremely rare cases, a State
might be the legatee as in U.S. V. Perkins32 and Synder V. Bettman33
but it is difficult to imagine that such a case was in contemplation.
Terminal taxes and taxes on railway fares and freights of No. 89 may
fall upon the States, but under Article 269, the proceeds have to be
assigned to the States. No. 90 deals with the taxes other than stamp
duties on transactions in stock exchanges and future markets. They are
seldom, if at all likely to fall on the States and the proceeds are also
assignable to the States. No. 91 is rates of stamp duties, and No. 92,
taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on advertisements
published therein, and No. 92-A, taxes on the sale and purchase of
goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, are again not taxes
such as may be considered to be "on property" The net proceeds of
these taxes are again to be given to the States. When the question was
put to the learned Solicitor-General as to which tax on property was in
contemplation, he could only point to the residuary power of
Parliament. This shows that unless Article 289(1) took in entries
relating to customs duties and excise duties, the protection granted by
the clause would be largely superfluous or nugatory.
78. The Government of India Act, 1935, granted exemption in
respect of lands and buildings only. The present article changed the
words to "property and income". The phrase is exhaustive of all the
assets and income of the States. Clause (2) of the article indicates that
the exemption is not to apply to the trade or business carried on by the
State and any tax can be imposed in respect of such trade or business
of any kind or any operations connected therewith and any property
used or occupied for the purpose of such trade or business and any
income accruing or arising in connection there with. The repeated, use
of the "word any" show that the distinction sought to be made in
Australia from the use of the word in one place and its omission in
another is not admissible. The words "used or occupied" show that
movable and immovable properties, are included. Clause (3) shows that
power is reserved to Parliament to declare by law which trade or
business or class of trade or business is incidental to the ordinary
functions of Government, thus, taking the matter out of the jurisdiction
of courts. Till Parliament so declares, all trade and business of any kind
must remain subject to taxation.
79. From the above, it follows that the three clauses of Article 289
must be read together and harmoniously to gather their correct import.
It is not possible to read clause (1) with the assistance of rulings of
other Courts. The problem to be faced is : What is included in the
expression "property of a State"? It must obviously include all property
to which the State can lay claim. The word "property" is wide enough to
include immovable as well as movable varieties. Article 289 departed
from the language of the Government of India Act, 1935, by discarding
"lands or buildings" and using the more comprehensive expression
"property", and in clause (2) qualified that word by "any" and by "used
or occupied". The collocation of these expressions clearly indicates that
the property of the State in whatever circumstances situated, was
meant and was exempt from taxation and the only property which was
made subject to taxation was any property used or occupied for
business. Property, which is brought into ownership and possession
abroad, or property, which is produced or manufactured by the State, is
property of the State. If not, the question may be asked, "Whose
property is it then"? and no answer to such a question can be given. I
am, therefore, of the opinion that taking the language of Article 289(1
by itself or even as modified by that of clauses (2) and (3), the
conclusion is inescapable that properties of all kinds belonging to the
States save those used or occupied for trade or business, were meant
to be exempted from "taxation". Such property may be immovable or
movable and need not be within the geographical limits. This article is
in the part dealing with "Finance" and is included in a sub-chapter
entitled "Miscellaneous Financial Provisions". Its significance is thus not
made less by any special considerations as was the case with Section
125 of the British North America Act. The powers of legislation, which
Parliament enjoys by virtue of the taxation entries in List I, are
expressly subject to the provisions of the Constitution, and Article 289
must, therefore, override unless it be inapplicable. The scheme of
Article 289 does not admit that the word "property" should be read in
any specialised sense. I, am therefore, of opinion that goods imported
and goods manufactured or produced by the States are included in the
word "property".
80. It is next contended that neither customs duties non excise
duties can be said to be "taxation", and even if they can be described
as "taxation" or "tax", they are not tax on property. They are said to be
taxes on movement of goods in the one case, and taxes on production
or manufacture, in the other. Many rulings were cited to show that this
is the way in which Judges have described these levies. I shall deal
with customs duties first because, in my opinion, excise duties are
simpler to deal with. Some Judges have described excise duties as "on
goods produced", and some, as "on production and manufacture", and
it is easy to cite an equal number of cases on either side.
81. The definition of the word "taxation" in our Constitution is the
most significant fact. It serves to distinguish the Australian cases and it
tells us what kind of levy would be hit by Article 289(1). This is what it
states:
"Taxation" includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether
general or local or special, and 'tax' shall be construed accordingly."
Though it is not an exhaustive definition and only shows what is
included in the word, one is struck immediately by its width of
language. Though it speaks of any tax or impost, it goes a step further
and adds "whether general, or local or special", indicating thereby that
no special or local considerations are relevant and even a general non-
discriminatory levy must be regarded as taxation. I have already stated
that the word "taxation" is used only in Article 289(1) and it must be
read with all its wealth of meaning into the first clause of the article.
Not to do so would be to make the definition entirely redundant. When
the clause is expanded in the light of the definition, it reads:
"The property and income of a State shall be exempt from any
Union tax or impost, whether general or local or special."
The underlined portion represents the definition.
82. The question thus arises why use the word and define it in this
comprehensive way if there was no tax in the legislative entries in List I
which could be said to fall on the property of the States unless one
thought in terms of customs duties and excises? According to Wells34
"Scientifically considered taxation is the taking or appropriating
such portions of the product or property of a country or community
as is necessary for the support of its Government by methods that
are not in the nature of extortions, punishments or confiscations."
Viewed in this broad way and having in mind that the term "taxation"
as used in the article was specially defined with great width, the answer
to the question posed by me is obvious. But that is not all. The
definition speaks of "impost" The word "impost" in its general sense
means a tax or tribute or duty and may be on persons or on goods. In a
special sense it means a duty on imported goods and on merchandise.
See Pacific Ins. Co. V. Sonle35 In Ward V. Maryland36 it is stated:
"An impost, or a duty on imports, is a custom or tax levied on
articles brought into a country."
The Oxford Dictionary does say that this special meaning is after Cowell
and that there is no evidence of the origin. But every dictionary of legal
terms will bear out the special meaning. Indeed, the American
Constitution classifies "impost" with "duties" and "excises" as indirect
taxes in contradistinction to taxes on property or capitation. The word
"duties" is sometimes used as synonymous with tax, but in a special
sense, it means an indirect tax imposed on the importation or
consumption of goods. See Pollock V. Farmers, Loan and Trust Co.
37
83. In Article 289(1), property of the States is exempted from Union
taxation. One cannot go by the word "property" alone but must take
into consideration the ambit of the word "taxation" also. I have read the
definition into the first clause of Article 289. Reading further into the
definition the meaning of the word "impost" not as a "tax" (which
is
unnecessary as the word "tax" has already been used and there is a
presumption against tautology) but as a "duty on importation or
consumption", one gets this result:
"The property and income of a State shall be exempt from any
Union tax or duty on imported goods or merchandise of all kinds."
In other words, property of the States shall be free from direct taxes
and indirect taxes.
84. It will thus be seen that both from the angle of the word
"property" as also from the angle of the word "taxation", we reach the
two kinds of taxes which are the subject-matter of controversy here. On
the other hand, all this width of language is lost completely if these
taxes are left out and one goes in search of other possible taxes. The
definition may conceivably cover some of them in very special
circumstances but the proceeds of those taxes are assignable to the
States, and it seems pointless to include them for taxation and then to
hand over the proceeds to the States. The distinction between the
trading activity of the State Governments and their ordinary functions
of Government which is worked out with such elaborate care on the
American pattern also loses its point. Clause (2) would scarcely be
necessary and clause (3) even less.
85. The next question is whether customs duties and excises are in
their true nature taxes on the occasion of importation in the one case
and production in the other, and cannot be described as "taxes on
property". To begin with, the expression "taxes on property" is not
used; non is the expression "taxes in respect of property", with which
the former expression was compared. The former expression was used
in the Australian Constitution Act and the distinction was made by the
High Court of that country. We are only concerned to see whether the
imports of the States would be free from Union taxation. If by the
nature of customs duties as a tax on movement of goods, it cannot be
said that the exemption has been earned, there should be an answer in
favour of the validity of the amendment. If customs duties can be said
to be "tax on property", the answer must be the other way.
86. In this connection, there is the high authority of Chief Justice
Marshall in Brown V. Maryland 38 where he observed:
"An impost, or duty on imports, is a custom or a tax levied on
articles brought into a country, and is most usually secured before
the importer is allowed to exercise his rights of ownership over them,
because evasions of the law can be prevented more certainly by
executing it while the articles are in its custody. It would not,
however, be less an impost or duty on the articles, if it were to be
levied on them after they were landed. The policy and consequent
practice of levying or securing the duty before or on entering the
port, does not limit the power to that state of things, nor,
consequently, the prohibition, unless the true meaning of the clause
so confines it. What, then, are 'imports'? The lexicons inform us,
they are 'things imported'. If we appeal to usage for the meaning of
the word, we shall receive the same answer. They are the articles
themselves which are brought into the country. 'A duty on imports',
then, is not merely a duty on the act of importation, but is a duty on
the thing imported."
In Merriot V. Brune39 later approved in Lawder V. Stoned it was laid
down that customs are duties charged upon commodities on their being
imported into or exported from a country. It follows, therefore, that it is
not right to say that customs duties are on movement of goods and not
upon the goods themselves. A glance at the Sea Customs Act, 1878,
which is sought to be amended shows that the legislative practice in
our country has been to describe customs duties as laid on the goods or
commodities. Section 20 itself, which is sought to be amended says:
11
customs duties shall be levied on
(a) goods imported or exported, etc.
(b) opium, salt or salted fish imported, etc.
(c) goods brought from any foreign port to etc.
(d) goods brought in bond from one customs-port to another."
Similarly, Sections 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 29-A, 31, 32 and several others
mention goods as being the subject of the tax. Section 43, which deals
with drawbacks, may be seen in this connection:
"43. When any goods, having been charged with import duty at
one customs-port and thence exported to another, are re-exported
by Sea as aforesaid, drawback shall be allowed on such goods as if
they had been so re-exported from the former port.
*
*
*,
The duty is laid on goods and it is the goods which earn the drawback.
It would be not wrong to say that the whole of the Sea Customs Act
speaks of goods all the time.
87. If then the goods be the property of the States and those goods
have to bear the tax before rights of ownership can be exercised in
respect of them, is it an error to say that the exemption of Article 289
(1) will be avilable to them, regard being had to the language of the
clause read with the definition of "taxation"-
"The property of a State shall be exempt from any Union tax or
impost, whether general or local or special?"
88. Indeed, Parliament in 1951, soon after the Constituent Assembly
had adopted the Constitution, amended Section 20 of the Sea Customs
Act, 1878, by inserting sub-section (2) which read:
"The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all
goods belonging to the Government of a State and used for the
purpose of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf
of, that Government. or of any operations connected with such trade
or business as they apply in respect of goods not belonging to any
Government."
This sub-section reproduces clause (2) of Article 289. It views the
goods imported as property, customs duties as "taxation", and declares
that such goods though belonging to a State Government would bear
the tax under the circumstances mentioned in the said clause. If there
ever was a perfect instance of contemporanea exposition, this must be
it. It is not a case of a modern statute being interpreted with reference
to an old one. Non is there any judicial interpretation involved. This is a
case of the same body of men enacting a provision in an Act to carry
out the intent and meaning of a provision of the Constitution adopted
earlier by them. In their understanding of the Constitution, customs
duties as levied under the Sea Customs Act, 1878, were affected by the
change from "lands and buildings" of Section 154 of the Government of
India Act, 1935, to "property" and, the grant of exemption to such
property from Union taxation. If I had any doubts about the
construction of Article 289, this would have served me to show the way.
I, however, think that the matter hardly admits of any doubt.
89. The learned Solicitor-General again and again referred to the
dual purpose achieved by the imposition of customs duties, namely, the
raising of revenue and the regulation of foreign trade. He associated
excise duties with customs in the same breath and cited the Privy
Council case from Canada to argue that if the proposed amendment is
declared in either case to be unconstitutional, then, the regulatory part
of the same law would fail without being in any way imperilled by
Article 289 or anything elsewhere to be found in the Constitution. This
argument needs serious consideration.
90. There can be no doubt that the power of Parliament to regulate
foreign trade is plenary and is untrammelled by anything contained in
Article 289. A similar assumption may also be made in favour of duties
of excise, though the element of regulation may be somewhat weaker
there than in the duties of customs. The question, however, is what
purpose is the proposed amendment intended to serve? It is a little
difficult to dissociate the regulatory aspect from taxation. Even in
Australia, where tax laws must deal only with taxation and no other
subject, the regulatory aspect of customs duties was adverted to. In
the United States of America also, this regulatory aspect of customs
duties did play a prominent article Can, we therefore, say that the
combined effect of Entries 83 and 41 of List I would sustain the
proposed amendment. If it were a question of regulation being
inextricably woven into the tax, would have paused to consider the
matter. I am not expounding a law already made but am giving an
opinion on certain questions. These questions definitely refer to the
revenue aspect of customs duties. If the law were framed to regulate
and even to prohibit the importation, by the State Government in
common with others, of certain goods or classes of goods, I would have
no hesitation in saying that such a law would not offend the exemption
in Article 289. Even if the law was intended to achieve "both ends",
there would be an argument in favour of the Union. But if the advice is
sought on the plain question whether the goods of the States can be
taxed to raise revenue, the answer is equally plain that it is not
permissible except in the circumstances already mentioned respectively
in the two sub-sections which are sought to be amended. Section 20 of
the Sea Customs Act, and Section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act,
do not pretend to regulate external trade in the one case and
production and manufacture, in the other. They are provisions for
raising revenue in much the traditional English way. Whatever little
pretence there might be is shed completely by the proposed
amendment which, to borrow once again from Mr Justice Douglas, is a
"measure designed to put the States on the tax collectors' list". In
these circumstances, I answer the question in respect of customs
duties without adverting to Entry 41 of the Union list. It is argued that
the States would import goods not only free but also freely and, thus,
lose valuable exchange. But the question can only be answered as
posed and not on the basis of horrible imaginings. It can be argued
with equal force that the State Governments may be expected to evince
a sane attitude towards our finances.
91. Insofar as excise duties are concerned, no question of regulation
of trade or of production or of manufacture can really arise except in
certain rare circumstances. Much of this power of regulation of
production and manufacture (except in respect of certain essential
commodities mentioned in No. 33 of List 111 and those specially
mentioned in List 1) belongs to the States. In Entry 84, we are
concerned with tobacco and other goods except alcoholic liquors for
human consumption, opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and
narcotics. If regulation can serve the purpose, power will have first to
be found either in List I or List 111. But if it were a case of pure
taxation, then, the excise duty is laid on goods in much the same way
as customs. We cannot treat the observations of Judges, where they
speak of excises as "on production and manufacture", to be as binding
as statutes. Other Judges have used other language, like "on goods
produced or manufactured". The Central Excise and Salt Act uses the
latter, and so do the lists in the Constitution. There is, therefore, no
difference in this respect between excises and customs. The case of
excises is simpler and a fortiori, because the goods produced in the
States by the States for their ordinary functions of Government and not
for trade or business, are property of the States and directly within
their ownership. If such property is taxed, it is directly hit by Article
289(1, and the arguments on the analogy of customs have little place.
It follows, therefore, that neither customs duties non excise duties can
be levied on goods properly belonging to a State if the goods are
imported or produced not for the purpose of trade or business but for
purposes incidental to the ordinary functions of Government. It also
follows that the sections of the two Acts as they stand today reflect the
true position under the Constitution. I may add that if the Union
Government desires to put a curb on the excessive importation of goods
by the States, the power to regulate external trade is available and it is
unaffected by Article 289. A measure designed to achieve regulation by
a system of controls, licensing and all such devices, would not be
affected by the exemption contained in the article, but a pure taxing
measure, which seeks to tax property used for State or governmental
purposes, is within the exemption.
92. My answers to the questions are:
(1) The provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution preclude the
Union from imposing, or authorizing the imposition of, customs
duties on the import or export of the property of a State used for
purposes other than those specified in clause (2) of that article, if
the imposition is to raise revenue but not to regulate external trade.
(2) The provisions of Article 289 of the Constitution of India
preclude the Union from imposing, or authorizing the imposition of
excise duties on the production or manufacture in India of the
property of a State used for purposes other than those specified in
clause (2) that article.
(3) The answer is in the affirmative.
N. RAJAGOPALA AYYANGAR, J. - | entirely agree with the opinion
expressed by my Lord the Chief Justice both as regards the answers to
the questions referred to this Court as well as the reasoning on which
the same is based. My only justification for venturing to add a few
words of my own, is because of my feeling that certain matters on
which great stress was laid by learned counsel appearing for the States,
might be dealt with a little more fully.
94. When the learned Solicitor-General submitted that on a proper
construction of Article 289(1), the immunity from Union taxation in its
relation to property was confined to a direct tax on property - and did
not extend to indirect taxes - which were not on property but on an
incident or an event in relation to property, it was urged by learned
counsel for the States that this was introducing a distinction between
direct and indirect taxes, which form no part of our constitutional
structure. It is true that no such express distinction has been made by
our Constitution, even so, taxes in the shape of duties of customs
(including export duties) and excise; particularly when imposed which
a view to regulating trade and commerce insofar as such matters are
within the competence of Parliament being covered by various entries
in List I, these cannot be called taxes on property; for they are imposts
with reference to the movement of property by way of import or export
or with reference to the production or manufacture of goods. Therefore,
even though our Constitution does not confer or distribute legislative
power to tax based on any distinction between direct and indirect
taxes, it is wrong to suggest that for construing the exemption in
Article 289(1), the distinction would necessarily be irrelevant. Learned
counsel for the States are perfectly correct in their submission that the
Constitution does not distribute legislative power in regard to taxation
between the Union and the States on any distinction between direct
and indirect taxes as in Canada. In passing I might observe that even
in Australia, there is no distribution of taxing power on such a basis, for
while the Commonwealth Parliament has an exclusive power to levy
duties of customs and excise (subject to the same having to be
uniform) it has power, generally speaking, to impose direct taxes also,
provided they do not discriminate, and the States have also a similar
power to levy such direct taxes. This however does not by itself
eliminate the relevance of the distinction for any particular purpose.
That there is a distinction between direct and indirect taxes cannot be
disputed and I heard no submission to the contrary. The question is
whether that distinction has any materiality for interpreting the
meaning of the words "the property of a State not being subject to
Union taxation". The question at once arises whether when reference is
made to "property" and "its taxation" what is meant is merely a tax on
property as such i.e. on the beneficial ownership by the State of the
property or whether it is intended to include a tax which bears merely
some relationship to or has some impact on such property. For in
ultimate analysis the distinction between a direct and an indirect tax is
a distinction based upon the difference in impact, which is also
expressed as a distinction based upon its being one not on property but
on a taxable event in relation to property. If the taxable event is merely
the ownership of the property and the beneficial interest "therein, it
would be a direct tax, whereas if the connection between the property
and the taxpayer is not merely ownership but something else such as a
transanction in relation to it, then it would be an in direct tax. The
argument therefore that under the Constitution legislative power in
relation to taxation is not distributed between the Union and the States
on any distinction between direct and indirect taxes as in Canada is not
very material and of course not decisive on the question under
consideration by us.
95. It was strenuously urged on behalf of the States that if Article
289(1) were construed in the manner suggested by the Union i.e.
confining the immunity to direct taxes on property as distinct from
taxes on property which merely impinged on or had an impact on
property, the States could derive no benefit at all from the provision,
because the Union Parliament had no legislative competence under the
entries in the Union list to impose any direct taxes on property and that
if some meaning and content has to be given to the exemption it would
only be if its scope were to be held to extend to indirect taxes on
property such as excise duty and duties of customs. The learned
Solicitor-General submitted that even on the construction which he
desired us to adopt there would be scope for the operation of the
immunity because the exemption might very well have been framed
inview of the possible direct taxation on certain forms of property under
Entry 97 of the Union List, read with Article 248, though such taxes had
not yet been imposed. His further argument was that the exemption
might be capable of being invoked in cases where any State owned
property in the Union territories, for in such a situation the Union
Government would have under Article 246(4) power to legislate on the
items enumerated in the State List and thus levy direct taxes on
property. On the other side, it was urged that it would not be
reasonable to construe the words as having some meaning by reference
to such unlikely eventualities, but that it would be proper to attribute to
the Constitution-makers an intention to make provision for the usual
and, the normal
96. I must say that the submissions of the learned Solicitor-General
are not without force. That apart, I consider that the history of this
clause should be sufficient to preclude an argument of the type urged
for the States having any great or decisive validity. It is common
ground that Article 289(1) was taken over from Section 155(1) of the
Government of India Act, 1935, with however a variation to which I
shall advert. In that earlier statute, that section ran:
"Subject as hereinafter provided, the Government of a Province
shall not be liable to Federal taxation in respect of lands or buildings
situate in British India or income accruing or arising or received in
British India."
The only change which is material which this section has undergone is
the substitution of the word "property" for the words "lands and
buildings", thus extending the immunity not only to immovable
property of the type specified but to other forms of property, including
moveable property as well. The distribution of legislative power in
regard to taxation under the Government of India Act in the field
relevant to the present context was identical with that which is found in
the Constitution. Then as now, there was no power in the Central
legislature to levy any direct taxes on lands and buildings, besides
there being no entry like 97 in the Union list, the residuary power
remaining after the distribution in the three lists being vested in the
Governor-General for allocation under Section 104. It would have been
impossible to find any scope for the operation of this exemption under
the scheme of distribution of taxing power under the Government of
India Act except possibly on some such line as suggested by the
learned Solicitor-General. The fact therefore that if one had regard
merely to the distribution of taxing power between the Centre and the
Provinces there was no scope for imparting a wider meaning to the
expression "taxes on lands and buildings" appears to me to support the
view that the circumstance that direct taxes on property are not within
Union Legislative power is not by itself a ground for reading the
exemption from taxation as necessarily having any particular or a wider
connotation.
97. The next question is whether the inclusion of property other than
"lands and buildings" in the article by itself brings within the immunity
taxation not merely of the property itself but on some incident or event
in relation to property such as production or manufacture, import or
export (to refer to the incidents which are relevant to the context) or
does the article contemplate the same type of taxes in relation to
moveable property as were within the exemption under the
Government of India Act in regard to "lands and buildings"? In other
words, just in the case of "lands and buildings" under the Government
of India Act, 1935, is the type of taxation of other species of property
now brought in one which is direct and which arises from the mere
ownership of such property or does it include a tax levied not on the
property itself but on an incident or event in relation to it? The analogy
of the immunity from direct taxes on "lands and buildings" which
formed the feature of the exemption in regard to "property" under the
Government of India Act, 1935 would appear to favour the view that it
is also a direct taxation in relation to the other forms of property that
was intended to be brought within Article 289(1). Of course, this view
could be over-borne by sufficient reason pointing the other way.
98. It was in this context that a reference was made to the use of
the expression "taxation" in Article 289, a term which has been defined
in Article 366(28) thus:
"366. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively
assigned to them, that is to say-
(28) 'Taxation' includes the imposition of any tax or impost,
whether general or local or special, and 'tax' shall be construed
accordingly."
99. There is no doubt that if this definition were applied and every
"tax duty or impost" were within the scope of the exemption, the
submissions made on behalf of the States would be formidable. A
subsidiary and related point was also made that the expression
"taxation" occurs only in Article 289 and that if the width of the
definition in Article 366(28) is not held to be applicable to understand
the content of that word in Article 289, the definition itself would be
rendered wholly unmeaning. Before considering these arguments it is
necessary to advert to some matters. It is true that the expression
"taxation" occurs only in Article 289( but it is also to be noted that
the definition of the term "taxation" in Article 366 has been bodily
taken from Section 311(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935. Just
as under the Constitution the word "taxation" also occurs only once in
the Government of India Act, 1935 viz. in section 155(1) corresponding
to Article 289(1). The definition, it would be seen, applies to define not
merely the word "taxation" but also to the grammatical variations of
that expression - for instance "taxes". In the circumstances the only
question is whether in the context in which the word occurs having
regard to the antecedent history and the form of the provision and to
the other provisions of the Constitution there is justification for the
word being understood as meaning something less than the full width
of which it is capable under the definition.
100. In this connection it would be pertinent to refer to the terms of
Article 285 in which the corresponding immunity of the Union from
State taxation is provided. That article runs:
"285. (1) The property of the Union shall, save insofar as
Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes
imposed by at State or by any authority within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax
on any property of the Union to which such property was
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution liable or
treated as liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in that
State."
In regard to this provision there are two matters to which attention
might be directed. The first of them is the use of the expression "all" in
clause (1) - (taken from the corresponding Section 154(1) of the
Government of India Act 1935) - which is absent from Article 289(1).
It is manifest that some significance has to be attached to this
variation. If the definition of the word "taxes" in Article 366(28) were
applied to that word in Article 285(1), it would be apparent that the
word "all" would be wholly superfluous and otiose, as the definition
itself, and that is the contention urged before us on behalf of the States
- embraces all and every tax. This would suggest that it would not be
wrong to take the view that the Constitution-makers felt that
notwithstanding the definition of "taxes" in Article 366(28), it might
not always have that width of connotation, so that it was necessary to
affirm and if need be supplement its width by the addition of the word
"all". The other matter is this. If the definition of "taxes" were read into
Article 285 and the article read literally, it would be seen that property
of which the Union was the owner would be entitled to the exemption,
whether or not the beneficial occupation and use of the property was in
the Union. In other words, the literal reading of the article would bring
within the exemption a tax on a private occupier of Union land - even
when imposed on the beneficial interest of such occupier. Section 125
of the, British North America Act, 1867 ran:
"No lands or property belonging to Canada
shall be liable to
taxation (Provincial).
A lessee of Dominion Crown lands taken on lease, for grazing purposes
was assessed to land tax under an enactment of Saskatchewan in
respect of the lessee's interest in the lands. The Dominion challenged
the validity of the imposition on the ground of the land itself being
within the immunity conferred by Section 125. Rejecting this
contention Viscount Haldane speaking for the Judicial Committee said:
11
although the appellant is sought to be taxed in respect of his
occupation of land, the fee of which is in the Crown, the operation of
the Statute imposing the tax is limited to the appellants own
interest. "41
My objection referring to these observations is that provisions, of this
sort cannot always be read literally and that the object of the framers
as disclosed by the general scheme of distribution of powers has to be
borne in mind to arrive at their proper construction. It is in this context
that the intimate correlation between the exclusive legislative power of
the Union in regard to "trade and commerce with foreign countries",
and related to it, "import and export across customs frontiers" and the
duties with, which we are now concerned and particularly import and
export duties on movements across the customs frontier assume crucial
importance; and pose the question whether this power confided to the
Union was intended to be broken into by every component State
importing its requirements free of duty.
101. There was one other further submission made to us by learned
counsel for the State which requires some detailed examination and
this was based upon the impact of clause (2) of Article 289 on the
import of clause (1). The argument was this : The non obstante clause
with which clause (2) opens should be taken to indicate that but for
that clause, the exemption would be operative so as to deprive the
Union of the power to levy tax in the converse circumstances, in other
words, that but for clause (2) even where the State was engaged in a
trading activity it would be entitled to claim exemption from Union
taxes. It was therefore submitted that light could be gathered from the
content of clause (2) on the types of taxation from which exempt on
was granted under clause (1) or in other words for determining the
ambit of the immunity covered by clause (1). The argument proceeded.
Clause (2) permits the Union to impose the following taxes
notwithstanding the blanket exemption granted by clause (1). These
taxes are : (1) A tax in respect of a trade or business, of any kind
carried on by or on behalf of the State. The taxes leviable in respect of
a trade or business would be, having regard to the entries in the Union
List - (a) income tax (Item 82), (b) possibly corporation tax (Item
85), where the State carries on business through a State owned or
State controlled corporation, (c) taxes on the capital value of assets of
companies (Item 86) in cases where the State carries on business
through a State owned corporation; (2) Taxes in respect of operations
connected with a trade or business. These might include a tax on
freights, Sales Tax, and it was added duties of customs and duties of
excise; (3) Taxes in respect of property used or occupied in connection
with such a trade or business or any income accruing or arising in
connection therewith. It was strongly pressed upon us that not merely
direct taxes on property and direct taxes on income, but other types of
taxes which were, incidental to the "operations connected" with a trade
or business (and it was suggested that customs and excise duties were
such) could be imposed by the Union upon the States in cases where
the latter was carrying on a trade or business. It necessarily followed, it
was urged, that if these were not used for a trade or business, the
taxes would fall within the scope of the exemption under Article 289(1).
In other words, the argument was that as there was a limited power in
Parliament, to impose taxation on States or on those acting on behalf of
the States it necessarily connoted that in cases not covered by clause
not (2), that is in cases where it was not connected with a trade or
business the exemption under clause (1) would operate.
102. The precise relationship between clauses (2) and (1) and the
question whether the former was a proviso properly, so called which
had been carved out of the main provision of clause (1) and which but
for such carving out would be within clause (1) was the subject of
considerable debate before us but, I consider that it is not necessary to
deal with this rather technica point for in my view the history of clause
(2) throws considerable light on it's significance and place in the
scheme of tax exemption. At the Imperial Economic Conference of 1923
a resolution was adopted to the effect that the Parliaments of Great
Britain, the Dominions and India should be invited to enact a
declaration that the general and particular provisions of their respective
Acts imposing taxation might be made to apply to any commercial or
industrial enterprises carried on by any other such Government in all
respects as if it were carried on by or on behalf of a subject of the
British Crown.
103. This resolution drew a distinction between the trading and
business activities of the several constituent units owing allegiance to
the Crown of England and their governmental activities. In pursuance
of this resolution the Imperial Parliament enacted Section 25 in the
Finance Act of 1925 (15 and 16 George V, Chapter 36) which read, to
quote the material words:
"25. (1) Where a trade or business of any kind is carried on by or
on behalf of the Government of any part of His Majesty's Dominions
which is outside Great Britain, and Northern Ireland, that
Government shall, in respect of the trade or business and of all
operations in connection therewith, all property occupied in Great
Britain or Northern Ireland and all goods owned in Great Britain or
Northern Ireland for the purposes thereof and all income arising in
connection therewith, be liable, in the same manner as in the like
case any other person would be, to all taxation for the time being in
force in Great Britain or Northern Ireland.
(2)
*
(3) Nothing in this section shall-
(a) affect the immunity of any such Government as aforesaid
from taxation in respect of any income or property which sub-
section (1) of this section does not apply; or
(b)
A similar provision was enacted in India in the Government Trading
Taxation Act, 1926 (Act 3 of 1926). Its preamble recited:
"WHEREAS it is expedient to determine the liability to taxation for
the time being in force in British India of the Government of any part
of His Majesty's Dominions, exclusive of British India, in respect of
any trade, or business carried on by or on behalf of such
Government; It is hereby enacted as follows:
The operative provision was Section 2 and it ran:
2. (1) where a trade or business of any kind is carried on by or on
behalf of the Government of any part of His Majesty Dominions,
exclusive of British India, that Government shall, in respect of the
trade or business and of all operations connected therewith, all
property occupied in British India and all goods owned in British
India for the purposes thereof and all income arising in connection
therewith, be liable-
(a) to taxation under the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922, in the
same manner and to the same extent as in the like case a
company would be liable-
(b) to all other taxation for the time being in force in British
India in the same manner as in the like case any other person
would be liable.
(2) For the purposes of the levy and collection of income tax
under the India Income Tax Act, 1922, in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (1), any Government to which that sub-
section applies shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning
of that Act, and the provisions of the Act shall apply accordingly.
(3) In this section the expression 'His Majesty's Dominions'
includes any territory which is under His Majesty's protection or in
respect of which a mandate is being exercised by the Government of
any part of His Majesty's Dominions."
This it would be seen, applied to a foreign Government carrying on a
trade or business or owning property or using property within British
India. The Act has been adapted subsequently to bring it into line with
the constitutional changes that have taken place since 1926, but it is
unnecessary to refer to them. Proviso (a) to sub-section (1) of Section
155 enacted the exemption in the same terms as in the Act of 1926 in
favour of the provinces under the Government of India Act, 1935. This
bodily incorporation was done without any reference to the distribution
of legislative powers effected by Schedule 7 of the Government of India
Act.
104. This being the historical origin of this provision, it is not easy to
relate it to the exemption in Article 289(1), or to construe the
exemption with its aid. Bearing in mind this antecedent history it
appears to me that it would not be proper to read the scope of the
saving in favour of the Union in clause (2) as reflecting on the scope of
Article 289(1).
105. There is also another angle from which the relevance of clause
(2) to the construction of clause (1) of Article 289 might be tested. One
of the more serious arguments put forward on behalf of the States to
which I have adverted was that if the expression "taxes" in relation to
the exemption of property from tax were confined to direct taxes on
property the exemption would be unmeaning, as such taxes could not
be imposed by the Union. Now, let me take the taxes specified in
Article 289(2). They include, for instance, taxes on "property used or
occupied for the purpose of such trade or business". A tax on the use of
property or on the property itself which is occupied for the purpose of
trade would obviously be a direct tax on property which ex-concessis
the Central legislature under the Government of India Act and
Parliament under the Constitution are incompetent to impose. It is not
the contention of the States that the Centre, has such a power to levy a
tax on occupation or use of property where it is in connection with a
trade or business. This would at least show that it is not justifiable to
imply from clause (2) that but for that provision Parliament would be
entitled to impose such a tax.
106. The other points urged have been dealt within the opinion of
my Lord the Chief Justice and I do not propose to cover the same
ground. I concur in the view that the questions referred to this Court
for its opinion should be answered as they have been by the Chief
Justice.
*
Reference by the President of India under Article 143(1) of the Constitution regarding the
proposed amendments to sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the Sea Customs Act 1878 (Act 8
of 1878) and sub-section 1 (a) of Section 3 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (Act 1 of
1944).
1
64 Can SCR 377
2
1924 AC 222
3
(1907-8) 5 CLR 818
4 AIR 1962 SC 1281
5
1939 FCR 18
6
1942 FCR 90
7
1945 FCR 179
8
1934 AC 45
9
1958 SCR 1422
10 1919 4 Wh 316
11 1907 AC 81
12 25 Mad 457
13 64 Canada Supreme Court Reports 377
14
5 CLR 789
15 1953 AC 594
16 72 IA 91 at 103
17 11 Wall 113 : 20 L Ed 122
18 277 US 218, 223 : 72 L Ed 857 at 859
19 306 US, 466
20 194 US 437
21 292 US 48
22 289 US 48
23 9 Wheaton 1
24 (1904) I CLR 91
25
(1930) 28 CLR 129
26 (1908) 3 CLR 789
27 (1881-82) 7 AC 96
28 (1894) AC 31 at 41
29 (1921) 2 AC 417
30 (1887) 12 AC 643
31
(1888) 13 AC 192
32 163 US 625 : 41 L Ed 287
33 190 US 249 : 47 LEd 1035
34 Theory and Practice of Tazation, p. 204
35 7 Wall (US) 433 : 19 LEd 95
36 12 Wall (US) 418 : 20 LEd 449
37
158 US 601, 622 : 39 LED 1103
38 12 Wheaton 419, 437 : 6 L Ed 678, 685
39 9 Haward US 619 at 632 : 13 L Ed 282
40 187 US 281 : 47 LED 178
41 (1916) 2 AC 569 @ 574 V. Vermillien Hills