(BEFORE Y.K. SABHARWAL, C.J. AND ASHOK BHAN, DR ARIJIT PASAYAT, B.P.
SINGH, S.H. KAPADIA, C.K. THAKKER, P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN, ALTAMAS
KABIR AND D.K. JAIN, JJ.)
I.R. COELHO (DEAD) BY LRS
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF T.N.
Respondent.
Civil Appeals Nos. 1344-45 of 1976A+ with WPs (C) Nos. 242 of
1988, 751 of 1990, CAs Nos. 6045-46 of 2002, WP (C) No. 408 of
2003, SLPs (C) Nos. 14182, 14245, 14248-49, 26879, 14946-47,
26880-81, 14949, 26882, 14950, 26883, 14965, 26884, 14993,
15020, 26885, 15022, 15029, 14940 and 26886 of 2004, WPs (C)
Nos. 454, 473 and 259 of 1994, 238 of 1995 and 35 of 1996,
decided on January 11, 2007
A. Constitution of India - Arts. 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX - Laws
included in Sch. IX after 24-4-1973 - Protection available to -
Constitutional amendments inserting such laws - Validity of - Scope and
effect of inclusion of such laws in Sch. IX - Applicability of basic structure
doctrine - Scope of judicial review - Held, all constitutional amendments
made on or after 24-4-1973 by which Sch. IX is amended shall have to be
tested on the touchstone of basic structure doctrine - So also, any law
placed in Sch. IX has to satisfy the test of basic structure doctrine - Laws
included in Sch. IX do not become part of the Constitution - They derive
their validity on account of being included in Sch. IX, and this exercise has to
be tested every time it is undertaken - Reasons for, extensively discussed
- Supremacy of Constitution mandates a mechanism for testing validity of
legislative acts through an independent organ viz. the judiciary
- However, if validity of any Sch. IX law has already been upheld by
Supreme Court, it would not be open to challenge again on principles
declared in this judgment - But, if a law held to be violative of any rights in
Pt. III is subsequently incorporated in Sch. IX after 24-4-1973, such
violation/infraction shall be open to challenge under the basic structure doctrine -
Action taken and transactions finalised as a result of the impugned statutes shall not
be open to challenge - The petitions/appeals which gave rise to this reference
directed to be placed before a three-Judge Bench for decision in accordance with
principles laid down in this judgment
B. Constitution of India - Arts. 368 and 31-B - Amendment of the
Constitution - Scope of amending power of Parliament - Power to increase
amending power - Unavailability of - Held, Parliament cannot increase the
amending power by amendment of Art. 368 to confer on itself unlimited
power of amendment and destroy and damage the fundamentals of the
Constitution, nor can it use Art. 31-B to achieve the same purpose - Art. 31
-B therefore cannot go beyond the limited amending power contained in Art.
368
C. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Constitutional amendments
-
Applicability of basic structure doctrine, reiterated - Held, validity of each
new constitutional amendment has to be judged on its own merits
D. Constitution of India - Arts. 31-B, 31-A and 31-C - Relative scope of
power under, and reasons for validity or invalidity of, compared
E. Constitution of India - Arts. 245, 32, 136 and 226 - Limitations on
legislative power - Principle of constitutional supremacy - Mandate of -
Held, constitutional supremacy mandates a mechanism for testing the
validity of legislative Acts through an independent organ viz. the judiciary
F. Constitution of India - Generally - Constitutional supremacy
-
Mandate of - Held, the supremacy of the Constitution mandates all
constitutional bodies to comply with the provisions of the Constitution
The question that was before this nine-Judge Bench on reference was whether
on and after 24-4-1973, the date on which the decision in Kesavananda, (1973) 4
permissible for Parliament under Article 31-B to immunise legislations from being
struck down for violation of fundamental rights by inserting them into the Ninth
Schedule and, if so, what is its effect on the power of judicial review of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts.
Answering the reference in the terms below, the Supreme Court
Held :
The contention that Article 31-B read with the Ninth Schedule was held to be
constitutionally valid in Kesavananda cannot be accepted. The validity thereof was
not in question. The constitutional amendments under challenge in Kesavananda
were examined assuming the constitutional validity of Article 31-B. Be that as it
may, it will be assumed that Article 31-B is valid. In any case, the validity of the 1st
Amendment inserting Article 31-B in the Constitution is not in challenge before this
Bench.
(Para 78)
Since the majority in Kesavananda which propounded the basic structure
doctrine did not unconditionally uphold the validity of the 29th Constitutional
Amendment and six learned Judges forming the majority left that to be decided by
a smaller Bench and upheld its validity subject to it passing the test of the basic
structure doctrine, the factum of validity of the 29th Amendment in Kesavananda is
The surest way t legal research!"
not conclusive of matters under consideration before this Bench. The decision in
Kesavananda regarding the Twenty-ninth Amendment is
restricted to that particular amendment and no principle flows therefrom.
(Paras 89 and 93)
1, requires the validity of each new constitutional amendment to be judged on its
own merits.
[Para 151(ii)]
The broad proposition urged by the petitioners that laws that have been found
by the courts to be violative of Part III of the Constitution cannot be protected by
placing the same in the Ninth Schedule by use of device of Article 31-B read with
Article 368 of the Constitution, cannot be accepted. Ninth Schedule laws are not
being per se held invalid, but what is being examined is the extent of the power
which the legislature has come to possess. All amendments to the Constitution
made on or after 24-4-1973 by which the Ninth Schedule has been amended by
inclusion of various laws therein shall have to be tested on the touchstone of the
basic or essential features of the Constitution. Further, after a law is placed in the
Ninth Schedule, its validity has to be tested on the touchstone of the basic structure
doctrine.
[Paras 75, 104 and 151(iii)]
The object behind Article 31-B is to remove difficulties and not to obliterate
judicial review or Part III in its entirety. Therefore every amendment to the
Constitution whether it be in the form of amendment of any article or amendment
by insertion of an Act in the Ninth Schedule, has to be tested by reference to the
doctrine of basic structure. Laws included in the Ninth Schedule do not become part
of the Constitution, they derive their validity on account of the exercise undertaken
by Parliament to include them in the Ninth Schedule. That exercise has to be tested
every time it is undertaken.
(Paras 133, 140 and 124)
Each exercise of the amending power inserting laws into the Ninth Schedule
entails a complete removal of the fundamental rights chapter vis-à-vis the laws that
are added in the Ninth Schedule. Further, insertion in the Ninth Schedule is not
controlled by any defined criteria or standards by which the exercise of power may
be evaluated. The consequence of insertion is that it nullifies the entire Part III of the
Constitution. There is no constitutional control on such nullification. It means an
unlimited power to totally nullify Part III insofar as the Ninth Schedule legislations are
concerned. The supremacy of the Constitution mandates all constitutional bodies to
comply with the provisions of the Constitution. It also mandates a mechanism for
testing the validity of legislative Acts through an independent organ viz. the
judiciary. Indeed, if Article 31-B only provided restricted immunity and it seems that
original intent was only to protect a limited number of laws, it would have been only
an exception to Part III and the basis for the initial upholding of the provision.
However, the unchecked and rampant exercise of this power, the number of
statutes inserted into Sch. IX having gone from 13 to 284, shows that it is no
longer a mere exception. The absence of guidelines for exercise of such power
means the absence of constitutional control which results in destruction of
constitutional supremacy and creation of parliamentary hegemony and absence of
full power of judicial review to determine the constitutional validity of such exercise.
(Paras 98 and 103)
Parliament cannot increase the amending power by amendment of Article 368
to confer on itself the unlimited power of amendment and destroy and damage the
fundamentals of the Constitution. Article 368 does not vest such a power in
Parliament. It cannot lift all restrictions placed on the amending power
or free the amending power from all its restrictions. This is the effect of the decision
in Kesavananda. If constituent power under Article 368, the other name for
amending power, cannot be made unlimited, it follows that Article 31-B cannot be
so used as to confer unlimited power. Article 31-B cannot go beyond the limited
amending power contained in Article 368. The power to amend Ninth Schedule
flows from Article 368. This power of amendment has to be compatible with the
limits on the power of amendment. This limit came with Kesavananda. Therefore
Article 31-B after 24-4-1973 despite its wide language cannot confer unlimited or
unregulated immunity.
(Paras 125 and 126)
enhancement of its own power by Parliament, be it Article 329-A(4) or Articles 368
(4) and (5) or Section 4 of the 42nd Constitutional Amendment, has been held to
be incompatible with the doctrine of basic structure as they introduced new
elements which altered the identity of the Constitution or deleted the existing
elements from the Constitution by which the very core of the Constitution is
discarded. They obliterated important elements like judicial review. They made
directive principles en bloc a touchstone for obliteration of all the fundamental rights
and provided for insertion of laws in the Ninth Schedule which had no nexus with
agrarian reforms.
(Para 138)
Regarding Articles 31-A and 31-C (validity whereof is not in question here)
having been held to be valid despite denial of Article 14, it may be noted that these
articles have an indicia which is not there in Article 31-B. Article 31-A does not
exclude an uncatalogued number of laws from challenge on the basis of Part III. It
provides for a standard by which laws stand excluded from judicial review. Likewise,
Article 31-C applies the criteria of Articles 39(b) and (c) which refer to equitable
distribution of resources as a yardstick. While examining the validity of Article 31-C
in Kesavananda it was held that the vesting of power of the exclusion of judicial
review in a legislature including a State Legislature, strikes at the basic structure of
the Constitution. It is on this ground that the second part of Article 31-C was held
to be beyond the permissible limits of power of amendment of the Constitution
under Article 368.
(Paras 142, 104 and 99)
If the validity of any Ninth Schedule law has already been upheld by the Supreme
Court, it would not be open to challenge such law again on the principles declared
by this judgment. However, if a law held to be violative of any rights in Part III is
subsequently incorporated in the Ninth Schedule after 24-4-1973, such a
violation/infraction shall be open to challenge on the ground that it destroys or
damages the basic structure as indicated in Article 21 read with Article 14, Article
19, etc. and the principles underlying thereunder.
[Para 151(v)]
Actions taken and transactions finalised as a result of the impugned Acts shall
not be open to challenge.
[Para 151(vi)]
625, clarified and followed
Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, AIR 1967 SC 1643 : (1967) 2 SCR 762; ADM,
1952 SCR 89; Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1965 SC 845 : (1965) 1
Maharashtra V. Man Singh Suraj Singh
V. State of Bihar, AIR 1951 Pat 91 : ILR 30 Pat 454, referred to
It is directed that the petitions/appeals giving rise to this reference be now
placed for hearing before a three-Judge Bench for decision in accordance with the
principles laid down in this judgment.
(Para 152)
G. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III - Laws
included in Sch. IX after 24-4-1973, and the constitutional amendments
inserting such laws, which affect fundamental rights or the principles
underlying/essence of fundamental rights - Protection available to such
laws and validity of such constitutional amendments - Scope and effect of
inclusion of such laws in Sch. IX - Applicability of basic structure doctrine -
Scope of judicial review - Held, Parliament has power to amend provisions
of Pt. III so as to abridge or take away fundamental rights, but that power
is subject to limitation of basic structure doctrine - Hence, all constitutional
amendments made on or after 24-4-1973 by which Sch. IX is amended by
inclusion of various laws, and the laws so included in Sch. IX, shall have to
be tested on the touchstone of basic structure doctrine as reflected in Art.
21 r/w Art. 14 and Art. 19; Art. 15 and Art. 14 r/w Arts. 16(4), (4-A) & (4
-B); Arts. 20 and 32, etc., and the principles underlying them, or if the law
(s) concerned infringe the essence of fundamental rights
H. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX, 32 and Pt. III -
Laws included in Sch. IX after 24-4-1973, and the constitutional
amendments inserting such laws, which affect fundamental rights or the
principles underlying/essence of fundamental rights - Extent and nature of
judicial scrutiny attracted - Factors to be considered, tests to be applied
and exercise to be undertaken by Court - Necessity to take synoptic view
of Pt. III/Constitution - Standards to be applied depending on context -
Held, every addition to Sch. IX triggers Art. 32 as part of the basic structure
and is consequently subject to the review of fundamental rights as they
stand in Pt. III
- Individual examination of each law/constitutional amendment - The
laws that are included in Sch. IX have to be examined individually for
determining whether the constitutional amendments by which they are put
in Sch. IX damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution
- Impact or "rights test" and "essence of right" test - The actual or
direct effect and impact of the impugned Sch. IX law on the rights
guaranteed under Pt. III has to be considered for determining whether or
not the law destroys the basic structure - Focus of Court is on the actual
impairment caused by the law, rather than the literal validity of the law -
This means that the form of the amendment is not the relevant factor, but
the consequence thereof would be the determinative factor; this is the
"rights test" - When in a controlled constitution conferring limited power of
amendment, an entire chapter is made inapplicable as in the case of
insertion of a law into Sch. IX under Art. 31-B, "essence of the right" test as
therein], will have no applicability - In such a situation, it is the "rights
test" which is more appropriate, which requires a synoptic view to be taken
of the Constitution/fundamental rights chapter
- Synoptic view - As fundamental rights are interconnected, one has to take a
synoptic view of the various articles in Pt. III while judging the impact of Sch. IX
laws on the articles in Pt. III/Constitution
- Compatibility test - Basic structure doctrine requires the State to
justify the degree of invasion of fundamental rights - Greater the invasion
into essential freedoms, greater is the need for justification and
determination by Court whether invasion was necessary, and if so, to what
extent - Degree of invasion is for the Court and not Parliament to decide -
Parliament is presumed to legislate compatibly with the fundamental rights
and this is where judicial review comes in - Compatibility is one of the
species of judicial review in which one has to see the effect of the impugned
law on one hand and exclusion of Pt. III under Art. 31-B in its entirety at
the will of Parliament on the other
- Standard to be applied - The extent of invasion of various freedoms
that is permissible varies depending upon the context - Thus, application of
a standard to determine the extent of invasion of freedoms that is
permissible in a particular context is an important exercise to be undertaken
by the Court in applying the basic structure doctrine - This exercise can be
undertaken by the Court alone and not the prescribed authority under Art.
368
- Step-wise approach - For determining whether the impugned Sch. IX
law which affects fundamental rights violates the basic structure, Court has
to first find out whether the impugned Sch. IX law is violative of Pt. III - If
it finds in the affirmative, the further examination to be undertaken by the
Court is whether the violation is found destructive of the basic structure -
If this is found in the affirmative also, the result would be invalidation of the
Sch. IX law concerned - Instances discussed
I. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 15, 16, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Art. 368
- Laws included in Sch. IX after 24-4-1973, and the constitutional
amendments inserting such laws, affecting fundamental rights under Arts.
14, 15 and 16 - Considerations involved in testing validity of - Balancing of
general right of equality under Art. 14 with that under Art. 15(4) when
excessiveness is detected in grant of protective discrimination - Balancing
of formal equality enshrined in Art. 16(1) with egalitarian equality enshrined
in Art. 16(4)
J. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Fundamental rights - Nature of
Interconnectedness of fundamental rights, reiterated
K. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III -
Constitutional amendments affecting fundamental rights - Testing on
touchstone of basic structure - Application of a standard to determine the
extent of invasion of freedoms permissible in a particular context -
Authority competent therefor, held, is the Court and not Parliament
L. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 32 and 31-B r/w
Sch. IX and 368 - Fundamental rights that are part of the basic structure of
the Constitution Held, Art. 21 r/w Art. 14 and Art. 19; Art. 15 and Art. 14
r/w Arts. 16(4), (4-A) & (4-B); Arts. 20 and 32, etc., including the
principles or essence underlying them, are part of the basic structure of the
Constitution
M. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and 368 - Nature of Art. 14
- Extent to which part of the basic structure of the Constitution - Held, essence of
the principle behind Art. 14 is part of the basic structure - In fact, essence or
principle of the right or nature of violation is more important than equality in the
abstract or formal sense
N. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 31-B r/w Sch. IX and 368 -
Amendability of fundamental rights - Permissibility and extent of - Held,
Parliament has power to amend provisions of Pt. III so as to abridge or
take away fundamental rights, but that power is subject to limitation of
basic structure doctrine
O. Constitution of India - Arts. 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX - Elements of
basic structure of the Constitution - Instances of - Reiterated, that
secularism, separation of powers, equality and judicial review are basic
features of Constitution and essential elements of the rule of law - Rule of
Law
P. Constitution of India - Art. 19(1)(a) - Freedom of Press - If part of
freedom guaranteed under Art. 19(1)(a) - Reiterated, that freedom of
press which, though not separately and specifically guaranteed, has been
read as part of Art. 19(1)(a)
Q. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Secularism -
Repositories of, in the Constitution - Held, secular character of the
Constitution is a matter of conclusion to be drawn from various articles
conferring fundamental rights - If the secular character is not to be found in
Pt. III, it cannot be found anywhere else in the Constitution because every
fundamental right in Pt. III stands either for a principle or a matter of detail
R. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Fundamental rights - Contents of -
Held, every fundamental right in Pt. III stands either for a principle or a
matter of detail
S. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 14, 15 and 16 - Existence of
social content in fundamental rights - View taken in M. Nagaraj, (2006) 8
T. Constitution of India - Arts. 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX - Applicability
of basic structure doctrine - Factors to be considered - Held,
developments made in the field of constitutional interpretation and
expansion of judicial review shall have to be kept in view while deciding the
applicability of the basic structure doctrine
Held :
"If by a constitutional amendment, the application of Articles 14 and 19 is
withdrawn from a defined field of legislative activity, which is reasonably in public
interest, the basic framework of the Constitution may remain unimpaired. But if the
protection of those articles is withdrawn in respect of an uncatalogued variety of
laws, fundamental freedoms will become a 'parchment in a glass case' to be viewed
as a matter of historical curiosity." These observations made in Minerva Mills case,
in cases wherein entire Part III, including Articles 14, 19, 20, 21 and 32 stand
excluded without any yardstick.
(Para 49)
The developments made in the field of constitutional interpretation and expansion of
judicial review shall have to be kept in view while deciding the applicability of the
basic structure doctrine-to find out whether there has been violation of any
fundamental right, the extent of violation, does it destroy the balance or it
maintains the reasonable balance.
(Paras 50 and 42)
[Ed. : See Shortnote X also, below.]
Parliament has power to amend the provisions of Part III so as to abridge or
take away fundamental rights, but that power is subject to the limitation of the
basic structure doctrine. It is permissible for the legislature to amend the Ninth
Schedule and grant a law the protection in terms of Article 31-B but subject to the
right of the citizen to assail it on the enlarged judicial review concept. If a law that
abrogates or abridges rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution violates the
basic structure doctrine, whether by amendment of any article of Part III or by an
insertion in the Ninth Schedule, such law will have to be invalidated in exercise of
judicial review power of the court. The legislature cannot grant fictional immunities
and exclude the examination of the Ninth Schedule law by the Court after the
enunciation of the basic structure doctrine. All amendments to the Constitution
made on or after 24-4-1973 by which the Ninth Schedule is amended by inclusion
of various laws therein shall have to be tested on the touchstone of the basic or
essential features of the Constitution as reflected in Article 21 read with Article 14
and Article 19; Article 15 and Article 14 read with Articles 16(4), (4-A) & (4-B);
Articles 20 and 32, etc., and the principles underlying them. To put it differently after
24-4-1973 the laws included in the Ninth Schedule would not have absolute
immunity. Even though an Act is put in the Ninth Schedule by a constitutional
amendment, its provisions would be open to attack on the ground that they
destroy or damage the basic structure if the fundamental right or rights taken away
or abrogated pertains or pertain to the basic structure or if the law infringes the
essence of any of such fundamental rights. Thus, validity of such laws can be
challenged on the touchstone of basic structure such as reflected in the
fundamental rights as listed above and the principles underlying these articles.
[Paras 97, 100, 106, 109, 114, 118, 123, 133, 143, 145 to 147 and 151(i) &
(iii)
It cannot be held that essence of the principle behind Article 14 is not part of the
basic structure. In fact, essence or principle of the right or nature of violation is
more important than equality in the abstract or formal sense. The majority opinion
in Kesavananda clearly is that the principles behind fundamental rights are part of
the basic structure of the Constitution.
(Para 109)
Justification for conferring protection, not blanket protection, on the laws
included in the Ninth Schedule by constitutional amendments shall be a matter of
constitutional adjudication by examining the nature and extent of infraction of a
fundamental right by a statute sought to be constitutionally protected, and on the
touchstone of the basic structure doctrine as reflected in Article 21 read with Article
14 and Article 19.
[Para 151(iv)]
To legislatively override entire Part III of the Constitution by invoking Article 31-B
would not only make the fundamental rights overridden by directive principles but it
would also defeat fundamentals such as secularism, separation of powers, equality
and also judicial review which are the basic features of the Constitution and
essential elements of rule of law, and that too without any yardstick/standard being
provided under Article 31-B.
(Para 127)
While laws may be added to the Ninth Schedule, once Article 32 is triggered, these
legislations must answer to the complete test of fundamental rights. Every insertion
into the Ninth Schedule does not restrict Part III review, it completely excludes Part
III at will. For this reason, every addition to the Ninth Schedule triggers Article 32 as
part of the basic structure and is consequently subject to the review of the
fundamental rights as they stand in Part III.
(Paras 116 and 102)
Whether the impact of an amendment to Part III results in violation of the basic
structure, and the extent of abrogation and limit of abridgment shall have to be
examined in each individual case. The laws that are included in the Ninth Schedule
have to be examined individually for determining whether the constitutional
amendments by which they are put in the Ninth Schedule damage or destroy the
basic structure of the Constitution. The placement of a right in the scheme of the
Constitution, the impact of the offending law on that right, the effect of the
exclusion of that right from judicial review, the abrogation of the principle or the
essence of that right is an exercise which cannot be denied on the basis of fictional
immunity under Article 31-B.
(Paras 95, 106, 107, 114 and 148)
The actual effect and impact of the law on the rights guaranteed under Part III
has to be taken into account for determining whether or not it destroys the basic
structure. The impact test would determine the validity of the challenge. The focus
of the Court is on the actual impairment caused by the law, rather than the literal
validity of the law. The Supreme Court being bound by all the provisions of the
Constitution and also by the basic structure doctrine has necessarily to scrutinise
the Ninth Schedule laws. It has to examine the terms of the statute, the nature of
the rights involved, etc. to determine whether in effect and substance the statute
violates the essential features of the Constitution. For so doing, it has to first find
whether the Ninth Schedule law is violative of Part III. If on such examination, the
answer is in the affirmative, the further examination to be undertaken is whether
the violation found is destructive of the basic structure doctrine. If on such further
examination the answer is again in the affirmative, the result would be invalidation
of the Ninth Schedule law. Therefore, first the violation of rights of Part III is
required to be determined, then its impact examined, and if it shows that in effect
and substance, it destroys the basic structure of the Constitution, the consequence
of invalidation has to follow.
[Paras 56, 106, 148 and 151(ii)]
Take the example of freedom of press which, though not separately and
specifically guaranteed, has been read as part of Article 19(1)(a). If Article 19(1)(a)
is sought to be amended so as to abrogate such right (which it is hoped will never
be done), the acceptance of the respondent's contention would mean that such
amendment would fall outside judicial scrutiny when the law curtailing these rights is
placed in the Ninth Schedule as a result of immunity granted by Article 31-B. The
impact of such an amendment shall have to be tested on the touchstone of rights
and freedoms guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. In a given case, even
abridgement may destroy the real freedom of the press and, thus, be destructive of
the basic structure.
(Para 106)
Take another example. The secular character of our Constitution is a matter of
conclusion to be drawn from various articles conferring fundamental rights; and
if
the secular character is not to be found in Part III, it cannot be found anywhere else
in the Constitution because every fundamental right in Part III stands either for a
principle or a matter of detail. Fundamental rights are
interconnected. Therefore, one has to take a synoptic view of the various articles in
Part III while judging the impact of the laws incorporated in the Ninth Schedule on
the articles in Part III. It is not necessary to multiply the illustrations.
(Paras 106 and 123)
When the golden triangle of Article 21 read with Article 14 and Article 19 is
sought to be eliminated not only the "essence of right" test but also the "rights
test" has to apply taking the synoptic view of the articles in Part III. Applying the
above tests to the Ninth Schedule laws, if the infraction affects the basic structure
then such a law(s) will not get the protection of the Ninth Schedule.
[Paras 140 and 151(iv)]
Hence, the constitutional validity of the Ninth Schedule laws on the touchstone
of basic structure doctrine can be adjudged by applying the direct impact and effect
test i.e. "rights test", which means the form of an amendment is not the relevant
factor, but the consequence thereof would be determinative factor.
(Para 150)
There is a difference between the "rights test" and the "essence of right test".
Both form part of application of the basic structure doctrine. When in a controlled
constitution conferring limited power of amendment, an entire chapter is made
inapplicable, "the essence of the right" test as applied in M. Nagaraj case, (2006) 8
law, it is the "rights test" which is more appropriate. The fact of validation of laws
based on exercise of blanket immunity granted by Article 31-B eliminates Part III in
entirety hence the "rights test" as part of the basic structure doctrine has to apply.
The situation where entire equality code, freedom code and right to move court
under Part III are all nullified by exercise of power to grant immunisation at will by
Parliament is incompatible with the implied limitation of the power of Parliament. In
such a case, it is the "rights test" that is appropriate and is to be applied. For the
correct interpretation, Article 368 requires a synoptic view of the Constitution
between its various provisions which, at first sight, look disconnected.
(Paras 142 and 118)
Article 31-B gives validation based on fictional immunity. In judging the validity of
a constitutional amendment the Court has to be guided by the impact test. The
basic structure doctrine requires the State to justify the degree of invasion of
fundamental rights. Parliament is presumed to legislate compatibly with the
fundamental rights and this is where judicial review comes in. The greater the
invasion into essential freedoms, greater is the need for justification and
determination by Court whether invasion was necessary and if so to what extent.
The degree of invasion is for the Court to decide. In respect of the inclusion of laws
in
the Ninth Schedule the principle of compatibility will come in. One has to see the
effect of the impugned law on one hand and the exclusion of Part III in its entirety
at the will of Parliament. Compatibility is one of the species of judicial review which
is premised on compatibility with rights regarded as fundamental. The power to
grant immunity, at will, on fictional basis, without full judicial review, will nullify the
entire basic structure doctrine.
(Paras 149 and 133)
The doctrine of basic structure as a principle has now become an axiom. It is
premised on the basis that invasion of certain freedoms needs to be justified. It is
the invasion which attracts the basic structure doctrine. Certain freedoms may
justifiably be interfered with. If freedom, for example, is interfered with in cases
relating to terrorism, it does not follow that the same test can be applied to all the
offences. Thus, the application of a standard is an important exercise required to be
undertaken by the Court in applying the basic structure doctrine and that has to be
done by the courts and not by the prescribed authority under Article 368. The
existence of the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution at will, with
requisite voting strength, so as to make any kind of laws that exclude Part III
including power of judicial review under Article 32, is incompatible with the basic
structure doctrine.
(Para 147)
It would be incorrect to assume that social content exists only in directive
212, egalitarian equality exists in Article 14 read with Articles 16(4), (4-A), (4-B).
Articles 15 and 16 are facets of Article 14. Therefore, it is wrong to suggest that
equity and justice find place only in the directive principles. Article 16(1) concerns
formal equality which is the basis of the rule of law. At the same time, Article 16(4)
refers to egalitarian equality. Similarly, the general right of equality under Article 14
has to be balanced with Article 15(4) when excessiveness is detected in grant of
protective discrimination. Article 15(1) limits the rights of the State by providing
that there shall be no discrimination on the grounds only of religion, race, caste,
sex, etc. and yet it permits classification for certain classes, hence social content
exists in fundamental rights as well. All these are relevant considerations to test the
validity of the Ninth Schedule laws.
(Paras 128 and 105)
(Cri) 1325, clarified
212, relied on
Seervai : Constitutional Law of India (4th Edn., Vol. III), relied on
U. Constitution of India - Arts. 31-B r/w Sch. IX and 368 - Likelihood of
abuse of Art. 31-B - Effect on validity thereof - Held, mere possibility of
abuse is not a relevant test to determine validity of a provision
It was contended that the power to pack up laws in the Ninth Schedule in
absence of any indicia in Article 31-B has been abused and that abuse is likely to
continue. It is submitted that the Ninth Schedule which commenced with only 13
enactments has now a list of 284 enactments. The validity of Article 31-B is not in
question before this Bench. Further, mere possibility of abuse is not a relevant test
to determine the validity of a provision. The people, through the Constitution, have
vested the power to make laws in their representatives through Parliament in the
same manner in which they have entrusted the responsibility to adjudge, interpret
and construe law and the Constitution including its limitation in the judiciary. Hence
no assumption can be made about the alleged abuse of the power.
(Para 76)
V. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III -
Fundamental rights if outside the purview of the basic structure of
at least some fundamental rights do form part of the basic structure of the
that he had never opined that fundamental rights were outside the purview of the
basic structure - Certain fundamental rights, and the principles that underlie them
are foundational not only to the Indian democracy, but democracies around the
world - India's constitutional history has led us to include the essence of each of
our fundamental rights in the basic structure - History of emergence of modern
democracy has also been the history of securing basic rights for the people of other
nations also - Situation and epoch making events and revolutions in such other
nations, discussed
W. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III -
Fundamental rights that are part of the basic structure of the Constitution -
Extent to which protected - Essence of/principles behind fundamental
rights - Held, India's constitutional history has led us to include the essence
of each of our fundamental rights in the basic structure
The view in Kesavananda is that at least some fundamental rights do form part
of basic structure of the Constitution. Detailed discussion in Kesavananda to
demonstrate that the right to property was not part of basic structure of the
Constitution by itself shows that some of the fundamental rights are part of the
basic structure of the Constitution. In order to understand the view of Khanna J. in
Kesavananda it is important to take into account his later clarification. In Election
fundamental rights were outside the purview of the basic structure.
(Paras 107, 90 and 96)
The framers of the Constitution have built a wall around certain parts of
fundamental rights, which has to remain forever, limiting ability of majority to
intrude upon them. That wall is the "basic structure" doctrine. Our Constitution will
almost certainly continue to be amended as India grows and changes. However, a
democratic India will not grow out of the need for protecting the principles behind
our fundamental rights.
(Paras 102 and 112)
Certain fundamental rights, and the principles that underlie them, are
foundational not only to the Indian democracy, but democracies around the world.
Throughout the world nations have declared that certain provisions or principles in
their constitutions are inviolable. Other countries having a controlled constitution,
like Germany, have embraced the idea that there is a basic structure to their
constitutions and in doing so have entrenched various rights as core constitutional
commitments. India's constitutional history has led us to include the essence of
each of our fundamental rights in the basic structure of our Constitution.
(Paras 111 and 113)
The history of the emergence of modern democracy has also been the history
of securing basic rights for the people of other nations also. In the United States the
Constitution was finally ratified only upon an understanding that a Bill of Rights
would be immediately added guaranteeing certain basic freedoms to its citizens. At
about the same time when the Bill of Rights was being ratified in America, the
French Revolution declared the Rights of Man to Europe. When the death of
colonialism and the end of World War II birthed new nations across the globe, these
States embraced rights as foundations to their new constitutions. Similarly, the
rapid increase in the creation of constitutions that coincided with the end of the Cold
War has planted rights at the base of these documents. Even
countries that have long respected and upheld rights, but in whose governance
traditions did not include their constitutional affirmation have recently felt they could
no longer leave their deep commitment to rights left unstated. In 1998, the United
Kingdom adopted the Human Rights Act which gave explicit effect to the European
Convention on Human Rights. In Canada, "the Constitution Act of 1982" enshrined
certain basic rights into their system of governance.
(Paras 110 and 111)
X. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III -
Fundamental rights that are part of the basic structure of the Constitution -
Determination of - Approach to be taken - Factors to be considered -
Cardinal importance of fundamental rights in constitutional scheme - Broad
interpretation vis-à-vis narrow interpretation of fundamental rights - Held,
the said determination has to be undertaken having regard to the
enlightened point of view as a result of the development of the fundamental
rights by the Supreme Court over the years wherein the broad
interpretation of fundamental rights has come to hold sway -
Interpretation of Constitution has to be such as to enable citizens to enjoy
the rights guaranteed by Pt. III in the fullest measure - Fundamental
rights are the heart and soul of the Constitution and have enjoyed a special
and privileged place in the Constitution - Fundamental rights are those
rights of citizens or those negative obligations of the State which do not
permit encroachment on individual liberties - Development of fundamental
rights over the years, traced - Constitutional
Interpretation
-
Interpretation of particular provisions - Interpretation of fundamental
rights
Y. Constitution of India - Pts. III & IV and Arts. 368 & 31-B r/w Sch. IX
- Primacy of Pt. III - Balance provided for between fundamental rights
and directive principles in the Constitution - Nature of - If part of basic
structure of the Constitution - Line to be drawn between public good and
individual liberty - Held, Pts. III and IV make it the responsibility of the
Government to adopt a middle path between individual liberty and public
good - Though balance between Pts. III and IV can be tilted in favour of
public good, it cannot be overturned by completely overriding individual
liberty - This balance is an essential feature of the Constitution - To
destroy the guarantees given by Pt. III in order to purportedly achieve
goals of Pt. IV is plainly to subvert the Constitution by destroying the
essential element of its basic structure - Goals set out in Pt. IV have to be
achieved without abrogation of the means provided for by Pt. III - Human
and Civil Rights - Preservation and protection of individual liberty in Indian
Constitution - Extent of
Z. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Art. 245 - Fundamental rights -
Nature of - Extent of protection available under - Check on legislative
power - Held, fundamental rights are not limited, narrow rights but provide
a broad check against the violations and excesses by State authorities -
They have proved to be the most significant constitutional control on the
Government, particularly legislative power - These rights collectively form a
comprehensive test against the arbitrary exercise of State power in any
area
ZA. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Fundamental rights - Object of
Held, the same are to foster a social revolution by creating a society
egalitarian to the extent that all citizens are equally free from coercion and
restriction by the State - Human and Civil Rights - Object of fundamental rights in
Indian Constitution
ZB. Constitution of India - Art. 14, Pts. III & IV and Preamble - Nature
of equality under the Constitution - Role of economic growth and social
equity - Relationship of, with individual rights - Held, economic growth and
social equity are the two pillars of our Constitution which are linked to
individual rights (right to equal opportunity), rather than in the abstract
zc. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Fundamental rights - Extent of
interconnectedness - Held, the fundamental rights are deeply
interconnected - Each supports and strengthens the work of the others
ZD. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III -
Construal of basic structure doctrine - March of time and development of
law - Necessity to consider - Constitutional Interpretation - Temporally
concordant exposition of the Constitution - Necessity of
The Constitution is a living document. Constitutional provisions have to be
construed having regard to the march of time and the development of law. It is,
therefore, necessary that while construing the doctrine of basic structure due
regard be had to various decisions which led to expansion and development of the
law.
(Paras 42 and 50)
The fundamentalness of fundamental rights has to be examined having regard to
the enlightened point of view as a result of development of fundamental rights over
the years. The abrogation or abridgment of the fundamental rights under Chapter III
have to be examined on the broad interpretation, the narrow interpretation of
fundamental rights chapter is a thing of past. Interpretation of the Constitution has
to be such as to enable the citizens to enjoy the rights guaranteed by Part III in the
fullest measure. It is, therefore, imperative to understand the nature of guarantees
under fundamental rights as understood in the years that immediately followed
after the Constitution was enforced when fundamental rights were viewed by the
Supreme Court as distinct and separate rights. In the early years, the scope of the
guarantee provided by these rights was considered to be very narrow. Individuals
could only claim limited protection against the State. This position has changed
since long. Over the years, the jurisprudence and development around fundamental
rights has made it clear that they are not limited, narrow rights but provide a broad
check against the violations or excesses by the State authorities. The fundamental
rights have in fact proved to be the most significant constitutional control on the
Government, particularly legislative power. Fundamental rights enshrined in Part III
were added to the Constitution as a check on the State power, particularly the
legislative power. Through Article 13 it is provided that the State cannot make any
laws that are contrary to Part III. The transition from a set of independent, narrow
rights to broad checks on State power is demonstrated by a series of cases that
have been decided by the Supreme Court. It can no longer be contended that
protection provided by fundamental rights comes in isolated pools. On the contrary,
these rights together provide a comprehensive guarantee against excesses by
development of fundamental rights has been such that it no longer involves the
interpretation of rights as isolated protections which directly arise
but they collectively form a comprehensive test against the arbitrary exercise of
State power in any area that occurs as an inevitable consequence. The protection
of fundamental rights has, therefore, been considerably widened.
(Paras 56, 60, 62 and 102)
It is necessary to always bear in mind that fundamental rights have been
considered to be the heart and soul of the Constitution. These rights have been
further defined and redefined through various trials having regard to various
experiences and some attempts to invade and nullify these rights. The fundamental
rights are deeply interconnected. Each supports and strengthens the work of the
others. The Constitution is a living document, its interpretation may change as the
time and circumstances change to keep pace with it.
(Para 109)
The fundamental rights have always enjoyed a special and privileged place in the
Constitution. Regarding the status and stature of fundamental rights in the
constitutional scheme, it is to be remembered that fundamental rights are those
rights of citizens or those negative obligations of the State which do not permit
encroachment on individual liberties. The State is to deny no one equality before the
law. Economic growth and social equity are the two pillars of our Constitution which
are linked to the rights of an individual (right to equal opportunity), rather than in
the abstract. The object of the fundamental rights is to foster a social revolution by
creating a society egalitarian to the extent that all citizens are to be equally free
from coercion or restriction by the State. By enacting fundamental rights and
directive principles which are negative and positive obligations of the States, the
Constituent Assembly made it the responsibility of the Government to adopt a
middle path between individual liberty and public good. Fundamental rights and
directive principles have to be balanced. That balance can be tilted in favour of the
public good. The balance, however, cannot be overturned by completely overriding
individual liberty. This balance is an essential feature of the Constitution. To destroy
the guarantees given by Part III in order to purportedly achieve the goals of Part IV
is plainly to subvert the Constitution by destroying its basic structure. Fundamental
rights occupy a unique place in the lives of civilised societies and have been
described in judgments as "transcendental", "inalienable" and "primordial". They
constitute the ark of the Constitution. Parts III and IV together constitute the core
of commitment to social revolution and they, together, are the conscience of the
Constitution. It is to be traced for a deep understanding of the scheme of the Indian
Constitution. The goals set out in Part IV have, therefore, to be achieved without
the abrogation of the means provided for by Part III. It is in this sense that Parts III
and IV together constitute the core of our Constitution and combine to form its
conscience. Anything that destroys the balance between the two parts will ipso
facto destroy the essential element of the basic structure of the Constitution.
(Paras 101, 105 and 49)
Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 305 : (1962) 3 SCR 842; Maneka
:
1950 Cri LJ 1383, held overruled
State of Bombay V. Bhanji Munji, AIR 1955 SC 41 : (1955) 1 SCR 777, impliedly
disapproved
215 : AIR 1952 SC 123 : 1952 SCR 435 : 1952 Cri LJ 805; Kerala Education
Bill, 1975, In re, AIR 1958 SC 956; All India Bank Employees' Assn. V. National
Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1962 SC 171; Bennett Coleman & Co. V. Union of India,
ZE. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX and Pt. III -
Fundamental rights that are part of the basic structure of the Constitution -
Determination of - Factors to be considered - Partial excludability of a
feature - Held, the fact that limited exceptions are made for limited
purposes, to protect certain kind of laws, does not mean that a particular
feature is not part of the basic structure
ZF. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX - Equality
- Importance of, in constitutional scheme - If part of the basic structure of
the Constitution - Determination of - Factors to be considered - Partial
excludability of - Held, the mere fact that equality which is a part of the
basic structure, can be excluded for a limited purpose, to protect certain
kinds of laws, does not prevent it from being a part of the basic structure -
Without equality the rule of law, secularism, etc. would fail
The mere fact that equality, which is a part of the basic structure, can be
excluded for a limited purpose, to protect certain kinds of laws, does not prevent it
from being part of the basic structure. Therefore, it follows that in considering
whether any particular feature of the Constitution is part of the basic structure-rule
of law, separation of powers-the fact that limited exceptions are made for limited
purposes, to protect certain kind of laws, does not mean that it is not part of the
basic structure.
(Para 130)
ZG. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX, Pt. III and Arts.
14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 32 and 359 - Fundamental rights that are part of the
basic structure of the Constitution - Held, golden triangle of Arts. 14, 19
and 21 as it stands for equality and rule of law, along with Arts. 15, 20 and
32, etc. clearly form part of the basic structure of the Constitution and
cannot be abrogated - These articles stand altogether on a different footing
- This fact has been recognised even by Parliament, by the 44th
Constitutional Amendment whereby Arts. 20 and 21 can no longer be
suspended during Emergency under Art. 359
ZH. Constitution of India - Art. 21 - Importance of, in constitutional
scheme - Held, Art. 21 is the heart of the Constitution - It confers right to
life as well as right of choice
ZI. Constitution of India - Arts. 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX - Basic features
of
Constitution - Instances - Held, rule of law and the federal structure are
part of the basic structure - Rule of Law
ZJ. Constitution of India - Sch. VII and Art. 368 - Extent to which Sch.
VII may be amended - Held, Parliament can make additions in three
legislative lists, but cannot abrogate all the lists as it would abrogate the
federal structure
ZK. Constitution of India - Art. 21 r/w Arts. 14 & 15 and Preamble - Secularism -
Repositories of, in Constitution - Held, Art. 21 r/w Arts. 14 & 15 represent
secularism [Ed. : Queare : do not Arts. 25, 26, 29 and 30 also represent
secularism?]
The golden triangle of Articles 14, 19 and 21 as it stands for equality and rule of
law clearly forms part of the basic structure of the Constitution and cannot be
abrogated. These articles stand on altogether different footing. Article 21 is the
heart of the Constitution. It confers right to life as well as right to choose. Article
15, Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 19 which constitute the core values which if
allowed to be abrogated would change completely the nature of the Constitution.
The fact that some articles in Part III stand alone has been recognised even by
Parliament, for example, Articles 20 and 21. Article 359 provides for suspension of
the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during Emergencies. However,
by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, it has been provided that
even during Emergencies, the enforcement of the rights under Articles 20 and 21
cannot be suspended. This is the recognition given by Parliament to the protections
granted under Articles 20 and 21. No discussion or argument is needed for the
conclusion that these rights are part of the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution. Same would be the position in respect of the rights under Article 32,
again, a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Exclusion of fundamental
rights would result in nullification of the basic structure doctrine, the object of which
is to protect basic features of the Constitution as indicated by the synoptic view of
the rights in Part III.
(Paras 109, 140, 141, 146 and 149)
Secularism (Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 15 represent secularism) is one
fundamental of the Constitution, equality is the other, to give a few examples to
illustrate the point. It would show that it is impermissible to destroy Articles 14 and
15 or abrogate or en bloc eliminate these fundamental rights. To further illustrate
the point, it may be noted that Parliament can make additions in the three
legislative lists, but cannot abrogate all the lists as it would abrogate the federal
structure. Without equality the rule of law, secularism, etc. would fail.
(Paras 105, 124 and 125)
ZL. Constitution of India - Generally - Arts. 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX,
Pt. III and Preamble - Nature of Indian Constitution - Constitutionalism,
common law constitutionalism, constitutional sovereignty, controlled
constitution - What are, explained - Importance of checks and balances
residing in the separation of powers and diffusion of power amongst
different independent centres of decision making, emphasised
Constitutional sovereignty distinguished from parliamentary sovereignty -
Held, Parliament can restrict fundamental rights but it is impossible for laws
protecting fundamental rights to be impliedly repealed by future statutes -
Protection of fundamental constitutional rights through the common law is a
main feature of common law constitutionalism - Words and phrases -
Constitutional Law - Separation of powers - Importance of - Held,
separation of powers between Legislature, Executive and Judiciary
constitutes one of the basic features of the Constitution
ZM. Constitution of India - Arts. 32, 136, 226, 368, 31-B r/w Sch. IX
and Pt. III - Determination of validity of constitutional amendments on
touchstone of basic structure doctrine - Authority competent for - Held, authority
to enact law and decide the legality thereof cannot vest in one organ of the State -
It would disturb the checks and balances in the Constitution - Validity of limitation
on rights in Pt. III can only be examined by another independent organ, namely, the
judiciary
ZN. Constitution of India - Arts. 32, 226, 136 and Pt. III - Protection of
fundamental rights - Role and suitability of judiciary as sentinel of
fundamental rights - Held, it is the job of the judiciary to ensure that the
Government on the basis of number does not override fundamental rights -
Judiciary is the best institution to protect fundamental rights, given its
independent nature and also because it involves interpretation based on the
assessment of values besides textual interpretation - It enables
application of principles of justice and law - It is therefore that power for
enforcement of fundamental rights has been vested by the Constitution in
Supreme Court and High Courts - Judiciary
zo. Constitution of India - Arts. 32, 226, 136, 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX
- Place of judicial review in the constitutional scheme - Extent of judicial
review which is part of basic structure of Constitution - Held, after
enunciation of the basic structure doctrine, full judicial review is an integral
part of the Constitutional Scheme - Jurisdiction so conferred on High Courts
and Supreme Court is part of the inviolable basic structure of the
Constitution - Judicial review
ZP. Constitution of India - Arts. 32, 226, 136 and 14, 19 & 21 -
Principles that form basis of judicial review - Held, Arts. 14, 19, 21
represent the foundational values which form the basis of judicial review
apart from the rule of law and separation of powers - Judicial review
ZQ. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 32, 226 and 136 - Equality, rule of
law, judicial review and separation of powers - Importance of -
Interrelationship between, explained - Rule of Law - Judicial review
-
Constitutional Law - Separation of Powers
ZR. Constitution of India - Arts. 32 and 136 - Duty of Supreme Court
as ultimate interpreter of Constitution, held, is to uphold the constitutional
values and enforce constitutional limitations
The principle of constitutionalism requires control over the exercise of
governmental power to ensure that it does not destroy the democratic principles
upon which it is based. These democratic principles include the protection of
fundamental rights. The principle of constitutionalism advocates a check and
balance model of the separation of powers; it requires a diffusion of powers,
necessitating different independent centres of decision-making. Under the controlled
constitution, the principles of checks and balances have an important role to play.
The principle of constitutionalism underpins the principle of legality which requires
the courts to interpret legislation on the assumption that Parliament would not wish
to legislate contrary to fundamental rights. The legislature can restrict fundamental
rights but it is impossible for laws protecting fundamental rights to be impliedly
repealed by future statutes. The protection of fundamental constitutional rights
through the common law is the main feature of common law constitutionalism.
(Paras 43, 44 and 47)
There is a difference between parliamentary and constitutional sovereignty. Our
Constitution is framed by a Constituent Assembly which was not Parliament. It is in
the exercise of law-making power by the Constituent Assembly that we have a
controlled Constitution.
(Para 48)
For preservation of liberty and prevention of tyranny it is absolutely essential to
vest separate powers in three different organs. The separation of powers between
Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary constitutes one of the basic features of the
Constitution.
(Paras 64 and 63)
Constitutional amendments are subject to limitations and if the question of
limitation is to be decided by Parliament itself which enacts the impugned
amendments and gives that law a complete immunity, it would disturb the checks
and balances in the Constitution. The authority to enact law and decide the legality
of the limitations cannot vest in one organ. The validity of the limitation on the
rights in Part III can only be examined by another independent organ, namely, the
judiciary.
(Para 144)
The role of the judiciary is to protect fundamental rights. A modern democracy is
based on the twin principles of majority rule and the need to protect fundamental
rights. It is job of the judiciary to balance the principles ensuring that the
Government on the basis of number does not override fundamental rights. Judiciary
is the best institution to protect fundamental rights, given its independent nature
and also because it involves interpretation based on the assessment of values
besides textual interpretation. It enables application of the principles of justice and
law. Realising that it is necessary to secure the enforcement of the fundamental
rights, power for such enforcement has been vested by the Constitution in the
Supreme Court and the High Courts. After enunciation of the basic structure
doctrine, full judicial review is an integral part of the constitutional scheme. The
jurisdiction so conferred on the High Courts and the Supreme Court is a part of
inviolable basic structure of the Constitution of India. It gives practical content to
the objectives of the Constitution embodied in Part III and other parts of the
Constitution.
(Paras 33, 46, 130, 136 and 107)
The jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court by Article 32 is an important
and integral part of the basic structure of the Constitution of India and no Act of
Parliament can abrogate it or take it away except by way of impermissible erosion
of fundamental principles of the constitutional scheme.
(Para 39)
It is the duty of the Supreme Court to uphold the constitutional values and
enforce constitutional limitations as the ultimate interpreter of the Constitution.
(Para 41)
Articles 14, 19, 21 represent the foundational values which form the basis of the
rule of law. These are the principles of constitutionality which form the basis of
judicial review apart from the rule of law and separation of powers. If in future,
judicial review was to be abolished by a constitutional amendment, as Lord Steyn
says, the principle of parliamentary sovereignty even in England would require a
relook. This is how the law has developed in England over the years. It is in such
cases that doctrine of basic structure as propounded in Kesavananda has to apply.
(Para 48)
Equality, rule of law, judicial review and separation of powers form parts of the
basic structure of the Constitution. Each of these concepts is intimately
connected. There can be no rule of law, if there is no equality before the law. These
would be meaningless if the violation was not subject to judicial review. All these
would be redundant if the legislative, executive and judicial powers are vested in
one organ. Therefore, the duty to decide whether the limits have been transgressed
has been placed on the judiciary.
(Para 129)
597 : 1952 Cri LJ 966; Fertilizer Corpn. Kamgar Union (Regd.) V. Union of India,
1961 SC 1457 : (1962) 1 SCR 574, affirmed
The Federalist Nos. 47, 48, 51, 78; Spirit of Laws (Book XI, Chapter 6); Lord
Steyn : Democracy Through Law, p. 131, relied on
zs. Constitution of India - Arts. 368 and 31-B r/w Sch. IX - Constituent
power and amending power - Distinction between, and nature and relative
scope of, explained - Insertion of words "constituent power" in Art. 368 -
Effect - Held, addition of words "constituent power" in Art. 368 does not
change the nature of power under Art. 368 from that of being an amending
power to a constituent power - Parliament did not become the original
Constituent Assembly by addition of said words - It remains a Parliament
under a controlled Constitution, and limitations of basic structure doctrine
continue to apply to it - Constitutional Law
There is a distinction between the making of a Constitution by a Constituent
Assembly which was not subject to restraints by any external authority as a plenary
law-making power and a power to amend the Constitution, a derivative power
derived from the Constitution and subject to the limitations imposed by the
Constitution. No provision of the Constitution framed in exercise of plenary-law
making power can be ultra vires because there is no touchstone outside the
Constitution by which the validity of provision of the Constitution can be adjudged.
This power of framing the Constitution has no limitations or constraints, it is
primary power, a real plenary power. The power for amendment cannot be equated
with such power of framing the Constitution. The amending power has to be within
the Constitution and not outside it. It has constraints of the document viz.
Constitution which creates it. This derivative power can be exercised within the four
corners of what has been conferred on the body constituted, namely, Parliament.
(Paras 54 and 118)
By addition of the words "constituent power" in Article 368, the amending body,
namely, Parliament does not become the original Constituent Assembly. It remains
a Parliament under a controlled Constitution. Even after the words "constituent
power" are inserted in Article 368, the limitations of doctrine of basic structure
would continue to apply to Parliament. It is on this premise that clauses (4) and (5)
inserted in Article 368 by the 42nd Amendment were struck down in Minerva Mills
(Para 137)
H.M. Seervai : Constitutional Law of India (4th Edn.), relied on
ZT. Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 - Object of
The main object of the First Amendment to the Constitution was to fully secure
the constitutional validity of zamindari abolition laws in general and certain specified
Acts in particular and save those provisions from the dilatory litigation which
resulted in holding up the implementation of the social reform measures affecting
large number of people.
(Para 10)
D-M/A/35617/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Goolam E. Vahanvati, Solicitor General, Gopal Subramaniam, Amarjit
Singh and R. Mohan, Additional Solicitors General, Uday Holla, Advocate
General, Raman, Additional Advocate General, F.S. Nariman, Harish N.
Salve, Raju Ramachandran, Milind Sathe, A.S. Qureshi, A.S. Nambiar,
K.M. Vijayan, Soli J. Sorabjee, T.R. Andhyarujina,
R.
Shunmugasundaram, Ram Jethmalani, Dushyant Dave, Ashok H. Desai
and Jugalkishore Gilda, Senior Advocates [P.H. Parekh, Sailesh
Mahintura, Sameer Parekh, E.R. Kumar, Subhash Sharma, Gopal
Sankaranarayanan, Ms Sonali Basu Parekh, Nitin Thukral, Ms Rukhmini
Bobde, Kush Chaturvedi, Rohan Thawani, Joseph Pookkatt, Ms Attreyee
Majumdar, Ms Pooja Dhar, Nikhil Majithia, Saurabh Sinha, Rishab,
Prashant Kumar, A.N. Bardiyar, Ms Rachana Joshi Issar, A. Rasheed
Qureshi, Banamali Sil, Sewa Ram, Jacob Mathew, P.K. Manohar, Anip
Sachthey, Harin P. Raval, Huzefa Ahmadi, Mohit Paul, Ms Meenakshi
Grover, Ms Aparajita Singh, Ms Gayatri Goswami, Kamal Deep, Pawan
Kumar, Tejveer Singh, Pradyuman Gohil, Arijit Prasad, Ravinder
Aggarwal, K.V. Mohan, K.V. Balakrishnan, S.R. Setia, Ms Kiran Suri, Ms
Madhumita Bhattacharjee, Avijit Bhattacharjee, M.A. Chinnasamy, J.
John, K. Krishna Kumar, V.N. Subramaniyam, A. Subba Rao, Hrishikesh
Baruah, Devdatt Kamat, C.P. Sharma, Ms Mrinalini Sen, V.K. Verma, Ms
Sushma Suri, P. Parmeswaran, Satyakam, R. Basant, V.G. Pragasam, S.
Vallinayagam, Preetesh Kapur, Ashish Chugh, Anand Misra,
Ardhendumauli Prasad, Ananth Srinivasan, Ms P.R. Mala, Sanjay R.
Hegde, Anil K. Mishra, Vikrant Yadav, Sashidhar, Tara Chandra Sharma,
Ms Neelam Sharma, Rajeev Sharma, Ajay Sharma, Rupesh Kumar,
Ramesh Singh, Ms Hemantika Wahi, Ms Shivangi, Ms Sumita Hazarika,
Rutwik Panda, Ms Sadhana Sandhu, Ms Pinky Behera, Rathin Das, A.
Subba Rao, A. Mariarputham, Ms Aruna Mathur (for Arputham, Aruna &
Co.), A.V. Rangam, A. Ranganadhan, Buddy A. Ranganadhan, M.T.
George, Parmanand Gaur, V. Krishna Murthy, M.A. Chinnasamy, V.
Senthil Kumar, V.N. Subramaniyam, Ms Kirti Mishra, E.C. Vidya Sagar,
Sewa Ram, Jacob Mathew, P.K. Manohar, Ms A. Subhashini and V.R.
Anumolu, Advocates] for the appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
85c, 100a, 108f-g
69b-c, 111g-h
Chandra Kumar V. Union of India
77b-c, 78e
General for India V. Amratlal Prajivandas
106a
78e-f
India
78e
69f, 70a, 77a, 90g,
96g, 97b, 99c, 103f,
107a-b, 107f, 108a
(Regd.) V. Union of India
78d-e
69g, 77a-b, 97c, 103f
India
80e-f, 81a, 81d, 93e-f,
95e, 96g, 97b, 97c,
101b, 103f, 104b, 107e
-f, 108f-g
Man Singh Suraj Singh Padvi
90c
India
b, 86b
India
78d-e
Shukla
76e
Haradhan Saha V. State of W.B.
83b-c, 83d-e
Das V. State of W.B.
83b-c
Narain
81g-h, 82d, 86e-f, 87g,
93a-b, 94c-d, 95d, 95e
-f, 97a-b, 97b, 97b-c,
97g-h, 100f-g, 101a,
101f, 103e-f, 103f,
104a, 104b, 104b-c,
107e-f, 108d, 108f-g,
109a, 111c, 111f-g
69b, 74f, 77a, 77a-b,
of Kerala
80a-b, 80b-c, 81a-b,
The surest way to legal research
81b, 81c, 81g, 86e,
87g, 88e-f, 89a-b, 89c,
89e, 89f, 89g, 90b-c,
90c-d, 90f-g, 91b-c,
91c, 91e, 91e-f, 91g,
91g-h, 91h, 92a, 92c-d,
92f, 92g, 93b, 93b-c,
93c, 93c-d, 93e, 93f,
93g, 94a-b, 94c-d, 94d-
e, 94g, 95d, 96f-g, 97a,
97a-b, 97b, 97f, 97g,
98a, 98a-b, 98d-e,
100e-f, 100f-g, 100g,
101d-e, 103b-c, 103d-
e, 103e, 103e-f, 104b,
104b-c, 104f-g, 105a-b,
106b-c, 106c-d, 107c-
d, 107g-h, 108d, 110b-
C, 110e-f, 111c
Nath Sarkar V. State of W.B.
83b, 83d-e, 84f
Union of India
84f
Kerala
90b-c
State of T.N.
69c-d
Union of India
83d-e, 84e, 84f
24. AIR 1967 SC 1643 : (1967) 2 SCR 762, Golak
73e, 73f-g, 74f, 89g,
Nath V. State of Punjab
91a, 91b-c, 93f-g
25. AIR 1965 SC 1096, N.B. Jeejeebhoy V. Asstt.
Collector
92a
26. AIR 1965 SC 845 : (1965) 1 SCR 933, Sajjan 72g, 73d, 73e, 90g, 93f
Singh V. State of Rajasthan
-g
27. AIR 1965 SC 745, Special Reference No. 1 of
1964
87e-f, 102e
28. AIR 1962 SC 305 : (1962) 3 SCR 842, Sakal
Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India
83a, 84f, 85f
29. AIR 1962 SC 171, All India Bank Employees'
Assn. V. National Industrial Tribunal
84f
30. AIR 1961 SC 1457 : (1962) 1 SCR 574, Daryao V.
State of U.P.
78e
31. AIR 1958 SC 956, Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In
re
84e-f
32. AIR 1955 SC 41 : (1955) 1 SCR 777, State of
Bombay V. Bhanji Munji
82f-g
597 : 1952 Cri LJ 966, State of Madras V. V.G.
Row
78c
435 : 1952 Cri LJ 805, Kathi Raning Rawat V.
State of Saurashtra
83f-g
284 : 1952 Cri LJ 510, State of W.B. V. Anwar Ali
Sarkar
83f-g
72d-e, 72e-f, 72g, 73e,
Sankari Prasad Singh Deo V. Union of India
90g, 91d, 93f-g
37. AIR 1951 Pat 91 : ILR 30 Pat 454, Kameshwar
Singh V. State of Bihar
70f-g
76f, 76f-g, 82f-g, 82g,
1950 Cri LJ 1383, A.K. Gopalan V. State of 83b, 83e-f, 84d-e, 84e-
Madras
f, 85g-h, 86b
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS
I. Mr F.S. Nariman, Senior Advocate, on behalf of the petitioners
II. Mr Goolam E. Vahanvati, Solicitor General of India, for the
Union of India
III. Mr Soli J. Sorabjee, Senior Advocate, on behalf of the State of
Tamil Nadu
IV. Mr T.R. Andhyarujina, Senior Advocate, on behalf of the State
of Tamil Nadu
I. Mr F.S. Nariman, Senior Advocate, on behalf of the petitioners
Submissions on Article 31-B
1. The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 introducing Article
31-B with 13 items in the Ninth Schedule was-a one-time measure-
and valid as a one-time measure:
(a) The marginal note to Article 31-A (Saving of laws providing for
acquisition of estates, etc.) and the marginal note to Article 31-B
(Validation of certain Acts and regulations) are to be contrasted.
(b) Article 31-B was obviously not intended as a general saving of
laws which were to be enacted in the future; the language of Article
31-B also did not countenance adding more enactments in the Ninth
Schedule (the words are "none of the Acts and regulations specified
in the Ninth Schedule. "), the language is not "none of the Acts and
regulations specified and to be specified in the Ninth Schedule". In
Sankari PrasadA1 (1952) this has been emphasised (SCR at p. 108).
(c) The words "nor any of the provisions thereof" (i.e. of the Acts
and regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule) "shall be deemed to
be void or ever to have become void" were on account of important
historic circumstances-noticed in the judgment in Sajjan SinghA2
(1965) (SCR at pp. 942-44; AIR at pp. 852-53, paras 10-14).
2. The extension of this one-time measure by the Fourth and
Seventeenth Amendment Acts which added Items 14 to 64 in the Ninth
Schedule (without re-enacting or even mentioning Article 31-B) was
tolerated on account of the circumstances stated in Sankari PrasadA1
(1952) and held to be valid in Golak NathA3 (1967):
(i) either on the basis of "earlier decisions of this Court" (Subba
Rao, C.J., or
(ii) on the basis of "acquiescence for a long time" (Hidayatullah,
J.).
3. As a consequence of the majority decision in Kesavananda
BharatiA4 (that "Article 368 does not enable Parliament to alter the
basic structure or framework of the Constitution") not only was there no
further justification for making additions to the Ninth Schedule with a
view to conferring a blanket protection on the laws included therein but
the "device" of making valid what was void (by a deeming fiction-
Article 31-B) was itself violative of one of the most basic features of our
Constitution viz. judicial review by the courts which ordinarily enforced
fundamental rights (viz. the High Courts under Article 226 and the
Supreme Court under Article 32). After Kesavananda BharatiA A4 (1973)
it is no longer open to say [as was said by
Patanjali Sastri, J. in Sankari Prasad A1 (AIR p. 464, para
15)
-
"But
to
make a law which contravenes the Constitution constitutionally valid is
a matter of constitutional amendment, "
The various constitutional amendments, by which additions were
made to the Ninth Schedule on or after 24-4-1973, were "open to
challenge on the ground that they or any one or more of them are
beyond the constituent power of Parliament since they damage the
basic or essential feature of the Constitution or its basic structure"; a
proposition set out in the order dated 9-5-1980 in Waman RaoA
4. The "basic or essential features of the Constitution" did not
exclude, and do not exclude, the provisions in the fundamental rights
chapter [except property rights in Articles 19(1)(f) and 31]. As a
matter of fact the basic or essential features would necessarily include
Part III of the Constitution; though they would not be restricted only to
Part III.
5. The impression that after the decision in Kesavananda BharatiA4
(1973) the majority had held that fundamental rights were not "basic
or essential features of the Constitution" was soon dispelled, when the
"basic structure test" was applied to the provisions of the Thirty-ninth
Amendment Act, 1975 (in Indira Gandhi Election caseA7 in 1975) where
Khanna, J. (himself part of that Bench), being aware that his own
somewhat ambiguous observations in Kesavananda BharatiA4 had
A4
fuelled the impression that fundamental rights were not part of the
basic structure : Khanna, J. had expressly clarified that what he meant
was that property rights were never part of the basic structure, not that
the other fundamental rights were not part of the basic structure.
Application of the test (the basic structure test)
6. To speak of something more would introduce great uncertainty in
the law-almost like the "Chancellor's foot"; and it would lead to
spiralling litigation if it were held that something more than what was
contained in the fundamental rights chapter was required to be
established when the constitutional validity of constitutional
amendments placing ordinary laws in the Ninth Schedule (post-April
1973) was questioned. It is respectfully submitted that the test of
"basic structure" would exclude property rights^8 but not other
fundamental rights-it may include also other aspects of "basic
structure" such as "rule of law", "separation of powers", "secularism",
"federalism", etc.
7. It is respectfully submitted that permitting Acts put in the Ninth
Schedule after April 1973 to be challenged also on the ground of
violation of fundamental rights would not at all disable Parliament from
making effective and valid constitutional amendments. The decision in
Minerva MillsA9 and in Waman RaoA6 clearly establishes this:
(a) In Minerva MillsA9 (1980) for instance, the Court expressly
struck down the extension of Article 31-C into the entire field of
directive principles [not
restricted to only Articles 39(b) and (c)] on the ground that such
extension disturbed the balance in the Constitution-a balance which
permits fundamental rights to be so amended as to conform with one or
another of the principles mentioned in Part IV but not so as to
completely override the same; by contrast Article 31-C as originally
enacted-and limited only to Articles 39(b) and (c) (25th Amendment)
was expressly upheld in Kesavananda44 (1973) (except the latter part
making the legislative declaration final and beyond judicial review).
(b) In Waman RaoA5 (1980) the Court unanimously upheld the
validity of Article 31-A although it took away fundamental rights
under Articles 14 and 19 from individuals whose rights under those
articles were challenged in respect of specified type of laws. This was
in the context of the larger good e.g. for implementing programme
-A had sufficient guidelines and did not exclude judicial review of the
courts (which enforced fundamental rights)-hence the constitutional
validity of Article 31-A was upheld.
It is respectfully submitted that the continued invocation of Article 31-
B merely by placing further Acts in the Ninth Schedule post-April 1973
would lead to the impossibility of any effective judicial review-simply
because there would be no parameters on the basis of which the
validity of the constitutional amendments could be tested-since Article
31-B contemplates any laws whether of the State Legislatures or of
Parliament which Parliament by a 2/3rd majority may choose to place in
the Ninth Schedule.
8. After more than 50 years of the working of our Constitution (and
after deletion of property rights from the fundamental rights chapter),
it is respectfully submitted that the power of Parliament and of the
State Legislatures to make laws only in conformity with fundamental
rights, and not in contravention of them, should be held by Your
Lordships to be a part of the basic feature or framework of the
Constitution. As to whether a particular constitutional amendment
damages or destroys a basic feature has to be judged on some higher
principle-a balancing of individual rights against societal rights, for
example-which can be judicially scrutinised by the court-by the same
court which is empowered to enforce fundamental rights. It is on this
principle that the validity of Article 31-A was upheld by the Court in
Waman RaoA5 (1980); denying the benefit to individuals of their
fundamental right of equality under Article 14 in agrarian reform
legislation which conforms to the principle of agrarian reform, such as
distribution of lands to the landless, etc., has been upheld on the larger
concept of equality when applied to the interests of society as a whole,
as opposed to individual interests. In other words, the salus populli est
suprema lex principle (Broom's Legal Maxims, 7th Edn., p. 1) "regard
for the public welfare is the highest law"; "public welfare" being judged
initially by those who framed the laws, and judged ultimately by those
whose constitutional duty it is to interpret them.
A10
9. In the reference order reported in I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N.
the specific question referred to this Hon'ble Bench of nine Judges is
"whether a provision of an Act which has already been struck down by
this Hon'ble Court could or could not be validly inserted in the Ninth
582, para 1)
"(1) Judicial review is a basic feature of the Constitution; to insert
in the Ninth Schedule an Act which, or part of which, has been
struck down as unconstitutional in exercise of the power of judicial
review is to destroy or damage the basic structure of the
Constitution.
(2) To insert in the Ninth Schedule after 24-4-1973, an Act which,
or part of which, has been struck down as being violative of the
fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution is to
destroy or damage its basic structure."
It is respectfully submitted that judicial review being a basic feature of
the Constitution, it should be held that to insert in the Ninth Schedule
after 24-4-1973 an Act which, or a part of which, has been struck down
as unconstitutional in exercise of the power of judicial review would per
se destroy or damage the basic structure of the Constitution.
10. It should also be held by this Hon'ble Court that to insert in the
Ninth Schedule after 24-4-1973 an Act which, or a part of which has
been struck down as being violative of fundamental rights conferred by
Part III of the Constitution, would also per se destroy or damage the
basic structure of the Constitution.
The supremacy of the Constitution has been stated to be a basic
feature of the Constitution : its relevance to Coelho case
and paras 571-74, pp. 217-18.
11. The doctrine of basic structure can be meaningful only if its
applicability is with reference to concepts. Apart from the question
whether any fundamental rights constitute a basic feature of the
Constitution, Part III in its totality codifies the concept of fundamental
rights-it establishes the supremacy of the Constitution. Part III itself
is undoubtedly a basic feature of the Constitution. The effect of Article
31-B and the Ninth Schedule is to bring into existence a Constitution
without Part III insofar as the Ninth Schedule Acts are concerned. The
Constitution without Part III is basically different from the Constitution
of India, as conceived and promulgated. Article 368 does not confer
constituent power on Parliament to make a different Constitution-at
least not after 24-4-1973.
12.
In
Coelho caseA10 the object of the Thirty-fourth Amendment Act
(Entry 80) is to declare as valid what the highest court of the land had
pronounced to be unconstitutional and invalid viz. Section 3 of the
Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act,
destroying not only judicial review but also the supremacy of the
Constitution. There can be no doubt that supremacy of the Constitution
as a basic feature is achieved and maintained only by judicial review,
namely, the power of the courts to uphold the supremacy of the
Constitution by deciding whether laws enacted are repugnant to Part
III or not. Hence it is that, supremacy of the Constitution and judicial
review are both basic features of our written Constitution.
Consequences
13. If laws which are struck down as violating fundamental rights
can also be put in the Ninth Schedule, even after 24-4-1973 A13 there is
an end to all our freedoms. For instance, take freedom of the press.
Laws which have been struck down as violating Article 19(1)(a) will get
full force and vigour if included in the Ninth Schedule. The old
newsprint policy-struck down in Bennett ColemanA14
(4
:
1)
as
violative of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution could be revived by
enacting a law to that effect and putting it in the Ninth Schedule; it will
be recalled that the old newsprint policy was aimed at the major print
media which criticised the Government.
14. To take another instance, after the clamour of election laws to be
more transparent, all political parties agreed to the Representation of
the People (Third Amendment) Act, 2002 being enacted which however
included Section 33-B quoted below:
"33-B. Candidate to furnish information only under the Act and
the rules.-Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment,
decree or order of any court or any direction, order or any other
instruction issued by the Election Commission, no candidate shall be
liable to disclose or furnish any such information, in respect of his
election. which is not required to be disclosed or furnished under this
Act or the rules made thereunder."
The judgment referred to was Union of India V. Assn. for Democratic
Reforms415
15. Article 33-B was struck down by this Court in PUCL V. Union of
IndiaA
A16
as violating Article 19(1)(a) and also because it overrode a
prior judgment of the Court (without attempting to remove the defect).
Since all political parties had agreed on the formulation of Section 33-
B, it is possible to imagine a constitutional Amendment including
Section 33-B of the Representation of the People (Third Amendment)
Act, 2002 in the Ninth Schedule; a "struck down" provision-Section 33
-B-would then revive if the contention of the respondents in this
reference were to prevail.
Conclusions
16. (1) The "basic structure" doctrine has been an evolutionary process-i
foundation was laid (at first only tentatively) in Sajjan SinghA2 (1965) by
Mudholkar, J., SCR at pp. 966, 967 and 969 F. It was then authoritatively
Parliament to alter the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution"): "Authoritatively" not merely because the majority of Judges (7 : 6)
said that "Article 368 does not enable Parliament to alter the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution", but additionally, because the doctrine was actually
applied in the same case when striking down the last part of Article 31-C (Twenty-
fifth
Amendment Act, 1971)-each of the Judges so struck it down on the
basis of different facets of the "basic structure". Sikri, C.J.,
para 608(6) at p. 463; Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. in para 744(7) at p.
512; Khanna, J. in para 1537(XIV) from pp. 824 and 825; and
Jaganmohan Reddy, J. in para 1205 at p. 662.
(2) The constitutional doctrine was accepted in Waman Rao A5 A6
by Chandrachud, C.J. who spoke for the Bench of 5 Judges, though it
was he who had initially dissociated himself from that doctrine
(minority opinion in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4).
(3) The approach to the enactments put in the Ninth Schedule
after 24-4-1973 has been uniform and in line with the last sentence
of para 51, pp. 397-98 in Waman Rao case A6 viz.
"The various constitutional Amendments by which
additions were made to the Ninth Schedule on or after 24
-4-1973, will be valid only if they do not damage or
destroy the basic structure of the Constitution."
(4) After Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 a Bench of thirteen Judges
were again assembled on 10-11-1975 after the Union of India (and
the Attorney General) had made an application on 1-9-1975 for
reconsideration.
H.M. Seervai in the fourth edition of his Constitutional Law of India (Vol.
II) at p. 1957 comments:
"On 20-10-1975, the Court indicated that on 10-11-1975 the
petitions would be heard by a Bench of thirteen Judges for
considering : (1) whether the power of amendment of the
Constitution was restricted by the theory of basic structure and
framework as propounded in Kesavananda caseA4 and (2) whether
Bank Nationalisation caseA17 was correctly decided. However, before
the hearing could take place on 10 November the judgment of five
Judges in the Election case, (Indira Gandhi V. Raj NarainAZ) four of
them clearly affirming the doctrine of the basic structure, had been
delivered. On 10-11-1975 when a large number of writ petitions
were placed before a Bench of thirteen Judges an objection was
raised to the Union Government's application for a reconsideration of
Kesavananda caseA4 on the theory of the basic structure and
framework of the Constitution on the ground that no case had been
made out for such reconsideration. Arguments were heard for two
days but then on 12-11-1975, as soon as the Court reassembled,
Ray, C.J., informed the parties that the Bench had been dissolved,
and the specified matter would be posted for hearing before the
Constitution Bench which, after considering the matter might, if it
thought necessary, refer the matter to a larger Bench."
Seervai then adds:
"This sequence of events would suggest that Ray, C.J., realised,
before 10-11-1975, that his brother Judges in the Election case were
not likely to depart from the theory of the basic structure; and
it
would also suggest that the two days' hearing before the Bench of
thirteen Judges satisfied him that the doctrine of the basic structure
would not be reconsidered by the present Bench."
(5) Subsequent legislative history noted below shows that when
an attempt was made by the Government of the day to introduce
amendments in Article 368 amplifying some aspects of the "basic
structure", the attempt was not successful.
(A) Bill 88 of 1978, titled the Constitution (Forty-fifth
Amendment) Bill, 1978 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 15-5-
1978. The Bill sought to amend various articles, including Article
368 of the Constitution-after clause (2) of Article 368 the
following proviso was sought to be inserted viz.
Provided further that if such amendment-
(a) seeks to make any change which, if made, would have
the effect of-
(i) impairing the secular or democratic character of this Constitution; or
(ii) abridging or taking away the rights of citizens under Part III; or
(iii) prejudicing or impeding free and fair elections to the House of the
People or the Legislative Assemblies of States on the basis of adult
suffrage; or
(iv) compromising the independence of the judiciary; or
(b) seeks to amend this proviso the amendment shall also
require to be approved by the people of India at a referendum
under clause (4);
and for clauses (4) and (5)-inserted by the Forty-second
Amendment Act, the following clauses were proposed to be
substituted:
"(4) The referendum for the purpose of seeking the approval
of the people of India for any amendment of the nature
referred to in the second proviso to clause (2) shall be through
a poll, and
(i) all persons who are for the time being eligible to be voters under
Article 326 at elections to the House of the People shall be entitled to
vote at such poll; and
(ii) any such amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by
the people of India if such amendment is approved by a majority of the
voters voting at such poll and the voters voting at such poll constitute
not less than fifty-one per cent of the voters entitled to vote at such
poll.
(5) The superintendence, direction and control of the
preparation of the rolls of voters for, and the conduct of every
referendum under this article shall vest in the Election
Commission and the result of such referendum as declared by
the Election Commission shall not be called in question in any
court.
(6) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4) and (5),
Parliament may from time to time by law make provision with
respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with
referenda under this article, including the preparation of the
rolls of voters."
(B) Bill 88 of 1978 was considered by the Lok Sabha on 7-8-
1978 to 12-8-1978 and 21-8-1978 to 23-8-1978, and as
amended passed on 23-8-1978.
(i) (Article 368) = Clause 45 (Lok Sabha Debates dated 23-8
-1978) p=43 to 54
"That clause 45 stands part of the Bill."
Votes : Ayes - 314 Noes - 88
Note.-The motion was carried by a majority of the total
membership of the House and by a majority of not less than
two-thirds of the Members present and voting.
(ii) Lok Sabha Debates 23-8-1978 (p=107 to 116)
"The whole Bill as amended be passed."
Votes : Ayes - 355 Noes - NIL
Note.- - The motion was carried by a majority and was
adopted.
(C) Bill 88 of 1978 was considered by the Rajya Sabha from 28
-8-1978 to 31-8-1978 and passed with amendments on 31st
August.
(i) Clause 45 (amendment of Article 368) p=270 to 281 of
Debates
"That clause 45 stands part of the Bill."
Votes : Ayes - 91 Noes - 86
Note.-Motion was declared not carried by the requisite
2/3rd majority of the Members present and voting.
(ii) "That the Bill, as amended, be passed."
Votes : Ayes - 182 Noes - 1
Note.-Motion carried by a 2/3rd majority.
(D) The Bill as amended by the Rajya Sabha was again
considered by the Lok Sabha on 6-12-1978 and 7-12-1978 :
Amendments made by the Rajya Sabha were agreed to by the Lok
Sabha on 7-12-1978. The Bill as amended was thus passed by the
Lok Sabha on 7-12-1978.
(i) Re : Clause 45 : on 7-12-1978 (Lok Sabha Debates 7-12-
1978) p=304 to 314 the motion was put to vote:
"That at pp. 13 and 14, clause 45 be deleted."
Votes : Ayes - 342 Noes - 41
Note.-Motion was carried with 2/3rd majority and adopted.
(ii) Entire Bill was passed on 7-12-1978 p=324 to 333
"That the Bill as amended by the amendments agreed to be
passed."
Votes : Ayes - 357 Noes - 1
Note.-Motion was carried by a majority of 2/3rd and
adopted.
Hence, there was no amendment to Article 368 as proposed in Bill 88 of 1978
and Article 368 [as amended by Section 55 of the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act by inserting clauses (4) and (5)] remained unaltered. ¹18
(6) Parliament has never attempted to reformulate any facets of
basic structure since then and has continuously accepted that it is
for the judiciary to explain and expound on a case-to-case basis.
(7) In Kesavananda BharatiA4 (1973) itself, the latter part of
Article 31-C introduced by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth
Amendment) Act, 1971 was struck
down inter alia on one aspect of the "basic features" mentioned by two
Judges viz. that it violated judicial review [Khanna, J. and Jaganmohan
Reddy, J. at para 1537(xiv), p. 825 and para 1205, p. 662
respectively]. Courts have in subsequent decisions consistently held
that judicial review of constitutional Amendments through the Court's
scrutiny under Article 226 and Article 136 is one of the basic features of
the Constitution (see L. Chandra Kumar caseA19).
(8) It is submitted that Article 31-B which has been consistently
held to be a "constitutional device to place the specified statutes
beyond any attack on the ground that they infringe Part III of the
Constitution" (see N.B. Jeejeebhoy V. Assistant Collector, ThaneA20)
can no longer survive after the fruition of the concept of judicial
review of constitutional Amendment-because laws enacted either by
Parliament or the State Legislatures which take away or abridge any
of the fundamental rights of Part III of the Constitution are expressly
declared void under Article 13, and the concept of "supremacy of the
Constitution" (itself a basic featureA21) precludes the notion of two
sets of laws-one which is subject to court's scrutiny for violation of
fundamental rights under Articles 32, 226 or 136 and another set of
laws which the High Courts and the Supreme Court are not
permitted to scrutinise only because of the "constitutional device" by
which they are placed in the Ninth Schedule. Article 31-B has now
become totally otiose and cannot be invoked by Parliament to make
void laws valid (void because they infringe all or any of the rights
mentioned in Part III). Khanna, J. has explained and clarified in
Indira Gandhi V. Raj NarainA7 (1975) that he did not say in
KesavanandaA4 (1973) that "fundamental rights are not a part of the
basic structure" (paras 251-52, pp. 114-16 in Indira Gandhi caseA7).
He has explained how his observation in Kesavananda44 militates
against the (ill-founded) contention that "according to my judgment
fundamental rights are not a part of the basic structure of the
Constitution".
(9) In the first case dealing with Article 31-B (Sankari Prasad V.
Union of IndiaA1) Patanjali Sastri, J. said at p. 109 "to make a law
which contravenes the Constitution constitutionally valid is a matter
of constitutional Amendment". No longer. After the basic structure
theory became part of Indian constitutional law-as from 24-4-
1973-it is impermissible to make a law which contravenes the
Constitution, constitutionally valid-if it violates any of the basic
features of the Constitution.
II. Mr Goolam E. Vahanvati, Solicitor General of India, for the
Union of India
Scope and object of Article 31-B of the Constitution
1. Article 31-A as well as Article 31-B were incorporated by way of
the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. The object and purpose
of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, as is discernible from
the Parliamentary Debates, is to achieve the constitutional objectives of
social equality. Directive principles of State policy points out the way in
which the State should achieve this goal. Part III of the Constitution
also guarantees fundamental rights. Both are
important. The directive principles of State policy represent a dynamic
move towards a certain objective. The fundamental rights appears to be
static. Both are fundamental and constitute the core. However, it is
conceivable that dynamic movement and static influences collide.
Therefore, a legislature must have the power to bring about the broader
social equality even if it be at the expense of particular individual
freedoms. Otherwise, the State fails to do what it has been commanded
to do by this Constitution. This does not mean that the Constitution is
changed; in fact it is made stronger. This merely gives effect to the real
intentions of the framers of the Constitution, and to the wording of the
Constitution.
Interaction between Article 31-A and Article 31-B
2. The expression, "without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions contained in Article 31-A" in Article 31-B, indicates that the
Acts and regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule would have the
immunity even if they did not attract Article 31-A of the Constitution. If
every Act in the Ninth Schedule would be covered by Article 31-A, this
article would become redundant. Article 31-B is not governed by Article
31-A. See N.B. Jeejeebhoy V. Asstt. Collector, Thana PrantA20 ,
(5
Judges); State of Bihar V. Kameshwar SinghA22 (5 Judges);
Kesavananda Bharati V. State of KeralaA4 (13 Judges). (Paras 463, 608,
742-43, 1062, 1211, 1332, 1536, 1782, 1851, 1992, 2136)
3. There are significant dissimilarities in the device or mechanism
created by Articles 31-A and 31-B. Article 31-A enables the passing of
laws of the description mentioned in clauses (a) to (e), in violation of
the guarantees afforded by Articles 14 and 19. Parliament is not
required, in the exercise of its constituent power or otherwise, to
undertake an examination of the laws which are to receive the
protection of Article 31-A. In other words, when a competent legislature
passes a law within the purview of clauses (a) to (e), it automatically
receives the protection of Article 31-A, with the result that the law
cannot be challenged on the ground of its violation of Articles 14 and
19. Insofar as Article 31-B is concerned, it does not define the category
of laws which are to receive its protection, and secondly, going little
further than Article 31-A, it affords protection to Schedule laws against
all the provisions of Part III of the Constitution. No Act can be placed in
the Ninth Schedule except by Parliament and since the Ninth Schedule
is a part of the Constitution, no additions or alterations can be made
therein without complying with the restrictive provisions governing
amendments to the Constitution. Thus, Article 31-B read with the Ninth
Schedule provides what is generally described as, a protective umbrella
to all Acts which are included in the Schedule, no matter of what
character, kind or category they may be. Putting it briefly, whereas
Article 31-A protects laws of a defined category, Article 31-B empowers
Parliament to include in the Ninth Schedule such laws as it considers fit
and proper to include therein. See Waman Rao V. Union of IndiaA6 (5
Judges).
4. There is no warrant or justification in restricting the laws to be
protected by Article 31-B to only the laws saved by Article 31-A. In this
regard, see the holding of this Hon'ble Court in Waman Rao V. Union of
A6
Chandrachud (for himself, Tulzapurkar and Sen, JJ.). Attention is
invited also to the judgment of this Hon'ble Court in Godavari Sugar
Article 31-B as a validating and curing provision
5. It is well settled that a validating statute can render a judgment
of the court ineffective. It is also well settled that a validating statute
has to remove the basis on which the judgment was rendered. [See
at para 4]. It is respectfully submitted that Article 31-I is a
constitutional mechanism for validating statutes which have been
struck down on the ground of violation of Part III of the Constitution.
See Sasanka Sekhar Maity V. Union of India A 25 (5 Judges).
6. When a statute is included in the Ninth Schedule, the vice or the
defect of unconstitutionality of the legislation on the ground of
infringement of fundamental rights is cured. Article 31-B itself acts as a
deeming validating provision. It is submitted that there is no necessity
of a separate validating Act taking away the basis of the judgment
before the Act is put in the Ninth Schedule. The very factum of
inclusion in the Ninth Schedule of the Act cures the Act of the
defect/basis which is pointed out in the judgment holding the
legislation to be unconstitutional. In this context, the words "shall be
deemed to be void or ever to have become void" are relevant and
significant.
7. It is submitted that a legislation which has been struck down on
the ground of violation of fundamental rights is cured of the defect/vice
by its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule by a deeming fiction as if Part III
of the Constitution was never available as a challenge to such statute.
Article 31-B creates a sphere whereby legislation or regulation provided
in
the Ninth Schedule would not attract the application of Part III of the
Constitution.
8. This Hon'ble Court in Prag Ice & Oil Mills V. Union of IndiaA26
(7
Judges) through Chandrachud, J. (for himself, Bhagwati, Fazal Ali,
Shinghal and Jaswant Singh, JJ.) held that when an enactment is
challenged on the ground of violation of fundamental rights, and the
defence of the State is that the legislation is included in the Ninth
Schedule, the narrow question to which one must address oneself is
whether the impugned law is specified in that Schedule. If it is, the
provisions of Article 31-B would be attracted and the challenge has to
fail without any further inquiry. See also Standard Chartered Bank V.
Amending power and Article 31-B
9. This Hon'ble Court in Golak Nath V. State of PunjabA3 (11 Judges)
through Bachawat, J. held as under:
"Article 31-B retrospectively validated the Acts mentioned in the
Ninth Schedule notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of
any court though they take away or abridge the rights conferred by
Part III. It is said that the Acts are stillborn and cannot be validated.
But by force of Article 31-B the Acts are deemed never to have
become void and must be regarded as valid from their inception. The
power to amend the Constitution carries with it the power to make a
retrospective amendment. It is said that Article 31-B amends Article
141
at it alters the law declared by this Court on the validity of the Acts.
This argument is baseless. As the Constitution is amended
retrospectively, the basis upon which the judgments of this Court were
pronounced no longer exists, and the law declared by this Court can
have no application. It is said that Article 31-B is a law with respect to
land and other matters within the competence of the State Legislature,
and Parliament has no power to enact such a law. The argument is
based on a misconception. Parliament has not passed any of the Acts
mentioned in the Ninth Schedule. Article 31-B removed the
constitutional bar on the making of the Acts. Only Parliament could
remove the bar by the Constitution amendment. It has done so by
Article 31-B. Parliament could amend each article in Part III separately
and provide that the Acts would be protected from attack under each
article. Instead of amending each article separately, Parliament has by
Article 31-B made a comprehensive amendment of all the articles by
providing that the Acts shall not be deemed to be void on the ground
that they are inconsistent with any of them. The Acts as they stood on
the date of the Constitution amendments are validated. By the last part
of Article 31-B the competent legislatures will continue to retain the
power to repeal or amend the Acts. The subsequent repeals and
amendments are not validated. If in future the competent legislature
passes a repealing or amending Act which is inconsistent with Part III it
will be void."
(emphasis supplied)
This principle of law laid down by Bachawat, J. holds good till now. This
principle has never been overruled.
Mere infringement of a fundamental right may not violate the
basic structure
10. The core issue which arises for consideration is the nature of the
challenge available to test the validity of constitutional amendments,
inserting and making additional entries in the Ninth Schedule. It is
submitted that this Hon'ble Court in Kesavananda Bharati caseA held
by a majority that the power to amend the Constitution has an inherent
limitation i.e. it cannot amend, alter or destroy the basic structure of
the Constitution. Therefore, an amendment to the Constitution cannot
be done when the amendment violates the basic structure of the
Constitution. This is an inherent limitation of the powers provided under
Article 368 of the Constitution.
11. It is submitted that when a constitutional amendment Act
inserts a legislation into the Ninth Schedule, the Act which is inserted
by the Constitution Amendment Act still remains an ordinary legislation
and does not partake the character of a constitutional provision.
the effect of inserting a legislation into the Ninth Schedule.
12. The question which then arises is the limits of judicial review
while testing a constitutional amendment inserting an act in the Ninth
Schedule. It is submitted that by virtue of the law laid down in
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 the constitutional amendment would be
ultra vires the amending power conferred by Article 368, if it
comprehends within it the damaging or destruction of the basic
structure. Therefore, a constitutional amendment which incorporates a
legislation in the Ninth Schedule has to be tested on the ground
whether it violates the basic structure of the Constitution. In the event,
the constitutional amendment Act incorporates an Act which violates
the basic structure then such an amendment would be ultra vires the
powers provided by Article 368 and therefore invalid and the protection
provided under Article 31-B would not be available.
13. The question which then arises is what is the test of judicial
review of such legislation inserted in the Ninth Schedule. It is
respectfully submitted that challenge to such a legislation incorporated
by a constitutional amendment in the Ninth Schedule on the ground of
basic structure is limited to the extent that the fundamental rights
which the legislation takes away, damages or destroys the basic
structure of the Constitution. It is therefore submitted that the correct
approach while testing a legislation incorporated in the Ninth Schedule
on the ground of basic structure was formulated by Mathew, J. in Indira
"The utmost that can be said is as I indicated, that even after
putting them in the Ninth Schedule their provisions would be open
to challenge on the ground that they took away or abrogated all or
any of the fundamental rights and therefore damaged or destroyed
the basic structure if the fundamental rights or right taken away or
abrogated constitutes a basic structure."
It is submitted that an Act which is inserted in the Ninth Schedule
cannot be tested on the broad parameters of basic structure doctrine
except as indicated above.
14. There is a vital difference between the invalidation of legislation
because of infringement of Article 14 of the Constitution and
invalidation of a constitutional amendment on account of the total
destruction or annihilation of the concept of equality, which would form
part of the basic feature. It is therefore submitted that mere
curtailment of a fundamental right might not offend the basic structure
of the Constitution. In this regard, see Bhim Singhji V. Union of India A 28
(5 Judges). See also R.S. Garg V. State of U.P.
A29
(2
Judges).
Judicial review and basic structure
15. Though in L. Chandra Kumar V. Union of IndiaA19 (7 Judges) this
Hon'ble Court concluded that,
"It appears that this Court has always considered the power of
judicial review vested in the High Courts and in this Court, under
Article 226 and Article 32 respectively, enabling legislative action to
be subjected to the scrutiny of superior courts to be integral to our
constitutional scheme; the fact remains that under the Constitution
itself there are several articles which exclude judicial review."
[See for instance, Article 33, Article 74(2), Article 103(1), Article 105
(2), Article 122, Article 136(2), Article 163(3), Article 194(2), Article
212, Article 262(2), Article 329-A and Article 3]
16. It is also necessary to note that there is a distinction between
total exclusion of judicial review and a validation of an Act which has
been struck down on the principles applicable to ordinary legislation,
namely, violation of Part III of the Constitution or legislative
competence. See the observations of Ray, C.J. in Indira Nehru Gandhi
17. The fact that Article 31-, and Article 31-C which provide for
protection from the challenge to Articles 14 and 19, have been upheld
so that this does not amount to an exclusion of judicial review.
18. This apart, though the judgment in Indira Gandhi caseA7 has
been extensively quoted in L. Chandra KumarA19 the conclusion drawn
therein namely that judicial
review of election disputes is not a compulsion and this is part of a
constitutional scheme, has not been doubted.
19. It is well settled that judicial review of statutes, which are
afforded the protection under Article 31-B, is not completely barred.
The only area where such Acts get immunity is from the mere infraction
of rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution. One of the areas
where judicial review can be exercised relates to compliance with the
form and procedure and requirements prescribed by Article 368.
20. The other recognised area where Acts under the Ninth Schedule
can be judicially reviewed is in relation to the question of legislative
competence. See State of Bihar V. Kameshwar SinghA22 (5 Judges).
21. Judicial review of Acts falling under the Ninth Schedule is also
permissible in a case where an Act which is put in the Ninth Schedule is
amended, then the amended provision can be judicially reviewed on the
touchstone of Article 13. The reason being that Article 31-B should be
interpreted strictly. But even interpreting it strictly, the only
requirement which is laid down by Article 31-B is that the Act should
be specified in the Ninth Schedule. Therefore, in the absence of the
amendment being specified in the Ninth Schedule the amendment
cannot be protected for infringement of the rights under Part III of the
Constitution. See State of Maharashtra V. Madhavrao Damodar PatilA13
(7 Judges). This principle has been reiterated by this Hon'ble Court in
Ramanlal Gulabchand Shah V. State of GujaratA30 (7 Judges) and in Sri
Ram Ram Narain Medhi V. State of BombayA31 (5 Judges).
22. There is one more area where judicial review of Acts falling
under the Ninth Schedule is permissible. After the law laid down by this
Hon'ble Court in Kesavananda BharatiA4 the Acts which are inserted in
the Ninth Schedule could be judicially reviewed if they violate the basic
structure of the Constitution as stated hereinabove. This principle was
laid down by this Hon'ble Court in Waman Rao V. Union of IndiaA6 (5
Judges). Chandrachud, C.J. (for himself and Krishna Iyer, Tulzapurkar
and A.P. Sen, JJ.) held as under:
"Thus, insofar as the validity of Article 31-B read with the Ninth
Schedule is concerned, we hold that all Acts and regulations included
in the Ninth Schedule prior to 24-4-1973 will receive the full
protection of Article 31-B. Those laws and regulations will not be
open to challenge on the ground that they are inconsistent with or
take away or abridge any of the rights conferred by any of the
provisions of Part III of the Constitution. Acts and regulations, which
are or will be included in the Ninth Schedule on or after 24-4-1973
will not receive the protection of Article 31-B for the plain reason
that in the face of the judgment in Kesavananda BharatiA4 there was
no justification for making additions to the Ninth Schedule with a
view to conferring a blanket protection on the laws included therein.
The various constitutional amendments, by which additions were
made to the Ninth Schedule on or after 24-4-1973, will be valid only
if they do not damage or destroy the basic structure of the
Constitution."
dissenting opinion. This test has also been applied in various cases
such as Minerva Mills Ltd. V. Union of IndiaA9 (5 Judges) as well as
Bhim Singhji V. Union of IndiaA28 (5 Judges). It is submitted that there
is no inconsistencies in the law laid down by this Hon'ble
Court in Waman RaoA , A6 and the test laid down by this Hon'ble Court
in the said case has been accepted in Minerva Mills caseA9 as well as
Bhim Singhji caseA28. This test has also been applied in Attorney
General for India V. Amratlal PrajivandasA32 (9 Judges).
23. It is submitted that the test for judicially reviewing the Acts
cannot be on the basis of mere infringement of the rights guaranteed
under Part III of the Constitution or the broad doctrine of basic
structure of the Constitution. The correct test has to be that the Acts
which are included in the Ninth Schedule can only be judicially
reviewed only if they damage or destroy that part of the fundamental
rights which forms a part of the basic structure. Any other view would
make Article 31-B of the Constitution otiose and redundant.
24. The petitioners have proceeded on the basis of certain
assumptions with reference to Article 31-B which need to be noticed
and highlighted in the forefront:
(A) It has been submitted that Articles 31-A and 31-B are part of
a common scheme. In this regard, reliance has been placed on the
para 91) in which it is stated that the Ninth Schedule of Article 31-B
was not intended to include laws other than those covered by Article
31-A and that Articles 31-A and 31-B were intended to serve the
same purpose of protecting the legislation falling within a certain
category.
(B) It has been submitted that the scope and validity of Article 31
-B must be judged having regard to the situation subsisting after the
judgment in Kesavananda Bharati V. State of KeralaA4 and the
introduction of the concept of basic structure and the basic features
of the Constitution implying that Article 31-B and the Ninth
Schedule did not fall for consideration in this judgment.
25. It is respectfully submitted that the first assumption is
erroneous in law. It ignores that the approach of Bhagwati, J. is in fact
contrary to what judges in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 have expressly
held. As set out hereinafter, the learned Judges in Kesavananda
BharatiA4 expressly negatived the arguments of Mr Palkhivala with
regard to the interaction between Articles 31-A and 31-B and this is
contrary to the approach of Bhagwati, J. in Minerva MillsA9
26. It is submitted that the second assumption is equally fallacious
in law since it ignores the observations of the Judges made in relation
to Article 31-B and the Twenty-ninth Amendment in Kesavananda
Bharati caseA4. It will be demonstrated that all the Judges were fully
alive to the consequences of the introduction of the basic structure
doctrine, and responded to it.
Are fundamental rights unamendable?
27. The submission of the petitioners that fundamental rights cannot
be amended at all is not correct. None of the Judges who constituted
the majority in Kesavananda BharatiA4 in relation to the basic structure
doctrine have so stated.
Are all fundamental rights part of the basic structure?
28. This leads to the next issue, namely, whether all fundamental
rights are part of the essential feature or basic structure of the
Constitution. The answer to this must be in the negative. The effect of
overruling the law laid down in Golak Nath caseA3 in Kesavananda
Bharati caseA4 is that fundamental rights can be amended. If
fundamental rights can be amended, fundamental rights cannot be said
to be part of the basic structure, unless the nature of the amendment is
such as which essentially destroys the nature and character of the
Constitution. This depends on the nature of the right sought to be
amended and the extent to which it is sought to be amended.
29. It is submitted that a fundamental right may not be an essential
feature or basic structure of the Constitution. This has been recognised
in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4. In that case, the majority held that
subject to the retention of the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary and includes within
itself the power to amend various articles of the Constitution, including
those relating to fundamental rights as well as those which may be said
to relate to essential feature. No part of a fundamental right can claim
immunity from the amendatory process by being described as the
essence or core of that right.
30. It is also submitted that a particular fundamental right may not
be a basic feature of the Constitution. For example, Article 19(1)(f) as
well as Article 31 of the Constitution was deleted from Part III of the
Constitution by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1948.
See Raghunathrao Ganpatrao V. Union of IndiaA3.
A33
(5
Judges),
Indira
paras 53-54), Khanna, J. (at para 251), Mathew, J. (at paras 328-30 &
334)
31. In this connection it is also important to note that all the Judges
upheld the validity of the Twenty-fourth Amendment Act [which
inserted Article 13(4) and Article 368(3)]. The effect of the said
amendments is that the restriction under Article 3(2) was inapplicable
to constitutional amendment. See Sikri, C.J. (paras 395-96), Shelat &
Grover, JJ. (para 583), Hegde & Mukherjea, JJ. (paras 673 & 678), Ray,
J. (para 1064), Jaganmohan Reddy, J. (para 1162), Palekar, J. [paras
1318, 1333(3)], Khanna, J. (para 1510), Mathew, J. (para 1716), Beg,
J. (para 1851), Dwivedi, J. (paras 1955, 1958), Chandrachud, J. (paras
2109, 2110).
Is judicial review a part of basic structure?
32. It is really not necessary to consider whether judicial review is a
part of the basic feature of the Constitution. In the present case, there
is no total exclusion of judicial review. The Acts placed in the Ninth
Schedule can be reviewed on the touchstone of whether they destroy
the essential features of the Constitution.
33. It is submitted that the test for judicially reviewing the Acts
cannot be on the basis of mere infringement of the rights guaranteed
under Part III of the Constitution. The correct test has to be that the
Acts which are included in the Ninth Schedule if they damage or
destroy that part of the fundamental rights which form a part of the
basic structure.
34. It is well settled that judicial review of statutes, which are
afforded the protection under Article 31-B, is not completely barred.
The only area where such Acts get immunity is from the mere infraction
of rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution. Another area
where judicial review can be exercised relates to compliance with the
form and procedure and requirements prescribed by Article 368.
35. Further, the question of legislative competence is always open.
See State of Bihar V. Kameshwar SinghA22
(5
Judges).
36. The amendments made to an Act specified in the Ninth Schedule
is also amenable to judicial review. Judicial review of Acts falling under
the Ninth Schedule is permissible in a case where an Act which is put in
the Ninth Schedule is amended.
The amended provision can be judicially reviewed on the touchstone of
Article 13. The reason being that Article 31-B should be interpreted
strictly. The only requirement which is laid down by Article 31-B is that
the Act should be specified in the Ninth Schedule. Therefore, in the
absence of the amendment being specified in the Ninth Schedule the
amendment cannot be protected for infringement of the rights under
Part III of the Constitution. See State of Maharashtra V. Madhavrao
Damodar PatilA13 (7 Judges). This principle has been reiterated by this
Hon'ble Court in Ramanlal Gulabchand Shah V. State of GujaratA30
(7
Judges) and in Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi V. State of BombayA31 (5
Judges).
37. In connection with the aspect of exclusion of judicial review, the
extracts from the judgment of Khanna, J. in Kesavananda Bharati
38. The reliance placed by the petitioners in the judgment of this
Hon'ble Court in L. Chandra Kumar V. Union of IndiaA19 (7 Judges) is
misplaced. Though this Hon'ble Court concluded that,
"It appears that this Court has always considered the power of
judicial review vested in the High Courts and in this Court, under
Article 226 and Article 32 respectively, enabling legislative action to
be subjected to the scrutiny of superior courts to be integral to our
constitutional scheme;"
the fact remains that under the Constitution itself there are several
articles which exclude judicial review. [See for instance, Article 33,
Article 74(2), Article 103(1), Article 105(2), Article 122, Article 136(2),
Article 163(3), Article 194(2), Article 212, Article 262(2), Article 329(a)
and Article 3]
39. There is a distinction between total exclusion of judicial review
and a validation of an Act which has been struck down on the principles
applicable to ordinary legislation, namely, violation of Part III of the
Constitution or legislative competence.
The fact that Article 31-A and Article 31-C which provide protection
to Acts from the challenge under Articles 14 and 19 has been upheld
would show that this does not amount to an exclusion of judicial
review.
40. This apart, though the judgment in Indira Gandhi caseA7 has
been extensively quoted in L. Chandra KumarA19 the conclusion drawn
therein, namely, that judicial review of election disputes is not a
compulsion and this is part of a constitutional scheme, has not been
doubted.
Possibility of abuse is no ground to test the validity of a
provision
41. It is well settled that possibility of abuse cannot be a ground to
test the validity of a constitutional provision. Fear of perversion is no
test of power. In Kesavananda BharatiA4 a majority of seven Judges
held that merely because wide powers were conferred, it would not
render a constitutional power unconstitutional.
What is the test to be applied to Article 31-B?
42. The controversy with regard to the distinction between ordinary
law and constitutional amendments is really irrelevant. The distinction
is valid and the decisions from Indira Gandhi caseA7 up to Kuldip Nayar
V. Union of India caseA34 represents the correct law. It has no
application in testing the constitutional amendment placing the Acts in
the Ninth Schedule. There is no manner of doubt that:
(A) In Kesavananda Bharati caseA Sikri, C.J. [para 475(h)],
Shelat & Grover, JJ. [paras 607, 608(7)], Hegde & Mukherjea, JJ.
[paras 742, 744(8)] and Jaganmohan Reddy, J. [paras 1211, 1212
(4)] all clearly held that the Acts placed in the Ninth Schedule and
the provisions thereof have to be subjected to the basic structure
test.
(B) Chandrachud, C.J. in Waman Rao case A5 A6 followed the path
laid down by 6 Judges in Kesavananda BharatiA4 without quoting
from their conclusions and without attempting to reconcile their
views with the subsequent development in the law regarding the
distinction between ordinary legislations and constitutional
amendments.
43. Therefore, a constitutional amendment which incorporates a
legislation in the Ninth Schedule has to be tested on the ground
whether such legislation or its provisions violate the basic structure of
the Constitution. In the event, the constitutional amendment Act
incorporates an Act which violates the basic structure then such an
amendment would be ultra vires the powers provided by Article 368
and therefore invalid and the protection provided under Article 31-B
would not be available.
44. It is respectfully submitted that challenge to such a legislation
incorporated by a constitutional amendment in the Ninth Schedule on
the ground of basic structure is limited to the extent that the
fundamental rights which the legislation takes away, damages or
destroys the basic structure of the Constitution. It is therefore
submitted that the correct approach while testing a legislation
incorporated in the Ninth Schedule on the ground of basic structure was
358):
"358. The utmost that can be said is as I indicated, that even
after putting them in the Ninth Schedule their provisions would be
open to challenge on the ground that they took away or abrogated all
or any of the fundamental rights and therefore damaged or
destroyed the basic structure if the fundamental rights or right taken
away or abrogated constitutes a basic structure."
Is Article 31-B a one-time exercise?
45. There is no substance in the argument that Article 31-B is "a one
-time exercise". Article 31-B protects Acts and regulations specified in
the Ninth Schedule. There is no prohibition that Acts and regulations
cannot be included/specified in the Ninth Schedule later. The power to
amend the Ninth Schedule flows from the power to amend the
Constitution from Article 368. This is the only way in which Article 31-
B, the Ninth Schedule and Article 368 can be read together. There are
several provisions in the Constitution which contain similar provisions.
Under Article 1(2), the States and Territories of India shall be as
specified in the First Schedule. Similarly, in Article 1(3)(b), the territory
of India shall comprise inter alia of the Union Territories specified in the
First Schedule. This does not mean that the First Schedule cannot be
changed. Similarly, languages are specified in the Eighth Schedule (see
344 & 351). The Eighth Schedule has been amended from time to time
to include several other languages other than those which were there
originally.
46. This apart, the provisions of Article 367 expressly provides that
the General Clauses Act would apply for the purpose of the
interpretation of the Constitution as it applies to the interpretation of an
Act of the legislature. Therefore, Section 14 of the General Clauses Act
would clearly apply.
Constituent power
47. (A) The argument is sought to be made with regard to constitutional
amendment and constituent powers and it has been contended that constitutional
amendment cannot interfere with the judicial power to enforce fundamental rights.
This submission is not correct. In the first place, Article 368 itself provides that the
power of amendment is in exercise of constituent power.
(B) Secondly, Article 368 does not impose any restriction with
regard to amendment of Part III of the Constitution. In this
connection, it is also important to note that the Twenty-fourth
Amendment which inserted clause (4) in Article 13, and clause (3) in
Article 368 has been upheld. The distinction between a law made in
exercise of legislative power and a law made in exercise of a
constituent power has been recognised in Sasanka Sekhar Maity V.
Conclusion
48. In Attorney General for India V. Amratlal PrajivandasA32 (9
Judges) Jeevan Reddy, J. for the unanimous Court observed as follows:
"20. Before entering upon discussion of the issues arising herein,
it is necessary to make a few clarificatory observations. Though a
challenge to the constitutional validity of 39th, 40th and 42nd
Amendments to the Constitution was levelled in the writ petitions on
the ground that the said Amendments-effected after the decision in
Kesavananda Bharati V. State of KeralaA4-infringe the basic
structure of the Constitution, no serious attempt was made during
the course of arguments to substantiate it. It was generally argued
that Article 14 is one of the basic features of the Constitution and
hence any constitutional amendment violative of Article 14 is equally
violative of the basic structure. This simplistic argument overlooks
the raison d'être of Article 31-B-at any rate, its continuance and
relevance after Bharati44-and of the 39th and 40th Amendments
placing the said enactments in the Ninth Schedule. Acceptance of
the petitioners' argument would mean that in case of post-Bharati44
constitutional amendments placing Acts in the Ninth Schedule, the
protection of Article 31-B would not be available against Article 14.
Indeed, it was suggested that Articles 21 and 19 also represent the
basic features of the Constitution. If so, it would mean a further
enervation of Article 31-B. Be that as it may, in the absence of any
effort to substantiate the said challenge, we do not wish to express
any opinion on the constitutional validity of the said Amendments.
We take them as they are i.e. we assume them to be good and valid.
We must also say that no effort has also been made by the counsel
to establish in what manner the said Amendment Acts violate Article
14."
(emphasis supplied)
49. It is submitted that the abovequoted passage shows that the
Bench:
(i) dismissed as simplistic the argument of a violation of Article
14 being equally violative of the basic structure;
(ii) recognised the raison d'être of Article 31-B and its
continuance and relevance after the judgment of Kesavananda
Bharati caseA4
(iii) repudiated the contention that if Articles 21 and 19 also
represented the basic features of the Constitution then it would lead
to further enervation of Article 31-B.
Further Submissions : Validity of Article 31-B
50. In the first two days of opening arguments, the judgment in
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 was not analysed. In the rejoinder the
petitioners have made the following submissions with regard to
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4:
(i) that the validity of Article 31-B was not in question in
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4.
(ii) that the question of considering the validity of a provision like
Article 31-B to validate Acts and the constitutionality thereof, was
also not in issue before thirteen Judges in Kesavananda Bharati
case A4
51. It was therefore felt necessary to take a search of the papers and
proceedings in Kesavananda Bharati caseA It is important to note that
an application to urge additional grounds and for amendment of Writ
Petition No. 135 of 1972 was made by the petitioners in Kesavananda
Bharati caseA4 on 4-8-1972. This application was allowed by an order
dated 10-8-1972. This fact has been noted by Sikri, C.J. in his
judgment at paras 6 and 7 and by Chandrachud, J. at para 2021. A
certified copy of the application is annexed hereto and marked as
Annexure 1.
52. It is respectfully submitted that the grounds taken in the said
application completely belie the submissions made on behalf of the
petitioners that the validity of Article 31-B was never raised in
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 It is submitted that the grounds taken in
the aforesaid application with regard to the Twenty-ninth Amendment
and the validity of Article 31-B completely negates the aforesaid
argument on behalf of the petitioners. The relevant portion of the
grounds are extracted hereunder:
"(xxiii) THAT, in any event, the scheme of the Constitution does
not confer any power on Parliament to have a permanent validating
provision by virtue of Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule to the
Constitution by which from time to time invalid Acts are
automatically made valid and screened from judicial scrutiny by its
insertion in the Ninth Schedule.
Such a power is ultra vires the Constitution and, therefore the
provisions of Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution
are unconstitutional and void, being beyond the competence of
Parliament.
Furthermore, in any event, Article 31-B was never enacted to be a
permanent provision of validating invalid Acts passed by legislatures
and was only intended to validate certain Acts and inserted in the
Ninth Schedule when Article 31-B was enacted.
In any event, Parliament had no power to validate statutes by
merely inserting them in the Ninth Schedule without amending the
main provision of Article 31-B."
53. The above ground shows that the following was directly in issue:
(i) That the petitioners in Kesavananda Bharati caseA A4 had
submitted "that the scheme of the Constitution does not confer any
power on Parliament to have a permanent validating provision by
virtue of Article 31-B and the Ninth
Schedule of the Constitution by which from time to time invalid Acts
are automatically made valid and screened from judicial scrutiny by its
insertion in the Ninth Schedule".
(ii) That the petitioners had specifically contended that "such a
power is ultra vires the Constitution and therefore the provisions of
Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution are
unconstitutional and void, being beyond the competence of
Parliament".
(iii) That the further contention was that "furthermore, in any
event, Article 31-B was never enacted to be a permanent provision
for validating invalid Acts passed by legislatures and was only
intended to validate certain Acts inserted in the Ninth Schedule
when Article 31-B was enacted".
(iv) That the petitioners finally contended that in any event,
Parliament had no power to validate statutes by merely inserting
them in the Ninth Schedule without amending the main provisions of
Article 31-B.
54. The nature of the issues before thirteen Judges can also be seen
from the propositions of law submitted by one of the
petitioners/intervenors before thirteen Judges. A certified copy of the
written submissions is annexed hereto as Annexure 2. In the written
submissions dated 28-10-1972 the following submissions were made:
"Article 31-B does not confer power to add to the Schedule. This
Court is invited to hold that Article 31-B was intended to protect only
those Acts specified in the Schedule. Article 31-B should have been
given a very restricted and narrow interpretation. If such an
interpretation is not given to the provisions of the Constitution, the
legislatures can make a mockery of the Constitution. Engrafting of
exceptions after exceptions to the articles of the Constitution which
will eventually result in total emasculation of the Constitution cannot
be considered amendments of the Constitution. Abuses of the
amending process is a fraud on the Constitution
"
55. It is respectfully submitted that all the above issues were the
subject-matter before the thirteen Judges in Kesavananda Bharati
caseA4 Only Sikri, C.J. upheld to some extent the above argument and
held that the device of Article 31-B was bad insofar as it protects
statutes even if they take away fundamental rights.
56. In this context, it is important to note that though the ground
relating to the validity of Article 31-B had been raised the argument
regarding the validity of Article 31-B was not pressed. Hegde and
Mukherjea, JJ. and Chandrachud, J. in this regard held as under:
Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. (para 738)
"738. The learned counsel for the petitioners did not challenge the
validity of Article 31-B. Its validity has been accepted in a number of
cases decided by this Court."
Chandrachud, J. (para 2136)
"2136. The validity of Article 31-B has been accepted in a series
of decisions of this Court and I suppose it is too late in the day to
reopen that question, nor indeed did the learned counsel for the
petitioner challenge the validity of that article."
57. Counsel for the petitioner did not urge this contention apparently
recognising, as observed in para 1.7 hereinabove that "the validity had
been accepted in a number of cases" as can be seen from the
quotations set out hereinabove. Twelve out of the thirteen Judges
proceeded on the basis that it was too late in the day to challenge the
validity of Article 31-B having regard to the various decisions of the
Supreme Court upholding Article 31-B.
58. Further, the argument that a permanent validating provision like
Article 31-B was invalid was also specifically raised before the thirteen
Judges in the amendment. The fact that it was not argued makes no
difference. This very same argument is now sought to be raised before
your Lordships by saying that this argument was not raised before
thirteen Judges-the basis of which is incorrect. A Nine-Judge Bench is,
in effect, asked to reconsider an issue which was raised before a Bench
of thirteen Judges and which was not pressed into service.
59. It is submitted that the argument that Article 31-B was never
enacted to be a permanent provision for validating invalid Acts passed
by legislature and was only intended to validate certain Acts in the
Ninth Schedule when Article 31-B was inserted was sought to be urged
by the counsel for the petitioner in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 in
a
slightly extended form by linking Article 31-B with Article 31-A and
contending that it was limited to agrarian reform. This argument was
expressly rejected. This has already been pointed out in the written
submissions which had been submitted on 1-11-2006 in paras III and
IV.
60. It is therefore respectfully submitted that the exercise sought to
be undertaken by the petitioners before a Bench of 9 Hon'ble Judges is
entirely impermissible as the issue of validity of Article 31-B is no
longer res integra in view of Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 It is,
therefore, too late in the day to reopen issues which are expressly
concluded.
61. It is also significant to note that in Sasanka Sekhar Maity caseA25
decided on 9-5-1980 (the same date on which the order in Waman Rao
case A5 and in Minerva Mills caseA9 was passed) a constitutional Bench of
five Judges noted the application to urge additional grounds filed in
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 In para 33 of the said judgment, it has
been noted that the challenge to the validity of the Constitution
(Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, was allowed to be raised as an
additional ground in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 (See Sasanka Sekhar
The judgment in Bhim Singhji caseA35
62. The petitioner's contention that a Constitution Bench of this
Hon'ble Court in Bhim Singhji V. Union of IndiaA35 had not applied
the
test of "basic structure doctrine" while testing the validity of the
provisions of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 is
completely incorrect. In that case, Chandrachud, C.J. (for himself and
Bhagwati, J.) upheld the various provisions of the Act except Section 27
(1) of the Act. The opinion of Chandrachud, C.J. stated at para 7 that
fuller reasons will follow later. Krishna Iyer, J. in his concurring opinion,
also upheld the validity of the various provisions of the Act except
Section 27(1) of the Act. Subsequently, Chandrachud, C.J. (speaking
for himself and Bhagwati, J.) in the same case Bhim Singhji V. Union of
IndiaA35 held that they "fully agreed with the reasons
given by Krishna Iyer, J. in his judgment". It is therefore submitted
that the majority in Bhim Singhji caseA31 , A35 did not strike down
Section 21(1) on the basis of violation of a particular fundamental right
like Article 14 of the Constitution. On the contrary, Krishna Iyer, J.'s
opinion at para 20 clearly indicates that the test which was applied was
the basic structure doctrine rather than the violation of a particular
fundamental right. It is therefore submitted that the contention of the
petitioner that this Hon'ble Court struck down the provisions of the Act
for abridging Article 14 in the aforementioned case is incorrect.
III. Mr Soli J. Sorabjee, Senior Advocate, on behalf of the State
of Tamil Nadu
The inescapable inference and the legal position which emerges
from the overruling of the decision in Golak Nath caseA3 and the ratio
laid down by this Hon'ble Court in Kesavananda caseA4 is that subject
to the retention of the basic structure the plenary power of amendment
reaches every part of the Constitution including articles relating to
(vii).] In short, fundamental rights are not unamendable and they have
been expressly held to be amendable. The theory of implied limitations
on the amending power as far as fundamental rights are concerned was
expressly negatived by the majority of the Judges in Kesavananda
case and what is more important also by Khanna, J. in Kesavananda
caseA4 [See Kesavananda Bharati caseA4. Shelat and Grover, JJ., paras
608(2)(a) and (7); Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ., paras 744(2), (4) and
(8); Ray, J., paras 866-68, 1064; Jaganmohan Reddy, J., paras 1094,
1212; Palekar, J., paras 1279 and 1333(1); Khanna, J. at paras 1421,
1464, 1465 and the conclusion in paras 1537(iii), (vii) and (ix);
Mathew, J., paras 1784 and 1786; Beg, J., paras 1851, 1857(1) and
(2); Dwivedi, J., para 1884; Chandrachud, J., paras 2075, 2076 and
paras 2142(iii) and (iv)].
64. Fundamental rights do occupy an important place in our
Constitution. But no fundamental right is expressly made unamendable
1092 of Kesavananda44. In some Constitutions fundamental rights are
inalienable, for example Article 1 of the German Constitution, Article 5
of the US Constitution (see Article 11 of the Japanese Constitution).
The status and position of fundamental rights in our Constitution can be
gauged by reference to Article 33. It is also extremely significant that
Part III of the Constitution is not one of the articles amendment to
which requires ratification by the legislatures of not less than one-half
of the States. In short, fundamental rights under our Constitution are
not untouchable and sacrosanct. If fundamental rights were
unamendable then it could possibly be argued that Article 31-B is
unconstitutional because it permits abrogation of unamendable
fundamental rights.
65. It is a fallacy to regard that Article 31-B read with Ninth
Schedule excludes judicial review in the matter of violation of
fundamental rights. The effect of Article 31-B is to remove a fetter on
the power of Parliament to pass a law in violation of fundamental rights.
On account of Article 31-B, cause of action for violation of fundamental
right is not available because the fetter placed by Part III on legislative
power is removed and is non-existent. Non-availability of cause of
action based on breach of fundamental right cannot be regarded as
exclusion or ouster of judicial review. As a result of the operation of
Article 31-B read with the Ninth Schedule, occasion for exercise of
judicial review does not arise (see Article 358). But there is
no question of exclusion or ouster of judicial review. The two concepts
are different and have been confused in the submissions of the
petitioner.
66. Retrospective validation of a statute which was void at its
inception either because of lack of legislative competence or because of
violation of fundamental rights is perfectly permissible. See M.P.V.
Sundararamier436 SCR at pp. 1438-41, 1467-68, 1476, see also West
Ray, C.J. A fortiori the same can be effected by a constitutional
validating and curative provision like Article 31-B.
67. Neutralising a judgment or making it ineffective by removing
retrospectively the cause or basis which imparted unconstitutionality or
invalidity to a statute is neither a trespass into a judicial field nor an
usurpation of judicial power. Even in such cases judicial review is
available to determine whether (1) the legislature has the requisite
legislative competence or (2) whether the validation is effective or it
has misfired. It is a fallacy to equate neutralisation of the effect of a
judgment by means of a validating mechanism with nullification or
defiance of a judgment. It is submitted that when a court declares a
statute unconstitutional it does not nullify the will of the people nor
does it encroach on Parliament's sovereignty. Likewise when a decision
is neutralised by appropriate legislation or constitutional amendment or
validation there is no question of defiance or disobedience of the
judgment of the court.
68. Article 31-B is a constitutional curative validating mechanism to
remove the basis of the judgment which pronounced the legislation to
be unconstitutional by retrospectively deeming that no Article in Part
III was ever in existence and retrospectively curing the defect and
removing the basis of the judgment, namely, the particular article in
at p. 619.)
69. To elaborate, if the Act was struck down because of infraction of
Article 19 but Article 19 was not available because of the deeming
fiction and retrospective operation of Article 31-B, the very basis for
striking down the legislation has disappeared and the source or the
cause which injected the infirmity of unconstitutionality has been
fictionally removed by reason of the deeming provision in Article 31-B.
Consequently, the legislation is cured of the defect, by the provisions of
Article 31-B and the law was never unconstitutional because of the
operation of deeming fiction to which full effect must be given without
37, J.K. CottonA40). Validating and curative exercise by the legislature
whereby the effect of the earlier judgment is neutralised or the same is
rendered irrelevant and unenforceable cannot be called an
impermissible legislative overruling of the judicial decision. (See Prithvi
A39
Virender Singh HoodaA44.)
70. Article 31-B has stood the test of time and has successfully
weathered constitutional challenges. It is a part of our Constitution and
was validly enacted by compliance with the requirements of Article 368.
Article 31-B was enacted by the same people who enacted the
Constitution and the chapter on fundamental rights after full
deliberations. It was not enacted by a motley conglomeration in order
to deprive the people of fundamental rights.
71. One of the reasons for putting an Act in the Ninth Schedule is to
remove uncertainties about its validity arising out of forensic
challenges, divided judicial pronouncements and to prevent time
consuming litigation which would impede the speedy and effective
implementation of statute in question. (See Statement of Objects and
true that despite Article 31(4) which expressly protected zamindari
land reform legislation the same was struck down by the Patna High
Court in Kameshwar Singh V. State of BiharA45 on the ground of Article
14. This is an instance of the need to avoid such invalidation of
legislation by hyper active judges. The Allahabad and Nagpur High
Courts upheld the legislation. (See in this connection observations of
paras 22, 23 at pp. 384-86.) There is no warrant to assume that the
Acts are put in the Ninth Schedule with the sole purpose of preventing
judicial scrutiny. That would be attributing mala fide to Parliament
which is not permissible. [See also observations of Khanna, J. in
the arguments of the petitioners is that Article 31-B read with the Ninth
Schedule totally excludes or ousts judicial scrutiny. This Hon'ble Court
has laid down in a number of cases that judicial scrutiny is available
with respect to (a) legislative competence of the State or Parliament
which has enacted the statute, (b) whether the provisions of Article 368
have been complied with, and (c) whether an amendment has been
made to the statute after the insertion of parent statute in which case
the amending statute will also have to meet the discipline and
requirement of Article 368. Furthermore, judicial scrutiny will also be
available whether (a) the statute in question violates Article 286 of the
Constitution or (b) is violative of Article 301 of the Constitution. Above
all, judicial review and scrutiny is always available in respect of the
basic condition which a constitutional amendment has to satisfy,
namely, that it does not damage or is violative of the basic structure of
the Constitution.
72. It is inarguable and indeed unstatable that a constitutional
provision Article 31-B has become otiose or redundant or it has outlived
its utility. In other words that it has become obsolete. The history and
operation of Article 31-B clearly militate against its obsolescence or its
having fallen into desuetude. There is no warrant in fact or in law for
this submission. Occasions may well arise in the future to insert laws in
the Ninth Schedule because of their possible challenge in courts,
divergent judgments of the courts and the time and resources
expended in time-consuming
73. Power under Article 31-B can be exercised from time to time by
virtue of Section 14 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 read with Article
367 of the Constitution. (See Sampat Prakash V. State of J&KA51, SCR
at p. 375; Epuru Sudhakar V. Govt. of A.P.A52)
74. The purpose, scope and effect of Article 31-B
(a) "The object of this article (Article 31-B) is to give blanket
protection to the Acts and regulations specified in the Ninth
Schedule and the provisions of those Acts and regulations against
any challenge to those Acts, regulations or the provisions thereof on
the ground that they are inconsistent with or take away or abridge
any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution. The result
is that howsoever violative of the fundamental rights may be the
provisions of an Act or regulation once the Act or regulation is
specified in the Ninth Schedule it would not be liable to be struck
down on that score. This immunity against the above challenge
would be available notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of
any court or tribunal to the contrary."
(emphasis supplied)
Article 31-B provides a protective umbrella to all Acts of whatever
character.
(b) Article 31-B is a constitutional device or mechanism for
validating statutes which have been struck down on the ground that
they infringe Part III of the Constitution.
JeejeebhoyA20, SCR at p. 648; Indira Gandhi V. Raj NarainAZ
(c) Article 31-B effects fictional validation by removing or curing
the constitutional vice or defect by the express words of the deeming
fiction. There is no requirement that before placing the Act in the
Ninth Schedule the defect should be cured by a separate validating
para 23). Article 31-B itself cures the defect which takes "place with
retrospective operation from the dates on which the Acts were put on
the statute-book".
Article 31-B in substance and effect is a curative provision and by
the very terms of Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule it cures the
defect, if any, in the various Acts mentioned in the said Schedule as
regards any unconstitutionality alleged on the ground of
infringement of fundamental rights. Moreover by the
express words of Article 31-B such curing of the defect takes "place
with retrospective operation from the dates on which the Acts were put
on the statute-book".
(d) In State of Maharashtra V. M.S. PadviA38 decided on 14-2-
1978 i.e. after the decision in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4
legislation which was struck down by the Bombay High Court as
unconstitutional, while the appeal against the judgment was pending
in the Supreme Court, was placed in the Ninth Schedule. A Bench of
seven Judges by a unanimous judgment held as follows:
"The effect of the inclusion was that the West Khandesh
Mehwassi Estate (Proprietary Rights Abolition, etc.) Regulation,
1961 was immunised from challenge on the ground that it was
inconsistent with or took away or abridged any of the rights
conferred by Part III of the Constitution and hence its
constitutional validity could no longer be assailed on the ground
that it violated Article 19(1)(f). Article 31-B and the Ninth
Schedule cured the defect, if any, in the West Khandesh Mehwassi
Estate (Proprietary Rights Abolition, etc.) Regulation, 1961 as
regards any unconstitutionality alleged on the ground of
infringement of fundamental rights and by the express words of
Article 31-B, such curing of the defect took place with
retrospective operation from the date on which this Regulation
was enacted by the Governor. This Regulation, even if inoperative
or void at the time when it was issued by the Governor on account
of infringement of Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution, assumed
full force and vigour from the date of its enactment by reason of
its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule." (para 4)
(emphasis supplied)
(e) The issue about the curative consequences resulting from the
insertion of an Act which has been struck down as unconstitutional in
the Ninth Schedule has been authoritatively and categorically
answered by two decisions of this Hon'ble Court viz. JagannathA13
and PadviA38, both of which are unanimous judgments of seven
Judges. The law laid down in these two decisions is that the mere
insertion of the legislation in the Ninth Schedule has the effect of
curing the infirmity or defect because the basis of the judgment,
namely, Article 14 or 19 or 31, as the case may be, on the basis of
which legislation was declared unconstitutional, is removed
retrospectively by the deeming clause in Article 31-B and the non-
obstante clause.
The binding nature of the law so declared about the scope and
effect of Article 31-B is not in any manner affected save and except
that the curative consequence of Article 31-B will not extend to nor
will it protect any legislation which damages the basic structure of
the Constitution.
The Seven-Judge Bench decision in PadviA38 which is after
Kesavananda BharatiA4, is binding and its ratio is not in any manner
affected by the decision in Waman Rao A5 , A6 Waman Rao A5 , A6 is a
Five-Judge Bench decision. It has not noticed PadviA38 a Seven-
Judge Bench decision, and to that extent it is per incuriam. In any
event Waman RaoA5 A6 cannot even remotely be said to have
impliedly overruled PadviA38.
75. It is submitted that once an Act has been inserted in the Ninth
Schedule the effect of Article 31-B is that the basis or the ground of
invalidation, namely, violation of a fundamental right no longer exists
and thus the basis of the judgment is removed or fundamentally
altered.
It is submitted that Article 31-B itself operates as a deeming
validating provision. It is submitted that there is no necessity of a
separate validating Act taking away the basis of the judgment before
the Act is put in the Ninth Schedule. The very factum of inclusion in the
Ninth Schedule of the Act cures the Act of the defect by removing the
basis which is pointed out in the judgment holding the legislation to be
unconstitutional. In this context, the words "shall be deemed to be void
or ever to have become void" are significant and should be given full
effect.
76. The rationale of validating provisions in the wake of court
judgments has been enunciated in the classic judgment of this Hon'ble
77. The same principle was reiterated by another Constitution Bench
principles have been reiterated and the scope of deeming fiction has
been explained by a recent Constitution Bench decision in State of T.N.
A39
78. In the leading judgment of this Hon'ble Court in West Ramnad
Electric Distribution Co. Ltd. V. State of MadrasA37, the specific
contention was that "the earlier Act of 1949 being dead and non-
existent, the impugned notification contravened Article 31(1) and this
contravention of a fundamental right cannot be cured by the legislature
by passing a subsequent law and making it retrospective" (see SCR at
p. 762). The said contention was expressly rejected in these words:".
if the legislature can validate actions taken under one class of void
legislation, there is no reason why it cannot exercise its legislative
power to validate actions taken under the other class of void legislation.
We are, therefore, not prepared to accept Mr Nambiar's contention that
where the contravention of fundamental rights is concerned, the
legislature cannot pass a law retrospectively validating actions taken
under a law which was void because it contravened fundamental
rights" (see SCR at p. 764).
Thus it is settled law that validating legislation can be passed
prospectively, or retrospectively to remove the basis of the judgment.
79. It is a misconception to consider such legislative exercises as a
trespass or an encroachment on judicial powers. The aforesaid
principles relating to validation of ordinary legislation apply a fortiori to
Article 31-B which is a constitutional mechanism to remove the basis of
the judgment which pronounced the legislation to be unconstitutional
by retrospectively deeming that no article in Part III was ever in
existence and therefore the basis of the judgment, say violation of a
particular article in Part III, is displaced. To elaborate, if the Act was
struck down because of infraction of Article 19 and Article 19 is no
longer available because of retrospective operation of Article 31-B, the
very basis for striking down the legislation has disappeared, the source
or the cause which injected the infirmity of unconstitutionality has been
fictionally removed by reason of the deeming provision in Article 31-B.
Consequently, the legislation is cured of the defect by the provisions of
Article 31-B and is no longer nor ever was unconstitutional. That is the
result of the deeming fiction and full effect must be given to it without
allowing the imagination to boggle. Validating and curative exercise by
the legislature whereby the effect of the earlier judgment is neutralised
or the same is rendered irrelevant and unenforceable cannot be called
an impermissible legislative overruling of the judicial decision.
"In its anxiety to safeguard judicial power, it is unnecessary to be
overzealous and conjure up incursion into the judicial preserve
invalidating the valid law competently made."
(c-d).]
80. Attention is also invited to the observations of this Hon'ble Court
91)
"The Twenty-sixth Amendment itself was passed by Parliament to
overcome the effect of this judgment."
81. It is a fallacy to equate neutralisation of the effect of a judgment
by means of a validating mechanism with nullification or defiance of a
judgment. It is submitted that when a court declares a statute
unconstitutional it does not nullify the will of the people nor does it
encroach on Parliament's sovereignty. Likewise when a decision is
neutralised by appropriate legislation or constitutional amendment or
validation there is no question of defiance or disobedience of the
judgment of the court.
82. Constitutional amendments have been made in other
jurisdictions which have a Bill of Rights and the rule of law is respected
to neutralise the effect of the judgment of the highest court of the land.
The rationale is that the most straightforward way to respond to a
Supreme Court decision with which there is disagreement, is to amend
the Constitution. Indeed that is an effective answer to critics who
regard judicial review as undemocratic. (See Stone Seidman's
Constitutional Law, 2nd Edn., p. 72.)
83. For example, in the United States there have been four or
perhaps five occasions to override Supreme Court's decisions. (See
Tribe's American Constitutional Law, 2nd Edn., pp. 64-65, and in
particular fn 10.)
84. In England, Parliament has exercised the power to legalise past
illegalities and to alter the law retrospectively. This power has been
used by an executive with a secure majority in Parliament to reverse
inconvenient decisions of an impartial judiciary. (emphasis added) (See
Bradley's Constitutional and Administrative Law, 12th Edn., p. 61.)
85. In Australia, when a judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme
Court of Queensland was pending in appeal in the High Court of
Australia the validating legislation with a deeming provision was
passed. In view of the amending and validating Act the High Court of
Australia rescinded the special leave granted by it. The Privy Council
upheld the judgment of the High Court of Australia. (See Western
Transport V. KroppA53.)
86. In Malaysia, a provision of the Federal Constitution was amended
by adding a proviso, which was deemed to have retrospective effect
from 27-8-1957. The amendment was effected on 27-8-1976 after the
High Court held in favour of the appellant on 21-3-1976. The Federal
Court of Malaysia, in allowing the government's appeal, held that this
proviso operated to validate the appellant's dismissal.
87. The Privy Council upheld the judgment of the Malaysian Federal
Court in Zainal V. Malaysian Govt. Viscount DilhorneA54 Reference is
invited to the observations of the Privy Council at p. 245 between (f) &
(h).
88. According to the majority decision in Kesavananda BharatiA4 a
constitutional amendment can be challenged on the ground that it
damages the basic structure of the Constitution and abrogates its
essential features. However, in this connection it is submitted that each
and every fundamental right is not an essential feature of the
Constitution and the same can be amended.
89. It is submitted that the inevitable and inescapable consequence
of overruling Golak NathA3 in Kesavananda Bharati case is that
fundamental rights can be amended. If fundamental rights can be
amended fundamental rights cannot be said to be part of the basic
structure.
90. According to the majority judgment in Kesavananda BharatiA4
fundamental rights are amendable and not unamendable. The correct
legal position has been set out in Justice Khanna's judgment in
91. In any event it is submitted that right to property has been held
157):
"The right to property even as a fundamental right was not a part
of the basic structure."
92. Equality by itself is not part of the basic structure. See Indira
Outright negation of equality by placing a particular individual
above the law and which also destroyed the basis of the rule of law
was regarded as an essential feature of the Constitution by
(emphasis added)
93. There is a vital distinction between the invalidation of legislation
because of infringement of Article 14 and invalidation of a constitutional
amendment on account of violation of the essential feature of equality.
For example, (a) legislation struck down because of unfettered
discretion to licensing authorities; (b) different procedures for
acquisition; (c) excise exemption granted to certain manufacturing
industries and not to others; and (d) cases of underinclusion or
overinclusion. In the above illustrative cases, it is submitted that even
though Article 14 may be infringed there is no violation of the basic
structure.
94. It is submitted that any and every infraction of Article 14
simpliciter irrespective of its repercussions on other articles of
Constitution cannot tantamount to the violation of the basic structure.
For example, legislation which strikes at the root of the equality
principle, which violates the essence of equality and which has its
repercussions on other essential features of the Constitution may not be
protected by Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule because such
legislation can be regarded as damaging the basic structure of the
Constitution. For example, (a) legislation that persons belonging to a
particular community alone can occupy certain high offices. Such
legislation strikes at the essence of the equality which underlies the
essential feature of the secularism; (b) bar of any civil or criminal
proceedings against a particular individual or a class of persons in
respect of malfeasance or criminal misconduct-in such a case the
essential feature of rule of law is also damaged; and (c) trial of criminal
offences in
respect of some individuals alone by military tribunals in camera, this
would be violative of Article 14 read with Article 21, and damage the
basic structure.
95. The decision in Bhim SinghjiA35 was reached after examining the
provisions of the Act and reaching the conclusion that Section 27(1) of
the Urban Land Ceiling Act was violative of the basic structure inter alia
because it ran counter to the directive principles. See pp. 899 and 932-
33 and hence was not protected by Article 31-B. There was no occasion
to consider JagannathA13 nor PadviA38 and the said decisions have not
been noticed. Bhim SinghjiA28, A35 is not an authority for the proposition
that mere insertion of an Act which has been declared unconstitutional
in the Ninth Schedule is itself unconstitutional. Bhim Singhji caseA28
recognises that there are shades and degrees of inequalities and is a
complete answer to the petitioner's contention to the contrary. (See
96. The observations in Bhim SinghjiA28 relevant for the present case
97. There is no total exclusion or complete ouster of judicial review
on account of the insertion of an Act in the Ninth Schedule. Judicial
review is available with regard to (a) compliance with the form and
procedure and requirements prescribed by Article 368; (b) the question
of legislative competence of the Union or the State which passed the
Act, as the case may be; (c) whether the Act inserted in the Ninth
Schedule violates the basic structure of the Constitution; and (d) if the
legislature amends any of the provisions contained in the said Acts, the
amended provisions would not receive the protection of Article 31-B
and its validity may be liable to be examined on merits. (See State of
Bihar V. Kameshwar SinghA22.)
98. The effect of insertion of a piece of legislation in the Ninth
Schedule is that "only a certain class of cases has been excluded from
the purview of Part III and the courts could no longer interfere, not
because their powers were curtailed in any manner or to any extent,
but because there would be no occasion hereafter for the exercise of
their power in such cases". (See Sankari Prasad V. Union of India A1
SCR at p. 108.)
99.
In
Sajjan Singh case the specific contention was that the
insertion of the Act in the Ninth Schedule "purports in substance to set
aside decisions of courts of competent jurisdiction and therefore the
same was unconstitutional". That contention was negatived (see SCR at
p. 945). The effect of Article 31-B read with Ninth Schedule is that
"certain area of cases in which the said powers could have been
exercised had been withdrawn" [see SCR at p. 947(F)].
100. The impugned Act which is inserted in the Ninth Schedule as
Item 80 was struck down on the ground that it did not have protection
of Article 31-A. Consequently, the Act was in violation of the
fundamental right of property under Article 19(1)(f) and Article 31(2).
The Act was not struck down on the ground of Article 14.
101. It is submitted that the constitutionality of the very Thirty-
fourth Amendment by which the State Act in question was inserted in
the Ninth Schedule has been upheld by the Constitution Bench of this
721, 728, paras 7 and 34).
It is significant that the judgment in Maity caseA25 was pronounced
on the same date as the judgment in Waman Rao case A5 (i.e. on 9-5-
1980).
It is submitted that the constitutionality of the insertion of the Thirty
-fourth Amendment Act in the Ninth Schedule is no longer res integra
and is concluded by the decision in Maity caseA25
102. It is further submitted that the impugned legislation dealt with
property rights. It was struck down on the ground that the acquisition
of the forests on the pannan land was not protected by Article 31-A.
Consequently, Article 31(2) was violated.
103. After the judgment, the Constitution (Twenty-fifth
Amendment) Act amended Article 31(2). The expression "amount" was
substituted for the expression "compensation". Thus the defect, if any,
was cured.
104. In any event impugned legislation can be sustained under
Article 31-C as it is covered by Articles 39(b) and (c) of the
Constitution. In that event the question of considering the scope and
effect of Article 31-B does not arise.
105. It is respectfully submitted that the decisions of the Hon'ble
Court which have held the field and stood test of time should not be
overruled unless compelling public interest is cogently established. See
Hon'ble Court observed that
"it is fundamental that the nation's Constitution is not kept in constant uncertainty
by judicial review every season because it paralyses, by perennial suspense, all
legislative and administrative action on vital issues deterred by the brooding threat
of forensic blow up".
106. This judicial approach and thinking are also reflected by
107. In this connection attention is also invited to the observations
in
the judgment of this Hon'ble Court in Rupa Ashok Hurra V. Ashok
108. The petitioner's submission regarding "total exclusion" of
judicial review proceeds on a misconception that there is complete
ouster of judicial review of an Act even on the touchstone of Part III.
On the contrary, judicial review is available even on the ground that the
Act takes away fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III, provided that
the extent and nature of abrogation of the fundamental rights in
question damages the basic structure of the Constitution. Any and
every abrogation of a fundamental right is not immunised. It depends
on the nature of the right, its place in the constitutional scheme and
the impact of the abrogation or violation of the fundamental right on
other fundamental rights and the essential features of the Constitution.
In a given case abrogation of a fundamental right by a statute placed in
the Ninth Schedule may amount to damage or impairment of the basic
structure and struck down as unconstitutional. In other words, judicial
review is available even on the touchstone of rights mentioned in Part
III, by application of the basic structure test. Further, it would only be
the courts, in exercise of powers under Articles 226 and 32 which would
be competent to determine whether the impugned abrogation of
fundamental rights is destructive of the basic structure of the
Constitution. Hence there is no question of total ouster of judicial
review.
109. For example, a law nationalising all newspapers can be
successfully challenged on the ground of violation of the basic structure
because free press is an
instrument of democratic control and accountability and is necessary for
the functioning of democracy and by the abrogation of this right a basic
feature of the Constitution, namely, democracy is impaired. Again,
suppose a law is passed prohibiting profession and propagation of
religion. Violation of Article 25 in this case would also tantamount to a
violation of basic feature of the Constitution because religious freedom
is an essential feature of the Constitution. A law which provides for trial
of criminal offences by military or non-judicial personnel and denies
legal assistance to the accused and the trial is held in camera, could be
challenged on the ground that it damages the basic structure because
it violates the essence of Article 21 which is a basic feature of the
Constitution. Suppose a law is passed which reserves the offices of the
President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister to be occupied by
persons belonging only to a particular community or it debars persons
belonging to certain communities and religion from occupying these
offices. Even if such a law is inserted in the Ninth Schedule it is liable
to be struck down because it affects the quintessence of equality and
also impacts on the essential feature of secularism.
110. On the other hand, suppose a law which prohibits chit funds
and lotteries and make them unlawful and that law is put in the Ninth
Schedule to forestall and avoid forensic challenges, uncertainties of
litigation and divergent judicial decisions. Such a law would not
damage the basic structure of the Constitution having regard to the
fundamental rights involved. It may be mentioned that lottery and
gambling have been held by this Hon'ble Court to be res extra
commercium and not entitled to the benefit of Article 19. A law which
bans the production and sale of liquor and is put in the Ninth Schedule
cannot be said to damage the basic structure of the Constitution in
view of the nature of the activity which this Court in Har Shankar
case held not to enjoy the status of fundamental rights. On the other
hand, in view of the espionage activities and leakage of secret vital
information by armed forces, suppose a law is passed which permits
surveillance and interception of communication in military
establishment to combat espionage activities cannot be said to damage
the basic structure of the Constitution even if some of its provisions do
not provide for a full hearing or for cross-examination. What is sought
to be emphasised is that in every case judicial review with regard to
damage to the basic structure or otherwise is available depending on
the nature of the fundamental rights and to the extent of its
abridgement and its impact on the essential features of the
Constitution.
111. It needs to be emphasised that this Court has effectively
exercised its power of judicial review and held constitutional
amendments to be unconstitutional. For example, see Indira Gandhi
case , Minerva MillsA9 L. Chandra KumarA19 and Bhim Singhji A28 , A35
The Bombay High Court has also ruled that MRTP Act in its application
to the press is unconstitutional. On the other hand, Twenty-sixth
Amendment relating to abolition of privy purse and insertion of SAFEMA
in the Ninth Schedule has been held to be constitutional.
112. Attention is invited to the observations of Chandrachud, J. in
observed as follows:
"
the Constitution, as originally enacted, expressly excluded
judicial review in a large variety of important matters. Articles 31(4),
31(6), 136(2), 227(4), 262(2) and 329(1) are some of the instances
in point. True, that each of these provisions has a purpose behind it
but these provisions show that the
Constitution did not regard judicial review as an indispensable measure
of the legality or propriety of every determination. Article 136(2)
expressly took away the power of the Supreme Court to grant special
leave to appeal from the decisions of any court or tribunal constituted
by a law relating to the armed forces. Article 262(2) authorised
Parliament to make a law providing that the Supreme Court or any
other court shall have no jurisdiction over certain river disputes.
113. Alternatively, it is submitted that a citizen whose fundamental
rights are violated is not without a remedy. In the first place, if the
violation is of a nature which damages the basic structure he can
approach the High Courts under Article 226 or the Supreme Court
under Article 32. If the Court accepts the petitioner's contention then
the legislation in question enjoys no immunity from Part III of the
Constitution the petitioner can have such a law struck down under
Article 13.
114. It needs to be emphasised that this Hon'ble Court did not hold
that the constitutional device of retrospectively validating laws which
were found to be in breach of fundamental rights was invalid or
unconstitutional. It is only Sikri, J. who held that the device of Article
31-B and the Ninth Schedule is bad insofar as it protects a statute even
though it takes away fundamental rights. (See Kesavananda BharatiA4,
115. There is a fundamental and qualitative distinction between
Article 31-A and Article 31-B. In the first place, it should be noted that
the Acts are not inserted in the Ninth Schedule upon any executive
determination or decision. Secondly, Article 31-A excludes fundamental
rights mentioned therein on the basis of an ordinary law passed by
Parliament or by a State Legislature. The same is the position with
regard to Article 31-C.
116. On the other hand, a constitutional amendment inserting Acts
in the Ninth Schedule can be brought only by exercise of constituent
power by Parliament when the Bill is passed in each house by a
majority of the total membership of the House and by a majority of not
less than two-third members of the House present and voting.
Furthermore, certain articles as mentioned therein by the proviso if
they are sought to be amended the amendment shall required to be
ratified by the legislatures of not less than one-half of the States.
117. It is settled that possibility of abuse of power is not a ground
for denying existence and exercise of power in Matajog DobeyA58
Constitutional provisions should not be interpreted on apprehensions of
paras 1417-18.)
118. The doctrine of consequences has no application in construing
grant of power conferred by a Constitution. In considering grant of
power the largest meaning should be given to the words of the power in
119. The level and intensity of judicial scrutiny has to be the same
in respect of the Acts placed in the Ninth Schedule irrespective of their
character. Different levels of judicial scrutiny are unwarranted. In
America, strict scrutiny is applied in cases of legislation based on
suspect classification, namely, those based on gender or race.
120. It is submitted that there is no scope for applying this principle
to a constitutional provision like Article 31-B in which there is no inbuilt
inhibition about the nature or character of laws that may be included in
the Ninth Schedule.
121. The so-called laundry bag of the Ninth Schedule is not
overflowing as was sought to be projected. Several Acts are Acts
effecting amendments to the parent Act already inserted in the Ninth
Schedule.
122. It is open to the Court in determining whether a statute
violates the basic structure to consider not, namely, the terms of the
statute but also the direct effect of its operation.
123. The Statement of Objects and Reasons can be looked at to
ascertain why the statute was put in the Ninth Schedule.
Further Submissions:
124. In the rejoinder it was submitted by Senior Counsel F.S.
Nariman that this Hon'ble Court in Bhim Singhji caseA28 struck down
the law on the ground of violation of Article 14. This is demonstrably
incorrect. It needs to be noticed that Tulzapurkar, J. alone struck down
the entire Act on the ground that its provisions "flagrantly violate those
pp. 189-90). In other words, on the ground that the Act violated the
basic structure and not on the ground of violation of Article 14.
Tulzapurkar, J. was clearly in the minority about the striking down of
the entire Act. The majority consisting of Chandrachud, C.J., Bhagwati,
J., and Krishna Iyer, J., who have emphatically disagreed with
Tulzapurkar, J. partially struck down Section 27(1) of the Act. There is
not a word or a statement that Section 27(1) was partially struck down
on account of violation of Article 14. A.P. Sen, J. struck down some
other provisions of the said Act in addition to partial striking down of
Article 27(1) but that was not on the ground of violation of Article 14
per se. Sen, J. also disagreed about the striking down of the Act in its
entirety. Thus the submission that in Bhim SinghjiA28 the Act was
not
struck down on the violation of Article 14 simpliciter is incorrect.
125. Furthermore, the petitioner's reading of the judgment in
Waman Rao caseA6 is flawed. It is erroneous to read a judgment by
picking out one sentence and trying to read it in isolation or dehors the
context. Senior Counsel F.S. Nariman for the petitioner has placed
heavy reliance on one sentence by Chandrachud, C.J. in para 51,
namely, that "Acts and regulations, which are or will be included in the
Ninth Schedule on or after 24-4-1973 will not receive the protection of
Article 31-B " On the basis of this sentence torn out of context it is
submitted that no constitutional amendment after 24-4-1973 will
receive the protection of Article 31-B The subsequent paragraphs
would clearly establish that this reading is not correct because what the
learned Chief Justice obviously meant was that the laws included in the
Ninth Schedule post-1973, will not receive the "full protection" or the
"blanket protection" of Article 31-B but that these laws " will be valid
only if they do not damage or destroy the basic structure of the
Constitution". This is evident from the very next sentence. This is also
obvious from the statement of the learned Chief Justice in para 55. This
is also plain from the statement in the operative part of the order of the
126. Senior Counsel for the petitioner has, in rejoinder, strongly for
the first time relied upon the judgment of a Constitution Bench in
analogy it was sought to be contended that a mechanism like Article 31
-B virtually tears away the basic fundamental freedoms and gives
primacy to all laws in the Ninth Schedule over Part III, and
thereby, ipso facto, destroys the basic structure of the Constitution. It
is submitted that since this judgment was read for the first time in
rejoinder, and for lack of time the respondents could not point out that
this judgment has been strongly criticised by a Constitution Bench of
this Hon'ble Court in Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. V. Bharat Coking Coal
127. The submission of the petitioners that Article 31-B provides no
standard and therefore, considering the width of the power, the
provision itself is invalid proceeds on a conceptual misconception. It is
submitted that though Article 31-B provides constitutional immunity to
laws mentioned in the Ninth Schedule, the source of the power to add
to the said Schedule lies in Article 368 itself. In other words, once a law
is put in the Ninth Schedule in exercise of constituent power, the
"standard" for review of such inclusion will necessarily be the basic
structure test, which is a matter of objective determination by the
Court. The emphatic conclusion in Kesavananda caseA4 is that there can
be no limitation on the exercise of constituent power except the test of
basic structure. In other words, the necessary consequence of
Kesavananda caseA4 is that the only standard available for judging the
validity of a constitutional amendment is the basic structure test and
no other. Reading in any other additional limitation on the exercise of
constituent power would run counter to the authoritative ruling of
Kesavananda caseA4.
128. If Parliament can, in the exercise of its constituent power,
amend each and every provision of Part III, the legal sequitur is that
Parliament can also in the exercise of the same constituent power,
grant immunity to certain laws that may be inconsistent with or abridge
the provisions of Part III-subject of course to the limitation that the
grant of immunity under Article 31-B to any particular law does not
destroy or damage the basic structure of the Constitution.
129. Further, the Court in Kesavananda caseA4 not only held that
Article 31-B is not controlled by Article 31-A but also specifically upheld
the Twenty-ninth Constitution Amendment whereby certain Kerala Land
Reform Acts were included in the Ninth Schedule, after those Acts had
been struck down by the Supreme Court in Kunjukutty caseA61 The
only logical basis for upholding the Twenty-ninth Amendment is that
the Court was of the opinion that the mechanism of Article 31-B, by
itself, is valid, though each time Parliament in exercise of its
constituent power added a law in the Ninth Schedule, such exercise
would have to be tested on the touchstone of the basic structure test.
[See Shelat & Grover, JJ., paras 607 & 608(7); Hegde & Mukherjea, JJ.,
paras 738-43, 744(8); Ray, J., paras 1055-60, 1064; Jaganmohan
Reddy, J., para 1212(4); Palekar, J., para 1333(3); Khanna, J., paras
1522, 1536, 1537(xv); Mathew, J., para 1782; Beg, J., paras 1857(6);
Dwivedi, J., para 1994, 1995(4) and Chandrachud, J., paras 2136-41
and 2142(10).]
130. As pointed out it is a fallacy to regard that Article 31-B read
with the Ninth Schedule excludes judicial review in the matter of
violation of fundamental rights. The effect of Article 31-B is to remove a
fetter on the power of Parliament to pass a law in violation of
fundamental rights. On account of Article 31-B, cause of action for
violation of fundamental right is not available because the fetter placed
by Part III on legislative power is removed and is non-existent. Non-
availability of cause of action based on breach of fundamental right
cannot be regarded as exclusion or ouster of judicial review. As a result
of the operation of Article 31-B read with the
Ninth Schedule, occasion for exercise of judicial review does not arise.
But there is no question of exclusion or ouster of judicial review. The
two concepts are different.
131. A Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court in West Ramnad
Electric Distribution Co. Ltd. V. State of MadrasA37 held that
retrospective validation of a statute which was ab initio void at its
inception either because of lack of legislative competence or because of
violation of fundamental rights is perfectly permissible. The decision in
West
RamnadA37 was not questioned in rejoinder. A fortiori
retrospective validation can be effected by a constitutional validating
and curative provision specifically enacted for that purpose like Article
31-B which has been upheld by this Hon'ble Court.
132. Submission of one of the counsel for petitioners was that the
principle that legal fiction created in Article 31-B should be given full
effect to without allowing the imagination to be boggled, is applicable
only in case of statute and not in the cases of constitutional provision
like Article 31-B. This submission is bereft of any logic, principle or
authority.
133. It is a well-settled legal position that Article 31-E is not
controlled by Article 31-A. Accordingly, the laws which can be inserted
in the Ninth Schedule do not have to be of the character or nature of
laws specified in Article 31-A. The first 13 Acts inserted by the
Constitution First Amendment Acts related to agrarian reforms. As
Article 31-B is not so controlled. laws other than Article 31-A laws can
be inserted. Therefore, to say that Article 31-B has spent itself upon the
inclusion of 13 Acts in the Ninth Schedule is totally unwarranted. It
needs to be emphasised that grave situations may arise which may
necessitate the inclusion of laws in the Ninth Schedule because of the
urgency of the matter and the need for speedy implementation
unhindered by tardy litigation and divided judicial verdicts. The
submission of one of the counsel of petitioners was that in such an
eventuality a separate article was necessary in the Constitution like
Article 31-D but the Ninth Schedule cannot be amended by inserting in
it such a law. The said submission is not based on any principle or
logic. The additional Article 31-D et seq would require a constitutional
amendment and would have to undergo the same procedure under
Article 368 for an insertion of an Act in the Ninth Schedule.
Furthermore, it needs to be noticed that amendments to the parent
Acts already inserted in the Ninth Schedule would become necessary.
As pointed out in the submissions of Senior Counsel T.R. Andhyarujina
there are 142 Amendment Acts in the Ninth Schedule (see Annexure I
to the submissions of T.R. Andhyarujina). If the contention of the
petitioner's counsel is correct and accepted, the Constitution would be
cluttered by Articles like 31-D going up to Article 31-ZZ which would
bring down the level and status of the paramount law of the land to the
status of the Income Tax Act. If once it is accepted that such a power is
necessary and there can be proper occasion for the exercise of that
power, the suggested methodology of non-amendment of the Ninth
Schedule but enactment of separate constitutional provisions makes no
sense.
134. Senior Counsel F.S. Nariman submitted that Article 31-B has
spent itself. The submission is not supported by any material or
authority but is a mere ipse dixit. In fact the history and operation of
Article 31-B clearly negative that this constitutional provision has spent
itself or has become obsolete. Only one sentence from the judgment of
this Court in State of U.P. V. Hindustan Aluminium Corpn. A46 was read
out in which it is mentioned that a statute can become obsolete if it has
spent itself. The significant passages in the judgment are omitted,
namely:
"It has to be appreciated that the power to legislate is both
positive in the sense of making a law, and negative in the sense of
repealing a law or making it inoperative. In either case, it is a power
of the legislature and should like where it belongs. Any other view
will be hazardous and may well be said to be an encroachment on
the legislative field. In an extreme and a clear case, no doubt, an
antiquated law may be said to have become obsolete-the more so if
it is a penal law and has become incapable of user by a drastic
change in the circumstances. But the judge of the change should be
the legislature, and courts are not expected to undertake that duty
unless that becomes unavoidable and the circumstances are so
apparent as to lead to one and only one conclusion. This is equally so
at p. 254)
(emphasis added)
The same view has been taken by the Court in other cases mentioned
in para 11, above.
135. Validating legislation after it has been pronounced
unconstitutional is a method employed by democratic countries. There
is nothing inherently outrageous about such a method. Attention is also
invited to the provisions in Section 33 of the Canadian Charter of
Human Rights. Respondents in this behalf adopt the supplementary
submission of Senior Counsel T.R. Andhyarujina.
136. It is submitted that this Hon'ble Court has clearly laid down
that the right to property is not part of the basic structure. It has
further been held by this Hon'ble Court in State of Kerala V. Gwalior
Balmadies caseA12 referred to above, the acquisition of forests owned
by janmies was set aside on the sole ground that the impugned law on
the material on record did not indicate that the transfer of forests from
the janmies to the Government was linked in any way with a scheme of
agrarian reform or for betterment of village economy."
(emphasis supplied)
137. The standards for review of a constitutional amendment is that
of the basic structure test which, if it pertains to a fundamental right,
must be such a "shocking betrayal" of the quintessence of the
concerned right. As held by Krishna Iyer, J. in Bhim Singhji caseA28
feature is not a mere violation of Article 14 but a shocking,
unconscionable or unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of equal
justice. If a legislation does go that far it shakes the democratic
foundation and must suffer the death penalty."
IV. Mr T.R. Andhyarujina, Senior Advocate, on behalf of the State
of Tamil Nadu
Binding nature of the majority judgment in Kesavananda Bharati
case of thirteen Judges on Article 31-B
138. In the first place, it is submitted that the decision of the
Thirteen-Judge Bench in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 by a majority 7 to
6 is that Article 31-B read with the Ninth Schedule is constitutionally
valid.
139. Kesavananda Bharati case44 considered the validity of the
Twenty-ninth Amendment Act, 1972 which introduced Items 65 and 66
into the Ninth Schedule viz. the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment)
Act, 1969 and the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971. The
"view of the majority" stated by 9 out of thirteen Judges is that "the
1007).
140. Khanna, J. who held that the constituent power could not alter
the basic structure of the Constitution nevertheless held:
"I have been able to find no infirmity in the Constitution (Twenty-
141. If Article 31-B suffered from violating the basic structure,
Khanna, J. would have declared that Article 31-B was unconstitutional
as he did for the second part of Article 31-C.
142. Six other Judges viz. Ray, Palekar, Mathew, Baig, Dwivedi and
Chandrachud, JJ. held that there were no limitations on the constituent
power to amend the Constitution and hence found that the Twenty-
ninth Amendment Act was valid.
143. The minority of 6 Judges viz. Sikri, C.J., para 472, Shelat, J.,
para 607, Grover, J., Hegde, J., para 508, Mukherjea, J., para 404 and
Jaganmohan Reddy, J., para 1214 held that later constitutional Benches
would decide whether the impugned Acts inserted into the Ninth
Schedule by the Twenty-ninth Amendment were valid. Sikri, C.J. went
further and held that Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule was bad as it
404, para 469).
144. Significantly, the summary of "the majority view" at p. 1007
also does not state that the Kerala Acts in the Twenty-ninth
Amendment Act would have to be examined by the Court for their
validity. The two Kerala Acts in the Twenty-ninth Amendment Act were
not thereafterwards considered for their validity.
145. It is thus clear that the majority view in Kesavananda BharatiA4
is that Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule is a permissible
constitutional device and there is no infirmity in it. The position was
para 152).
146. After 1973, the following decisions of this Court applied Article
31-B as per se protecting the impugned Act in the Ninth Schedule:
(1) Godavari Sugar Mills V. S.B. KambleA23 (H.R. Khanna, P.N.
Bhagwati and P.K. Goswami, JJ.) per Khanna, J. held that the
Maharashtra Agricultural Land (Ceilings or Holdings) Act was fully
protected by its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule by the Constitution
(Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964.
(2) State of Maharashtra V. M.S. PadviA38 (7 Judges), per
Bhagwati, J., held that a law declared unconstitutional by the High
Court was validated by its insertion into the Ninth Schedule by the
Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976.
(3) Prag Ice V. Union of IndiaA26 (7 Judges) per Chandrachud, J.,
Ninth Schedule by the Fortieth Amendment Act, 1976 protected it
from the challenge of fundamental rights under Part III.
In none of these cases (which were post-1973) was Article 31-B
doubted as giving protection to the scheduled Act and none of the
scheduled Acts were required to be examined if it violated the basic
structure.
147. There is no consideration of the binding effect of the majority
judgments in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 in either Waman Rao V.
5 Judges.
Nor do these cases even refer to Godavari Sugar Mills caseA23 , Padvi
caseAS A38 (7 Judges) or Prag Ice caseA26 (7 Judges).
148. In effect sub silentio ignoring the binding decision of
Kesavananda BharatiA4 on Article 31-B, both Waman Rao A5 , A6 and
Minerva MillsA9 have adopted the minority view of 6 Judges in
Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 that Article 31-B is valid but the specified
Acts/regulations in the Ninth Schedule have to be examined, if they
damage or destroy the basic structure.
Validity of Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule res integra
149. On the basis that Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 did not decide
the validity of Article 31-B and it was res integra after the criterion of
the limitation of the basic structure, the position will be thus:
Fundamental right
If the inconsistency of a protected Act with a particular
fundamental right is only its abridgement (e.g. Article 14) but does
not abrogate or destroy or damage the fundamental right, Article 31-
B will give protection to the inconsistency. If the inconsistency is
such that it abrogates or destroys or damages the particular
fundamental right, the Act will be declared as void for that reason.
150. The correct position is given by Mathew, J. in Indira GandhiAZ
the conclusion at p. 403, para
151. The effect of the application of the limitation of the basic
structure to a scheduled Act is that Article 31-B read with the Ninth
Schedule is no longer not subject to judicial review. Judicial review is,
therefore, very much present.
Waman RaoA6 para 51 correct in all respects
152. It is not correct to rewrite para 51 of Waman RaoA
A6
in
the
manner sought to be done by the petitioners. The last sentence in para
51 is crucial and cannot be rewritten to refer without any context
suddenly to "a post-1973 non-Article 31-B Amendment of the
Constitution". Waman RaoA6 was only considering the validity of Article
31-A (which was held fully protected at all times) and Article 31-B
which was held not protected after 24-4-1973, and Article 31-C (first
part) which was protected at all times. No other Constitution
Amendments came up for consideration in Waman RaoA6 or were in
contemplation.
153. It is not at all correct that the last sentence of para 55 requires
to be re-read to apply only to "a post-1973 non-Article 31-B
constitutional amendment".
Relationship between judicial review and the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution
154. In the first place, it is necessary to distinguish between the
necessity for the judiciary in a written Constitution and judicial review
by the judiciary. The existence of the judiciary is part of the basic
framework of the Constitution. The constituent power of Parliament
under Article 368 of the Constitution cannot abrogate the existence of
the judiciary.
155. On the other hand, the power of judicial review is a power of
the judiciary over certain matters. There is no judicial review in
absolute terms given to the judiciary under the Constitution.
The Constitution itself has provisions for specifically excluding
judicial review in certain matters e.g. repealed Articles (4) and 31
(6), present Article 74(2), Article 33, Article 103(1), Article 105(2),
Article 122(1), Article 136(2), Article 262(2), Article 227(4), Article
329(a) and Article 3 The exclusion of judicial review by the
Constitution itself in certain fields shows that judicial review is not in
absolute terms and there is a necessity to limit it in certain areas.
Chandrachud, J. in Indira Gandhi caseA7 said:
"These provisions show that the Constitution did not regard
judicial review as an indispensable measure of legality or propriety of
every determination." (per Chandrachud, J., p. 253, para 666)
156. In Kesavananda Bharati caseA4 there is no mention of the
feature of judicial review as such being part of the basic structure.
157. Khanna, J. found that the first part of Article 31-C was not
unconstitutional though on its plain terms it eliminated judicial review
in respect of laws which gave effect to the directive principles in Article
39(b) and Article 39(c) of the Constitution or breach of Articles 14, 19
158. However, he held that the second part of the article had
peculiar vices.
Article 31-C contained an unchallengeable declaration by any
legislature including a State Legislature that a law was giving effect to
these directive principles. This would provide,
"The cover for making laws with a regional bias even though such
laws imperil the oneness of the nation and contain seeds of national
disintegration." (p. 814, para 1519).
159. Khanna, J. held:
"In empowering a State Legislature to make laws violative of
Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution and in further empowering
the State Legislature to make laws immune from attack on the
ground of being violative of Articles 14, 19 and 31, by inserting the
requisite declaration, the authority vested with the power to make
amendment under Article 368 (viz. the prescribed majority in each
House of Parliament) has, in effect, delegated or granted the power
of making amendment in important respects to a State
Legislature." (p. 817, para 1526)
Summing up, he held:
"In my opinion, the second part of Article 31-C is liable to be
quashed on the following grounds:
(1) It gives a carte blanche to the legislature to make any law
violative of Articles 14, 19 and 31 and make it immune from
attack by inserting the requisite declaration. Article 31-C taken
along with its second part gives in effect the power to the
legislature, including a State Legislature, to amend the
Constitution.
(2) The legislature has been made the final authority to decide
as to whether the law made by it is for the objects mentioned in
Article 31-C. The vice of the second part of Article 31-C lies in the
fact that even if the law enacted is not for the object mentioned in
Article 31-C, the declaration made by the legislature precludes a
party from showing that the law is not for that object and
prevents a court from going into the question as to whether the
law enacted is really for that object. The exclusion by the
legislature, including a State Legislature, of even that limited judicial
review strikes at the basic structure of the Constitution. The second
part of Article 31-C goes beyond the permissible limit of what
constitutes amendment under Article 368. (p. 822, para 1535-A)
Thus, it was a particular type of elimination of judicial review from the
second part of Article 31-C which was held to be violative of the basic
structure of the Constitution.
160. On the other hand, Khanna, J. specifically approved the
exclusion of judicial review by Article 31-B in contradistinction to the
elimination of judicial review by a declaration by the legislature under
the second part of Article 31-C. The relevant part of Khanna, J.'s
judgment is at pp. 813 to 825.
161. Judicial review is also excluded by Article 31-A and Article 31-C
(first part).
Article 31-A excludes judicial review of certain laws from the
application of Articles 14, 19 and 31. Article 31-A was held not violative
of the basic structure unanimously in Waman Rao A5 , A6 and Minerva
Mills caseA9 (post-1973).
162. Likewise, the first part of unamended Article 31-C which
excluded judicial review of certain laws was held by a majority of 7 to 6
not to destroy the basic structure of the Constitution in Kesavananda
Bharati caseA4 and affirmed in Waman RaoA5 , A6 and Minerva Mills
case A9 (post-1973) as valid. The upholding of the validity of Articles 31-
A and 31-C shows that judicial review of this type may legitimately be
excluded.
1 In Indira Gandhi V. Raj NarainA7 also there is no proposition
that judicial review as such is a basic structure of the Constitution and
cannot be excluded. In fact, even in respect of as vital a matter as
election disputes, Ray, C.J., and Chandrachud, J. held that there was no
necessity of judicial review.
Therefore, after the theory of basic structure which came to be
established in Kesavananda Bharati caseA4, , it is only that kind of
judicial review whose elimination would destroy or damage the basic
structure of the Constitution that is beyond the constituent power. In
every case where a constituent power excludes judicial review, the
basic structure of the Constitution is not abrogated. The question to be
asked in each case is, does the particular exclusion alter the basic
structure of the Constitution.
For example, Article 243-0 made by the Seventy-third Amendment,
1993 on 20-4-1993 (i.e. post-1973) bars the interference by courts in
electoral matters relating to electoral rolls and elections to Panchayat.
Such an exclusion of judicial review does not in any manner affect the
basic structure of the Constitution.
164. On the other hand, an amendment introducing clause (2)(d) of
Article 323-A and clause (3)(d) of Article 232-B of the Constitution by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 which excluded
jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme Court under Articles
226 and 227 and Article 32 of the Constitution was declared
unconstitutional as altering the basic structure of the Constitution as
the entire jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme Court was
abrogated. (L. Chandra Kumar V. Union of India A 19).
165. Judicial review under the Constitution is comprehensive in
nature. The broad areas are:
1. Over legislative competence of Parliament and the State
Legislatures;
2. Over executive and administrative actions;
3. Over specific limitations in the Constitution e.g. Articles 265,
286, 301, etc.;
4. Over limits of various authorities under the Constitution, and;
5. Breach of Part III of the Constitution.
166. Giving immunity of Part III to specified laws from judicial
review does not abrogate judicial review from the Constitution. Judicial
review remains with the courts but with its exclusion over certain
enacted laws to which Part III will not apply. The effect of Article 31-B
is to remove the fetter of Part III but does not oust the court's
jurisdiction.
167. As constitutional amendment of Article 31-B read with the
Ninth Schedule does not make any change in the court's jurisdiction, it
does not require ratification as held in Sankari PrasadA1 and Sajjan
SinghA2,
168. Justice O.W. Holmes said in a celebrated passage-
"I do not think the United States would come to an end if we lost
our power to declare an Act of Congress void. I do think the Union
would be imperilled if we could not make that declaration as to the
laws of the several States." [Holmes, Collected Legal Papers (1920),
295-96).
169. The exclusion of judicial review of specified Acts in the Ninth
Schedule is not done by the State Legislatures making laws conforming
either to certain types of laws or to certain directive principles as in the
case of Article 31-A and Article 31-C but the very enacted Act is the
subject-matter of Parliament's consideration. Parliament, by a special
majority of two-thirds of each House, on a consideration, makes the
already enacted law to which, in its opinion, the provisions of Part III
should not apply. No sense of irresponsibility can be ascribed or
attributed to the representatives of the people.
170. Nor can a power be denied because of the possibility of its
abuse. Rhetorical arguments of misuse of power (e.g. "abyss" or
"laundry bag" of the Ninth Schedule, etc.) are always appealing but are
irrelevant to the test of power. The width of a power to be considered is
different from the possibility of its abuse. In Kesavananda BharatiA4 7
Judges have held that it is not a legitimate mode of construing a power
to consider its worst use or abuse. See per Ray, J., pp. 565-66, paras
948-51; per Jaganmohan Reddy, J., p. 613, para 1103; per Khanna, J.,
p. 762, paras 1416-17; per Mathew, J., p. 863, para 1662; per Dwivedi,
The surest way legal research!
J., p. 947, paras 1949-52; per Chandrachud, J., p. 991, para 2093 and
per Palekar, J., p. 690, para 12
Conclusion
171. In the final analysis, it is submitted that the power to include
Acts in the Ninth Schedule has been entrusted to the peoples'
representatives in Parliament. Like with other vast powers entrusted to
them, we must presume that they would be exercised in a responsible
way.
172. The peoples' representatives under our Constitution are vested
with larger powers over the lives of the nation. No assumption can be
made that they will be misused. From 1950, under the interpretation
given by this Court in Gopalan caseA63 there was no protection given in
matters of life and personal liberty except by such
law as Parliament would make till 28 years later this Court in Maneka
Gandhi caseA64 introduced for all practical purposes the due process of
law in matters relating to life and personal liberty.
For over 23 years with the full amending power up to 1973 no abuse
of amending power can be said to have made.
173. The analysis of the Ninth Schedule Acts show that the bulk of
the Acts are those relating to land reforms. Even in respect of other
Acts, it cannot be said that any of the Acts are such that they are
oppressive or destroy the personal liberties of citizens.
174. Parliament can be trusted with the power to insert Acts in the
Ninth Schedule and not to misuse the power as indeed it has not done
so far.
Further Submissions:
Relationship between Article 31-A and Article 31-B
175. Articles 31-A and 31-B were enacted originally by the First
Amendment Act in 1951. It was said, therefore, that Articles 31-A and
31-B were enacted to serve the same purpose of making legislation
falling within a certain category, namely, relating to agrarian reforms.
176. However, from 1955, Article 31-A no longer exclusively dealt
with estates or agrarian reforms. At the same time, by the same
Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, six other Acts were included in
the Ninth Schedule, namely, Items 14 to 20 which had no connection
with land agrarian reforms.
177. Thus, after the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955
Article 31-B had no similarity even to the contents of Article 31-A. It is
significant that the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955 was
piloted in Parliament on 17-12-1954 by Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru himself
who had earlier stated at the time of the First Amendment in 1951 that
"the Ninth Schedule consisted of a particular type of legislation
generally speaking and that another type should not come in "
178. It is, therefore, only partially true that Article 31-B was
adopted only as a means of giving definite and assured protection to
legislation already protected under Article 31-A. From 1955 onwards,
this was no longer true as Article 31-A itself changed its character.
179. An analysis of the 285 entries in the Ninth Schedule inserted
up to 1995 shows:
(1) 17 Acts are not relatable to any clause in Article 31-A.
(2) 11 Acts are relatable to Articles 31-A(b) to (e).
(3) Remaining 257 Acts are relatable to land reforms/land
acquisition.
Re : Submission of logical follow up from invalidation of Article
31-C by Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act
180. It has been argued that if the majority judgment in Minerva
Mills caseA9 found Article 31-C as amended by the Forty-second
Amendment Act, 1976 to be an invalid constitutional amendment,
logically Article 31-B which according to the petitioners has a wider
reach cannot be valid.
181. The factual foundations of this argument is not correct. Article
31-C as amended by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act
was held to be damaging the basic structure of the Constitution by the
majority judgment in
Minerva Mills Ltd. caseA A9 (Bhagwati, J. dissenting) because the Forty-
second Amendment gave absolute primacy to the whole of Part IV over
Part III and the harmony between the fundamental rights and directive
principles which was an essential feature of the basic structure of the
Constitution was damaged [see, Chandrachud, C.J. in Minerva Mills
Re : Argument that Article 31-B renders the Constitution
"uncontrolled"
182. It is been argued that the continued retention of Article 31-B
makes the Constitution cease to be "a controlled Constitution". This is
total misunderstanding of the concept of "controlled" and
"uncontrolled"
Constitution.
An
uncontrolled
Constitution
(corresponding to a flexible Constitution) does not have any special
procedure for amending the Constitution in respect of any part of the
Constitution whether a vital part or an innocuous part of it. Thus, as it
has been said in England, Parliament may amend the Bill of Rights with
as much ease and without any special procedure as the Dogs Act or the
Dentists Act. On the other hand, in a controlled Constitution, the
amendment of the Constitution cannot be made by an ordinary law but
by special procedure which renders the Constitution controlled (or
rigid). This distinction was made in the leading Privy Council case of
McCawley V. KingA65
183. See the distinction between "controlled" and "uncontrolled"
Constitutions in the following parts of Kesavananda Bharati caseA4:
(a) Ray, J. at pp. 521-22, para 782.
(b) Khanna, J. at pp. 735-36, para 1345.
(c) Palekar, J. at pp. 670-71, para 1222; at pp. 682-83, para
1243.
(d) Mathew, J. at pp. 832-33, para 1569; at p. 839, para 1592.
(e) Shelat and Grover, JJ. at pp. 408-409, para 486; pp. 432,
para 540.
(f) Dwivedi, J. at pp. 927, para 1878; pp. 939, para 1920.
(g) Chandrachud, J. at pp. 985, paras 2073-2074.
Wrong foundation of the petitioners' submissions
184. Besides this, the petitioners lay a wholly wrong foundation for
their arguments. They suggest that each and every article of Part III of
the Constitution in its entirety is excluded by Article 31-B as if Part III
does not exist. This is totally erroneous. Article 31-B gives immunity
only to specified laws in the Ninth Schedule from the challenge of
fundamental rights in Part III. It does not wipe out Part III from the
Constitution.
Re : Submission of absence of "criteria or standard" in Article 31
-B
185. The petitioners submit that there is no criterion or standard in
Article 31-B for inclusion of Acts in the Ninth Schedule. The answer is
that the criterion is that those Acts which in Parliament's considered
opinion are necessary for giving immunity from Part III and which if not
given would result in long and dilatory challenge and would frustrate
the objectives of the scheduled Act are included in the Ninth Schedule.
Article 31-B affords a better protection than leaving all legislatures in
India free to make laws with reference to any subject related to Article
31-A(1) and making fundamental rights immune to the challenge of
fundamental rights and by Article 31-C leaving all legislatures to make
laws in pursuance of the directive
principles of State Policy in Articles 39(b) and (c) and making them
immune. As Khanna, J. observed in Kesavananda BharatiA Parliament's
scrutiny of the specified Acts by two-thirds majority is a solid protection
which makes Article 31-B unobjectionable (see Khanna, J. in
and p. 820, para 1533).
186. Parliament does not recklessly put in Acts in the Ninth
Schedule. The petitioners have not shown that any Act in the Schedule
is oppressive or destructive of fundamental freedom. As shown earlier,
out of the present Ninth Schedule of 285 Acts, 257 Acts are relatable
estate and land reform, etc. 11 Acts are relatable to Articles 31-A(b) to
(e).
187. A complete analysis of the Acts and Regulations in the Ninth
Schedule is annexed to these submissions as Annexure I.
Submission that after 24-4-1973, Article 31-B ceases to have
efficacy or must cease
188. There is no legal basis for the proposition that Article 31 "has
spent itself" or "has become obsolete" or because "it has accomplished
its purpose". Even an ordinary statute does not cease to operate by
desuetude, much less a part of the Constitution which is a living
document for all times can be so condemned or the court can be invited
to do so.
Analogous provision to Article 31-B in Canada
189. A significant analogy to Article 31-B exists in the Canadian
Constitution Act, 1982 which introduced the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms.
190. Various rights and freedoms are guaranteed in the Charter.
However, the Charter itself carries an exception in Section 33 to
exclude rights and freedoms by an express declaration in an Act of
Parliament or of the legislature of the province by which that Act will
operate notwithstanding certain rights and provisions of the Charter.
191. The material portions of Section 33 are as follows:
33. Exception where express declaration. - (1) Parliament or the
legislature of a province may expressly declare in an Act of
Parliament or of the legislature, as the case may be, that the Act or a
provision thereof shall operate notwithstanding a provision included
in Section 2 or Sections 7 to 15 of this Charter.
(2) An Act or a provision of an Act in respect of which a
declaration made under this section is in effect shall have such
operation as it would have but for the provision of this Charter
referred to in the declaration.
192. Section 33 allows Parliament or a Provincial Legislature to limit
the rights granted in Sections 2 (fundamental freedoms) and 7 to 15
(legal and equality rights) of the Charter. This can be done by means of
an ordinary statute, passed either prior to a constitutional challenge, or
in response to a finding of unconstitutionality by a court. If Section 33
is invoked, there is no requirement that the legislation be reasonable or
demonstrably justified under Section 1 of the Charter. Moreover, when
Section 33 is invoked, courts have no ability to review the legislation,
except with respect to compliance with Section 33 itself.
193. This shows there is nothing per se objectionable in other
democratic Constitutions to the legislature excluding fundamental
freedoms to a particular Act if the legislature deems fit.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Y.K. SABHARWAL, C.J.- In these matters we are confronted with a
very important yet not very easy task of determining the nature and
character of protection provided by Article 31-B of the Constitution of
India (for short "the Constitution") to the laws added to the Ninth
Schedule by amendments made after 24-4-1973. The relevance of this
date is for the reason that on this date the judgment in Kesavananda
Bharati V. State of Kerala¹ was pronounced propounding the doctrine of
basic structure of the Constitution to test the validity of constitutional
amendments.
Re : Order of reference
2. The order of reference made more than seven years ago by a
Constitution Bench of five Judges is reported in I.R. Coelho V. State of
T.N. 2 (14-9-1999). The Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and
Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1969 (the Janmam Act), insofar as it
vested forest lands in the Janmam estates in the State of Tamil Nadu,
was struck down by this Court in Balmadies Plantations Ltd. V. State of
T.N. because this was not found to be a measure of agrarian reform
3
protected by Article 31-A of the Constitution. Section 2(c) of the West
Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 was struck down by the
Calcutta High Court as being arbitrary and, therefore, unconstitutional
and the special leave petition filed against the judgment by the State of
West Bengal was dismissed. By the Constitution (Thirty-fourth
Amendment) Act, the Janmam Act, in its entirety, was inserted in the
Ninth Schedule. By the Constitution (Sixty-sixth Amendment) Act, the
West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979, in its entirety, was
inserted in the Ninth Schedule. These insertions were the subject-
matter of challenge before a five-Judge Bench.
3. The contention urged before the Constitution Bench was that the
statutes, inclusive of the portions thereof which had been struck down,
could not have been validly inserted in the Ninth Schedule.
4. In the referral order, the Constitution Bench observed that,
according to Waman Rao V. Union of India amendments to the
Constitution made on or after 24-4-1973 by which the Ninth Schedule
was amended from time to time by inclusion of various Acts,
regulations therein were open to challenge on the ground that they, or
any one or more of them, are beyond the constituent power of
Parliament since they damage the basic or essential features of the
Constitution or its basic structure. The decisions in Minerva Mills Ltd. V.
Union of India5 and Bhim Singhji V. Union of India were also noted and
it
was observed that the judgment in Waman Rao4 needs to be
reconsidered by a larger Bench so that the apparent inconsistencies
therein are reconciled and it is made clear whether an Act or regulation
which, or a part of which, is or has been found by this Court to be
violative of one or more of the fundamental rights conferred by Articles
14, 19 and 31 can be included in the Ninth Schedule or whether it is
only a constitutional amendment amending the Ninth Schedule which
damages or destroys the basic structure of the Constitution that can be
struck down. While referring these matters for decision to a larger
Bench, it was observed that preferably the matters be placed before a
Bench of nine Judges. This is how these matters have been placed
before us.
Broad question
5. The fundamental question is whether on and after 24-4-1973
when the basic structure doctrine was propounded, it is permissible for
Parliament under Article 31-B to immunise legislations from
fundamental rights by inserting them into the Ninth Schedule and, if
so, what is its effect on the power of judicial review of the Court.
Development of the law
6. First, we may consider, in brief, the factual background of framing
of the Constitution and notice the developments that have taken place
almost since inception in regard to interpretation of some of the articles
of the Constitution.
7. The Constitution was framed after an in-depth study of manifold
challenges and problems including that of poverty, illiteracy, long years
of deprivation, inequalities based on caste, creed, sex and religion. The
independence struggle and intellectual debates in the Constituent
Assembly show the value and importance of freedoms and rights
guaranteed by Part III and State's welfare obligations in Part IV. The
Constitutions of various countries including that of the United States of
America and Canada were examined and after extensive deliberations
and discussions the Constitution was framed. The fundamental rights
chapter was incorporated providing in detail the positive and negative
rights. It provided for the protection of various rights and freedoms. For
enforcement of these rights, unlike Constitutions of most of the other
countries, the Supreme Court was vested with original jurisdiction as
contained in Article 32.
8. The High Court of Patna in Kameshwar Singh V. State of Bihar
held that a Bihar legislation relating to land reforms was
unconstitutional while the High Courts of Allahabad and Nagpur upheld
the validity of the corresponding legislative measures passed in those
States. The parties aggrieved had filed appeals before the Supreme
Court. At the same time, certain zamindars had also approached the
Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution. It was, at this
stage, that Parliament amended the
Constitution by adding Articles 31-A and 31-B to assist the process of
legislation to bring about agrarian reforms and confer on such
legislative measures immunity from possible attack on the ground that
they contravene the fundamental rights of the citizen. Article 31-B was
not part of the original Constitution. It was inserted in the Constitution
by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. The same
amendment added after the Eighth Schedule a new Ninth Schedule
containing thirteen items, all relating to land reform laws, immunising
these laws from challenge on the ground of contravention of Article 13
of the Constitution. Article 13, inter alia, provides that the State shall
not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by
Part III and any law made in contravention thereof shall, to the extent
of the contravention, be void.
9. Articles 31-/ A and 31-B read as under:
"31-A. Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc. -
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 13, no law
providing for-
(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights
therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights,
or
(b) the taking over of the management of any property by the
State for a limited period either in the public interest or in order
to secure the proper management of the property, or
(c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the
public interest or in order to secure the proper management of
any of the corporations, or
(d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of
managing agents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors,
directors or managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of
shareholders thereof, or
(e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing
by virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of
searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the
premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement,
lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with,
or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by Article 14 or
Article 19:
Provided that where such law is a law made by the legislature of a
State, the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless
such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the
President, has received his assent:
Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the
acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised
therein is held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not
be lawful for the State to acquire any portion of such land as is
within the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the time
being in force or any building or structure standing thereon or
appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the acquisition of
such land, building or structure, provides for payment of
compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value
thereof.
(2) In this article.-
(a) the expression 'estate', shall, in relation to any local area,
have the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent
has in the
existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also
include-
(i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the
States of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, any janmam right;
(ii) any land held under ryotwari settlement;
(iii) any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for
purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land,
land for pasture or sites of buildings and other structures
occupied by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and
village artisans;
(b) the expression 'rights', in relation to an estate, shall include
any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-
proprietor, tenure-holder, raiyat, under-raiyat or other
intermediary and any rights or privileges in respect of land
revenue.
31-B. Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.-Without
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in Article 31-
A, none of the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule
nor any of the provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever
to have become void, on the ground that such Act, Regulation or
provision is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding
any judgment, decree or order of any court or tribunal to the
contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the
power of any competent legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in
force."
10. The constitutional validity of the First Amendment was upheld in
Sankari Prasad Singh Deo V. Union of India8.
11. The main object of the amendment was to fully secure the
constitutional validity of zamindari abolition laws in general and certain
specified Acts in particular and save those provisions from the dilatory
litigation which resulted in holding up the implementation of the social
reform measures affecting large number of people. Upholding the
validity of the amendment, it was held in Sankari Prasad that Article
13(2) does not affect amendments to the Constitution made under
Article 368 because such amendments are made in the exercise of
constituent power. The Constitution Bench held that to make a law
which contravenes the Constitution constitutionally valid is a matter of
constitutional amendment and as such it falls within the exclusive
power of Parliament.
12. The constitutional validity of the Acts added to the Ninth
Schedule by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964 was
challenged in petitions filed under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Upholding the constitutional amendment and repelling the challenge in
Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan the law declared in Sankari Prasad
was reiterated. It was noted that Articles 31-A and 31-B were added to
the Constitution realising that State legislative measures adopted by
certain States for giving effect to the policy of agrarian reforms have to
face serious challenge in the courts of law on the ground that they
contravene the fundamental rights guaranteed to the citizen by Part
III. The Court observed that the genesis of the amendment
made by adding Articles 31-A and 31-B is to assist the State
Legislatures to give effect to the economic policy to bring about much
needed agrarian reforms. It noted that if pith and substance test is to
apply to the amendment made, it would be clear that Parliament is
seeking to amend fundamental rights solely with the object of removing
any possible obstacle in the fulfilment of the socio-economic policy viz.
a policy in which the party in power believes. The Court further noted
that the impugned Act does not purport to change the provisions of
Article 226 and it cannot be said even to have that effect directly or in
any appreciable measure. It noted that the object of the Act was to
amend the relevant articles in Part III which confer fundamental rights
on citizens and as such it falls under the substantive part of Article 368
and does not attract the provision of clause (b) of that proviso. The
Court, however, noted, that if the effect of the amendment made in the
fundamental rights on Article 226 is direct and not incidental and if in
significant order, different considerations may perhaps arise.
13. Hidayatullah and J.R. Mudholkar, JJ. concurred with the opinion
of Gajendragadkar, C.J. upholding the amendment but, at the same
time, expressed reservations about the effect of possible future
amendments on fundamental rights and basic structure of the
Constitution. Mudholkar, J. questioned that : (Sajjan Singh case AIR
p. 864, para 58)
"58. It is also a matter for consideration whether making a change
in a basic feature of the Constitution can be regarded merely as an
amendment or would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the
Constitution; and if the latter, would it be within the purview of
Article 368?"
14. In Golak Nath V. State of Punjab19 a Bench of 11 Judges
considered the correctness of the view that had been taken in Sankari
Prasad and Sajjan Singh . By majority of six to five, these decisions
were overruled. It was held that the constitutional amendment is "law"
within the meaning of Article 13 of the Constitution and, therefore, if it
takes away or abridges the rights conferred by Part III thereof, it is
void. It was declared that Parliament will have no power from the date
of the decision (27-2-1967) to amend any of the provisions of Part III
of the Constitution so as to take away or abridge the fundamental
rights enshrined therein.
15. Soon after Golak Nath case 10 the Constitution (Twenty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1971, the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment)
Act, 1971, the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971 and
the Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1972 were passed.
16. By the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971,
Article 13 was amended and after clause (3), the following clause was
inserted as Article 13(4):
"13. (4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of
this Constitution made under Article 368."
17. Article 368 was also amended and in Article 368(1) the words
"in exercise of its constituent powers" were inserted.
18. The Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1971 amended
the provision of Article 31 dealing with compensation for acquiring or
acquisition of properties for public purposes so that only the amount
fixed by law need to be given and this amount could not be challenged
in court on the ground that it was not adequate or in cash. Further,
after Article 31-B of the Constitution, Article 31-C was inserted,
namely:
"31-C. Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.
-Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 13, no law giving
effect to the policy of the State towards securing all or any of the
principles laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be void on the
around that it is inconsistent with. or takes awav or abridges anv of
the rights conferred by Article 14 or Article 19 and no law containing
a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called
in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to
such policy:
Provided that where such law is made by the legislature of a
State, the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless
such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the
President, has received his assent."
(emphasis supplied)
19. The Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971 omitted
from the Constitution Article 291 (privy purses) and Article 362 (rights
and privileges of rulers of Indian States) and inserted Article 363-A
after Article 363 providing that recognition granted to rulers of Indian
States shall cease and privy purses be abolished.
20. The Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1972
amended the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution inserting therein two
Kerala Amendment Acts in furtherance of land reforms after Entry 64,
namely, Entry 65- Kerala Land Reforms Amendment Act, 1969 (Kerala
Act 35 of 1969); and Entry 66-Kerala Land Reforms Amendment Act,
1971 (Kerala Act 35 of 1971).
21. These amendments were challenged in Kesavananda Bharati
case1. The decision in Kesavananda Bharati case1 was rendered on 24-4
-1973 by a thirteen-Judge Bench and by majority of seven to six Golak
Nath
case was overruled. The majority opinion held that Article 368
did not enable Parliament to alter the basic structure or framework of
the Constitution. The Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1971 was held to be valid. Further, the first part of Article 31-C was
also held to be valid. However, the second part of Article 31-C that
"no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such
policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it
does not give effect to such policy"
was declared unconstitutional. The 29th Constitution Amendment was
held valid. The validity of the 26th Amendment was left to be
determined by a Constitution Bench of five Judges.
22. The majority opinion did not accept the unlimited power of
Parliament to amend the Constitution and instead held that Article 368
has implied limitations. Article 368 does not enable Parliament to alter
the basic structure or framework of the Constitution.
23. Another important development took place in June 1975, when
the Allahabad High Court set aside the election of the then Prime
Minister Mrs Indira Gandhi to the fifth Lok Sabha on the ground of
alleged corrupt practices. Pending appeal against the High Court
judgment before the Supreme Court, the Constitution (Thirty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 1975 was passed. Clause (4) of the amendment
inserted Article 329-A after Article 329. Sub-clauses (4) and (5) of
Article 329-A read as under:
"329-A. (4) No law made by Parliament before the
commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1975, insofar as it relates to election petitions and matters
connected therewith, shall apply or shall be deemed ever to have
applied to or in relation to the election of any such person as is
referred to in clause (1) to either House of Parliament and such
election shall not be deemed to be void or ever to have become void
on any ground on which such election could be declared to be void or
has before such commencement, been declared to be void under any
such law and notwithstanding any order made by any court, before
such commencement, declaring such election to be void, such
election shall continue to be valid in all respects and any such order
and any finding on which such order is based shall be and shall be
deemed always to have been void and of no effect.
(5) Any appeal or cross-appeal against any such order of any
court as is referred to in clause (4) pending immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1975, before the Supreme Court shall be disposed of in conformity
with the provisions of clause (4)."
24. Clause (5) of the Amendment Act inserted after Entry 86,
Entries 87 to 124 in the Ninth Schedule. Many of the entries inserted
were unconnected with land reforms.
25. In Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj Narain11 the aforesaid clauses
were struck down by holding them to be violative of the basic structure
of the Constitution.
26. About two weeks before the Constitution Bench rendered the
decision in Indira Gandhi case11 internal Emergency was proclaimed in
11
the country. During the Emergency from 26-6-1975 to March 1977,
Article 19 of the Constitution stood suspended by virtue of Article 358
and Articles 14 and 21 by virtue of Article 359. During internal
Emergency, Parliament passed the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment)
Act, 1976. By clause (3) of the said amendment, in the Ninth Schedule,
after Entry 124, Entries 125 to 188 were inserted. Many of these entries
were unrelated to land reforms.
27. Article 368 was amended by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976. It, inter alia, inserted by Section 55 of the
Amendment Act, in Article 368, after clause (3), the following clauses
(4) and (5):
"368. (4) No amendment of this Constitution (including the
provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have been made under
this article whether before or after the commencement of Section 55
of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 shall be
called in question in any court on any ground.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there
shall be no limitation whatever on the constituent power of
Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the
provisions of this Constitution under this article."
28. After the end of internal Emergency, the Constitution (Forty-
fourth Amendment) Act, 1978 was passed. Section 2, inter alia,
omitted sub-clause (f) of Article 19 with the result that the right to
property ceased to be a fundamental right and it became only legal
right by insertion of Article 300-A in the Constitution. Articles 14, 19
and 21 became enforceable after the end of Emergency. Parliament also
took steps to protect fundamental rights that had been infringed during
the Emergency. The Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971 and the
Prevention of Publication of Objectionable Matter Act, 1976 which had
been placed in the Ninth Schedule were repealed. The Constitution
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act also amended Article 359 of the
Constitution to provide that even though other fundamental rights
could be suspended during the Emergency, rights conferred by Articles
20 and 21 could not be suspended.
29. During Emergency, the fundamental rights were read even more
restrictively as interpreted by the majority in ADM, Jabalpur V.
Shivakant Shukla¹2. The decision in ADM, Jabalpur12 about the
restrictive reading of right to life and liberty stood impliedly overruled
by various subsequent decisions.
30. The fundamental rights received enlarged judicial interpretation
in the post-Emergency period. Article 21 which was given strict textual
meaning in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras13 interpreting the words
"according to procedure established by law" to mean only enacted law,
received enlarged interpretation in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India¹4
A.K. Gopalan13 was no longer good law. In Maneka Gandhi- 14 a Bench of
seven Judges held that the procedure established by law in Article 21
had to be reasonable and not violative of Article 14 and also that
fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III were distinct and mutually
exclusive rights.
31. In Minerva Mills case the Court struck down clauses (4) and (5)
of Article 368 finding that they violated the basic structure of the
Constitution.
32. The next decision to be noted is that of Waman Rao4. The
developments that had taken place post-Kesavananda Bharati case1
have been noticed in this decision.
33. In Bhim Singhji 6 challenge was made to the validity of the Urban
Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 which had been inserted in the
Ninth Schedule after Kesavananda Bharati case1. The Constitution
Bench unanimously held that Section 27(1) which prohibited disposal
of property within the ceiling limit was violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)
(f) of Part III. When the said Act was enforced in February 1976, Article
19(1)(f) was part of fundamental rights chapter and as already noted it
was omitted therefrom only in 1978 and made instead only a legal right
under Article 300-A.
34. It was held in L. Chandra Kumar V. Union of India¹5 that power
of judicial review is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution
constituting the basic part, the jurisdiction so conferred on the High
Courts and the Supreme Court is a part of inviolable basic structure of
the Constitution of India.
Constitutional amendment of the Ninth Schedule
35. It would be convenient to note at one place, various
constitutional amendments which added/omitted various
Acts/provisions in the Ninth Schedule from Items 1 to 284. It is as
under:
"Amendment
Acts/Provisions added
1st Amendment (1951)
1-13
4th Amendment (1955)
14-20
17th Amendment (1964)
21-64
29th Amendment (1971)
65-66
34th Amendment (1974)
67-86
39th Amendment (1975)
87-124
40th Amendment (1976)
125-188
47th Amendment (1984)
189-202
66th Amendment (1990)
203-257
76th Amendment (1994)
257-A
78th Amendment (1995)
258-284
Omissions
In 1978 Item 92 (the Internal Security Act) was repealed by the
parliamentary Act.
In 1977 Item 130 (the Prevention of Publication of Objectionable
Matter) was repealed.
In 1978 the 44th Amendment omitted Items 87 (the
Representation of People Act), 92 and 130."
Many additions are unrelated to land reforms.
36. The question is as to the scope of challenge to the Ninth
Schedule laws after 24-4-1973.
Article 32
37. The significance of jurisdiction conferred on this Court by Article
32 is described by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar as follows : (Constituent
Assembly Debates, Vol. IX, p. 953)
"most important article without which this Constitution would be a nullity".
Further, it has been described as "the very soul of the Constitution and
the very heart of it".
38. Reference may also be made to the opinion of Patanjali Sastri,
C.J. in State of Madras V. V.G. Row16 to the following effect : (AIR p.
199, para 13)
"This is especially true as regards the 'fundamental rights', as to
which [the Supreme Court] has been assigned the role of a sentinel
on the 'qui vive'. While the Court naturally attaches great weight to
the legislative judgment, it cannot desert its own duty to determine
finally the constitutionality of an impugned statute."
39. The jurisdiction conferred on this Court by Article 32 is an
important and integral part of the basic structure of the Constitution of
India and no Act of Parliament can abrogate it or take it away except by
wav of impermissible erosion of fundamental principles of the
constitutional scheme, are settled propositions of Indian jurisprudence
[see Fertilizer Corpn. Kamgar Union (Regd.) V. Union of India¹7, State
of Rajasthan V. Union of India ¹8, Krishna Swami V. Union of India¹9
Daryao V. State of U.P. 20 and L. Chandra Kumar15.
40. In S.R. Bommai V. Union of India²1 it was reiterated that the
judicial review is a basic feature of the Constitution and that the power
of judicial review is a constituent power that cannot be abrogated by
judicial process of interpretation. It is a cardinal principle of our
Constitution that no one can claim to be the sole judge of the power
given under the Constitution and that its actions are within the confines
of the powers given by the Constitution.
41. It is the duty of this Court to uphold the constitutional values
and enforce constitutional limitations as the ultimate interpreter of the
Constitution.
Principles of construction
42. The Constitution is a living document. The constitutional
provisions have to be construed having regard to the march of time and
the development of law. It is, therefore, necessary that while
construing the doctrine of basic structure due regard be had to various
decisions which led to expansion and development of the law.
43. The principle of constitutionalism is now a legal principle which
requires control over the exercise of governmental power to ensure that
it does not destroy the democratic principles upon which it is based.
These democratic principles include the protection of fundamental
rights. The principle of constitutionalism advocates a check and balance
model of the separation of powers; it requires a diffusion of powers,
necessitating different independent centres of decision-making. The
principle of constitutionalism underpins the principle of legality which
requires the courts to interpret legislation on the assumption that
Parliament would not wish to legislate contrary to fundamental rights.
The legislature can restrict fundamental rights but it is impossible for
laws protecting fundamental rights to be impliedly repealed by future
statutes.
Common law constitutionalism
44. The protection of fundamental constitutional rights through the
common law is main feature of common law constitutionalism.
45. According to Dr. Amartya Sen, the justification for protecting
fundamental rights is not on the assumption that they are higher
rights, but that protection is the best way to promote a just and
tolerant society.
46. According to Lord Steyn, the judiciary is the best institution to
protect fundamental rights, given its independent nature and also
because it involves interpretation based on the assessment of values
besides textual interpretation. It enables application of the principles of
justice and law.
47. Under the controlled Constitution, the principles of checks and
balances have an important role to play. Even in England where
Parliament is sovereign, Lord Steyn has observed that in certain
circumstances, courts may be forced to modify the principle of
parliamentary sovereignty, for example, in cases where judicial review
is sought to be abolished. By this the judiciary is protecting a limited
form of constitutionalism, ensuring that their institutional role in the
Government is maintained.
Principles of constitutionality
48. There is a difference between parliamentary and constitutional
sovereignty. Our Constitution is framed by a Constituent Assembly
which was not Parliament. It is in the exercise of law-making power by
the Constituent Assembly that we have a controlled Constitution.
Articles 14, 19, 21 represent the foundational values which form the
basis of the rule of law. These are the principles of constitutionality
which form the basis of judicial review apart from the rule of law and
separation of powers. If in future, judicial review was to be abolished by
a constitutional amendment, as Lord
Steyn says, the principle of parliamentary sovereignty even in England
would require a relook. This is how law has developed in England over
the years. It is in such cases that doctrine of basic structure as
propounded in Kesavananda Bharati case 1 has to apply.
49. Granville Austin has been extensively quoted and relied on in
Minerva
Mills5.
Chandrachud, C.J. observed that to destroy the
guarantees given by Part III in order to purportedly achieve the goals
of Part IV is plainly to subvert the Constitution by destroying its basic
structure. Fundamental rights occupy a unique place in the lives of
civilised societies and have been described in judgments as
"transcendental", "inalienable" and "primordial". They constitute the ark
learned Chief Justice held that Parts III and IV together constitute the
core of commitment to social revolution and they, together, are the
conscience of the Constitution. It is to be traced for a deep
understanding of the scheme of the Indian Constitution. The goals set
out in Part IV have, therefore, to be achieved without the abrogation of
the means provided for by Part III. It is in this sense that Parts III and
IV together constitute the core of our Constitution and combine to form
its conscience. "Anything that destroys the balance between the two
parts will ipso facto destroy an essential element of the basic structure
para 57.) Further observes the learned Chief Justice, that the matters
have to be decided not by metaphysical subtlety, nor as a matter of
semantics, but by a broad and liberal approach. We must not miss the
wood for the trees. A total deprivation of fundamental rights, even in a
limited area, can amount to abrogation of a fundamental right just as
partial deprivation in every area can. The observations made in the
context of Article 31-C have equal and full force for deciding the
questions in these matters. Again the observations made in para 70
that (Minerva Mills case5, para 70, p. 659)
"[I]f by a constitutional amendment, the application of Articles 14
and 19 is withdrawn from a defined field of legislative activity, which
is reasonably in public interest, the basic framework of the
Constitution may remain unimpaired. But if the protection of those
articles is withdrawn in respect of an uncatalogued variety of laws,
fundamental freedoms will become a 'parchment in a glass case' to
be viewed as a matter of historical curiosity."
These observations are very apt for deciding the extent and scope of
judicial review in cases wherein entire Part III, including Articles 14,
19, 20, 21 and 32, stand excluded without any yardstick.
50. The developments made in the field of interpretation and
expansion of judicial review shall have to be kept in view while deciding
the applicability of the basic structure doctrine-to find out whether
there has
been violation of any fundamental right, the extent of violation, does it
destroy the balance or it maintains the reasonable balance.
51. The observations of Bhagwati, J. in Minerva Mills case 5 show how
clause (4) of Article 368 would result in enlarging the amending power
of Parliament contrary to the dictum in Kesavananda Bharati case1. The
"So long as clause (4) stands, an amendment of the Constitution
though unconstitutional and void as transgressing the limitation on
the amending power of Parliament as laid down in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 would be unchallengeable in a court of law. The
consequence of this exclusion of the power of judicial review would
be that, in effect and substance, the limitation on the amending
power of Parliament would, from a practical point of view, become
non-existent and it would not be incorrect to say that, covertly and
indirectly, by the exclusion of judicial review, the amending power of
Parliament would stand enlarged, contrary to the decision of this
Court in Kesavananda Bharati case1 This would undoubtedly
damage the basic structure of the Constitution, because there are
two essential features of the basic structure which would be violated,
namely, the limited amending power of Parliament and the power of
judicial review with a view to examining whether any authority under
the Constitution has exceeded the limits of its powers."
52. In Minerva Mills5 while striking down the enlargement of Article
31-C through 42nd Amendment which had replaced the words "of or
any of the principles laid down in Part IV" with "the principles specified
pp. 592-93, para 1)
"Section 4 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act is
beyond the amending power of Parliament and is void since it
damages the basic or essential features of the Constitution and
destroys its basic structure by a total exclusion of challenge to any
law on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or
abridges any of the rights conferred by Article 14 or Article 19 of the
Constitution, if the law is for giving effect to the policy of the State
towards securing all or any of the principles laid down in Part IV of
the Constitution."
53. In Indira Gandhi case¹¹, for the first time the challenge to the
constitutional amendment was not in respect of the rights to property
or social welfare, the challenge was with reference to an electoral law.
Analysing this decision, H.M. Seervai in Constitutional Law of India (4th
Edn.) says that "the judgment in Election case11 breaks new ground,
which has important effects on Kesavananda Bharati case1 1 itself" (para
30.18). Further the author says that:
"No one can now write on the amending power, without taking
into account the effect of Election case " (para 30.19)
The author then goes on to clarify the meaning of certain concepts -
"constituent power", "rigid" (controlled), or "flexible" (uncontrolled)
constitution, "primary power" and "derivative power".
54. The distinction is drawn by the author between the making of a
Constitution by a Constituent Assembly which was not subject to
restraints by any external authority as a plenary law-making power and
a power to amend the Constitution, a derivative power derived from the
Constitution and subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution.
No provision of the Constitution framed in exercise of plenary law-
making power can be ultra vires because there is no touchstone outside
the Constitution by which the validity of provision of the Constitution
can be adjudged. The power for amendment cannot be equated with
such power of framing the Constitution. The amending power has to be
within the Constitution and not outside it.
55. For determining whether a particular feature of the Constitution
is part of its basic structure, one has per force to examine in each
individual case the place of the particular feature in the scheme of our
Constitution, its object and purpose, and the consequences of its denial
on the integrity of the Constitution as a fundamental instrument of the
country's governance (Chandrachud, C.J. in Indira Gandhi case¹1.
56. The fundamentalness of fundamental rights has thus to be
examined having regard to the enlightened point of view as a result of
development of fundamental rights over the years. It is, therefore,
imperative to understand the nature of guarantees under fundamental
rights as understood in the years that immediately followed after the
Constitution was enforced when fundamental rights were viewed by this
Court as distinct and separate rights. In early years, the scope of the
guarantee provided by these rights was considered to be very narrow.
Individuals could only claim limited protection against the State. This
position has changed since long. Over the years, the jurisprudence and
development around fundamental rights has made it clear that they are
not limited, narrow rights but provide a broad check against the
violations or excesses by the State authorities. The fundamental rights
have in fact proved to be the most significant constitutional control on
the Government, particularly legislative power. This transition from a
set of independent, narrow rights to broad checks on State power is
demonstrated by a series of cases that have been decided by this
Court. In State of Bombay V. Bhanji Munji22 relying on the ratio of
Gopalan 13 it was held that Article 31 was independent of Article 19(1)
(f). However, it was in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India²3
(popularly known as Bank Nationalisation case) that the viewpoint of
Gopalan1 was seriously disapproved. While rendering this decision, the
focus of the Court was on the actual impairment caused by the law,
rather than the literal validity of the law. This view was reflective of
the decision taken in Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India² where the
Court was faced with the validity of certain legislative measures
regarding the control of newspapers and whether it amounted to
infringement of Article 19(1)(a). While examining this question the
Court stated that the actual effect of the law on the right guaranteed
must be taken into account. This ratio was applied in Bank
Nationalisation case23 The Court examined the relation between Article
19(1)(f) and Article 13 and held that they were not mutually exclusive.
The ratio of Gopalan13 was not approved.
57. View taken in Bank Nationalisation case 23 has been reiterated in
25
number of cases (see Sambhu Nath Sarkar V. State of W.B.
Haradhan Saha V. State of W.B. 26 and Khudiram Das V. State of W.B.
27
and finally the landmark judgment in Maneka Gandhi14). Relying upon
Cooper case23 it was said that Articles 19(1) and 21 are not mutually
83, para 6)
"The law, must, therefore, now be taken to be well settled that
Article 21 does not exclude Article 19 and that even if there is a law
prescribing a procedure for depriving a person of 'personal liberty'
and there is consequently no infringement of the fundamental right
conferred by Article 21, such law, insofar as it abridges or takes
away any fundamental right under Article 19 would have to meet the
challenge of that article. This proposition can no longer be disputed
after the decisions in R.C. Cooper case23, Sambhu Nath Sarkar
case25
25
and
Haradhan
Saha case26. Now, if a law depriving a person
of 'personal liberty' and prescribing a procedure for that purpose
within the meaning of Article 21 has to stand the test of one or more
of the fundamental rights conferred under Article 19 which may be
applicable in a given situation, ex hypothesi it must also be liable to
be tested with reference to Article 14. This was in fact not disputed
by the learned Attorney General and indeed he could not do so in
view of the clear and categorical statement made by Mukherjea, J.,
in A.K. Gopalan case¹3 that Article 21 'presupposes that the law is a
valid and binding law under the provisions of the Constitution having
regard to the competence of the legislature and the subject it relates
to and does not infringe any of the fundamental rights which the
Constitution provides for', including Article 14. This Court also
applied Article 14 in two of its earlier decisions, namely, State of
W.B. V. Anwar Ali Sarkar28 and Kathi Raning Rawat V. State of
Saurashtra 29 "
(emphasis supplied)
58. The decision also stressed on the application of Article 14 to a
law under Article 21 and stated that even principles of natural justice
& 8)
" \
In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one
belongs to the rule of law in a republic, while the other, to the whim
and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is
implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and
constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14. Article 14
strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and
equality of treatment. The principle of reasonableness, which legally
as well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-
arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence and
the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of
reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must
be 'right and just and fair' and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive;
otherwise, it would be no procedure at all and the requirement of
Article 21 would not be satisfied.
Any procedure which permits impairment of the constitutional
right to go abroad without giving reasonable opportunity to show
cause cannot but be condemned as unfair and unjust and hence,
there is in the present case clear infringement of the requirement of
Article 21."
(emphasis supplied)
59. The above position was also reiterated by Krishna Iyer, J., as
"The Gopalan13 verdict, with the cocooning of Article 22 into a self
-contained code, has suffered supersession at the hands of R.C.
Cooper23 By way of aside, the fluctuating fortunes of fundamental
23
rights, when the proletarist and the proprietarist have asserted them
in Court, partially provoke sociological research and hesitantly
project the Cardozo thesis of subconscious forces in judicial noesis
when the cycloramic review starts from Gopalan13, , moves on to
Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In re30 and then on to All India Bank
Employees' Assn.31, next to Sakal Papers24, crowning in Cooper
and followed by Bennett Coleman32 and Sambhu Nath Sarkar Be
that as it may, the law is now settled, as I apprehend it, that no
article in Part III is an island but part of a continent, and the
conspectus of the whole part gives the direction and correction
needed for interpretation of these basic provisions. Man is not
dissectible into separate limbs and, likewise, cardinal rights in an
organic constitution, which make man human have a synthesis. The
proposition is indubitable that Article 21 does not, in a given situation,
exclude Article 19 if both rights are breached."
(emphasis supplied)
60. It is evident that it can no longer be contended that protection
provided by fundamental rights comes in isolated pools. On the
contrary, these rights together provide a comprehensive guarantee
against excesses by State authorities. Thus post-Maneka Gandhi case14
it is clear that the development of fundamental rights has been such
that it no longer involves the interpretation of rights as isolated
protections which directly arise but they collectively form a
comprehensive test against the arbitrary exercise of State power in any
area that occurs as an inevitable consequence. The protection of
fundamental rights has, therefore, been considerably widened.
61. The approach in the interpretation of fundamental rights has
been evidenced in a recent case M. Nagaraj V. Union of India 3³ in which
"20. This principle of interpretation is particularly apposite to the
interpretation of fundamental rights. It is a fallacy to regard
fundamental rights as a gift from the State to its citizens. Individuals
possess basic human rights independently of any Constitution by
reason of the basic fact that they are members of the human race.
These fundamental rights are important as they possess intrinsic
value. Part III of the Constitution does not confer fundamental
rights. It confirms their existence and gives them protection. Its
purpose is to withdraw certain subjects from the area of political
controversy to place them beyond the reach of majorities and
officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied by the
courts. Every right has a content. Every foundational value is put in
Part III as a fundamental right as it has intrinsic value. The converse
does not apply. A right becomes a fundamental right because it has
foundational value. Apart from the principles, one has also to see the
structure of the article in which the fundamental value is
incorporated. Fundamental right is a limitation on the power of the
State. A Constitution, and in particular that of it which protects and
which entrenches fundamental rights and freedoms to which all
persons in the State are to be entitled is to be given a generous and
purposive construction. In Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India²
this Court has held that while considering the nature and content of
fundamental rights, the Court must not be too astute to interpret the
language in a literal sense so as to whittle them down. The Court
must interpret the Constitution in a manner which would enable the
citizens to enjoy the rights guaranteed by it in the fullest measure.
An instance of literal and narrow interpretation of a vital fundamental
right in the Indian Constitution is the early decision of the Supreme
Court in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras13 Article 21 of the
Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life and
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. The
Supreme Court by a majority held that 'procedure established by law'
means any procedure established by law made by Parliament or the
legislatures of the State. The Supreme Court refused to infuse the
procedure with principles of natural justice. It concentrated solely upon
the existence of enacted law. After three decades, the Supreme Court
overruled its previous decision in A.K. Gopalan13 and held in its
landmark judgment in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India 14 that the
procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of
reasonableness. The Court further held that the procedure should also
be in conformity with the principles of natural justice. This example is
given to demonstrate an instance of expansive interpretation of a
fundamental right. The expression 'life' in Article 21 does not connote
merely physical or animal existence. The right to life includes right to
live with human dignity. This Court has in numerous cases deduced
fundamental features which are not specifically mentioned in Part III on
the principle that certain unarticulated rights are implicit in the
enumerated guarantees."
(emphasis supplied)
62. The abrogation or abridgment of the fundamental rights under
Chapter III have, therefore, to be examined on broad interpretation,
the narrow interpretation of fundamental rights chapter is a thing of
past. Interpretation of the Constitution has to be such as to enable the
citizens to enjoy the rights guaranteed by Part III in the fullest
measure.
Separation of powers
The separation of powers between Legislature, Executive and the
Judiciary constitutes basic structure, has been found in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 by the majority. Later, it was reiterated in Indira Gandhi
11
case A large number of judgments have reiterated that the
separation of powers is one of the basic features of the Constitution.
64. In fact, it was settled centuries ago that for preservation of
liberty and prevention of tyranny it is absolutely essential to vest
separate powers in three different organs. In The Federalist Nos. 47,
48, and 51, James Madison details how a separation of powers
preserves liberty and prevents tyranny. In The Federalist No. 47,
Madison discusses Montesquieu's treatment of the separation of powers
in Spirit of Laws, (Book XI, Chapter 6). There Montesquieu writes,
"When the legislative and executive powers are united in the
same person, or in the same body of Magistrates, there can be no
liberty
Again, there is no liberty, if the judicial power be not
separated from the legislative and executive."
Madison points out that Montesquieu did not feel that different
branches could not have overlapping functions, but rather that the
power of one department of Government should not be entirely in the
hands of another department of Government.
65. Alexander Hamilton in The Federalist No. 78, remarks on the
importance of the independence of the judiciary to preserve the
separation of powers and the rights of the people:
"The complete independence of the courts of justice is peculiarly
essential in a limited Constitution. By a limited Constitution, I
understand one which contains certain specified exceptions to the
legislative authority; such, for instance, that it shall pass no bills of
attainder, no ex post facto laws, and the like. Limitations of this kind
can be preserved in practice in no other way than through the
medium of courts of justice, whose duty it must be to declare all acts
contrary to the manifest tenor of the Constitution void. Without this,
all the reservations of particular rights or privileges would amount to
nothing." (434)
66. Montesquieu finds that tyranny pervades when there is no
separation of powers:
"There would be an end of everything, were the same man or
same body, whether of the nobles or of the people, to exercise those
three powers, that of enacting laws, that of executing the public
resolutions, and of trying the causes of individuals."
67. The Supreme Court has long held that the separation of powers
is part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Even before the basic
structure doctrine became part of constitutional law, the importance of
the separation of powers on our system of governance was recognised
by this Court in Special Reference No. 1 of 19643
Contentions
68. In the light of aforesaid developments, the main thrust of the
argument of the petitioners is that post-1973, it is impermissible to
immunise Ninth Schedule laws from judicial review by making Part III
inapplicable to such laws. Such a course, it is contended, is
incompatible with the doctrine of basic structure. The existence of
power to confer absolute immunity is not compatible with the implied
limitation upon the power of amendment in Article 368, is the thrust of
the contention.
69. Further, relying upon the clarification of Khanna, J., as given in
Indira Gandhi case 11 in respect of his opinion in Kesavananda Bharati
case 1 it is no longer correct to say that fundamental rights are not
included in the basic structure. Therefore, the contention proceeds that
since fundamental rights form a part of basic structure thus laws
inserted into the Ninth Schedule when tested on the ground of basic
structure shall have to be examined on the fundamental rights test.
70. The key question, however, is whether the basic structure test
would include judicial review of the Ninth Schedule laws on the
touchstone of fundamental rights. Thus, it is necessary to examine
what exactly is the content of the basic structure test. According to the
petitioners, the consequence of the evolution of the principles of basic
structure is that the Ninth Schedule laws cannot be conferred with
constitutional immunity of the kind created by Article 31-B Assuming
that such immunity can be conferred, its constitutional validity would
have to be adjudged by applying the direct impact and effect test
which means the form of an amendment is not relevant, its
consequence would be determinative factor.
71. The power to make any law at will that transgresses Part III in
its entirety would be incompatible with the basic structure of the
Constitution. The consequence also is, learned counsel for the
petitioners contended, to emasculate Article 32 (which is part of
fundamental rights chapter) in its entirety-if the rights themselves
(including the principle of rule of law encapsulated in Article 14) are
put out of the way, the remedy under Article 32 would be meaningless.
In fact, by the exclusion of Part III, Article 32 would stand abrogated
qua the Ninth Schedule laws. The contention is that the abrogation of
Article 32 would be per se violative of the basic structure. It is also
submitted that the constituent power under Article 368 does not
include judicial power and that the power to establish judicial remedies
which is compatible with the basic structure is qualitatively different
from the power to exercise judicial power. The impact is that on the one
hand the power under Article 32 is removed and, on the other hand,
the said power is exercised by the legislature itself by declaring, in a
way, the Ninth Schedule laws as valid.
72. On the other hand, the contention urged on behalf of the
respondents is that the validity of the Ninth Schedule legislations can
only be tested on the touchstone of basic structure doctrine as decided
by the majority in Kesavananda Bharati case1 which also upheld the
29th Constitution Amendment unconditionally and thus there can be no
question of judicial review of such legislations on the ground of
violation of fundamental rights chapter. The fundamental rights
chapter, it is contended, stands excluded as a result of protective
umbrella provided by Article 31-B and, therefore, the challenge can
only be based on the ground of basic structure doctrine and in addition,
legislation can further be tested for (i) lack of legislative competence,
and (ii) violation of other constitutional provisions. This would also
show, counsel for the respondents argued, that there is no exclusion of
judicial review and consequently, there is no violation of the basic
structure doctrine.
73. Further, it was contended that the constitutional device for
retrospective validation of laws was well known and it is legally
permissible to pass laws to remove the basis of the decisions of the
Court and consequently, nullify the effect of the decision. It was
submitted that Article
31-B and the amendments by which legislations are added to the Ninth
Schedule form such a device, which "cure the defect" of legislation.
74. The respondents contend that the point in issue is covered by
the majority judgment in Kesavananda Bharati case1 According to that
view, Article 31-B or the Ninth Schedule is a permissible constitutional
device to provide a protective umbrella to the Ninth Schedule laws. The
distinction is sought to be drawn between the necessity for the
judiciary in a written Constitution and judicial review by the judiciary.
Whereas the existence of judiciary is part of the basic framework of the
Constitution and cannot be abrogated in exercise of constituent power
of Parliament under Article 368, the power of judicial review of the
judiciary can be curtailed over certain matters. The contention is that
there is no judicial review in absolute terms and Article 31-B only
restricts that judicial review power. It is contended that after the
doctrine of basic structure which came to be established in
Kesavananda Bharati case it is only that kind of judicial review whose
elimination would destroy or damage the basic structure of the
Constitution that is beyond the constituent power. However, in every
case where the constituent power excludes judicial review, the basic
structure of the Constitution is not abrogated. The question to be asked
in each case is, does the particular exclusion alter the basic structure.
Giving immunity of Part III to the Ninth Schedule laws from judicial
review, does not abrogate judicial review from the Constitution. Judicial
review remains with the Court but with its exclusion over the Ninth
Schedule laws to which Part III ceases to apply. The effect of placing a
law in the Ninth Schedule is that it removes the fetter of Part III by
virtue of Article 31-B but that does not oust the court's jurisdiction. It
was further contended that Khanna, J. in Kesavananda Bharati case1
held that subject to the retention of the basic structure or framework of
the Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary and will include
within itself the power to add, alter or repeal various articles including
taking away or abridging fundamental rights and that the power to
amend the fundamental rights cannot be denied by describing them as
natural rights. The contention is that the majority in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 held that there is no embargo with regard to amending
any of the fundamental rights in Part III subject to the basic structure
theory and, therefore, the petitioners are not right in the contention
that in the said case the majority held that the fundamental rights form
part of the basic structure and cannot be amended. The further
contention is that if fundamental rights can be amended, which is the
effect of Kesavananda Bharati case1 overruling Golak Nath case 10 then
fundamental rights cannot be said to be part of the basic structure
unless the nature of the amendment is such which destroys the nature
and character of the Constitution. It is contended that the test for
judicially reviewing the Ninth Schedule laws cannot be on the basis of
mere infringement of the rights guaranteed under Part III of the
Constitution. The correct test is
whether such laws damage or destroy that part of fundamental rights
which form part of the basic structure. Thus, it is contended that
judicial review of the Ninth Schedule laws is not completely barred. The
only area where such laws get immunity is from the infraction of rights
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution.
75. To begin with, we find it difficult to accept the broad proposition
urged by the petitioners that laws that have been found by the courts
to be violative of Part III of the Constitution cannot be protected by
placing the same in the Ninth Schedule by use of device of Article 31-B
read with Article 368 of the Constitution. In Kesavananda Bharati case1
the majority opinion upheld the validity of the Kerala Act which had
been set aside in Kunjukutty Sahib V. State of Kerala³5 and the device
used was that of the Ninth Schedule. After a law is placed in the Ninth
Schedule, its validity has to be tested on the touchstone of basic
structure doctrine. In State of Maharashtra V. Man Singh Suraj Singh
Padvi³ a seven-Judge Constitution Bench, post-decision
in
Kesavananda Bharati case1 upheld the Constitution (Fortieth
Amendment) Act, 1976 which was introduced when the appeal was
pending in the Supreme Court and thereby included the regulations in
the Ninth Schedule. It was held that Article 31-B and the Ninth
Schedule cured the defect, if any, in the regulations as regards any
unconstitutionality alleged on the ground of infringement of
fundamental rights.
76. It is also contended that the power to pack up laws in the Ninth
Schedule in absence of any indicia in Article 31-B has been abused and
that abuse is likely to continue. It is submitted that the Ninth Schedule
which commenced with only 13 enactments has now a list of 284
enactments. The validity of Article 31-B is not in question before us.
Further, mere possibility of abuse is not a relevant test to determine
the validity of a provision. The people, through the Constitution, have
vested the power to make laws in their representatives through
Parliament in the same manner in which they have entrusted the
responsibility to adjudge, interpret and construe law and the
Constitution including its limitation in the judiciary. We, therefore,
cannot make any assumption about the alleged abuse of the power.
Validity of Article 31-B
77. There was some controversy on the question whether validity of
Article 31-B was under challenge or not in Kesavananda Bharati1. On
390, para 32)
"In Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan the Court refused to
reconsider the decision in Sankari Prasad 8 with the result that the
validity of the 1st Amendment remained unshaken. In Golak Nath10 it
was held by a majority of 6 : 5 that the power to amend the
Constitution was not located in Article 368. The inevitable result of this
holding should have been the striking down of all constitutional
amendments since, according to the view of the majority, Parliament
had no power to amend the Constitution in pursuance of Article 368.
But the Court resorted to the doctrine of prospective overruling and
held that the constitutional amendments which were already made
would be left undisturbed and that its decision will govern the future
amendments only. As a result, the 1st Amendment by which Articles 31
-A and 31-B were introduced remained inviolate. It is trite knowledge
that Golak Nath10 was overruled in Kesavananda Bharati1 in which it
was held unanimously that the power to amend the Constitution was to
be found in Article 368 of the Constitution. The petitioners produced
before us a copy of the civil miscellaneous petition which was filed in
Kesavananda Bharati1 by which the reliefs originally asked for were
modified. It appears therefrom that what was challenged in that case
was the 24th, 25th and the 29th Amendments to the Constitution. The
validity of the 1st Amendment was not questioned. Khanna, J.,
however, held while dealing with the validity of the unamended Article
31-C that the validity of Article 31-A was upheld in Sankari Prasad
that its validity could not be any longer questioned because of the
principle of stare decisis and that the ground on which the validity of
Article 31-A was sustained will be available equally for sustaining the
1518)."
78. We have examined various opinions in Kesavananda Bharati
case¹ but are unable to accept the contention that Article 31-B read
with the Ninth Schedule was held to be constitutionally valid in that
case. The validity thereof was not in question. The constitutional
amendments under challenge in Kesavananda Bharati case¹ were
examined assuming the constitutional validity of Article 31-B. Its
validity was not in issue in that case. Be that as it may, we will assume
Article 31-B as valid. The validity of the 1st Amendment inserting in
the Constitution, Article 31-B is not in challenge before us.
Point in issue
79. The real crux of the problem is as to the extent and nature of
immunity that Article 31-E can validly provide. To decide this intricate
issue, it is first necessary to examine in some detail the judgment in
Kesavananda Bharati case1 particularly with reference to the 29th
Amendment.
Kesavananda Bharati case1
80. The contention urged on behalf of the respondents that all the
Judges, except Sikri, C.J., in Kesavananda Bharati case held that the
29th
Amendment was valid and applied Jeejeebhoy case 37 is not based on
correct ratio of Kesavananda Bharati case1. Six learned Judges (Ray,
Palekar, Mathew, Beg, Dwivedi and Chandrachud, JJ.) who upheld the
validity of 29th Amendment did not subscribe to the basic structure
doctrine. The other six learned Judges (Sikri, C.J., Shelat, Grover,
Hegde, Mukherjea and Reddy, JJ.) upheld the 29th Amendment subject
to it passing the test of basic structure doctrine. The 13th learned
Judge (Khanna, J.), though subscribed to basic structure doctrine,
upheld the 29th Amendment agreeing with six learned Judges who did
not subscribe to the basic structure doctrine. Therefore, it would not be
correct to assume that all Judges or Judges in majority on the issue of
basic structure doctrine upheld the validity of 29th Amendment
unconditionally or were alive to the consequences of basic structure
doctrine on 29th Amendment.
81. Six learned Judges otherwise forming the majority, held 29th
Amendment valid only if the legislation added to the Ninth Schedule
did not violate the basic structure of the Constitution. The remaining six
who are in minority in Kesavananda Bharati case1 insofar as it relates to
laying down the doctrine of basic structure, held 29th Amendment
unconditionally valid.
82. While laying the foundation of basic structure doctrine to test
the amending power of the Constitution, Khanna, J. opined that the
fundamental rights could be amended, abrogated or abridged so long
as the basic structure of the Constitution is not destroyed but at the
same time, upheld the 29th Amendment as unconditionally valid. Thus,
it cannot be inferred from the conclusion of the seven Judges upholding
unconditionally the validity of 29th Amendment that the majority
opinion held fundamental rights chapter as not part of the basic
structure doctrine. The six Judges who held the 29th Amendment
unconditionally valid did not subscribe to the doctrine of basic
structure. The other six held 29th Amendment valid subject to it
passing the test of basic structure doctrine.
83. Khanna, J. upheld the 29th Amendment in the following terms :
"1536. We may now deal with the Constitution (Twenty-ninth
Amendment) Act. This Act, as mentioned earlier, inserted Kerala Act
35 of 1969 and Kerala Act 25 of 1971 as Entries 65 and 66 in the
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution. I have been able to find no
infirmity in the Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act."
84. In his final conclusions, with respect to the Twenty-ninth
Amendment, Khanna, J. held as follows : (Kesavananda Bharati case1,
"1537. (xv) The Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act does
not suffer from any infirmity and as such is valid."
85. Thus, while upholding the Twenty-ninth Amendment, there was
no mention of the test that is to be applied to the legislations inserted
in the
Ninth Schedule. The implication that the respondents seek to draw from
the above is that this amounts to an unconditional upholding of the
legislations in the Ninth Schedule.
86. They have also relied on observations by Ray, C.J., as quoted
66, paras 152-53)
"152. The Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act was
considered by this Court in Kesavananda Bharati case1. The Twenty-
ninth Amendment Act inserted in the Ninth Schedule to the
Constitution Entries 65 and 66 being the Kerala Land Reforms Act,
1969 and the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1971. This Court
unanimously upheld the validity of the Twenty-ninth Amendment
Act.
The view of seven Judges in Kesavananda Bharati case1 is
that Article 31-B is a constitutional device to place the specified
statutes in the Schedule beyond any attack that these infringe Part
III of the Constitution. The 29th Amendment is affirmed in
Kesavananda Bharati case1 by majority of seven against six Judges.
153.
Second, the majority view in Kesavananda Bharati case1 is
that the 29th Amendment which put the two statutes in the Ninth
Schedule and Article 31-B is not open to challenge on the ground of
either damage to or destruction of basic features, basic structure or
basic framework or on the ground of violation of fundamental rights."
(emphasis supplied)
87. The respondents have particularly relied on the aforesaid
highlighted portions.
88. On the issue of how the 29th Amendment in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 was decided, in Minerva Mills5, Bhagwati, J. has said
"The validity of the Twenty-ninth Amendment Act was challenged
in Kesavananda Bharati case¹, but by a majority consisting of
Khanna, J. and the six learned Judges led by Ray, J. (as he then
was), it was held to be valid. Since all the earlier constitutional
amendments were held valid on the basis of unlimited amending
power of Parliament recognised in Sankari Prasad case 8 and Sajjan
Singh case9 and were accepted as valid in Golak Nath case 10 and the
Twenty-ninth Amendment Act was also held valid in Kesavananda
Bharati case¹, though not on the application of the basic structure
test, and these constitutional amendments have been recognised as
valid over a number of years and moreover, the statutes intended to
be protected by them are all falling within Article 31-
A with the possible exception of only four Acts referred to above, I do
not think, we would be justified in reopening the question of validity of
these constitutional amendments and hence we hold them to be valid.
But, all constitutional amendments made after the decision in
Kesavananda Bharati case would have to be tested by reference to the
basic structure doctrine, for Parliament would then have no excuse for
saying that it did not know the limitation on its amending power."
89. To us, it seems that the position is correctly reflected in the
aforesaid observations of Bhagwati, J. and with respect we feel that
Ray, C.J. is not correct in the conclusion that the 29th Amendment was
unanimously upheld. Since the majority which propounded the basic
structure doctrine did not unconditionally uphold the validity of the
29th Amendment and six learned Judges forming the majority left that
to be decided by a smaller Bench and upheld its validity subject to it
passing basic structure doctrine, the factum of validity of the 29th
Amendment in Kesavananda Bharati case is not conclusive of matters
under consideration before us.
90. In order to understand the view of Khanna, J. in Kesavananda
Bharati1, it is important to take into account his later clarification. In
Indira Gandhi1 Khanna, J. made it clear that he never opined that
fundamental rights were outside the purview of basic structure and
"251. There was a controversy during the course of arguments on
the point as to whether I have laid down in my judgment in
Kesavananda Bharati case1 that fundamental rights are not a part of
the basic structure of the Constitution. As this controversy cropped
up a number of times, it seems apposite that before I conclude I
should deal with the contention advanced by learned Solicitor
General that according to my judgment in that case no fundamental
right is part of the basic structure of the Constitution. I find it
difficult to read anything in that judgment to justify such a
conclusion. What has been laid down in that judgment is that no
article of the Constitution is immune from the amendatory process
because of the fact that it relates to a fundamental right and is
contained in Part III of the Constitution.
252.
The above observations clearly militate against the
contention that according to my judgment fundamental rights are
not a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. I also dealt with
the matter at length to show that the right to property was not a
part of the basic structure of the Constitution. This would have been
wholly unnecessary if none of the fundamental rights was a part of
the basic structure of the Constitution."
91. Thus, after his aforesaid clarification, it is not possible to read
the decision of Khanna, J. in Kesavananda Bharati1 so as to exclude
fundamental rights from the purview of the basic structure. The import
of this
observation is significant in the light of the amendment that he earlier
upheld. It is true that if the fundamental rights were never a part of the
basic structure, it would be consistent with an unconditional upholding
of the Twenty-ninth Amendment, since its impact on the fundamental
rights guarantee would be rendered irrelevant. However, having held
that some of the fundamental rights are a part of the basic structure,
any amendment having an impact on fundamental rights would
necessarily have to be examined in that light. Thus, the fact that
Khanna, J. held that some of the fundamental rights were a part of the
basic structure has a significant impact on his decision regarding the
Twenty-ninth Amendment and the validity of the Twenty-ninth
Amendment must necessarily be viewed in that light. His clarification
demonstrates that he was not of the opinion that all the fundamental
rights were not part of the basic structure and the inevitable conclusion
is that the Twenty-ninth Amendment, even if treated as unconditionally
valid, is of no consequence on the point in issue in view of peculiar
position as to majority abovenoted.
92. Such an analysis is supported by Seervai, in his book
Constitutional Law of India (4th Edn., Vol. III), as follows : (para
30.65, pp. 3150-51)
"Although in his judgment in Election case¹¹, Khanna, J. clarified
his judgment in Kesavananda case1, that clarification raised a
serious problem of its own. The problem was : in view of the
clarification, was Khanna, J. right in holding that Article 31-B and
Schedule IX were unconditionally valid? Could he do so after he had
held that the basic structure of the Constitution could not be
amended? As we have seen, that problem was solved in Minerva
Mills case5 by holding that Acts inserted in Schedule IX after 25-4-
1973 were not unconditionally valid, but would have to stand the
test of fundamental rights. (para 30.48, p. 3138)
*
*
*
But while the clarification in Election case11 simplifies one
problem-the scope of the amending power-it raises complicated
problems of its own. Was Khanna, J. right in holding Article 31-B
(and Schedule IX) unconditionally valid by holding the 29th
Amendment unconditionally valid? And was he right when he held
the substantive part of Article 31-C unconditionally valid? An answer
to these questions requires an analysis of the function of Article 31-B
and Schedule IX
Taking Article 31-B and Schedule IX first, their
effect is to confer validity on laws already enacted which would be
void for violating one or more of the fundamental rights conferred by
Part III (fundamental rights).
But if the power of amendment is
limited by the doctrine of the basic structure, a grave problem
immediately arises.
The thing to note is that though such Acts do
not become a part of the Constitution, by
being included in Schedule IX** they owe their validity to the exercise
of the amending power. Can Acts, which destroy the secular character
of the State, be given validity and be permitted to destroy a part of the
basic structure as a result of the exercise of the amending power? That,
in the last analysis, is the real problem; and it is submitted that if the
doctrine of the basic structure is accepted, there can be only one
answer. If Parliament, exercising constituent power cannot enact an
amendment destroying the secular character of the State, neither can
Parliament, exercising its constituent power, permit Parliament or the
State Legislatures to produce the same result by protecting laws,
enacted in the exercise of legislative power, which produce the same
result. To hold otherwise would be to abandon the doctrine of the basic
structure in respect of fundamental rights, for every part of that basic
structure can be destroyed by first enacting laws which produce that
effect, and then protecting them by inclusion in Schedule IX. Such a
result is consistent with the view that fundamental rights are not part
of the basic structure; it is wholly inconsistent with the view that some
fundamental rights are a part of the basic structure, as Khanna, J. said
in his clarification.
In other words, the validity of the 25th and 29th
Amendments raised the question of applying the law laid down as to
the scope of the amending power when determining the validity of the
24th Amendment. If that law was correctly laid down, it did not
become incorrect by being wrongly applied. Therefore the conflict
between Khanna, J.'s views on the amending power and on the
unconditional validity of the 29th Amendment is resolved by saying
that he laid down the scope of the amending power correctly but
misapplied that law in holding Article 31-B and Schedule IX
unconditionally valid
Consistently with his view that some
fundamental rights were part of the basic structure, he ought to have
joined the 6 other Judges in holding that the 29th Amendment was
valid, but the Acts included in Schedule IX would have to be scrutinised
by the Constitution Bench to see whether they destroyed or damaged
any part of the basic structure of the Constitution, and if they did, such
laws would not be protected."
(portion in italics is emphasis in original, portion underlined is
emphasis supplied herein)
93. The decision in Kesavananda Bharati1 regarding the Twenty-
ninth Amendment is restricted to that particular amendment and no
principle flows therefrom.
94. We are unable to accept the contention urged on behalf of the
respondents that in Waman Rao case4 Chandrachud, J., and in Minerva
Mills case5 5 Bhagwati, J. have not considered the binding effect of
majority
judgments in Kesavananda Bharati case1. In these decisions, the
development of law post-Kesavananda Bharati case1 has been
considered. The conclusion has rightly been reached, also having regard
to the decision in Indira Gandhi case¹1 that post-Kesavananda Bharati
case¹ or after 24-4-1973, the Ninth Schedule laws will not have the full
protection. The doctrine of basic structure was involved in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 but its effect, impact and working was examined in Indira
Gandhi case11, Waman Rao case4 and Minerva Mills case5. To say that
these judgments have not considered the binding effect of the majority
judgment in Kesavananda Bharati case1 is not based on a correct
reading of Kesavananda Bharati1.
95. On the issue of equality, we do not find any contradiction or
inconsistency in the views expressed by Chandrachud, J. in Indira
Gandhi case¹¹ by Krishna Iyer, J. in Bhim Singh case and Bhagwati, J.
in Minerva Mills case5. All these judgments show that violation in
individual case has to be examined to find out whether violation of
equality amounts to destruction of the basic structure of the
Constitution.
96. Next, we examine the extent of immunity that is provided by
Article 31-B. The principle that constitutional amendments which
violate the basic structure doctrine are liable to be struck down will also
apply to amendments made to add laws in the Ninth Schedule is the
view expressed by Sikri, C.J. Substantially similar separate opinions
were expressed by Shelat, Grover, Hegde, Mukherjea and Reddy, JJ. In
the four different opinions six learned Judges came substantially to the
same conclusion. These Judges read an implied limitation on the power
of Parliament to amend the Constitution. Khanna, J. also opined that
there was implied limitation in the shape of the basic structure doctrine
that limits the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution but the
learned Judge upheld the 29th Amendment and did not say, like the
remaining six Judges, that the Twenty-ninth Amendment will have to
be examined by a smaller Constitution Bench to find out whether the
said amendment violated the basic structure theory or not. This gave
rise to the argument that fundamental rights chapter is not part of
basic structure. Khanna, J. however, does not so say in Kesavananda
Bharati case1. Therefore, Kesavananda Bharati case1 cannot be said to
have held that fundamental rights chapter is not part of basic structure.
Khanna, J. while considering the Twenty-ninth Amendment, had
obviously in view the laws that had been placed in the Ninth Schedule
by the said amendment related to the agrarian reforms. Khanna, J. did
not want to elevate the right to property under Article 19(1)(f) to the
level and status of basic structure or basic framework of the
Constitution, that explains the ratio of Kesavananda Bharati case1.
Further, doubt, if any, as to the opinion of Khanna, J. stood resolved on
the clarification given in Indira Gandhi case1 11 by the learned
Judge that in Kesavananda Bharati case1 he never held that
fundamental rights are not a part of the basic structure or framework of
the Constitution.
97. The rights and freedoms created by the fundamental rights
chapter can be taken away or destroyed by amendment of the relevant
article, but subject to limitation of the doctrine of basic structure. True,
it may reduce the efficacy of Article 31-B but that is inevitable in view
of the progress the laws have made post-Kesavananda Bharati case¹
which has limited the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution
under Article 368 of the Constitution by making it subject to the
doctrine of basic structure.
98. To decide the correctness of the rival submissions, the first
aspect to be borne in mind is that each exercise of the amending power
inserting laws into the Ninth Schedule entails a complete removal of
the fundamental rights chapter vis-à-vis the laws that are added in the
Ninth Schedule. Secondly, insertion in the Ninth Schedule is not
controlled by any defined criteria or standards by which the exercise of
power may be evaluated. The consequence of insertion is that it
nullifies entire Part III of the Constitution. There is no constitutional
control on such nullification. It means an unlimited power to totally
nullify Part III insofar as the Ninth Schedule legislations are concerned.
The supremacy of the Constitution mandates all constitutional bodies to
comply with the provisions of the Constitution. It also mandates a
mechanism for testing the validity of legislative acts through an
independent organ viz. the judiciary.
99. While examining the validity of Article 31-C in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 it was held that the vesting of power of the exclusion of
judicial review in a legislature including a State Legislature, strikes at
the basic structure of the Constitution. It is on this ground that second
part of Article 31-C was held to be beyond the permissible limits of
power of amendment of the Constitution under Article 368.
100. If the doctrine of basic structure provides a touchstone to test
the amending power or its exercise, there can be no doubt and it has to
be so accepted that Part III of the Constitution has a key role to play in
the application of the said doctrine.
101. Regarding the status and stature in respect of fundamental
rights in constitutional scheme, it is to be remembered that
fundamental rights are those rights of citizens or those negative
obligations of the State which do not permit encroachment on
individual liberties. The State is to deny no one equality before the law.
The object of the fundamental rights is to foster the social revolution by
creating a society egalitarian to the extent that all citizens are to be
equally free from coercion or restriction by the State. By enacting
fundamental rights and directive principles which are negative and
positive obligations of the States, the Constituent Assembly made it the
responsibility of the Government to adopt a middle path between
individual liberty and public good. Fundamental rights and directive
principles have to be balanced. That balance can be tilted in favour of
the public good. The balance, however, cannot be overturned by
completely overriding individual liberty. This balance is an essential
feature of the Constitution.
102. Fundamental rights enshrined in Part III were added to the
Constitution as a check on the State power, particularly the legislative
power. Through Article 13, it is provided that the State cannot make
any laws that are contrary to Part III. The framers of the Constitution
have built a wall around certain parts of fundamental rights, which have
to remain forever, limiting ability of majority to intrude upon them.
That wall is the "basic structure" doctrine. Under Article 32, which is
also part of Part III, the Supreme Court has been vested with the
power to ensure compliance with Part III. The responsibility to judge
the constitutionality of all laws is that of judiciary. Thus, when power
under Article 31-B is exercised, the legislations made completely
immune from Part III results in a direct way out of the check of Part
III, including that of Article 32. It cannot be said that the same
Constitution that provides for a check on legislative power, will decide
whether such a check is necessary or not. It would be a negation of the
Constitution. In Waman Rao case 4 while discussing the application
of
basic structure doctrine to the first amendment, it was observed that
the measure of the permissibility of an amendment of a pleading is how
far it is consistent with the original; you cannot by an amendment
transform the original into opposite of what it is. For that purpose, a
comparison is undertaken to match the amendment with the original.
Such a comparison can yield fruitful results even in the rarefied sphere
of constitutional law.
103. Indeed, if Article 31-B only provided restricted immunity and it
seems that original intent was only to protect a limited number of laws,
it would have been only exception to Part III and the basis for the
initial upholding of the provision. However, the unchecked and rampant
exercise of this power, the number having gone from 13 to 284, shows
that it is no longer a mere exception. The absence of guidelines for
exercise of such power means the absence of constitutional control
which results in destruction of constitutional supremacy and creation of
parliamentary hegemony and absence of full power of judicial review to
determine the constitutional validity of such exercise.
104. It is also contended for the respondents that Article 31-A
excludes judicial review of certain laws from the applications of Articles
14 and 19 and that Article 31-A has been held to be not violative of the
basic structure. The contention, therefore, is that exclusion of judicial
review would not make the Ninth Schedule law invalid. We are not
holding such law per se invalid but, examining the extent of the power
which the legislature will come to possess. Article 31-A does not
exclude uncatalogued number of laws from challenge on the basis of
Part III. It provides for a standard by which laws stand excluded from
judicial review. Likewise, Article 31-C applies as a yardstick the criteria
of
sub-clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 which refers to equitable
distribution of resources.
105. The fundamental rights have always enjoyed a special and
privileged place in the Constitution. Economic growth and social equity
are the two pillars of our Constitution which are linked to the rights of
an individual (right to equal opportunity), rather than in the abstract.
Some of
the rights in Part III constitute fundamentals of the Constitution like
Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 15 which represent secularism, etc.
As held in Nagaraj33 egalitarian equality exists in Article 14 read with
Articles 16(4), (4-A), (4-B) and, therefore, it is wrong to suggest that
equity and justice finds place only in the directive principles.
106. Parliament has power to amend the provisions of Part III so as
to abridge or take away fundamental rights, but that power is subject
to the limitation of basic structure doctrine. Whether the impact of such
amendment results in violation of basic structure has to be examined
with reference to each individual case. Take the example of freedom of
press which, though not separately and specifically guaranteed, has
been read as part of Article 19(1)(a). If Article 19(1)(a) is sought to be
amended so as to abrogate such right (which we hope will never be
done), the acceptance of the respondent's contention would mean that
such amendment would fall outside the judicial scrutiny when the law
curtailing these rights is placed in the Ninth Schedule as a result of
immunity granted by Article 31-B. The impact of such an amendment
shall have to be tested on the touchstone of rights and freedoms
guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. In a given case, even
abridgement may destroy the real freedom of the press and, thus, be
destructive of the basic structure. Take another example. The secular
character of our Constitution is a matter of conclusion to be drawn from
various articles conferring fundamental rights; and if the secular
character is not to be found in Part III, it cannot be found anywhere
else in the Constitution because every fundamental right in Part III
stands either for a principle or a matter of detail. Therefore, one has to
take a synoptic view of the various articles in Part III while judging the
impact of the laws incorporated in the Ninth Schedule on the articles in
Part III. It is not necessary to multiply the illustrations.
107. After enunciation of the basic structure doctrine, full judicial
review is an integral part of the constitutional scheme. Khanna, J. in
Kesavananda Bharati case1 was considering the right to property and it
is in that context it was said that no article of the Constitution is
immune from the amendatory process. We may recall what Khanna, J.
said while dealing with the words "amendment of the Constitution". His
Lordship said that these words with all the wide sweep and amplitude
cannot have the effect of destroying or abrogating the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution. The opinion of Khanna, J. in Indira
Gandhi11 clearly indicates that the view in Kesavananda Bharati case1 is
that at least some fundamental rights do form part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. Detailed discussion in Kesavananda
Bharati case1 to demonstrate that the right to property was not part of
the basic structure of the Constitution by itself shows that some of the
fundamental rights are part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
The placement of a right in the scheme of the Constitution, the impact
of the offending law on that right, the effect of the exclusion of that
right from judicial review, the abrogation of the principle or the essence
of that right is
an exercise which cannot be denied on the basis of fictional immunity
under Article 31-B.
11
108. In Indira Gandhi case Chandrachud, J. posits that equality
embodied in Article 14 is part of the basic structure of the Constitution
and, therefore, cannot be abrogated by observing that the provisions
impugned in that case are an outright negation of the right of equality
conferred by Article 14, a right which more than any other is a basic
postulate of our Constitution.
109. Dealing with Articles 14, 19 and 21 in Minerva Mills case it
was said that these clearly form part of the basic structure of the
Constitution and cannot be abrogated. It was observed that three
articles of our Constitution, and only three, stand between the heaven
of freedom into which Tagore wanted his country to awake and the
abyss of unrestrained power. These articles stand on altogether
different footing. Can it be said, after the evolution of the basic
structure doctrine, that exclusion of these rights at Parliament's will
without any standard, cannot be subjected to judicial scrutiny as a
result of the bar created by Article 31-B? The obvious answer has to be
in the negative. If some of the fundamental rights constitute a basic
structure, it would not be open to immunise those legislations from full
judicial scrutiny either on the ground that the fundamental rights are
not part of the basic structure or on the ground that Part III provisions
are not available as a result of immunity granted by Article 31-B. It
cannot be held that essence of the principle behind Article 14 is not
part of the basic structure. In fact, essence or principle of the right or
nature of violation is more important than the equality in the abstract
or formal sense. The majority opinion in Kesavananda Bharati case1
clearly is that the principles behind fundamental rights are part of the
basic structure of the Constitution. It is necessary to always bear in
mind that fundamental rights have been considered to be heart and
soul of the Constitution. Rather these rights have been further defined
and redefined through various trials having regard to various
experiences and some attempts to invade and nullify these rights. The
fundamental rights are deeply interconnected. Each supports and
strengthens the work of the others. The Constitution is a living
document, its interpretation may change as the time and circumstances
change to keep pace with it. This is the ratio of the decision in Indira
Gandhi case¹¹
110. The history of the emergence of modern democracy has also
been the history of securing basic rights for the people of other nations
also. In the United States the Constitution was finally ratified only upon
an understanding that a Bill of Rights would be immediately added
guaranteeing certain basic freedoms to its citizens. At about the same
time when the Bill of Rights was being ratified in America, the French
Revolution declared the Rights of Man to Europe. When the death of
colonialism and the end of World War II birthed new nations across the
globe, these States embraced rights as foundations to their new
Constitutions. Similarly, the rapid increase in the creation of
Constitutions that coincided with the end of the Cold War has planted
rights at the base of these documents.
111. Even countries that have long respected and upheld rights, but
whose governance traditions did not include their constitutional
affirmation have recently felt they could no longer leave their deep
commitment to rights, left unstated. In 1998, the United Kingdom
adopted the Human Rights Act which gave explicit effect to the
European Convention on Human Rights. In Canada, "the Constitution
Act of 1982" enshrined certain basic rights into their system of
governance. Certain fundamental rights, and the principles that
underlie them, are foundational not only to the Indian democracy, but
democracies around the world. Throughout the world nations have
declared that certain provisions or principles in their constitutions are
inviolable.
112. Our Constitution will almost certainly continue to be amended
as India grows and changes. However, a democratic India will not grow
out of the need for protecting the principles behind our fundamental
rights.
113. Other countries having controlled constitutions, like Germany,
have embraced the idea that there is a basic structure to their
constitutions and in doing so have entrenched various rights as core
constitutional commitments. India's constitutional history has led us to
include the essence of each of our fundamental rights in the basic
structure of our Constitution.
114. The result of the aforesaid discussion is that since the basic
structure of the Constitution includes some of the fundamental rights,
any law granted Ninth Schedule protection deserves to be tested
against these principles. If the law infringes the essence of any of the
fundamental rights or any other aspect of the basic structure then it
will be struck down. The extent of abrogation and limit of abridgment
shall have to be examined in each case.
115. We may also recall the observations made in Special Reference
No. 1 of 196434 as follows : (AIR p. 763, para 42)
"[W]hether or not there is distinct and rigid separation of powers
under the Indian Constitution, there is no doubt that the
Constitution has entrusted to the judicature in this country the task
of construing the provisions of the Constitution and of safeguarding
the fundamental rights of the citizens. When a statute is challenged
on the ground that it has been passed by a legislature without
authority, or has otherwise unconstitutionally trespassed on
fundamental rights, it is for the courts to determine the dispute and
decide whether the law passed by the legislature is valid or not. Just
as the legislatures are conferred legislative authority and their
functions are normally confined to legislative functions, and the
functions and authority of the executive lie within the domain of
executive authority, so the jurisdiction and authority of the
judicature in this country lie within the domain of adjudication. If the
validity of any law is challenged before the courts, it is never
suggested that the material question as to whether legislative
authority has been exceeded or fundamental rights have been
contravened, can be decided by the legislatures themselves.
Adjudication of such a dispute is entrusted solely and exclusively to
the judicature of this country;"
(emphasis supplied)
116. We are of the view that while laws may be added to the Ninth
Schedule, once Article 32 is triggered, these legislations must answer
to the complete test of fundamental rights. Every insertion into the
Ninth Schedule does not restrict Part III review, it completely excludes
Part III at will. For this reason, every addition to the Ninth Schedule
triggers Article 32 as part of the basic structure and is consequently
subject to the review of the fundamental rights as they stand in Part
III.
Extent of judicial review in the context of amendments to the
Ninth Schedule
117. We are considering the question as to the extent of judicial
review permissible in respect of the Ninth Schedule laws in the light of
the basic structure theory propounded in Kesavananda Bharati case1 In
this connection, it is necessary to examine the nature of the constituent
power exercised in amending a Constitution.
118. We have earlier noted that the power to amend cannot be
equated with the power to frame the Constitution. This power has no
limitations or constraints, it is primary power, a real plenary power. The
latter (sic former) power, however, is derived from the former (sic
latter). It has constraints of the document viz. Constitution which
creates it. This derivative power can be exercised within the four
corners of what has been conferred on the body constituted, namely,
Parliament. The question before us is not about power to amend Part
III after 24-4-1973. As per Kesavananda Bharati1 power to amend
exists in Parliament but it is subject to the limitation of doctrine of
basic structure. The fact of validation of laws based on exercise of
blanket immunity eliminates Part III in entirety hence the "rights test"
as part of the basic structure doctrine has to apply.
119. In Kesavananda Bharati case the majority held that the power
of amendment of the Constitution under Article 368 did not enable
Parliament to alter the basic structure of the Constitution.
120. Kesavananda Bharati case1 laid down a principle as an axiom
which was examined and worked out in Indira Gandhi case1 11 , Minerva
Mills5, Waman Rao4 and Bhim Singhji6.
121. As already stated, in Indira Gandhi case¹1 for the first time, the
constitutional amendment that was challenged did not relate to
property right but related to free and fair election. As is evident from
what is stated above that the power of amending the Constitution is a
species of law-making power which is the genus. It is a different kind of
law-making power conferred by the Constitution. It is different from the
power to frame the Constitution i.e. a plenary law-making power as
described by Seervai in Constitutional Law of India (4th Edn.).
122. The scope and content of the words "constituent power"
expressly stated in the amended Article 368 came up for consideration
in Indira Gandhi case¹1 Article 329-A(4) was struck down because it
crossed the implied limitation of amending power, that it made the
controlled Constitution uncontrolled, that it removed all limitations on
the power to amend and that it sought to eliminate the golden triangle
of Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 19. (See also Minerva Mills
case5.)
123. It is Kesavananda Bharati case1 read with clarification of
Khanna, J. in Indira Gandhi case1 11 which takes us one step forward,
namely, that fundamental rights are interconnected and some of them
form part of the basic structure as reflected in Article 15, Article 21
read with Article 14, Article 14 read with Articles 16(4), (4-A), (4-B),
etc. Bharati1 and Indira Gandhi11 cases have to be read together and if
so read the position in law is that the basic structure as reflected in the
above articles provide a test to judge the validity of the amendment by
which laws are included in the Ninth Schedule.
124. Since power to amend the Constitution is not unlimited, if
changes brought about by amendments destroy the identity of the
Constitution, such amendments would be void. That is why when entire
Part III is sought to be taken away by a constitutional amendment by
the exercise of constituent power under Article 368 by adding the
legislation in the Ninth Schedule, the question arises as to the extent of
judicial scrutiny available to determine whether it alters the
fundamentals of the Constitution. Secularism is one such fundamental,
equality is the other, to give a few examples to illustrate the point. It
would show that it is impermissible to destroy Articles 14 and 15 or
abrogate or en bloc eliminate these fundamental rights. To further
illustrate the point, it may be noted that Parliament can make additions
in the three legislative lists, but cannot abrogate all the lists as it would
abrogate the federal structure.
125. The question can be looked at from yet another angle also. Can
Parliament increase the amending power by amendment of Article 368
to confer on itself the unlimited power of amendment and destroy and
damage the fundamentals of the Constitution? The answer is obvious.
Article 368 does not vest such a power in Parliament. It cannot lift all
restrictions placed on the amending power or free the amending power
from all its restrictions. This is the effect of the decision in Kesavananda
Bharati case¹ as a result of which secularism, separation of power,
equality, etc., to cite a few examples, would fall beyond the constituent
power in the sense that the constituent power cannot abrogate these
fundamentals of the Constitution. Without equality the rule of law,
secularism, etc. would fail. That is why Khanna, J. held that some of the
fundamental rights like Article 15 form part of the basic structure.
126. If constituent power under Article 368, the other name for
amending power, cannot be made unlimited, it follows that Article 31-B
cannot be so
used as to confer unlimited power. Article 31-B cannot go beyond the
limited amending power contained in Article 368. The power to amend
Ninth Schedule flows from Article 368. This power of amendment has to
be compatible with the limits on the power of amendment. This limit
came with Kesavananda Bharati case1. Therefore Article 31- after 24-4
-1973 despite its wide language cannot confer unlimited or unregulated
immunity.
127. To legislatively override entire Part III of the Constitution by
invoking Article 31-B would not only make the fundamental rights
overridden by directive principles but it would also defeat fundamentals
such as secularism, separation of powers, equality and also the judicial
review which are the basic features of the Constitution and essential
elements of rule of law and that too without any yardstick/standard
being provided under Article 31-B.
128. Further, it would be incorrect to assume that social content
exists only in directive principles and not in the fundamental rights.
Articles 15 and 16 are facets of Article 14. Article 16(1) concerns formal
equality which is the basis of the rule of law. At the same time, Article
16(4) refers to egalitarian equality. Similarly, the general right of
equality under Article 14 has to be balanced with Article 15(4) when
excessiveness is detected in grant of protective discrimination. Article
15(1) limits the rights of the State by providing that there shall be no
discrimination on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, etc. and
yet it permits classification for certain classes, hence social content
exists in fundamental rights as well. All these are relevant
considerations to test the validity of the Ninth Schedule laws.
129. Equality, rule of law, judicial review and separation of powers
form parts of the basic structure of the Constitution. Each of these
concepts are intimately connected. There can be no rule of law, if there
is no equality before the law. These would be meaningless if the
violation was not subject to the judicial review. All these would be
redundant if the legislative, executive and judicial powers are vested in
one organ. Therefore, the duty to decide whether the limits have been
transgressed has been placed on the judiciary.
130. Realising that it is necessary to secure the enforcement of the
fundamental rights, power for such enforcement has been vested by
the Constitution in the Supreme Court and the High Courts. Judicial
review is an essential feature of the Constitution. It gives practical
content to the objectives of the Constitution embodied in Part III and
other parts of the Constitution. It may be noted that the mere fact that
equality, which is a part of the basic structure, can be excluded for a
limited purpose, to protect certain kinds of laws, does not prevent it
from being part of the basic structure. Therefore, it follows that in
considering whether any particular feature of the Constitution is part of
the basic structure-rule of law, separation of powers-the fact that
limited exceptions are made for limited purposes, to protect certain
kind of laws, does not mean that it is not part of the basic structure.
131. On behalf of the respondents, reliance has been placed on the
decision of a nine-Judge Constitution Bench in Attorney General for
India V. Amratlal Prajivandas 38 to submit that argument of a violation of
Article 14 being equally violative of basic structure or Articles 19 and
21 representing the basic structure of the Constitution has been
rejected. Para 20 referred to by learned counsel for the respondent
"20. Before entering upon discussion of the issues arising herein,
it is necessary to make a few clarificatory observations. Though a
challenge to the constitutional validity of 39th, 40th and 42nd
Amendments to the Constitution was levelled in the writ petitions on
the ground that the said amendments-effected after the decision in
Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala--infringe the basic structure
of the Constitution, no serious attempt was made during the course
of arguments to substantiate it. It was generally argued that Article
14 is one of the basic features of the Constitution and hence any
constitutional amendment violative of Article 14 is equally violative
of the basic structure. This simplistic argument overlooks the raison
d'être of Article 31-B-at any rate, its continuance and relevance
after Bharati1-and of the 39th and 40th Amendments placing the
said enactments in the Ninth Schedule. Acceptance of the
petitioners' argument would mean that in case of post-Bharati
constitutional amendments placing Acts in the Ninth Schedule, the
protection of Article 31-E would not be available against Article 14.
Indeed, it was suggested that Articles 21 and 19 also represent the
basic features of the Constitution. If so, it would mean a further
enervation of Article 31-B. Be that as it may, in the absence of any
effort to substantiate the said challenge, we do not wish to express
any opinion on the constitutional validity of the said amendments.
We take them as they are i.e. we assume them to be good and valid.
We must also say that no effort has also been made by the counsel
to establish in what manner the said Amendment Acts violate Article
14."
132. It is evident from the aforenoted passage that the question of
violation of Articles 14, 19 or 21 was not gone into. The Bench did not
express any opinion on those issues. No attempt was made to establish
violation of these provisions. In para 56, while summarising the
conclusion, the Bench did not express any opinion on the validity of the
Thirty-ninth and Fortieth Amendment Acts to the Constitution of India
placing COFEPOSA and SAFEMA in the Ninth Schedule. These Acts were
assumed to be good and valid. No arguments were also addressed with
respect to the validity of the Forty-second Amendment Act.
133. Every amendment to the Constitution whether it be in the form
of amendment of any article or amendment by insertion of an Act in the
Ninth Schedule, has to be tested by reference to the doctrine of basic
structure which includes reference to Article 21 read with Article 14,
Article 15, etc. As stated, laws included in the Ninth Schedule do not
become part of the Constitution, they derive their validity on account of
the exercise undertaken
by Parliament to include them in the Ninth Schedule. That exercise has
to be tested every time it is undertaken. In respect of that exercise the
principle of compatibility will come in. One has to see the effect of the
impugned law on one hand and the exclusion of Part III in its entirety
at the will of Parliament.
134. In Waman Rao4 it was accordingly rightly held that the Acts
inserted in the Ninth Schedule after 24-4-1973 would not receive the
full protection.
Exclusion of judicial review if compatible with the doctrine of
basic structure-concept of judicial review
135. Judicial review is justified by combination of "the principle of
separation of powers, rule of law, the principle of constitutionality and
the reach of judicial review" (Democracy Through Law by Lord Styen, p.
131).
136. The role of the judiciary is to protect fundamental rights. A
modern democracy is based on the twin principles of majority rule and
the need to protect fundamental rights. According to Lord Styen, it is
job of the judiciary to balance the principles ensuring that the
Government on the basis of number does not override fundamental
rights.
Application of doctrine of basic structure
137. In Kesavananda Bharati case¹ the discussion was on the
amending power conferred by unamended Article 368 which did not use
the words "constituent power". We have already noted the difference
between original power of framing the Constitution known as
constituent power and the nature of constituent power vested in
Parliament under Article 368. By addition of the words "constituent
power" in Article 368, the amending body, namely, Parliament does not
become the original Constituent Assembly. It remains a Parliament
under a controlled Constitution. Even after the words "constituent
power" are inserted in Article 368, the limitations of doctrine of basic
structure would continue to apply to Parliament. It is on this premise
that clauses (4) and (5) inserted in Article 368 by the 42nd
Amendment were struck down in Minerva Mills case5.
138. The relevance of Indira Gandhi case¹¹ Minerva Mills case and
Waman Rao case lies in the fact that every improper enhancement of
its own power by Parliament, be it clause (4) of Article 329-A or clauses
(4) and (5) of Article 368 or Section 4 of the 42nd Amendment has
been held to be incompatible with the doctrine of basic structure as
they introduced new elements which altered the identity of the
Constitution or deleted the existing elements from the Constitution by
which the very core of the Constitution is discarded. They obliterated
important elements like judicial review. They made directive principles
en bloc a touchstone for obliteration of all the fundamental rights and
provided for insertion of laws in the Ninth Schedule which had no nexus
with agrarian reforms. It is in this context that we have to examine the
power of immunity bearing in mind that after Kesavananda Bharati
case1 Article 368 is subject to implied limitation of basic structure.
139. The question examined in Waman Rao case 4 was whether the
device of Article 31-B could be used to immunise the Ninth Schedule
laws from judicial review by making the entire Part III inapplicable to
such laws and whether such a power was incompatible with basic
structure doctrine. The answer was in the affirmative. It has been said
that it is likely to make the controlled Constitution uncontrolled. It
would render the doctrine of basic structure redundant. It would
remove the golden triangle of Article 21 read with Article 14 and Article
19 in its entirety for examining the validity of the Ninth Schedule laws
as it makes the entire Part III inapplicable at the will of Parliament.
This results in the change of the identity of the Constitution which
brings about incompatibility not only with the doctrine of basic
structure but also with the very existence of limited power of amending
the Constitution. The extent of judicial review is to be examined having
regard to these factors.
140. The object behind Article 31-B is to remove difficulties and not
to obliterate Part III in its entirety or judicial review. The doctrine of
basic structure is propounded to save the basic features. Article 21 is
the heart of the Constitution. It confers right to life as well as right to
choose. When this triangle of Article 21 read with Article 14 and Article
19 is sought to be eliminated not only the "essence of right" test but
also the "rights test" has to apply, particularly when Kesavananda
Bharati- and Indira Gandhi11 cases have expanded the scope of basic
structure to cover even some of the fundamental rights.
141. The doctrine of basic structure contemplates that there are
certain parts or aspects of the Constitution including Article 15, Article
21 read with Articles 14 and 19 which constitute the core values which
if allowed to be abrogated would change completely the nature of the
Constitution. Exclusion of fundamental rights would result in
nullification of the basic structure doctrine, the object of which is to
protect basic features of the Constitution as indicated by the synoptic
view of the rights in Part III.
142. There is also a difference between the "rights test" and the
"essence of right" test. Both form part of application of the basic
structure doctrine. When in a controlled Constitution conferring limited
power of amendment, an entire chapter is made inapplicable, "the
essence of right" test++ as applied in M. Nagaraj case33 33 will have no
applicability. In such a situation, to judge the validity of the law, it is
the "rights test" which is more appropriate. We may also note that in
Minerva Mills5 and Indira Gandhi¹ cases elimination of Part III in its
entirety was not in issue. We are considering the situation where the
entire equality code, freedom code and right to move court under Part
III are all nullified by exercise of power to grant immunisation at will by
Parliament which, in our view, is incompatible with the implied
limitation of
the power of Parliament. In such a case, it is the rights test that is
appropriate and is to be applied. In Indira Gandhi case¹¹ 11 it was held
that for the correct interpretation, Article 368 requires a synoptic view
of the Constitution between its various provisions which, at first sight,
look disconnected. Regarding Articles 31-A and 31-C (validity whereof
is not in question here) having been held to be valid despite denial of
Article 14, it may be noted that these articles have an indicia which is
not there in Article 31-B.
143. Part III is amendable subject to basic structure doctrine. It is
permissible for the legislature to amend the Ninth Schedule and grant a
law the protection in terms of Article 31-B but subject to right of citizen
to assail it on the enlarged judicial review concept. The legislature
cannot grant fictional immunities and exclude the examination of the
Ninth Schedule law by the court after the enunciation of the basic
structure doctrine.
144. The constitutional amendments are subject to limitations and if
the question of limitation is to be decided by Parliament itself which
enacts the impugned amendments and gives that law a complete
immunity, it would disturb the checks and balances in the Constitution.
The authority to enact law and decide the legality of the limitations
cannot vest in one organ. The validity to the limitation on the rights in
Part III can only be examined by another independent organ, namely,
the judiciary.
145. The power to grant absolute immunity at will is not compatible
with basic structure doctrine and, therefore, after 24-4-1973 the laws
included in the Ninth Schedule would not have absolute immunity.
Thus, validity of such laws can be challenged on the touchstone of basic
structure such as reflected in Article 21 read with Article 14 and Article
19, Article 15 and the principles underlying these articles.
146. It has to be borne in view that the fact that some articles in
Part III stand alone has been recognised even by Parliament, for
example, Articles 20 and 21. Article 359 provides for suspension of the
enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III during Emergencies.
However, by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, it
has been provided that even during Emergencies, the enforcement of
the rights under Articles 20 and 21 cannot be suspended. This is the
recognition given by Parliament to the protections granted under
Articles 20 and 21. No discussion or argument is needed for the
conclusion that these rights are part of the basic structure or framework
of the Constitution and, thus, immunity by suspending those rights by
placing any law in the Ninth Schedule would not be countenanced. It
would be an implied limitation on the constituent power of amendment
under Article 368. Same would be the position in respect of the rights
under Article 32, again, a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
147. The doctrine of basic structure as a principle has now become
an axiom. It is premised on the basis that invasion of certain freedoms
needs to be justified. It is the invasion which attracts the basic
structure doctrine. Certain freedoms may justifiably be interfered with.
If freedom, for example, is interfered with in cases relating to terrorism,
it does not follow that the same test can be applied to all the offences.
The point to be noted is that the
application of a standard is an important exercise required to be
undertaken by the Court in applying the basic structure doctrine and
that has to be done by the Courts and not by prescribed authority
under Article 368. The existence of the power of Parliament to amend
the Constitution at will, with requisite voting strength, so as to make
any kind of laws that excludes Part III including power of judicial
review under Article 32 is incompatible with the basic structure
doctrine. Therefore, such an exercise if challenged, has to be tested on
the touchstone of basic structure as reflected in Article 21 read with
Article 14 and Article 19, Article 15 and the principles thereunder.
148. The power to amend the Constitution is subject to the aforesaid
axiom. It is, thus, no more plenary in the absolute sense of the term.
Prior to Kesavananda Bharati1 the axiom was not there. Fictional
validation based on the power of immunity exercised by Parliament
under Article 368 is not compatible with the basic structure doctrine
and, therefore, the laws that are included in the Ninth Schedule have to
be examined individually for determining whether the constitutional
amendments by which they are put in the Ninth Schedule damage or
destroy the basic structure of the Constitution. This Court being bound
by all the provisions of the Constitution and also by the basic structure
doctrine has necessarily to scrutinise the Ninth Schedule laws. It has to
examine the terms of the statute, the nature of the rights involved, etc.
to determine whether in effect and substance the statute violates the
essential features of the Constitution. For so doing, it has to first find
whether the Ninth Schedule law is violative of Part III. If on such
examination, the answer is in the affirmative, the further examination
to be undertaken is whether the violation found is destructive of the
basic structure doctrine. If on such further examination the answer is
again in affirmative, the result would be invalidation of the Ninth
Schedule law. Therefore, first the violation of rights of Part III is
required to be determined, then its impact examined and if it shows
that in effect and substance, it destroys the basic structure of the
Constitution, the consequence of invalidation has to follow. Every time
such amendment is challenged, to hark back to Kesavananda Bharati1
upholding the validity of Article 31-B is a surest means of a drastic
erosion of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III.
149. Article 31-B gives validation based on fictional immunity. In
judging the validity of constitutional amendment we have to be guided
by the impact test. The basic structure doctrine requires the State to
justify the degree of invasion of fundamental rights. Parliament is
presumed to legislate compatibly with the fundamental rights and this
is where judicial review comes in. Greater the invasion into essential
freedoms, greater is the need for justification and determination by
Court whether invasion was necessary and if so, to what extent. The
degree of invasion is for the Court to decide. Compatibility is one of the
species of judicial review which is premised on compatibility with rights
regarded as fundamental. The power to grant immunity, at will, on
fictional basis, without full judicial review, will nullify the entire basic
structure doctrine. The golden triangle referred to above is the basic
feature of the Constitution as it stands for equality and rule of law.
150. The result of the aforesaid discussion is that the constitutional
validity of the Ninth Schedule laws on the touchstone of basic structure
doctrine can be adjudged by applying the direct impact and effect test
i.e. rights test, which means the form of an amendment is not the
relevant factor, but the consequence thereof would be determinative
factor.
151. In conclusion, we hold that:
(i) A law that abrogates or abridges rights guaranteed by Part III
of the Constitution may violate the basic structure doctrine or it may
not. If former is the consequence of the law, whether by amendment
of any article of Part III or by an insertion in the Ninth Schedule,
such law will have to be invalidated in exercise of judicial review
power of the Court. The validity or invalidity would be tested on the
principles laid down in this judgment.
(ii) The majority judgment in Kesavananda Bharati case1 read
with Indira Gandhi case requires the validity of each new
constitutional amendment to be judged on its own merits. The actual
effect and impact of the law on the rights guaranteed under Part III
has to be taken into account for determining whether or not it
destroys basic structure. The impact test would determine the
validity of the challenge.
(iii) All amendments to the Constitution made on or after 24-4-
1973 by which the Ninth Schedule is amended by inclusion of
various laws therein shall have to be tested on the touchstone of the
basic or essential features of the Constitution as reflected in Article
21 read with Article 14, Article 19, and the principles underlying
them. To put it differently even though an Act is put in the Ninth
Schedule by a constitutional amendment, its provisions would be
open to attack on the ground that they destroy or damage the basic
structure if the fundamental right or rights taken away or abrogated
pertains or pertain to the basic structure.
(iv) Justification for conferring protection, not blanket protection,
on the laws included in the Ninth Schedule by constitutional
amendments shall be a matter of constitutional adjudication by
examining the nature and extent of infraction of a fundamental right
by a statute, sought to be constitutionally protected, and on the
touchstone of the basic structure doctrine as reflected in Article 21
read with Article 14 and Article 19 by application of the "rights test"
and the "essence of the right" test taking the synoptic view of the
articles in Part III as held in Indira Gandhi case¹¹. Applying the
above tests to the Ninth Schedule laws, if the infraction affects the
basic structure then such law(s) will not get the protection of the
Ninth Schedule.
This is our answer to the question referred to us vide order dated
14-9-1999 in I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N. 2
(v) If the validity of any Ninth Schedule law has already been
upheld by this Court, it would not be open to challenge such law
again on the
principles declared by this judgment. However, if a law held to be
violative of any rights in Part III is subsequently incorporated in the
Ninth Schedule after 24-4-1973, such a violation/infraction shall be
open to challenge on the ground that it destroys or damages the basic
structure as indicated in Article 21 read with Article 14, Article 19 and
the principles underlying thereunder.
(vi) Action taken and transactions finalised as a result of the
impugned Acts shall not be open to challenge.
152. We answer the reference in the above terms and direct that the
petitions/appeals be now placed for hearing before a three-Judge Bench
for decision in accordance with the principles laid down herein.
At
From the Judgment and Order dated 23-9-1976 of the High Court of Judicature at Madras
in WPs Nos. 4386 of 1974 and 90 of 1975
A1
A2 Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1965 SC 845
A3 Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, AIR 1967 SC 1643
A6
A7
A8
No longer in the fundamental rights chapter since the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978 (w.e.f. June 1979).
A10
A12
A13
State of Maharashtra V. Madhavrao Damodar Patilchand, (1968) 3 SCR 712 (7 Judges)
24-4-1973 this Hon'ble Court has held that : such Acts even if void or inoperative at the time
when enacted by reason of infringement of Article 13(2) assumed full force and vigour from
their respective dates of their enactment after inclusion in the Ninth Schedule.
A16
A18
Clauses (4) and (5) were struck down as violating the basic structure in the first Minerva
A20
See N.B. Jeejeebhoy V. Asstt. Collector, Thana Prant, AIR 1965 SC 1096 : (1965) 1 SCR
636 at pp. 648 H-649 A (Subba Rao, C.J. for the Court) : specifically cited by Khanna, J. in
A21
See Basu, Shorter Constitution of India, 13th Edn. at p. 1651.
A22
A26
A27
A30
AIR 1969 SC 168 : (1969) 1 SCR 42
A31 AIR 1959 SC 459 : 1959 Supp (1) SCR 489
A32
A33
A34
A36
M.P.V. Sundararamien & Co. V. State of A.P., AIR 1958 SC 468 : 1958 SCR 1422
A37 West Ramnad Electric Distribution Co. Ltd. V. State of Madras, AIR 1962 SC 1753
:
(1963) 2 SCR 747
A38
A39
A40
(Tax) 26
A43
A45
AIR 1951 Patna 91 (SB)
A46
A48
A49
A51
Sampat Prakash V. State of J&K, AIR 1970 SC 1118 : (1969) 2 SCR 365
A52
WPs (Crl) Nos. 284-85 of 2005
A53 1965 AC 914 : (1964) 3 WLR 1082 : (1964) 3 All ER 722 (PC)
A54 1980 AC 734 : (1980) 2 WLR 136 : (1979) 3 All ER 241 (PC)
A56
A57
A58
Matajog Dobey V. H.C. Bhari, AIR 1956 SC 44 : (1955) 2 SCR 925 : 1956 Cri LJ 140
A59
A62
A63
A65 1920 AC 691 : 89 LJ PC 130 : 123 LT 177 (PC)
*
Ed. : The unanimous opinion of the nine-Judge Bench has been delivered by Chief Justice
Y.K. Sabharwal.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AIR 1951 Pat 91 : ILR 30 Pat 454
8
9
AIR 1965 SC 845 : (1965) 1 SCR 933
10 AIR 1967 SC 1643 : (1967) 2 SCR 762
13
14
15
+
Ed. : Also by Dr. Ambedkar in Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, p. 953.
16
20 AIR 1961 SC 1457 : (1962) 1 SCR 574
22 AIR 1955 SC 41 : (1955) 1 SCR 777
24 AIR 1962 SC 305 : (1962) 3 SCR 842
25
26
30 AIR 1958 SC 956
31
All India Bank Employees' Assn. V. National Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1962 SC 171
32
#
Ed. : Emphasis in original.
34 AIR 1965 SC 745 : (1965) 1 SCR 413
35
37 N.B. Jeejeebhoy V. Asstt. Collector, AIR 1965 SC 1096
**
[Footnote at p. 3150] This is clear from the provision of Article 31-B that such laws are
subject to the power of any competent legislature to repeal or amend them-and no State
Legislature has the power to repeal or amend the Constitution, nor has Parliament such
power outside Article 368, except where such power is conferred by a few articles.
++
Ed. : See Shortnote U in M. Nagaraj, and para 37 thereof.