In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE J.S. KHEHAR, C.J. AND JASTI CHELAMESWAR, S.A. BOBDE, R.K.
AGRAWAL, R.F. NARIMAN, A.M. SAPRE, DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, SANJAY KISHAN
KAUL AND S. ABDUL NAZEER, JJ.)
K.S. PUTTASWAMY AND ANOTHER
Petitioners;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Writ Petitions (C) No. 494 of 2012 with Nos. 829, 833, 932 of 2013,
37, 220 of 2015, 797 of 2016, 342, 000372 of 2017, Transfer Cases
(C) Nos. 151-52 of 2013, Transfer Petitions (C) Nos. 312-13 of 2014,
921 of 2015, Contempt Petition (C) No. 144 of 2014 in Writ Petition
(C) No. 494 of 2012, Contempt Petition (C) No. 674 of 2015 in Writ
Petition (C) No. 829 of 2013, Contempt Petition (C) No. 470 of 2015
in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012, Contempt Petition (C) No. 444
of 2016 in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012, Contempt Petition (C)
No. 608 of 2016 in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012, Contempt
Petition (C) No. 844 of 2017 in Writ Petition (C) No. 494 of 2012 and
SLP (Crl.) No. 2524 of 2014, decided on August 24, 2017
INDEX TO HEADNOTE
SI.
Contents
No.
I.
Key rulings of the Court recognising Right to Privacy as basic core
fundamental right - Shortnotes A and B
II.
Nature and Facets of Right to Privacy - The Individual as Core of
Constitutional Focus - Shortnotes C to V
III.
Restrictions that may be placed on Right to Privacy - Tests and
Principles for - Shortnotes W to YB
IV.
Nature and Facets of Dignity - Fundamental and Integral Core of
Fundamental Rights - Shortnotes YC to YG
V.
Nature of Right to Life and Liberty and Restrictions that may be
placed thereon as per "Procedure established by law" - Shortnotes
YH to YJ
VI.
Preamble, Fundamental Rights and Judicial Review - Nature and
Scope - Shortnotes YK to YS
VII.
Constitutional Interpretation - Shortnotes YT to YX
VIII.
Miscellaneous - Shortnotes YY to ZB
I. Key rulings of the Court recognising Right to Privacy as basic core
fundamental right
A. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 25, 28 and Preamble
- Right to privacy - Held, is a basic fundamental right - It forms an intrinsic
part of Art. 21 and freedoms guaranteed in Pt. III
B. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 25, 28 and Preamble
- Right to privacy - Being a basic fundamental right covered by Pt. III,
decisions of Supreme Court in M.P. Sharma, AIR 1954 SC 300 and Kharak
Singh, AIR 1963 SC 1295, to the extent they hold that it is not a fundamental
right protected by the Constitution, overruled
A Bench of three Judges of the Supreme Court, while considering the constitutional
challenge to the Aadhaar card scheme of the Union Government noted in its order
dated 11-8-2015 that the norms for and compilation of demographic biometric data
by the Government was questioned on the ground that it violates the right to privacy.
The Attorney General for India urged that the existence of a fundamental right to
privacy is in doubt in view of two decisions : the first-M.P. Sharma, AIR 1954 SC 300
("M.P. Sharma"), rendered by a Bench of eight Judges and the second, in Kharak
Singh, AIR 1963 SC 1295 ("Kharak Singh"), rendered by a Bench of six Judges. Each
of these decisions, in the submission of the Attorney General, contained observations
that the Indian Constitution does not specifically protect the right to privacy. On the
other hand, the submission of the petitioners was that M.P. Sharma case and Kharak
AIR 1950 SC 27 ("Gopalan"). Gopalan case, which construed each provision
contained in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights as embodying a distinct protection,
was held not to be good law by an eleven-Judge Bench in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper,
two earlier decisions is not valid. Moreover, it was also urged that in the seven-Judge
judgment of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh case was specifically approved and the
decision of the majority was overruled.
While addressing these challenges, the Bench of three Judges of the Supreme
Court took note of several decisions of the Supreme Court in which the right to
privacy has been held to be a constitutionally protected fundamental right. Those
Benches of a strength smaller than those in M.P. Sharma case and Kharak Singh case.
Faced with this predicament and having due regard to the far-reaching questions of
importance involving interpretation of the Constitution, it was felt that institutional
integrity and judicial discipline would require a reference to a larger Bench. On 18-7-
2017, a Constitution Bench presided over by the Chief Justice considered it
appropriate that the issue be resolved by a Bench of nine Judges. The order of the
Constitution Bench read:` it seems that it has become essential for us to determine
whether there is any fundamental right to privacy under the Indian Constitution. The
determination of this question would essentially entail whether the decision recorded
by the Supreme Court in M.P. Sharma case by an eight-Judge Constitution Bench, and
also, in Kharak Singh case by a six-Judge Constitution Bench, that there is no such
fundamental right, is the correct expression of the constitutional position."
Thus the following two questions arose for consideration by the present Bench:
1. Whether there is any fundamental right of privacy under the Constitution and
if so, where is it located and what are its contours?
2. What is the ratio decidendi of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh cases and
whether those cases are rightly decided?
Answering the reference in terms below, the nine-Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court
Held :
Per curiam
The right to privacy is protected as an intrinsic part of the right to life and personal
liberty under Article 21 and as a part of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III of the
Constitution. The decision in M.P. Sharma case which holds that the right to privacy is
not protected by the Constitution stands overruled. The decision in Kharak Singh case
to the extent that it holds that the right to privacy is not protected by the
Constitution also stands overruled.
(Para 652)
M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra, AIR 1954 SC 300 : 1954 Cri LJ 865 : 1954 SCR
1077; Kharak Singh V. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 329
:
(1964) 1 SCR 332, overruled on this point
II. Nature and Facets of Right to Privacy - The Individual as Core of
Constitutional Focus
C. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20(3), 25, 26, 28
and Preamble - Right to privacy - Natural, primordial, basic, inherent and
inalienable right - It permeates the core of Preambular
philosophy underlying "liberty" and "dignity" as also human concepts of "life" and
"personal liberty" enshrined in Art. 21 and wide ranging freedoms guaranteed under
Pt. III, considered essential for a meaningful human existence - It also finds
recognition in various international conventions as well as in Protection of Human
Rights Act, 1993 - Absence of express enumeration of right to privacy is no ground
for disregarding its omnipresence in Pt. III - Jurisprudence - Natural law and natural
rights - Nature and basis of
D. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29
and Preamble - Right to privacy - Meaning - Nature, content and different
facets of - Its three connotations viz. spatial control, decisional autonomy
and informational control, are significant - It has a normative as well as
descriptive function and negative as well as positive content - It has intrinsic
as well as instrumental value - It comprehends physical as well as mental
aspects - Merely because a precise definition cannot be formulated, it cannot
be termed as vague and on that ground cannot be disregarded as a
fundamental right - (See also Shortnotes E, F, G, H, I, M, N, o, P, Q, R, S, T
and U)
E. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Right to privacy - How
inheres in different articles of Pt. III other than Art. 21; and the various rights
contained within privacy, discussed and enumerated
F. Constitution of India - Pts. III and IV and Preamble - Intrinsic value
and paramountcy of the individual and individual autonomy - Role of privacy
in enabling individual autonomy and thus the enjoyment and exercise of
liberty and freedoms - Held, the individual lies at the core of constitutional
focus and the ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity animate the
vision of securing a dignified existence to the individual - The objective of Pt.
III is to place citizens at centre stage and make the State accountable to
them - Our Constitution places the individual at the forefront of its focus,
guaranteeing civil and political rights in Pt. III and embodying an aspiration for
achieving socio-economic rights in Pt. IV
- The individual is the focal point of the Constitution because it is in the
realisation of individual rights that the collective well-being of the community
is determined - Privacy constitutes the foundation of all liberty because it is
in privacy that the individual can decide how liberty is best exercised -
Individual dignity and privacy are inextricably linked in a pattern woven out of
a thread of diversity into the fabric of a plural culture - Privacy eminently
qualifies as an inalienable natural right, intimately connected to two values
whose protection is a matter of universal moral agreement : the innate
dignity and autonomy of man
G. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Privacy - Instrumental
or facilitative role in enabling individual autonomy and thus, the enjoyment
and exercise of liberty and freedoms - Explained in detail,
thereby clarifying its logically prior position to almost all other rights in Part III, and
hence its nature as a core fundamental right
- The vigour and vitality of the various expressive freedoms guaranteed
by the Constitution depends on the existence of a corresponding guarantee of
cognitive freedom - Personal choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to
privacy - The ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the
realisation of the full value of life and liberty - Liberty has a broader meaning
of which privacy is a subset - All liberties may not be exercised in privacy -
Yet others can be fulfilled only within a private space - Privacy enables the
individual to retain the autonomy of the body and mind - The autonomy of
the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life
- The inability to create a condition of selective seclusion virtually denies an
individual the freedom to exercise that particular liberty or freedom necessary
to do that activity - It is not possible to truncate or isolate the basic freedom
to do an activity in seclusion from the freedom to do the activity itself -
Privacy of the body entitles an individual to the integrity of the physical
aspects of personhood - The intersection between one's mental integrity and
privacy entitles the individual to freedom of thought, the freedom to believe in
what is right, and the freedom of self-determination - When these
guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects
all those elements which are crucial to gender identity - The family, marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the
individual - Thus, above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an
inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be exercised - The integrity
of the body and the sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that each
individual possesses an inalienable ability and right to preserve a private
space in which the human personality can develop - Without the ability to
make choices, the inviolability of the personality would be in doubt -
Recognising a zone of privacy is but an acknowledgment that each individual
must be entitled to chart and pursue the course of development of personality
- Hence privacy is a postulate of human dignity itself
- Privacy, thus, constitutes the basic, irreducible condition necessary for
&
the exercise of personal liberty and the freedoms guaranteed by the
Constitution - It is the inarticulate major premise in Part III of the
Constitution - In the case of privacy, the case for judicial enumeration is
especially strong - It is no doubt a fair implication from Art. 21, but also more
- Privacy is a right or condition, logically presupposed by rights expressly
recorded in the constitutional text, if they are to make sense - As a result,
privacy is more than merely a derivative constitutional right - It is the
necessary and unavoidable logical entailment of rights guaranteed in the text
of the Constitution
H. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Right to privacy -
Recognition of, as a fundamental right - Definitional uncertainty no reason
against the same - There is no need to resolve all definitional concerns at an
abstract level to understand the nature of the right to privacy
- The ever-growing possibilities of technological and psychological
intrusions by the State into the liberty of subjects must leave some doubt in
this context - Definitional uncertainty is no reason to not recognise the
existence of the right to privacy - For the purpose of this case, it is sufficient
to go by the understanding that the right to privacy consists of three facets
i.e. repose, sanctuary and intimate decision - Each of these facets is so
essential for the liberty of human beings that there is no reason to doubt that
the right to privacy is part of the liberty guaranteed by our Constitution - As
in the case of "life" under Art. 21, a precise definition of the term "privacy"
may not be possible - However, definitional and boundary-setting challenges
are not unique to the rights guaranteed in Art. 21 - This feature is integral to
many core rights, such as the right to equality - Evidently, the expansive
character of any right central to constitutional democracies like ours has
nowhere stood in the way of recognising a right and treating it as fundamental
where there are strong constitutional grounds to do so
I. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28 and
Preamble - Right to privacy - Not an elitist construct - "Life" and "personal
liberty" - No conflict between "life" and "personal liberty" under Art. 21 on
ground that "life" pertains to the poor and "personal liberty" pertains to the
rich as no such antipathy exists
- Hence, there is no substance in the contention that right to privacy
should be forsaken in the interest of welfare entitlements conferred to the
poor as they are concerned only with economic well-being for subsistence of
their "life" - Economic rights and civil and political rights are complementary
and the former cannot be said to be subservient to the latter - Privacy is not
&
a privilege only for a few and right to privacy is equally available to all - The
sanctity of marriage, the liberty of procreation, the choice of a family life and
the dignity of the being, are matters which concern every individual
irrespective of social strata or economic well-being - The pursuit of happiness
is founded upon autonomy and dignity - Both are essential attributes of
privacy which makes no distinction between the birth marks of individuals
J. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29
and Preamble - Right to privacy - Not just a common law right - Mere
conferment of protection at common law would not be a bar to its
constitutional recognition as an intrinsic part of Pt. III - Privacy has the
nature of being both a common law right as well as a fundamental right - Its
content, in both forms, is identical - All that differs is the incidence of burden
and the forum for enforcement for each form - Any interference with privacy
by an entity covered by Art. 12's description of the "State" must satisfy the
tests applicable to whichever one or more of the Pt. III freedoms the
interference affects
K. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Common law right and fundamental
right - Distinction - Both can be recognised simultaneously - In case of
interference by State, claim for violation of fundamental right would lie; and in case of
interference by non-State actor, action at common law would lie - It is perfectly
possible for an interest to simultaneously be recognised as a common law right and a
fundamental right - The only material distinctions between the two classes of right,
of which the nature and content may be the same, lie in the incidence of the duty to
respect the right and in the forum in which a failure to do so can be redressed
L.
Common Law - Common law rights and Natural rights
-
Interrelationship, explained - When interests are worth protecting on moral
grounds, irrespective of the existence of a legal system or the operation of
law, they are given the name of a natural right - Where a natural law right
cannot be enforced at law, the common law right is evidently an instrument
by which invasions into the valued interest in question can be addressed
M. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Privacy - How protects
and engenders heterogeneity and plurality and diversity
- Personal choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy - Thus,
privacy protects heterogeneity and recognises the plurality and diversity of
our culture - Thoughts and behavioural patterns which are intimate to an
individual are entitled to a zone of privacy where one is free of social
expectations - In that zone of privacy, an individual is not judged by others -
Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions which find expression
in the human personality - It enables individuals to preserve their beliefs,
thoughts, expressions, ideas, ideologies, preferences and choices against
societal demands of homogeneity - Privacy is an intrinsic recognition of
heterogeneity, of the right of the individual to be different and to stand
against the tide of conformity in creating a zone of solitude
N. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble and Art. 29 - Privacy in
groups, and importance to conservation of cultural and educational rights
- Solitude not always essential to privacy - Privacy has a deep affinity
with seclusion (of our physical persons and things) as well as such ideas as
repose, solitude, confidentiality and secrecy (in our communications), and
intimacy - But this is not to suggest that solitude is always essential to
privacy - It is in this sense of an individual's liberty to do things privately that
a group of individuals, however large, is entitled to seclude itself from others
and be private - The right to privacy is also integral to the cultural and
educational rights whereby a group having a distinct language, script or
culture shall have the right to conserve the same
O. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Privacy - Not lost in
public places, but attaches to the person
- Held, while the legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from the
intimate zone to the private zone and from the private to the public arenas, it
is important to underscore that privacy is not lost or surrendered merely
because the
individual is in a public place - Privacy attaches to the person since it is an essential
facet of the dignity of the human being
P. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Privacy distinguished
from anonymity
- Both anonymity and privacy prevent others from gaining access to
pieces of personal information yet they do so in opposite ways - Privacy
involves hiding information whereas anonymity involves hiding what makes it
personal - An unauthorised parting of the medical records of an individual
which have been furnished to a hospital will amount to an invasion of privacy
- On the other hand, the State may assert a legitimate interest in analysing
data borne from hospital records to understand and deal with a public health
epidemic such as malaria or dengue to obviate a serious impact on the
population - If the State preserves the anonymity of the individual it could
legitimately assert a valid State interest in the preservation of public health to
design appropriate policy interventions on the basis of the data available to it
Q. Constitution of India - Art. 14 - Guarantee against arbitrariness -
How protects privacy as well - The guarantee of equality is a guarantee
against arbitrary State action - It prevents the State from discriminating
between individuals - The destruction by the State of a sanctified personal
space, whether of the body or of the mind, is violative of the guarantee
against arbitrary State action
R. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Art. 300-A - Right to privacy as an
integral part of right to property - Right to privacy has also always been an
integral part of the right to own property and has been treated as such in civil
law as well as in criminal law, vide all the offences and torts of trespass
known to law
S. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 26, 28, 29 and
Preamble - Right to privacy - Informational and technological privacy -
Internet and its impact on privacy - Data mining processes, metadata,
internet of things, wearable devices, social media networks, profiling, and "big
data" or collection of data sets - Dataveillance and intrusive journalism -
Privacy of children as a particular concern - Cyber attacks and terrorist
activities - Right to control dissemination of personal information - Scope
and limitations - Claim of right to privacy against State and non-State actors
- Data regulation and protection - Data protection regimes - Principles they
must follow - Safety of persons and legitimate State interests required to be
balanced against right to privacy - Regulation of extent to which information
can be stored, processed and used by non-State actors and protection of such
information from State, needed - State must enact law to justify
encroachment on privacy of individual - Law must be reasonable and non-
arbitrary, means adopted by legislature must be proportional to object and
needs sought to be fulfilled by law (See the tests laid down in Shortnotes W
to YB)
T. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Right to privacy - Other rights
emanating from right to privacy, particularly in cyberspace, internet, social
media, etc. - Right to identity, Right to control dissemination of personal
information, Right to be forgotten - Privacy of children - Particular concern
for - Commercial and other aspects of, discussed per Kaul, J.
U. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Right to privacy - Information already
in public domain, held, is not protected by privacy only if voluntarily parted
with
V. Information Technology, Internet, Computer and Cyber Laws -
Generally - Information - Facets of - Information has three facets : it is non
-rivalrous, invisible and recombinant
- Information is non-rivalrous in the sense that there can be simultaneous
users of the good - Use of a piece of information by one person does not
make it less available to another - Secondly, invasions of data privacy are
difficult to detect because they can be invisible - Information can be
accessed, stored and disseminated without notice - Its ability to travel at the
speed of light enhances the invisibility of access to data : information
collection can be the swiftest theft of all - Thirdly, information is recombinant
in the sense that data output can be used as an input to generate more data
output
III. Restrictions that may be placed on Right to Privacy - Tests and
Principles for
W. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29
and Preamble - Right to privacy - Restriction on, by law - Requirements
that the law must meet, explained in detail - Privacy is not an absolute right
- Held, it is subject to restrictions and limitations made by the State to
protect legitimate State interests or public interest
- If a privacy claim specifically flows only from one of the expressly
enumerated provisions under Art. 19, then the standard of review would be
as expressly provided under Art. 19 - However, the possibility of a privacy
claim being entirely traceable to rights other than Art. 21 is bleak - Without
discounting that possibility, Art. 21 is the bedrock of the privacy guarantee -
A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to withstand the touchstone of
permissible restrictions on fundamental rights to which the right to privacy in
that situation relates
- In the context of Art. 21 an invasion of privacy must be justified on the
basis of a law which stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and reasonable
- Not only the procedure, but the law must also be valid with reference to the
encroachment on life and personal liberty under Art. 21 - An invasion of life
or personal liberty and thus of privacy, must meet the threefold requirement
of
(i) legality, which postulates the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a
legitimate State aim; and (iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between
the objects and the means adopted to achieve them
- Once it is established that privacy imbues every constitutional freedom
with its efficacy and that it can be located in each of them, it must follow that
interference with it by the State must be tested against whichever one or
more Pt. III guarantees whose enjoyment is curtailed - As a result, privacy
violations will usually have to answer to tests in addition to the one applicable
to Art. 21
- For example, if the restraint on privacy is over fundamental personal
choices that an individual is to make, State action can be restrained under Art.
21 r/w Art. 14 if it is arbitrary and unreasonable; and under Art. 21 r/w Art.
19(1)(a) only if it relates to the subjects mentioned in Art. 19(2) and the
tests laid down by the Supreme Court for such legislation or subordinate
legislation to pass muster under the said article - Each of the tests evolved
by the Supreme Court, qua legislation or executive action, under Art. 21 r/w
Art. 14; or Art. 21 r/w Art. 19(1)(a) in the aforesaid examples must be met
in order that State action passes muster
- In the ultimate analysis, the balancing act that is to be carried out
between individual, societal and State interests must be left to the training
and expertise of the judicial mind - Every State intrusion into privacy
interests which deals with the physical body or the dissemination of
information personal to an individual or personal choices relating to the
individual would be subjected to the balancing test prescribed under the
fundamental right that it infringes depending upon where the privacy interest
claimed is founded
X. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Privacy - Legitimate
State interests which would permit abridgement of right to privacy by
enactment of law - Instantiated (non-exhaustively) - National security,
including terrorist and cyber attacks, data mining to ensure that public
resources are not siphoned off by the undeserving in social welfare
programmes and schemes, prevention of crime, protecting interests of the
Revenue, public health - Furthermore, digital platforms are a vital tool of
ensuring good governance in a social welfare State
Y. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Right to privacy -
Restrictions on by law - Standard of compelling State interest - When may
be applied
compelling State interest standard in addition to the Art. 21 reasonableness
enquiry - From the United States, where the terminology of "compelling
State interest" originated, a strict standard of scrutiny comprises two things :
a
"compelling State interest" and a requirement of "narrow tailoring" (narrow
tailoring means that the law must be narrowly framed to achieve the
objective)
- As a term, "compelling State interest" does not have definite contours in the US -
Hence, it is critical that this standard be adopted with some clarity as to when and in
what types of privacy claims it is to be used - Only in privacy claims which deserve
the strictest scrutiny is the standard of compelling State interest to be used - As for
others, the just, fair and reasonable standard under Art. 21 will apply - As to when
the compelling State interest standard is to be employed, must depend upon the
context of concrete cases
YA. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Privacy - Existence of
actionable claim - Choice and Specification Test (per Bobde, J.)
- To exercise one's right to privacy is to choose and specify on two levels
- It is to choose which of the various activities that are taken in by the
general residue of liberty available to her she would like to perform, and to
specify whom to include in one's circle when performing them - It is also
autonomy in the negative, and takes in the choice and specification of which
activities not to perform and which persons to exclude from one's circle - To
check for the existence of an actionable claim to privacy, all that needs to be
considered is if such an intent to choose and specify exists, whether directly in
its manifestation in the right bearer's actions, or otherwise - Such a
formulation would exclude three recurring red herrings - Firstly, it would not
admit of arguments that privacy is limited to property or places - So, for
example, taking one or more persons aside to converse at a whisper even in a
public place would clearly signal a claim to privacy, just as broadcasting one's
words by a loudspeaker would signal the opposite intent - Secondly, this
formulation would not reduce privacy to solitude - Reserving the rights to
admission at a large gathering place, such as a cinema hall or club, would
signal a claim to privacy - Thirdly, neither would such a formulation require to
hold that private information must be information that is inaccessible to all
others
YB. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29
and Preamble - Right to privacy - Tests of privacy - Reasonable
expectation or legitimate expectation test - Efficacy of, and applicability of,
discussed, per Khehar, C.J., Agrawal, Chandrachud & Nazeer, JJ. and per
Nariman, J.
IV. Nature and Facets of Dignity - Fundamental and Integral Core of
Fundamental Rights
YC. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Dignity - Fundamental
and integral core of fundamental rights - Relationship of dignity, with life and
liberty - Role of privacy as an essential aspect of dignity and in assuring
dignity - Explained in detail
- Human dignity is an integral part of the Constitution - Reflections of
dignity are found in the guarantee against arbitrariness (Art. 14), the lamps
of
freedom (Art. 19) and in the right to life and personal liberty (Art. 21) - Held, there is
inseparable relationship between protection of life and liberty, with dignity - Dignity as
a constitutional value finds expression in the Preamble - The constitutional vision
seeks the realisation of justice (social, economic and political); liberty (of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship); equality (as a guarantee against arbitrary
treatment of individuals) and fraternity (which assures a life of dignity to every
individual) - These constitutional precepts exist in unity to facilitate a humane and
compassionate society - To live is to live with dignity
- The draftsmen of the Constitution defined their vision of the society in
which constitutional values would be attained by emphasising, among other
freedoms, liberty and dignity - So fundamental is dignity that it permeates
the core of the rights guaranteed to the individual by Pt. III - Dignity is the
core which unites the fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek
to achieve for each individual the dignity of existence - Privacy with its
attendant values assures dignity to the individual and it is only when life can
be enjoyed with dignity can liberty be of true substance - Privacy ensures the
fulfilment of dignity and is a core value which the protection of life and liberty
is intended to achieve - Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity
- Privacy has both a normative/instrumenta and descriptive/inherent
function - At a normative or instrumental level privacy subserves those
eternal values upon which the guarantees of life, liberty and freedom are
founded - At a descriptive or inherent level, privacy postulates a bundle of
entitlements and interests which lie at the foundation of ordered liberty -
Dignity cannot exist without privacy - Both reside within the inalienable
values of life, liberty and freedom which the Constitution has recognised -
Privacy is the ultimate expression of the sanctity of the individual - It is a
constitutional value which straddles across the spectrum of fundamental
rights and protects for the individual a zone of choice and self-determination
- Constitutional Law - Values in Constitution - Dignity as a Constitutional
value - Nature and scope - Place and position in the Constitution
YD. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Dignity - Intrinsic and
instrumental value of, explained - Facilitative role of dignity in enjoyment and
exercise of liberty and freedoms
YE. Constitution of India - Preamble and Pt. III - Dignity and Fraternity,
Unity and Integrity of the Nation - Interrelationship between, explained -
The Court should always make attempt to expand the reach and ambit of the
fundamental rights rather than to attenuate their meaning and the content by
process of judicial construction
YF. Constitution of India - Art. 14 - Dignity - Reflection of dignity in Art.
14, held, is found in guarantee against arbitrariness as well, in addition to
other articles in Pt. III
YG. Constitution of India - Art. 19 - Dignity - Reflection of dignity in Art.
19, held, is found in lamps of freedom contained in Art. 19, in addition to other
articles of Pt. III
V. Nature of Right to Life and Liberty and Restrictions that may be
placed thereon as per "Procedure established by law"
YH. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Right to life and
personal liberty - Nature of - Held, inherent or natural to human beings -
They are not bestowed or conferred for the first time by the Constitution -
view of Khanna, J. in ADM, Jabalpur case, held, is the correct position of law -
Life and personal liberty are not creations of the Constitution - These rights
are recognised by the Constitution as inhering in each individual as an intrinsic
and inseparable part of the human element which dwells within Natural
rights - What are, and their inalienable nature - Explained
YI. Constitution of India - Arts. 21, 19 and 14 - "Procedure established by
law" - Substantive challenge to law on ground of violation of "procedure
established by law" - The impugned law, held, must meet threefold
requirements viz. (1) legality; (2) need defined in terms of legitimate claim;
and (3) proportionality which ensures nexus between objects and means
adopted to achieve them (see also Shortnote YJ)
YJ. Constitution of India - Art. 21 - "Procedure established by law" -
Substituted in place of "due process" by Framers of the Constitution -
Expression "due process" omitted as it might lead to vagaries of
interpretation - In any case, "procedure established by law" as well as law
itself must be shown to be just, fair and reasonable in case of challenge based
on violation of Art. 21 (see also Shortnote YI) - Constitutional Law - Due
process - Substantive due process
VI. Preamble, Fundamental Rights and Judicial Review - Nature and
Scope
YK. Constitution of India - Preamble - Scope, nature and ambit of -
Justice, liberty, equality, fraternity and dignity - Expanding dimensions of
these constitutional values - Significance in human life - Held, the individual
lies at the core of constitutional focus and the ideals of justice, liberty, equality
and fraternity animate the vision of securing a dignified existence to the
individual - Constitutional vision of protecting fundamental human values
manifested in fundamental rights - Liberty and dignity inseparably interlinked
with life
YL. Constitution of India - Preamble and Pt. III - Dignity, Equality and
Liberty - Foundational pillars of the Constitution - The dignity of the
individual, equality between human beings and the quest for liberty are the
foundational pillars of the Indian Constitution
YM. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Interrelatedness and overlapping of
fundamental rights, and cumulative and composite tests that laws abridging
fundamental rights must meet, explained in detail - Liberty being the core
that animates Pt. III
- At a substantive level, the constitutional values underlying each article in
Pt. III animate the meaning of the others - This development of the law has
followed a natural evolution - The basis of this development after all is that
every aspect of the diverse guarantees of fundamental rights deals with
human beings - Every element together with others contributes in the
composition of the human personality - In the very nature of things, no
element can be read in a manner disjunctive from the composite whole - The
close relationship between each of the fundamental rights has led to the
recognition of constitutional entitlements and interests - Some of them may
straddle more than one, and on occasion several, fundamental rights - Yet
others may reflect the core value upon which the fundamental rights are
founded
- The most basic understanding of the expression "liberty" is the freedom
of an individual to do what he pleases - But the idea of liberty is more
complex than that - A better view of the whole scheme of Pt. III is to look at
each one of the guaranteed fundamental rights not as a series of isolated
points, but as a rational continuum of the legal concept of liberty i.e. freedom
from all substantial, arbitrary encroachments and purposeless restraints
sought to be made by the State - Words and Phrases - "Liberty"
YN. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Interpretation - Court should
endeavour to expand the reach and ambit of fundamental rights - It should
strike a balance between changing needs and protection of fundamental rights
YO. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Supreme Court should interpret the
nature and extent of constitutional guarantees with the object of achieving
justice, liberty and dignity and determine whether any right claimed (such as
the right to privacy), when not expressly guaranteed as a fundamental right,
is implicit and inherent in Pt. III
YP. Constitution of India - Pt. III - Scope of Supreme Court's power of
interpretation of the Constitution - Judicial interpretation of existence of a
right (such as the right to privacy) as an inherent guarantee under Pt. III not
an exercise in nature of constitutional amendment
- Judicial review certainly has the task before it of determining the nature
and extent of the freedoms available to each person under the fabric of those
constitutional guarantees which are protected - Courts have traditionally
discharged that function - There is nothing unusual in the judicial
enumeration
of one right on the basis of another under the Constitution - By the process of
enumeration, constitutional courts merely give a name and specify the core of
guarantees already present in the residue of constitutional liberty - A Constitution
has to be read in such a way that the words deliver up principles that are to be
followed and if this is kept in mind, it is clear that the concept of privacy is contained
not merely in personal liberty, but also in the dignity of the individual
YQ. Constitution of India - Pt. III and Preamble - Fundamental rights -
Reason for constitutional protection of, and effect of such constitutional
protection - Elevating a right to the position of a constitutionally protected
right places it beyond the pale of legislative majorities
- When a constitutional right such as the right to equality or the right to
life assumes the character of being a part of the basic structure of the
Constitution, it assumes inviolable status : inviolability even in the face of the
power of amendment of even the Constitution - Ordinary legislation is not
beyond the pale of legislative modification - A statutory right can be
modified, curtailed or annulled by a simple enactment of the legislature - In
other words, statutory rights are subject to the compulsion of legislative
majorities - Moreover, when a right is conferred with an entrenched
constitutional status in Pt. III, it provides a touchstone on which the validity
of executive decision-making can be assessed and the validity of law can be
determined by judicial review - Entrenched constitutional rights provide the
basis of evaluating the validity of law
YR. Constitution of India - Pt. III, Arts. 32, 136 & 226 and Preamble -
Judicial review of legislation Guarantee against impermissible
encroachments of fundamental rights - It must be recognised that judicial
review is a powerful guarantee against legislative encroachments on life and
personal liberty - To cede this right would dilute the importance of the
protection granted to life and personal liberty by the Constitution
YS. Constitution of India - Pts. III & IV and Preamble - Relationship
between civil and political rights and socio-economic rights - Role of civil and
political rights (CPR) in ensuring that benefits of socio-economic rights (SER)
are justly and equitably distributed, explained
- Our Constitution places the individual at the forefront of its focus,
guaranteeing civil and political rights in Pt. III and embodying an aspiration for
achieving socio-economic rights in Pt. IV - Every individual in society
irrespective of social class or economic status is entitled to the intimacy and
autonomy which privacy protects - Above all, it is the right to question, the
right to scrutinise and the right to dissent which enables an informed citizenry
to scrutinise the actions of the Government
- Civil and political rights and socio-economic rights do not exist in a state
of antagonism - The conditions necessary for realising or fulfilling socio-
economic rights do not postulate the subversion of political freedom - The
reason is that socio-economic entitlements must yield true benefits to those
for whom they are intended - This can be achieved by eliminating rent-
seeking behaviour and by preventing the capture of social welfare benefits by
persons who are not entitled to them - Capture of social welfare benefits can
be obviated only when political systems are transparent and when there is a
free flow of information - Opacity enures to the benefit of those who
monopolise scarce economic resources - On the other hand, conditions where
civil and political freedoms flourish ensure that governmental policies are
subjected to critique and assessment - It is this scrutiny which subserves the
purpose of ensuring that socio-economic benefits actually permeate to the
underprivileged for whom they are meant
- Conditions of freedom and a vibrant assertion of civil and political rights
promote a constant review of the justness of socio-economic programmes
and of their effectiveness in addressing deprivation and want - Scrutiny of
public affairs is founded upon the existence of freedom - Hence civil and
political rights and socio-economic rights are complementary and not mutually
exclusive
VII. Constitutional Interpretation
YT. Constitution of India - Arts. 145 and 141 - Power of interpretation of
the Constitution - In our Constitution, it is not left to all the three organs of
the State to interpret the Constitution - When a substantial question as to
the interpretation of the Constitution arises, it is the Supreme Court alone
under Art. 145(3) which is to decide what the interpretation of the
Constitution shall be, and for this purpose the Constitution entrusts this task
to a minimum of five Judges of the Court
YU. Constitutional Interpretation - Dynamic and evolving process -
Constitutional doctrines should be evolved and expanded in consonance with
evolution of society - Interpretation should be in present day socio-economic
and political context and not in "originalist" context of era when Constitution
was framed and came into existence - Original intent theory itself
contemplates that the Constitution is organic in nature - While doing so,
Court should leave open path for succeeding generations to meet new
challenges - While roots of constitutional tree of justice remaining firm,
continuous growth of rights in the form of its branches and leaves through
interpretative process together constitute the "great brooding spirit" of Law
YV. Constitutional Interpretation - Constitution's "dark matter" - As
important as express provisions - Implications can be derived in absence of
express words - Supreme Court should probe into non-expressive aspect
keeping in mind aspiration for liberty of People of India - Court has to ascertain
constitutional scheme, purpose and limitations, for which text of the Constitution not
the only material - Constitutional Law - Silences of the Constitution/Implied
Limitation
YW. Constitutional Interpretation - Aids to construction - External aids -
Foreign Constitutions/law/views - English decisions - Deserve
to
be
considered but Constitution of India should be interpreted keeping in view
socio-economic and political conditions of our country
YX. Constitutional Interpretation - Aids to construction - External aids -
Historical background, Constituent Assembly Debates, etc. - Constituent
Assembly Debates (CAD) - Held, can be considered by Court but cannot form
conclusive basis for interpretation of a constitutional provision - CAD should
not be regarded as a seminar on the issue debated
VIII. Miscellaneous
YY. Constitution of India - What does Constitution of a country signify
YZ. Constitution of India - Art. 14 and Arts. 21 & 19 - Guarantee against
arbitrariness - Scope - Reiterated, no legislation can suffer from manifest
arbitrariness - Moreover, not only is this principle applicable in case of direct
challenges under Art. 14, but is also imported into the composite principle that
"procedure established by law" which seeks to abridge life or liberty, or any
aspect thereof, such as privacy, must be just, fair and reasonable - So also
when applying the test of reasonableness under Art. 19
Z. Constitution of India - Art. 14 - Guarantee against arbitrariness -
Scope - Proportionality as essential facet of - Held, proportionality is an
essential facet of the guarantee against arbitrary State action because it
ensures that the nature and quality of the encroachment on the right is not
disproportionate to the purpose of the law
ZA. Constitution of India - Arts. 25, 19(1)(a) and 21 - Right to freedom
of conscience - Aspects of, reflected in articles other than Art. 25
- While the right to freely "profess, practise and propagate religion" may
be a facet of free speech guaranteed under Art. 19(1)(a), the freedom of
belief or faith in any religion is a matter of conscience falling within the zone of
purely private thought process and is an aspect of liberty - There are areas
other than religious beliefs which form part of the individual's freedom of
conscience such as political belief, etc. which form part of the liberty under Art.
21
ZB. International Law - International Conventions - Should be read into
constitutional rights and interpreted in consonance therewith in absence of
any inconsistency with Constitution of India
Held :
Per Chandrachud, J. (for Khehar, C.J., Agrawal, J., himself and Nazeer, J.)
Interpretation of the Constitution
The Constitution was drafted and adopted in a historical context. The vision of the
Founding Fathers was enriched by the histories of suffering of those who suffered
oppression and a violation of dignity both here and elsewhere. Yet, it would be difficult
to dispute that many of the problems which contemporary societies face would not
have been present to the minds of the most perspicacious draftsmen. No generation,
including the present, can have a monopoly over solutions or the confidence in its
ability to foresee the future. As society evolves, so must constitutional doctrine. The
institutions which the Constitution has created must adapt flexibly to meet the
challenges in a rapidly growing knowledge economy. Above all, constitutional
interpretation is but a process in achieving justice, liberty and dignity to every citizen.
(Para 130)
The interpretation of the Constitution cannot be frozen by its original
understanding. The Constitution has evolved and must continuously evolve to meet
the aspirations and challenges of the present and the future. Nor can Judges foresee
every challenge and contingency which may arise in the future. This is particularly of
relevance in an age where technology reshapes our fundamental understanding of
information, knowledge and human relationships that was unknown even in the
recent past. Hence as Judges interpreting the Constitution today, the Court must
leave open the path for succeeding generations to meet the challenges to privacy that
may be unknown today.
(Para 259)
The Constitution must evolve with the felt necessities of time to meet the
challenges thrown up in a democratic order governed by the Rule of Law. The
meaning of the Constitution cannot be frozen on the perspectives present when it
was adopted. Technological change has given rise to concerns which were not
present seven decades ago and the rapid growth of technology may render
obsolescent many notions of the present. Hence the interpretation of the Constitution
must be resilient and flexible to allow future generations to adapt its content bearing
in mind its basic or essential features.
(Para 324)
International Conventions
The recognition of privacy as a fundamental constitutional value is part of India's
commitment to a global human rights regime. Article 51 of the Constitution, which
forms part of the directive principles, requires the State to endeavour to "foster
respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised
peoples with one another". Where there is a contradiction between international law
and a domestic statute, the Court would give effect to the latter. In the present case,
there is no contradiction between the international obligations which have been
assumed by India and the Constitution. The Court will not readily presume any
inconsistency. On the contrary, constitutional provisions must be read and interpreted
in a manner which would enhance their conformity with the global human rights
regime. India is a responsible member of the international community and the Court
must adopt an interpretation which abides
by the international commitments made by the country particularly where its
constitutional and statutory mandates indicate no deviation. In fact, the enactment of
the Human Rights Act by Parliament would indicate a legislative desire to implement
the human rights regime founded on constitutional values and international
conventions acceded to by India.
(Paras 148 and 154)
Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, recognises the right to
privacy. Similarly, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was adopted
on 16-12-1979 and came into effect on 23-3-1976. India ratified it on 11-12-1977.
The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 which has been enacted by Parliament
refers to ICCPR as a human rights instrument. On 30-6-2014, a report was presented
by the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
(Paras 148, 149 and 151)
"The Right to Privacy in the Digital Age", Report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (30-6-2014), p. 5, para 13, referred to
Preamble to the Constitution
The Preamble emphasises the need to secure to all citizens justice, liberty, equality
and fraternity. Together they constitute the founding faith or the blueprint of values
embodied with a sense of permanence in the constitutional document. The
constitutional vision seeks the realisation of justice (social, economic and political);
liberty (of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship); equality (as a guarantee
against arbitrary treatment of individuals) and fraternity (which assures a life of dignity
to every individual). The Preamble speaks of securing liberty of thought, expression,
belief, faith and worship. Fraternity is to be promoted to assure the dignity of the
individual. The individual lies at the core of constitutional focus and the ideals of
justice, liberty, equality and fraternity animate the vision of securing a dignified
existence to the individual. The Preamble envisions a social ordering in which
fundamental constitutional values are regarded as indispensable to the pursuit of
happiness. Such fundamental values have also found reflection in the foundational
document of totalitarian regimes in other parts of the world. What distinguishes India
is the adoption of a democratic way of life, founded on the Rule of Law. Democracy
accepts differences of perception, acknowledges divergences in ways of life, and
respects dissent.
(Paras 107 and 108)
Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan, (1965) 1 SCR 933 : AIR 1965 SC 845, affirmed
on this point
Interrelationship between Fundamental Rights
The ambit of "the procedure established by law" has been interpreted to mean
that the procedure must be fair, just and reasonable. The coalescence of Articles 14,
19 and 21 has brought into being a jurisprudence which recognises the
interrelationship between rights. That is how the requirements of fairness and non-
discrimination animate both the substantive and procedural aspects of
Article 21. These constitutional developments have taken place as the words of the
Constitution have been interpreted to deal with new exigencies requiring an expansive
reading of liberties and freedoms to preserve human rights under the Rule of Law. The
impact of the decision in Cooper case is to establish a link between the fundamental
rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. The immediate consequence of the
decision is that a law which restricts the personal liberties contained in Article 19 must
meet the test of permissible restrictions contemplated by clauses (2) to (6) in relation
to
the fundamental freedom which is infringed. Moreover, since the fundamental rights
are interrelated, Article 21 is no longer to be construed as a residue of rights which
are not specifically enumerated in Article 19. Both sets of rights overlap and hence a
law which affects one of the personal freedoms under Article 19 would, in addition to
the requirement of meeting the permissible restrictions contemplated in clauses (2) to
(6), have to meet the parameters of a valid "procedure established by law" under
Article 21 where it impacts on life or personal liberty. The law would be assessed not
with reference to its object but on the basis of its effect and impact on the
fundamental rights. Coupled with the breakdown of the theory that the fundamental
rights are watertight compartments, the post-Maneka case jurisprudence infused the
test of fairness and reasonableness in determining whether the "procedure established
by law" passes muster under Article 21. At a substantive level, the constitutional
values underlying each article in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights animate the
meaning of the others. This development of the law has followed a natural evolution.
The basis of this development after all is that every aspect of the diverse guarantees
of fundamental rights deals with human beings. Every element together with others
contributes in the composition of the human personality. In the very nature of things,
no element can be read in a manner disjunctive from the composite whole. The close
relationship between each of the fundamental rights has led to the recognition of
constitutional entitlements and interests. Some of them may straddle more than one,
and on occasion several, fundamental rights. Yet others may reflect the core value
upon which the fundamental rights are founded.
(Paras 259 and 260)
Judicial recognition of the existence of a constitutional right to privacy is not an
exercise in the nature of amending the Constitution nor is the Court embarking on a
constitutional function of that nature which is entrusted to Parliament. Neither is this
an exercise in constitutional amendment brought about by judicial decision nor does it
result in the creation of a new set of fundamental rights. The exercise has been one of
interpreting existing rights guaranteed by the Constitution and while understanding the
core of those rights, to define the ambit of what the right comprehends.
(Paras 321 and 260)
Satwant Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam, (1967) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1967 SC
:
Evolution of Privacy doctrine
The evolution of the comparative framework of law and history reflects the basic
need of every individual to live with dignity. Urbanisation and economic development
lead to a replacement of traditional social structures. Urban ghettos replace the
tranquillity of self-sufficient rural livelihoods. The need to protect the privacy of the
being is no less when development and technological change continuously threaten to
place the person into public gaze and portend to submerge the individual into a
seamless web of interconnected lives.
(Para 41)
Rishika Taneja and Sidhant Kumar : Privacy Law : Principles, Injunctions and
Compensation, Eastern Book Company (2014), for a comprehensive account on
the right to privacy and privacy laws in India; Gautam Bhatia: "State Surveillance
and the Right to Privacy in India : A Constitutional Biography", National Law School
of India Review (2014), Vol. 26(2), pp. 138-139; William Blackstone in his
Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765); John Stuart Mill : On Liberty
(1859); Austin in his Lectures on Jurisprudence (1869); Harvard Law Review,
Samuel D. Warren and Louis Brandeis; Michael C. James, "A Comparative Analysis
of the Right to Privacy in the United States, Canada and Europe", Connecticut
Journal of International Law (Spring 2014), Vol. 29, Issue 2, p. 261; James
Madison, "Essay on Property", in Gaillard Hunt (Ed.), The Writings of James
Madison (1906), Vol. 6, pp. 101-103; Warren and Brandeis, "The Right to Privacy",
Harvard Law Review (1890), Vol. 4, No. 5, p. 193; Thomas Cooley, Treatise on the
Law of Torts (1888), 2nd Edn.; Dorothy J. Glancy, "The Invention of the Right to
Privacy", Arizona Law Review (1979) Vol. 21, No. 1, p. 1; Alpheus Mason :
Brandeis : A Free Man's Life (1956) 70, referred to
Privacy - Natural right
Privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to exercise control over his or
her personality. It finds an origin in the notion that there are certain rights which are
natural to or inherent in a human being. The human element in life is impossible to
conceive without the existence of natural rights. Natural rights are not bestowed by
the State. They inhere in human beings because they are human. They exist equally in
the individual irrespective of class or strata, gender or orientation.
(Paras 42 and 46)
John Locke : Second Treatise of Government (1760); William Blackstone :
Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765), American Declaration of
Independence (1776); Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789)
adopted by the French National Assembly; Roscoe Pound : The spirit of Common
Law (1921), Roscoe Pound : The Revival of Natural Law (1942); Edwin W.
Patterson in A Pragmatist Looks at Natural Law and Natural Rights (1955), Edwin
W. Patterson, "A Pragmatist Looks At Natural Law and Natural Rights", in Arthur L.
Harding (Ed.), Natural Law and Natural Rights (1955), pp. 62-63, referred to
Inalienability
Natural rights are inalienable because they are inseparable from the human
personality. Distinguishing an inalienable right to an object from the object itself
emphasises the notion of inalienability. All human beings retain their inalienable rights
(whatever their situation, whatever their acts, whatever their guilt or innocence). The
concept of natural inalienable rights secures autonomy to human beings and protects
the right of the individual to choose and preserve liberty. But the autonomy is not
absolute, for the simple reason that, the concept of inalienable rights postulates that
there are some rights which no human being may alienate.
(Paras 42, 318 and 47)
Craig A. Ster and Gregory M. Jones; "The Coherence of Natural Inalienable Rights",
UMKC Law Review (2007-08), Vol. 76(4), pp. 971-972; Ronald Dworkin : Taking
Rights Seriously (Duckworth, 1977), referred to
Life, Liberty and dignity - Nature of, and Interrelationship between - Privacy
as an essential aspect of dignity
Life is precious in itself. But life is worth living because of the freedoms which
enable each individual to live life as it should be lived. The best decisions on how life
should be lived are entrusted to the individual. They are continuously shaped by the
social milieu in which individuals exist. The duty of the State is to safeguard the ability
to take decisions - the autonomy of the individual - and not to dictate those
decisions. "Life" within the meaning of Article 21 is not confined to the integrity of the
physical body. The right comprehends one's being in its fullest sense. That which
facilitates the fulfilment of life is as much within the protection of the guarantee of life.
Privacy is a constitutionally protected right which emerges primarily from the
guarantee of life and personal liberty in Article 21 of the Constitution. Elements of
privacy also arise in varying contexts from the other facets of freedom and dignity
recognised and guaranteed by the fundamental rights contained in Part III.
(Paras 118, 102 and 320)
whether an order issued by the President under Article 359(1) of the Constitution
suspends the right of every person to move any court for the enforcement of the
right to personal liberty under Article 21 upon being detained under a law providing for
preventive detention. The majority Judges rejected the submission of the detenu that
the suspension of the remedy to enforce Article 21 does not automatically entail
suspension of the right or the rule of law and that even during an emergency the rule
of law could not be suspended. It was held "The safeguard of liberty is in the good
sense of the people and in the system of representative and responsible Government
which has been evolved. If extraordinary powers are given, they are given because
the emergency is extraordinary, and are limited to the period of the emergency.". The
judgments rendered by all the four Judges constituting the majority in ADM, Jabalpur,
by the State nor does the Constitution create these rights. The right to life has existed
even before the advent of the Constitution. In recognising the right, the Constitution
does not become the sole repository of the right. It would be preposterous to
suggest that a democratic Constitution without a Bill of Rights would leave individuals
governed by the State without either the existence of the right to live or the means of
enforcement of the right. The right to life being inalienable to each individual, it existed
prior to the Constitution and continued in force under Article 372 of the Constitution.
Khanna, J. was clearly right in holding that the recognition of the right to life and
personal liberty under the Constitution does not denude the existence of that right,
apart from it nor can there be a fatuous assumption that in adopting the Constitution
the people of India surrendered the most precious aspect of the human persona,
namely, life, liberty and freedom to the State on whose mercy these rights would
depend. Such a construct is contrary to the basic foundation of the Rule of Law which
imposes restraints upon the powers vested in the modern State when it deals with
the liberties of the individual. The power of the Court to issue a writ of habeas corpus
is a precious and undeniable feature of the Rule of Law.
(Paras 132 and 136)
ADM, Jabalpur must be and is accordingly overruled. The decision in Bhanudas
(Para 139)
214 (1944), referred to
Siddhartha Mukherjee, The Gene : An Intimate History (Penguin Books Ltd., 2016)
pp. 78-85, referred to
Life and personal liberty are not creations of the Constitution. These rights are
recognised by the Constitution as inhering in each individual as an intrinsic and
inseparable part of the human element which dwells within. Life and personal liberty
are inalienable rights. These are rights which are inseparable from a dignified human
existence. The dignity of the individual, equality between human beings and the quest
for liberty are the foundational pillars of the Indian Constitution. There is inseparable
relationship between protection of life and liberty, with dignity. Dignity as a
constitutional value finds expression in the Preamble. The constitutional vision seeks
the realisation of justice (social, economic and political); liberty (of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship); equality (as a guarantee against arbitrary
treatment of individuals) and fraternity (which assures a life of dignity to every
individual). These constitutional precepts exist in unity to facilitate a humane and
compassionate society. The individual is the focal point of the Constitution because it
is in the realisation of individual rights
that the collective well-being of the community is determined. Human dignity is an
integral part of the Constitution. Reflections of dignity are found in the guarantee
against arbitrariness (Article 14), the lamps of freedom (Article 19) and in the right to
life and personal liberty (Article 21).
(Paras 319, 318, 107 and 108)
(L&S) 1013; Maharashtra University of Health Sciences V. Satchikitsa Prasarak
Aharon Barak : Human Dignity-The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right
(Cambridge University Press, 2015), cited
To live is to live with dignity. The draftsmen of the Constitution defined their vision
of the society in which constitutional values would be attained by emphasising, among
other freedoms, liberty and dignity. So fundamental is dignity that it permeates the
core of the rights guaranteed to the individual by Part III. Dignity is the core which
unites the fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve for
each individual the dignity of existence. Privacy with its attendant values assures
dignity to the individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed with dignity can liberty
be of true substance. Privacy ensures the fulfilment of dignity and is a core value
which the protection of life and liberty is intended to achieve.
(Para 119)
Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has both an
intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity is an entitlement
or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its instrumental facet, dignity and
freedom are inseparably intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to achieve the
other. The ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the realisation
of the full value of life and liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is a
subset. All liberties may not be exercised in privacy. Yet others can be fulfilled only
within a private space. Privacy enables the individual to retain the autonomy of the
body and mind. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital
matters of concern to life. Privacy has not been couched as an independent
fundamental right. But that does not detract from the constitutional protection
afforded to it, once the true nature of privacy and its relationship with those
fundamental rights which are expressly protected, is understood. Privacy lies across
the spectrum of protected freedoms. The guarantee of equality is a guarantee against
arbitrary State action. It prevents the State from discriminating between individuals.
The destruction by the State of a sanctified personal space whether of the body or of
the mind is violative of the guarantee against arbitrary State action. Privacy of the
body entitles an individual to the integrity of the physical aspects of personhood. The
intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to
freedom of thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and
the freedom of self-determination. When these guarantees intersect with gender,
they create a private space which protects all those elements which are crucial to
gender identity. The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all
integral to the dignity of the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual
recognises an inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be exercised. An
individual may perceive that the best form of expression is to remain silent. Silence
postulates a realm of privacy. An artist finds reflection of the soul in a creative
endeavour. A writer expresses the outcome of a process of thought. A musician
contemplates upon notes which musically lead to silence. The silence, which lies
within, reflects on the ability to choose how to convey thoughts and ideas or interact
with others. These are crucial aspects of personhood. The freedoms under Article 19
can be fulfilled where the individual is entitled to decide upon his or her preferences.
Read in conjunction with Article 21, liberty enables the individual to have a choice of
preferences on various facets of life including what and how one will eat, the way one
will dress, the faith one will espouse and a myriad other matters on which autonomy
and self-determination require a choice to be made within the privacy of the mind.
The constitutional right to the freedom of religion under Article 25 has implicit within it
the ability to choose a faith and the freedom to express or not express those choices
to the world. These are some illustrations of the manner in which privacy facilitates
freedom and is intrinsic to the exercise of liberty. Dignity cannot exist without privacy.
Both reside within the inalienable values of life, liberty and freedom which the
Constitution has recognised. Privacy is the ultimate expression of the sanctity of the
individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles across the spectrum of
fundamental rights and protects for the individual a zone of choice and self-
determination.
(Para 298)
The sanctity of privacy lies in its functional relationship with dignity. Privacy ensures
that a human being can lead a life of dignity by securing the inner recesses of the
human personality from unwanted intrusion. Privacy recognises the autonomy of the
individual and the right of every person to make essential choices which affect the
course of life. In doing so privacy recognises that living a life of dignity is essential for
a human being to fulfil the liberties and freedoms which are the cornerstone of the
Constitution. To recognise the value of privacy as a constitutional entitlement and
interest is not to fashion a new fundamental right by a process of amendment
through judicial fiat. Neither are the Judges nor is the process of judicial review
entrusted with the constitutional responsibility to amend the Constitution. But judicial
review certainly has the task before it of determining the nature and extent of the
freedoms available to each person under the fabric of those constitutional guarantees
which are protected. Courts have traditionally discharged that function and in the
context of Article 21 itself; a panoply of protections governing different facets of a
dignified existence has been held to fall within the protection of Article 21.
(Para 127)
Privacy postulates the reservation of a private space for the individual, described
as the right to be let alone. The concept is founded on the autonomy of the individual.
The ability of an individual to make choices lies at the core of the human personality.
The notion of privacy enables the individual to assert and control the human element
which is inseparable from the personality of the individual. The
inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in the ability to make
decisions on matters intimate to human life. The autonomy of the individual is
associated over matters which can be kept private. These are concerns over which
there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The body and the mind are inseparable
elements of the human personality. The integrity of the body and the sanctity of the
mind can exist on the foundation that each individual possesses an inalienable ability
and right to preserve a private space in which the human personality can develop.
Without the ability to make choices, the inviolability of the personality would be in
doubt. Recognising a zone of privacy is but an acknowledgment that each individual
must be entitled to chart and pursue the course of development of personality. Hence
privacy is a postulate of human dignity itself. Thoughts and behavioural patterns which
are intimate to an individual are entitled to a zone of privacy where one is free of
social expectations. In that zone of privacy, an individual is not judged by others.
Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions which find expression in the
human personality. It enables individuals to preserve their beliefs, thoughts,
expressions, ideas, ideologies, preferences and choices against societal demands of
homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic recognition of heterogeneity, of the right of the
individual to be different and to stand against the tide of conformity in creating a zone
of solitude. Privacy protects the individual from the searching glare of publicity in
matters which are personal to his or her life. Privacy attaches to the person and not
to the place where it is associated. Privacy constitutes the foundation of all liberty
because it is in privacy that the individual can decide how liberty is best exercised.
Individual dignity and privacy are inextricably linked in a pattern woven out of a thread
of diversity into the fabric of a plural culture.
(Para 297)
Privacy represents the core of the human personality and recognises the ability of
each individual to make choices and to take decisions governing matters intimate and
personal. Yet, it is necessary to acknowledge that individuals live in communities and
work in communities. Their personalities affect and, in turn are shaped by their social
environment. The individual is not a hermit. The lives of individuals are as much
a
social phenomenon. In their interactions with others, individuals are constantly
engaged in behavioural patterns and in relationships impacting on the rest of society.
Equally, the life of the individual is being consistently shaped by cultural and social
values imbibed from living in the community. This state of flux which represents
a
constant evolution of individual personhood in the relationship with the rest of society
provides the rationale for reserving to the individual a zone of repose. The lives which
individuals lead as members of society engender a reasonable expectation of privacy.
The notion of a reasonable expectation of privacy has elements both of a subjective
and objective nature. Privacy at a subjective level is a reflection of those areas where
an individual desire to be left alone. On an objective plane, privacy is defined by those
constitutional values which shape the content of the protected zone where the
individual ought to be left alone. The notion that there must exist a reasonable
expectation of privacy ensures that while on the one hand, the individual has a
protected zone of privacy, yet on the other, the exercise of individual choices is
subject to the rights of others to lead orderly lives. For instance, an individual who
possesses a plot of land may decide to build upon it subject to zoning regulations. If
the building bye-laws define the area upon which construction can be raised or the
height of the boundary wall around the property, the right to privacy of the individual
is conditioned by regulations designed to protect the interests of the community in
planned spaces. Hence while the individual is entitled to a zone of privacy, its extent is
based not only on the subjective expectation of the individual but on an objective
principle which defines a reasonable expectation. Privacy is the constitutional core of
human dignity. Privacy has both a normative and descriptive function. At a normative
level privacy subserves those eternal values upon which the guarantees of life, liberty
and freedom are founded. At a descriptive level, privacy postulates a bundle of
entitlements and interests which lie at the foundation of ordered liberty.
(Paras 299 and 322)
248, affirmed
Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643; Kesavananda
Behram Khurshid Pesikaka V. State of Bombay, (1955) 1 SCR 613 : AIR 1955 SC
123 : 1955 Cri LJ 215, referred to
SCR 587; Ujjam Bai V. State of U.P., (1963) 1 SCR 778 : AIR 1962 SC 1621; Moti
Privacy - Concept Connotations/Facets
Privacy is the constitutional core of human dignity. Privacy has both a normative
and descriptive function. At a normative level privacy subserves those eternal values
upon which the guarantees of life, liberty and freedom are founded. At a descriptive
level, privacy postulates a bundle of entitlements and interests which lie at the
foundation of ordered liberty.
(Para 322)
Privacy has both positive and negative content. The negative content restrains the
State from committing an intrusion upon the life and personal liberty of a citizen. Its
positive content imposes an obligation on the State to take all necessary measures to
protect the privacy of the individual.
(Para 326)
Privacy has distinct connotations including (i) spatial control; (ii) decisional
autonomy; and (iii) informational control. Spatial control denotes the creation of
private spaces. Decisional autonomy comprehends intimate personal choices such as
those governing reproduction as well as choices expressed in public such as faith or
modes of dress. Informational control empowers the individual to use privacy as a
shield to retain personal control over information pertaining to the person.
(Para 248)
Bhairav Acharya, "The Four Parts of Privacy in India", Economic & Political Weekly
(2015), Vol. 50 Issue 22, p. 32; Bert-Jaap Koops et al., "A Typology of Privacy",
University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Law (2017), Vol. 38 Issue 2, p.
566, referred to
An article published in 2017 titled "A Typology of Privacy" in the University of
Pennsylvania Journal of International Law presented two primary axes : a horizontal
axis consisting of four zones of privacy and a vertical axis which emphasises two
aspects of freedom : the freedom to be let alone and the freedom for self-
development. The nine primary types of privacy are, according to the above
depiction:
(i) bodily privacy which reflects the privacy of the physical body. Implicit in this
is the negative freedom of being able to prevent others from violating one's body
or from restraining the freedom of bodily movement;
(ii) spatial privacy which is reflected in the privacy of a private space through
which access of others can be restricted to the space; intimate relations and
family life are an apt illustration of spatial privacy;
(iii) communicational privacy which is reflected in enabling an individual to
restrict access to communications or control the use of information which is
communicated to third parties;
(iv) proprietary privacy which is reflected by the interest of a person in utilising
property as a means to shield facts, things or information from others;
(v) intellectual privacy which is reflected as an individual interest in the privacy
of thought and mind and the development of opinions and beliefs;
(vi) decisional privacy reflected by an ability to make intimate decisions
primarily consisting one's sexual or procreative nature and decisions in respect of
intimate relations;
(vii) associational privacy which is reflected in the ability of the individual to
choose who she wishes to interact with;
(viii) behavioural privacy which recognises the privacy interests of a person
even while conducting publicly visible activities. Behavioural privacy postulates that
even when access is granted to others, the individual is entitled to control the
extent of access and preserve to herself a measure of freedom from unwanted
intrusion; and
(ix) informational privacy which reflects an interest in preventing information
about the self from being disseminated and controlling the extent of access to
information.
(Paras 249 and 250)
Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of
family life, marriage, procreation, the home and sexual orientation. Privacy also
connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards individual autonomy and
recognises the ability of the individual to control vital aspects of his or her life.
Personal choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy. Privacy protects
heterogeneity and recognises the plurality and diversity of our culture. While the
legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from the intimate zone to the private
zone and from the private to the public arenas, it is important to underscore that
privacy is not lost or surrendered merely because the individual is in a public place.
Privacy attaches to the person since it is an essential facet of the dignity of the human
being.
(Para 323)
The Court herein has not embarked upon an exhaustive enumeration or a
catalogue of entitlements or interests comprised in the right to privacy.
(Para 324)
Entick V. Carrington, (1765) 19 St Tr 1029 : 95 ER 807; Albert V. Strange, (1849) 1
Mac & G 25 : 41 ER 1171; Kaye V. Robertson, 1991 FSR 62 (CA); R. V. Director of
Serious Fraud Office, ex p Smith, 1993 AC 1 : (1992) 3 WLR 66 (HL); Wainwright
V. Home Office, (2004) 2 AC 406 : (2003) 3 WLR 1137 (HL); Douglas V. Hello!
Ltd., 2001 QB 967 : (2001) 2 WLR 992 (CA); Douglas V. Hello! Ltd. (No. 3), 2006
QB 125 : (2005) 3 WLR 881 (CA); Prince of Wales V. Associated Newspapers Ltd.,
2008 Ch 57 : (2007) 3 WLR 222 : 2006 EWCA Civ 1776 (CA); Murray V. Express
Newspapers plc, 2009 Ch 481 : (2008) 3 WLR 1360 (CA); R. (GC) V. Commr. of
Police of the Metropolis, 2011 UKSC 21 : (2011) 1 WLR 1230 (SC); JR38, In re,
2015 UKSC 42 : (2015) 3 WLR 155 (SC); PJS V. News Group Newspapers Ltd.,
US SC 150 : 67 L Ed 1042 : 262 US 390 (1923); Olmstead V. United States,
OnLine US SC 103 : 52 L Ed 2d 675 : 431 US 678 (1977); Smith V. Maryland,
:
165 : 92 L Ed 2d 140 : 478 US 186 (1986); National Aeronautics and Space
Ed 2d 285 : 573 US (2014); National Media Ltd. V. Jooste, (1996) 3 SA 262
OnLine ZACC 15 : (1999) 1 SA 6 (CC); Investigating Directorate : Serious
:
V. tat belge, Case C-450/06, 2008 ECR I-581; Niemietz V. Germany, (1992) 16
EHRR 97; Costello-Roberts V. United Kingdom, (1993) 19 EHRR 112; S and Marper
V. United Kingdom, 2008 ECHR 1581; Uzun V. Germany, Application No.
35623/05, decided on 2-9-2010 (ECHR) : (2010) 53 EHRR 852; Asociacin
Nacional de Establecimientos Financieros de Crdito (ASNEF) V. Spain, C-468/10,
decided on 24-11-2011, 2011 ECR I-12181 : ECLI : EU : C : 2011 : 777; Digital
Rights Ireland Ltd. V. Minister, (2014) 3 WLR 1607 : C-293/12, decided on 8-4-
2014 (CJEU);
RE V. United Kingdom, Application No. 62498/11, decided on 27-10-2015 : 2015
ECHR 947; Roman Zakharov V. Russia, Application No. 47143/06, decided on 4-12-
2015 (ECHR) : (2016) 63 EHRR 17; Artavia Murillo ("In Vitro Fertilization") V. Costa
-7-2009 (Inter-Am Ct HR), referred to
Av.B plc, 2003 QB 195 : (2002) 3 WLR 542 : (2002) EWCA Civ 337 (CA), cited
"Privacy", Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy (2002), available at
<https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/privacy/> Julie E. Cohen, "What Privacy is
For", Harvard Law Review (2013), Vol. 126, p. 1904; Judith Jarvis Thomson, "The
Right to Privacy", Philosophy and Public Affairs (1975), Vol. 4, pp. 295-314;
Richard Posner, The Economics of Justice (Harvard University Press, 1981); Robert
Bork, The Tempting of America : The Political Seduction of the Law (Simon and
Schuster, 1990); Catherine MacKinnon, Toward a Feminist Theory of the State
(Harvard University Press, 1989); William L. Prosser, "Privacy", California Law
Review (1960), Vol. 48(3), pp. 383-423; Bert-Jaap Koops et al., "A Typology of
Privacy", University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Law (2017), Vol. 38,
Issue 2, p. 496; Id, at p. 497; Lord Neuberger, "Privacy in the 21st Century", the
UK Association of Jewish Lawyers and Jurists' Lecture (28-11-2012), referred to
Informational privacy
Ours is an age of information. Information is knowledge. The old adage that
"knowledge is power" has stark implications for the position of the individual where
data is ubiquitous, an all-encompassing presence. Technology has made life
fundamentally interconnected. The internet has become all-pervasive as individuals
spend more and more time online each day of their lives. Individuals connect with
others and use the internet as a means of communication. Yet every transaction of
an individual user and every site that she visits, leaves electronic tracks generally
without her knowledge. These electronic tracks contain powerful means of
information which provide knowledge of the sort of person that the user is and her
interests. Individually, these information silos may seem inconsequential. In
aggregation, they disclose the nature of the personality : food habits, language,
health, hobbies, sexual preferences, friendships, ways of dress and political affiliation.
In aggregation, information provides a picture of the being : of things which matter
and those that do not, of things to be disclosed and those best hidden.
(Para 300)
Francois Nawrot, Katarzyna Syska and Przemyslaw Switalski, "Horizontal Application
of Fundamental Rights - Right to Privacy on the Internet", 9th Annual European
Constitutionalism Seminar (May 2010), University of Warsaw, available at
<http://en.zpc.wpia.uw.edu.pl/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/9_Horizontal_Application_of_Fundamental_Rights.pdf>.
Press
Release
45/2017,
available
at
<http://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/PR_No.45of2017.pdf>, referred to
The age of information has resulted in complex issues for informational privacy.
These issues arise from the nature of information itself. Information has three facets :
it is non-rivalrous, invisible and recombinant. Information is non-rivalrous in the sense
that there can be simultaneous users of the good - use of a piece of information by
one person does not make it less available to another. Secondly, invasions of data
privacy are difficult to detect because they can be
invisible. Information can be accessed, stored and disseminated without notice. Its
ability to travel at the speed of light enhances the invisibility of access to data,
"information collection can be the swiftest theft of all". Thirdly, information is
recombinant in the sense that data output can be used as an input to generate more
data output.
(Para 303)
Christina P. Moniodis: 'Moving from Nixon to NASA : Privacy's Second Strand - A
Right to Informational Privacy", Yale Journal of Law and Technology (2012), Vol. 15
(1), p. 153, referred to
Data mining processes together with knowledge discovery can be combined to
create facts about individuals. Metadata and the internet of things have the ability to
redefine human existence in ways which are yet fully to be perceived. The
contemporary age has been aptly regarded as "an era of ubiquitous dataveillance, or
the systematic monitoring of citizen's communications or actions through the use of
information technology". It is also an age of "big data" or the collection of data sets.
These data sets are capable of being searched; they have linkages with other data
sets; and are marked by their exhaustive scope and the permanency of collection.
The challenges which big data poses to privacy interests emanate from State and non
-State entities. Users of wearable devices and social media networks may not
conceive of themselves as having volunteered data but their activities of use and
engagement result in the generation of vast amounts of data about individual
lifestyles, choices and preferences.
(Para 304)
Yvonne McDermott:"Conceptualizing the Right to Data Protection in an Era of Big
Data", Big Data and Society (2017), p. 1; Christina P. Moniodis, "Moving from
Nixon to NASA : Privacy's Second Strand - A Right to Informational Privacy", Yale
Journal of Law and Technology (2012), Vol. 15(1), at p. 159. The article attributes
Daniel Solove's work on privacy as - Daniel J. Solove, Understanding Privacy
(2008) 70; Yvonne McDermott, "Conceptualizing the Right to Data Protection in an
Era of Big Data", Big Data and Society (2017), p. 4, referred to
The balance between data regulation and individual privacy raises complex issues
requiring delicate balances to be drawn between the legitimate concerns of the State
on one hand and individual interest in the protection of privacy on the other.
(Para 306)
The sphere of privacy stretches at one end to those intimate matters to which a
reasonable expectation of privacy may attach. It expresses a right to be left alone. A
broader connotation which has emerged in academic literature of a comparatively
recent origin is related to the protection of one's identity. Data protection relates
closely with the latter sphere. Data such as medical information would be a category
to which a reasonable expectation of privacy attaches. There may be other data
which falls outside the reasonable expectation paradigm. Apart from safeguarding
privacy, data protection regimes seek to protect the autonomy of the individual. This
is evident from the emphasis in the European data protection regime on the centrality
of consent. Related to the issue of consent is the requirement of transparency which
requires a disclosure by the data recipient of information pertaining to data transfer
and use.
(Para 307)
Another aspect which data protection regimes seek to safeguard is the principle of
non-discrimination which ensures that the collection of data should
be carried out in a manner which does not discriminate on the basis of racial or ethnic
origin, political or religious beliefs, genetic or health status or sexual orientation.
(Para 308)
Formulation of a regime for data protection is a complex exercise which needs to
be undertaken by the State after a careful balancing of the requirements of privacy
coupled with other values which the protection of data subserves together with the
legitimate concerns of the State. One of the chief concerns which the formulation of a
data protection regime has to take into account is that while the web is a source of
lawful activity-both personal and commercial, concerns of national security intervene
since the seamless structure of the web can be exploited by terrorists to wreak havoc
and destruction on civilised societies. Cyber attacks can threaten financial systems.
(Para 309)
Richard A. Posner: "Privacy, Surveillance, and Law", The University of Chicago Law
Review (2008), Vol. 75, p. 251., referred to
The State does have a legitimate interest when it monitors the web to secure the
nation against cyber attacks and the activities of terrorists. While it intervenes to
protect legitimate State interests, the State must nevertheless put into place a robust
regime that ensures the fulfilment of a threefold requirement. These three
requirements apply to all restraints on privacy (not just informational privacy). They
emanate from the procedural and content-based mandate of Article 21. The first
requirement that there must be a law in existence to justify an encroachment on
privacy is an express requirement of Article 21. For, no person can be deprived of his
life or personal liberty except in accordance with the procedure established by law.
The existence of law is an essential requirement. Second, the requirement of a need,
in terms of a legitimate State aim, ensures that the nature and content of the law
which imposes the restriction falls within the zone of reasonableness mandated by
Article 14, which is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. The pursuit of a
legitimate State aim ensures that the law does not suffer from manifest arbitrariness.
Legitimacy, as a postulate, involves a value judgment. Judicial review does not
reappreciate or second guess the value judgment of the legislature but is for deciding
whether the aim which is sought to be pursued suffers from palpable or manifest
arbitrariness. The third requirement ensures that the means which are adopted by the
legislature are proportional to the object and needs sought to be fulfilled by the law.
Proportionality is an essential facet of the guarantee against arbitrary State action
because it ensures that the nature and quality of the encroachment on the right is not
disproportionate to the purpose of the law. Hence, the threefold requirement for a
valid law arises out of the mutual interdependence between the fundamental
guarantees against arbitrariness on the one hand and the protection of life and
personal liberty, on the other. The right to privacy, which is an intrinsic part of the
right to life and liberty, and the freedoms embodied in Part III is subject to the same
restraints which apply to those freedoms.
(Paras 309 and 310)
Apart from national security, the State may have justifiable reasons for the
collection and storage of data. In a social welfare State, the Government embarks
upon programmes which provide benefits to impoverished and marginalised sections
The surest way t to legal research!"
of society. There is a vital State interest in ensuring that scarce public
resources are not dissipated by the diversion of resources to persons who do not
qualify as recipients. Allocation of resources for human development is coupled with a
legitimate concern that the utilisation of resources should not be siphoned away for
extraneous purposes. Data mining with the object of ensuring that resources are
properly deployed to legitimate beneficiaries is a valid ground for the State to insist on
the collection of authentic data. But, the data which the State has collected has to be
utilised for legitimate purposes of the State and ought not to be utilised
unauthorisedly for extraneous purposes. This will ensure that the legitimate concerns
of the State are duly safeguarded while, at the same time, protecting privacy
concerns. Prevention and investigation of crime and protection of the revenue are
among the legitimate aims of the State. Digital platforms are a vital tool of ensuring
good governance in a social welfare State. Information technology-legitimately
deployed, is a powerful enabler in the spread of innovation and knowledge.
(Para 311)
A distinction has been made in contemporary literature between anonymity on one
hand and privacy on the other. Both anonymity and privacy prevent others from
gaining access to pieces of personal information yet they do so in opposite ways.
Privacy involves hiding information whereas anonymity involves hiding what makes it
personal. An unauthorised parting of the medical records of an individual which have
been furnished to a hospital will amount to an invasion of privacy. On the other hand,
the State may assert a legitimate interest in analysing data borne from hospital
records to understand and deal with a public health epidemic such as malaria or
dengue to obviate a serious impact on the population. If the State preserves the
anonymity of the individual it could legitimately assert a valid State interest in the
preservation of public health to design appropriate policy interventions on the basis of
the data available to it.
(Para 312)
Jeffrey M. Skopek "Reasonable Expectations of Anonymity", Virginia Law Review
(2015), Vol. 101, pp. 691-762, referred to
The Union Government constituted a Group of Experts on privacy under the
auspices of the erstwhile Planning Commission. The Expert Group in its Report (dated
16-10-2012) proposed a framework for the protection of privacy concerns which, it
was expected, would serve as a conceptual foundation for legislation protecting
privacy. The framework suggested by the Expert Group was based on five salient
features : (i) Technological neutrality and interoperability with international standards;
(ii) Multi-dimensional privacy; (iii) Horizontal applicability to State and non-State
entities; (iv) Conformity with privacy principles; and (v) A co-regulatory enforcement
regime. After reviewing international best practices. the Expert Group proposed nine
privacy principles. They are : Notice, choice and consent, collection limitation, purpose
limitation, Access and correction. Disclosure of information, Security, Openness, and
Accountability.
(Para 314)
"Report of the Group of Experts on Privacy" (16-10-2012), Government of India,
available at <http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/rep_privacy.pdf>
referred to
During the course of the hearing of these proceedings, the Union Government has
placed on the record an Office Memorandum dated 31-7-2017 by which it has
constituted a committee chaired by Justice B.N. Srikrishna, former Judge of the
Supreme Court of India to review inter alia data protection norms in the country and
to make its recommendations. The terms of reference of the Committee are:
(a) To study various issues relating to data protection in India;
(b) To make specific suggestions for consideration of the Central Government
on principles to be considered for data protection in India and suggest a draft Data
Protection Bill.
Since the Government has initiated the process of reviewing the entire area of data
protection, it would be appropriate to leave the matter for expert determination so
that a robust regime for the protection of data is put into place. It is expected that
the Union Government shall follow up on its decision by taking all necessary and
proper steps.
(Para 315)
Constituent Assembly Debates
There is no substance in the submission that the Founding Fathers of the
Constitution, having rejected the notion of privacy being a fundamental right, it would
be outside the realm of constitutional adjudication for the Court to declare a
fundamental right to privacy. The debates of the Constituent Assembly indicate that
the proposed inclusion (which was eventually dropped) was in two specific areas,
namely, correspondence and searches and seizures. From this, it cannot be
concluded that the Constituent Assembly had expressly resolved to reject the notion
of the right to privacy as an integral element of the liberty and freedoms guaranteed
by the fundamental rights.
(Paras 251 and 258)
B. Shiva Rao : The Framing of India's Constitution (Indian Institute of Public
Administration, 1967) Vol. 2, p. 75; B. Shiva Rao : The Framing of India's
Constitution : A Study (Indian Institute of Public Administration, 1968) pp. 219-20,
referred to
The Constitution does not contain a separate article telling that privacy has been
declared to be a fundamental right. Nor has the Court tagged the provisions of Part III
with an alpha-suffixed right to privacy : this is not an act of judicial redrafting. To
recognise the value of privacy as a constitutional entitlement and interest is not to
fashion a new fundamental right by a process of amendment through judicial fiat.
Neither are the Judges nor is the process of judicial review entrusted with the
constitutional responsibility to amend the Constitution. But judicial review certainly has
the task before it of determining the nature and extent of the freedoms available to
each person under the fabric of those constitutional guarantees which are protected.
Courts have traditionally discharged that function and in the context of Article 21
itself, a panoply of protections governing different facets of a dignified existence has
been held to fall within the protection of Article 21.
(Paras 298 and 127)
Statutory protection to privacy
The submission that there is a statutory regime by virtue of which the right to
privacy is adequately protected and hence it is not necessary to read a constitutional
right to privacy into the fundamental rights, betrays lack of understanding of the
reason why rights are protected in the first place as entrenched guarantees in a Bill of
Rights or, as in the case of the Indian Constitution, as part of the fundamental
rights. Elevating a right to the position of a constitutionally protected right places it
beyond the pale of legislative majorities. When a constitutional right such as the right
to equality or the right to life assumes the character of being a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution, it assumes inviolable status : inviolability even in the
face of the power of amendment. Ordinary legislation is not beyond the pale of
legislative modification. A statutory right can be modified, curtailed or annulled by a
simple enactment of the legislature. In other words, statutory rights are subject to
the compulsion of legislative majorities. The purpose of infusing a right with a
constitutional element is precisely to provide it a sense of immunity from popular
opinion and, as its reflection, from legislative annulment. Constitutionally protected
rights embody the liberal belief that personal liberties of the individual are so
sacrosanct that it is necessary to ensconce them in a protective shell that places
them beyond the pale of ordinary legislation. To negate a constitutional right on the
ground that there is an available statutory protection is to invert constitutional theory.
As a matter of fact, legislative protection is in many cases, an acknowledgment and
recognition of a constitutional right which needs to be effectuated and enforced
through protective laws. But, the important point to note is that when a right is
conferred with an entrenched constitutional status in Part III, it provides a touchstone
on which the validity of executive decision-making can be assessed and the validity of
law can be determined by judicial review. Entrenched constitutional rights provide the
basis of evaluating the validity of law. Hence, it would be plainly unacceptable to urge
that the existence of a law creating a corresponding statutory right negates the
rationale for a constitutional right or renders the constitutional right unnecessary.
(Paras 263 to 265)
Elitist Construct
The submission that the right to privacy must be forsaken in the interest of welfare
entitlements provided by the State suggesting that the right to privacy is an elitist
construct which stands apart from the needs and aspirations of the large majority
constituting the rest of society, is unsustainable. This submission betrays a
misunderstanding of the constitutional position. Our Constitution places the individual
at the forefront of its focus, guaranteeing civil and political rights in Part III and
embodying an aspiration for achieving socio-economic rights in Part IV. The refrain
that the poor need no civil and political rights and are concerned only with economic
well-being has been utilised through history to wreak the most egregious violations of
human rights. Above all, it is the right to question, the right to scrutinise and the right
to dissent which enables an informed citizenry to scrutinise the actions of the
Government. Those who are governed are entitled to question those who govern,
about the discharge of their constitutional duties including in the provision of socio-
economic welfare benefits. The power to scrutinise and to reason enables the citizens
of a democratic polity to make informed decisions on basic issues which govern their
rights. The theory that civil and political rights are subservient to socio-economic
rights has been urged in the past and has been categorically rejected in the course of
constitutional adjudication by the Supreme Court.
(Para 266)
Civil and political rights and socio-economic rights do not exist in a state of
antagonism. The conditions necessary for realising or fulfilling socio-economic rights
do not postulate the subversion of political freedom. The reason is that socio-
economic entitlements must yield true benefits to those for whom they are intended.
This can be achieved by eliminating rent-seeking behaviour and by preventing the
capture of social welfare benefits by persons who are not entitled to them. Capture of
social welfare benefits can be obviated only when political systems are transparent
and when there is a free flow of information. Opacity enures to the benefit of those
who monopolise scarce economic resources. On the other hand, conditions where
civil and political freedoms flourish ensure that governmental policies are subjected to
critique and assessment. It is this scrutiny which subserves the purpose of ensuring
that socio-economic benefits actually permeate to the underprivileged for whom they
are meant. Conditions of freedom and a vibrant assertion of civil and political rights
promote a constant review of the justness of socio-economic programmes and of
their effectiveness in addressing deprivation and want. Scrutiny of public affairs is
founded upon the existence of freedom. Hence civil and political rights and socio-
economic rights are complementary and not mutually exclusive.
(Para 267)
Liberty and freedom are values which are intrinsic to our constitutional order. But
they also have an instrumental value in creating conditions in which socio-economic
rights can be achieved. India has no iron curtain. Our society prospers in the shadow
of its drapes which let in sunshine and reflect a multitude of hues based on language,
religion, culture and ideologies.
(Para 270)
There is lack of substance in the submission that privacy is a privilege for the few.
Every individual in society irrespective of social class or economic status is entitled to
the intimacy and autonomy which privacy protects. It is privacy as an intrinsic and
core feature of life and personal liberty which enables an individual to stand up against
a programme of forced sterilisation. Then again, it is privacy which is a powerful
guarantee if the State were to introduce compulsory drug trials of non-consenting
men or women. The sanctity of marriage, the liberty of procreation, the choice of a
family life and the dignity of being are matters which concern every individual
irrespective of social strata or economic well-being. The pursuit of happiness is
founded upon autonomy and dignity. Both are essential attributes of privacy which
makes no distinction between the birth marks of individuals.
(Para 271)
(2002) 5 SA 721 (CC), referred to
Amartya Sen : Development as Freedom (Oxford University Press, 2000) pp. 178-
79; Amartya Sen, The Idea of Justice (Penguin Books, 2009) at p. 339; Amartya
Sen, Development as Freedom (Oxford University Press, 2000) at p. 180; Amartya
Sen, The Country of First Boys (Oxford University Press) pp. 80-81; Edwin
Cameron and Max Taylor, "The Untapped Potential of the Mandela Constitution",
Public Law (2017), at p. 394; Minister of Health V. Treatment Action Campaign,
Taylor, "The Untapped Potential of the Mandela Constitution", Public Law (2017), p.
395, referred to
Common Law right
There is also no merit in the defence of the Union and the States that privacy is
merely a Common law right. The fact that a right may have been afforded protection
at Common law does not constitute a bar to the constitutional recognition of the
&
right. The Constitution recognises the right simply because it is an incident of a
fundamental freedom or liberty which the draftsperson considered to be so significant
as to require constitutional protection. Once privacy is held to be an incident of the
protection of life, personal liberty and of the liberties guaranteed by the provisions of
Part III of the Constitution, the submission that privacy is only a right at Common law
misses the wood for the trees. The central theme is that privacy is an intrinsic part of
life, personal liberty and of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III which entitles it to
protection as a core of constitutional doctrine. The protection of privacy by the
Constitution liberates it, as it were, from the uncertainties of statutory law, which is
subject to the range of legislative annulments open to a majoritarian government.
Any abridgment must meet the requirements prescribed by Article 21, Article 19 or
the relevant freedom.
(Para 272)
Anna Jonsson Cornell, "Right to Privacy", Max Planck Encyclopaedia of Comparative
Constitutional Law (2015), referred to
Substantive due process
The submission is that the requirement of a valid law with reference to Article 21 is
not conditioned by the notion of substantive due process which has been evolved in
relation to the US Constitution but is inapposite in relation to the Indian Constitution.
(Para 273)
Ct 277 : 208 US 161 (1908) (Fifth Amendment); Adkins V. Children's Hospital,
718 : 47 S Ct 426 : 273 US 418 (1927) and New State Ice Co. V. Liebmann, 1932
OnLine US SC 58 : 81 L Ed 703 : 57 S Ct 578 : 300 US 379 (1937), referred to
William B. Lockhart, et al, Constitutional Law : Cases - Comments Questions (West
Publishing Co., 1986) 6th Ed, p. 394; B. Shiva Rao : The Framing of India's
Constitution : A Study (Indian Institute of Public Administration, 1968) at p. 235; B.
Shiva Rao, The Framing of India's Constitution, Vol. 2, pp. 20-36, 147-153;
Granville Austin : The Indian Constitution : Cornerstone of a Nation (Oxford
University Press, 1966) p. 103; Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 7 (6-12-
1948), available at <http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/vol7p20b.htm>
Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution : Cornerstone of a Nation p. 105;
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 7 (13-12-1948), available at
<http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/vol7p25a.htm>,referred to
The constitutional history surrounding the drafting of Article 21 contains an
abundant reflection of a deliberate and studied decision of the Constituent Assembly
to delete the expression "due process of law" from the draft Constitution when the
Constitution was adopted. In the Constituent Assembly, the Drafting
Committee chaired by Dr B.R. Ambedkar had included the phrase but it came to be
deleted after a careful evaluation of the vagaries of the decision-making process in
the US involving interpretation of the due process clause. Significantly, present to the
mind of the Framers of our Constitution was the invalidation of social welfare
legislation in the US on the anvil of the due process clause on the ground that it
violated the liberty of contract of men, women and children to offer themselves for
work in a free market for labour. This model evidently did not appeal to those who
opposed the incorporation of a similar phrase into the Indian Constitution. Yet the
debates in the Constituent Assembly indicate that there was a substantial body of
opposition to the deletion of the due process clause, which eventually led Dr B.R.
Ambedkar to objectively sum up the rival viewpoints for decision by the House.
Evidently "due process" was substituted with the expression "procedure established
by law". "Liberty" was qualified by "personal".
(Para 290)
indicates two major areas of change. First, the fundamental rights are no longer
regarded as isolated silos or watertight compartments. In consequence, Article 14 has
been held to animate the content of Article 21. Second, the expression "procedure
established by law" in Article 21 does not connote a formalistic requirement of a mere
presence of procedure in enacted law. That expression has been held to signify the
content of the procedure and its quality which must be fair, just and reasonable. The
mere fact that the law provides for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is not
sufficient to conclude its validity and the procedure to be constitutionally valid must be
fair, just and reasonable. The quality of reasonableness does not attach only to the
content of the procedure which the law prescribes with reference to Article 21 but to
the content of the law itself. In other words, the requirement of Article 21 is not
fulfilled only by the enactment of fair and reasonable procedure under the law and a
law which does so may yet be susceptible to challenge on the ground that its content
does not accord with the requirements of a valid law. The law is open to substantive
challenge on the ground that it violates the fundamental right.
(Para 291)
In dealing with a substantive challenge to a law on the ground that it violates a
fundamental right, there are settled principles of constitutional interpretation which
hold the field. The first is the presumption of constitutionality which is based on the
foundational principle that the legislature which is entrusted with the duty of law-
making best understands the needs of society and would not readily be assumed to
have transgressed a constitutional limitation. The burden lies on the individual who
asserts a constitutional transgression to establish it. Secondly, the courts tread warily
in matters of social and economic policy where they singularly lack expertise to make
evaluations. Policy-making is entrusted to the State.
(Para 292)
Krishna Dalmia V. S.R. Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 538; Burrakur Coal Co. Ltd. V. Union
Secondary and Higher Secondary Education V. Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth, (1984)
The doctrine of separation of powers requires the Court to allow deference to the
legislature whose duty it is to frame and enact law and to the executive whose duty it
is to enforce law. The Court would not, in the exercise of judicial review, substitute its
own opinion for the wisdom of the law-enacting or law-enforcing bodies.
(Para 293)
196 : 1952 Cri LJ 966, affirmed
Like other rights which form part of the fundamental freedoms protected by Part
III, including the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21, privacy is not an
absolute right. A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to withstand the
touchstone of permissible restrictions on fundamental rights. In the context of Article
21 an invasion of privacy must be justified on the basis of a law which stipulates a
procedure which is fair, just and reasonable. The law must also be valid with reference
to the encroachment on life and personal liberty under Article 21. An invasion of life or
personal liberty must meet the threefold requirement of (i) legality, which postulates
the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and (iii)
proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the objects and the means
adopted to achieve them.
(Para 325)
Above all, it must be recognised that judicial review is a powerful guarantee against
legislative encroachments on life and personal liberty. To cede this right would dilute
the importance of the protection granted to life and personal liberty by the
Constitution. Hence, while judicial review in constitutional challenges to the validity of
legislation is exercised with a conscious regard for the presumption of constitutionality
and for the separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial
institutions, the constitutional power which is vested in the Court must be retained as
a vibrant means of protecting the lives and freedoms of individuals.
(Para 295)
The danger of construing this as an exercise of "substantive due process" is that it
results in the incorporation of a concept from the American Constitution which was
consciously not accepted when the Constitution was framed. Moreover, even in the
country of its origin, substantive due process has led to vagaries of judicial
interpretation. Particularly having regard to the constitutional history surrounding the
deletion of that phrase in our Constitution, it would be inappropriate to equate the
jurisdiction of a constitutional court in India to entertain a substantive challenge to the
validity of a law with the exercise of substantive due process under the US
Constitution. Reference to substantive due process in some of the judgments is
essentially a reference to a substantive challenge to the validity of a law on the
ground that its substantive (as distinct from procedural) provisions violate the
Constitution.
(Para 296)
1957 SCR 399 : AIR 1957 SC 297 : 1957 Cri LJ 409, cited
Per Chelameswar, J. (concurring)
What is a Constitution
The Constitution of any country reflects the aspirations and goals of the people of
that country voiced through the language of the few chosen individuals entrusted with
the responsibility of framing its Constitution. Such aspirations and goals depend upon
the history of that society. History invariably is a product of various forces emanating
from religious, economic and political events. The degree of refinement of the
Constitution depends upon the wisdom of the people entrusted with the responsibility
of framing the Constitution.
(Para 351)
The distinction between an ordinary legislation and an enacted Constitution is that
the latter is believed and expected to be a relatively permanent piece of legislation
which cannot be abrogated by a simple majority of representatives elected for a
limited tenure to legislative bodies created thereby. The Constitution of any country is
a document which contains provisions specifying the rules of governance in its
different aspects. It defines the powers of the legislature and the procedures for law-
making, the powers of the executive to administer the State by enforcing the law
made by the legislature and the powers of the judiciary. The underlying belief is that
the Constitution of any country contains certain core political values and beliefs of the
people of that country which cannot normally be tinkered with lightly, by transient
public opinion.
(Para 352)
Interpretation of the Constitution
If a right is recognised by the express language of a statute, no question of
implying such a right from some provision of such statute arises. Implications are
logical extensions of stipulations in the express language of the statute and arise only
when a statute is silent on certain aspects. Implications are the product of the
interpretative process, of silences of a statute. It is by now well settled that there are
implications even in written Constitutions. The scope and amplitude of implications are
to be ascertained in the light of the scheme and purpose sought to be achieved by a
statute. The purpose of the statute is to be ascertained from the overall scheme of
the statute. The Constitution is the fundamental law adumbrating the powers and
duties of the various organs of the State and rights of the subjects and limitations
thereon, of the State. Provisions purportedly conferring power on the State are in fact
limitations on the State power to infringe on the liberty of subjects. In the context of
the interpretation of a Constitution, the intensity of analysis to ascertain the purpose
is required to be more profound. The implications arising from the scheme of the
Constitution are "Constitution's dark matter" and
are as important as the express stipulations in its text. The principle laid down by the
Constitution cannot be abrogated, is the most outstanding and brilliant exposition of
the "dark matter" and is a part of our Constitution, though there is nothing in the text
suggesting that principle. The necessity of probing seriously and respectfully into the
invisible portion of the Constitution cannot be ignored without being disrespectful to
the hard earned political freedom and the declared aspirations of the liberty of "We
the People of India". The text of enumerated fundamental rights is only the primary
source of expressed information as to what is meant by liberty proclaimed by the
Preamble of the Constitution. To embrace a rule that the text of the Constitution is
the only material to be looked at to understand the purpose and scheme of the
Constitution would not only be detrimental to liberties of subjects but could also
render the administration of the State unduly cumbersome.
(Paras 344 to 346)
Romesh Thappar V. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 124 : (1950) 51 Cri LJ 1514;
Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 305 : (1962) 3 SCR 842;
Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam, (1967) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1967 SC 1836;
Commonwealth, (1947) 74 CLR 31 (Aust); State of Bihar V. Lal Krishna Advani,
Supply Co. V. Union of India, AIR 1956 SC 479, considered
held, overruled on this point
Per Chelameswar, J. (concurring)
Constituent Assembly Debates
To sanctify an argument that whatever is not found in the text of the Constitution
cannot become a part of the Constitution, would be too primitive an understanding of
the Constitution and contrary to settled canons of constitutional interpretation. Such
an approach regarding the rights and liberties of citizens would be an affront to the
collective wisdom of our people and the wisdom of the Members of the Constituent
Assembly. The fact that some of the Members opined during the course of debates in
that Assembly, that the right to privacy need not find an express mention in the
Constitution, would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that they were oblivious to
the importance of the right to privacy. The Constituent Assembly was not a seminar
on the right to privacy and its amplitude. A close scrutiny of the Debates reveals that
the Assembly only considered whether there should be an express provision
guaranteeing the right to privacy in the limited context of "searches" and "secrecy of
correspondence". Dimensions of the right to privacy are much larger and were not
fully examined. The question whether the expression
"liberty" in Article 21 takes within its sweep the various aspects of the right to privacy
was also not debated.
(Para 350)
Fundamental rights - Need for - Interrelation
All Constitutions apart from containing provisions for administration of the State,
contain provisions specifying or identifying certain rights of citizens and even some of
the rights of non-citizens (both the classes of persons could be collectively referred to
as subjects for the sake of convenience). Such rights came to be described as
"basic", "primordial", "inalienable" or "fundamental" rights. Such rights are a protective
wall against State's power to destroy the liberty of the subjects. The question now
arises as to what is the purpose the Framers of the Constitution sought to achieve by
specifically enumerating some of the freedoms which otherwise would form part of
the expression "liberty". The answer is that the Constituent Assembly thought it fit
that some aspects of liberty require a more emphatic declaration so as to restrict the
authority of the State to abridge or curtail them. The need for such an emphatic
declaration arose from the history of this nation. The purpose sought to be achieved
is twofold. Firstly, to place the expression "liberty" beyond the argumentative process
of ascertaining the meaning of the expression "liberty", and secondly, to restrict the
authority of the State to abridge those enumerated freedoms only to achieve the
purposes indicated in the corresponding clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. The authority
of the State to deprive any person of the fundamental right of liberty is textually
unlimited as the only requirement to enable the State to achieve that result is to
make a "law". When it comes to deprivation of the freedoms under Article 19(1), the
requirement is : (a) that there must not only be a law but such law must be tailored
to achieve the purposes indicated in the corresponding clause; and (b) to declare that
the various facets of liberty enumerated in Article 19(1) are available only to the
citizens of the country but not all subjects. It is now clearly held by the Supreme
Court that the rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 21 are not confined only to
citizens but available even to non-citizens, aliens or incorporated bodies, etc.
(Paras 353 to 363)
The interrelationship of Articles 19 and 21, if understood as the authority of the
State to deprive any person of his liberty is circumscribed by certain factors:
(1) It can only be done under the authority of law.
(2) "Law" in the context means a valid legislation.
(3) If the person whose liberty is sought to be deprived is a citizen and that
liberty happens to be one of the freedoms enumerated in Article 19(1), such a law
is required to be reasonable within the parameters stipulated in clauses (2) to (6)
of Article 19, relevant to the nature of the entrenched freedom(s), such law seeks
to abridge.
(4) If the person whose liberty is sought to be deprived of is a non-citizen or
even if a citizen is with respect to any freedom other than those specified in
Articles 19(1), the law should be just, fair and reasonable.
(Para 364)
Thus the expression "liberty" in Article 21 is wide enough to take in not only the
various freedoms enumerated in Article 19(1) but also many others which are
not enumerated. The expression "liberty" is capable of taking within its sweep not
only the right to move freely, guaranteed under Article 19(1)(d); but also each one of
the other freedoms mentioned under Article 19(1). Personal liberty takes within its
sweep not only the right not to be subjected to physical restraints, but also the
freedom of thought, belief, emotion and sensation and a variety of other freedoms.
The most basic understanding of the expression "liberty" is the freedom of an
individual to do what he pleases. But the idea of liberty is more complex than that. A
better view of the whole scheme of the chapter on fundamental rights is to look at
each one of the guaranteed fundamental rights not as a series of isolated points, but
as a rational continuum of the legal concept of liberty i.e. freedom from all substantial,
arbitrary encroachments and purposeless restraints sought to be made by the State.
Deprivation of liberty could lead to curtailment of one or more of freedoms which a
human being possesses, but for interference by the State.
(Paras 365 and 362)
Muller of Nurenburg V. Supt., Presidency Jail, AIR 1955 SC 367 : 1955 Cri LJ 876,
considered
Right to Privacy - Concept/Facets/Connotations
For answering the present reference, the Supreme Court is only concerned with
the question whether subjects who are amenable to the laws of this country have a
fundamental right to privacy against the State. The text of the Constitution is silent in
this regard. Therefore, it is required to examine whether such a right is implied in any
one or more of the fundamental rights in the text of the Constitution; whether it is
possible to arrive at a coherent, integrated and structured statement explaining the
right to privacy.
(Paras 368 and 366)
There is no need to resolve all definitional concerns at an abstract level to
understand the nature of the right to privacy. The ever-growing possibilities of
technological and psychological intrusions by the State into the liberty of subjects
must leave some doubt in this context. Definitional uncertainty is no reason to not
recognise the existence of the right to privacy. For the purpose of this case, it is
sufficient to go by the understanding that the right to privacy consists of three facets
i.e. repose, sanctuary and intimate decision. Each of these facets is so essential for
the liberty of human beings that there is no reason to doubt that the right to privacy
is part of the liberty guaranteed by our Constitution.
(Para 371)
Conditioning the thought process by prescribing what to read or not to read; what
forms of art alone are required to be appreciated leading to the conditioning of beliefs;
interfering with the choice of people regarding the kind of literature, music or art which
an individual would prefer to enjoy. Such conditioning is sought to be achieved by
screening the source of information or prescribing penalties for making choices which
Governments do not approve. Insofar as religious beliefs are concerned, a good deal
of the misery our species suffer owes its existence to and centres around competing
claims of the right to propagate religion. The Constitution of India protects the liberty
of all subjects guaranteeing the freedom of conscience and right to freely profess,
practise and propagate religion. While the right to freely "profess, practise and
propagate religion" may be a facet of free
speech guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a), the freedom of the belief or faith in any
religion is a matter of conscience falling within the zone of purely private thought
process and is an aspect of liberty. There are areas other than religious beliefs which
form part of the individual's freedom of conscience such as political belief, etc. which
form part of the liberty under Article 21.
(Para 372)
Concerns of privacy arise when the State seeks to intrude into the body of
subjects. Corporeal punishments were not unknown to India, their abolition is of a
recent vintage. Forced feeding of certain persons by the State raises concerns of
privacy. An individual's rights to refuse life prolonging medical treatment or terminate
his life is another freedom which fall within the zone of the right to privacy. It is true
that this issue is pending before the Supreme Court. But in various other jurisdictions,
there is a huge debate on those issues though it is still a grey area. A woman's
freedom of choice whether to bear a child or abort her pregnancy are areas which fall
in the realm of privacy. Similarly, the freedom to choose either to work or not and
the freedom to choose the nature of the work are areas of private decision-making
process. The right to travel freely within the country or go abroad is an area falling
within the right to privacy. The text of our Constitution recognises the freedom to
travel throughout the country under Article 19(1)(d). The Supreme Court has already
recognised that such a right takes within its sweep the right to travel abroad. A
person's freedom to choose the place of his residence once again is a part of his right
to privacy recognised by the Constitution of India under Article 19(1)(e) though the
predominant purpose of enumerating the abovementioned two freedoms in Article 19
(1) is to disable both the federal and State Governments from creating barriers which
are incompatible with the federal nature of our country and its Constitution. The
choice of appearance and apparel are also aspects of the right to privacy. The
freedom of certain groups of subjects to determine their appearance and apparel
(such as keeping long hair and wearing a turban) are protected not as a part of the
right to privacy but as a part of their religious belief. Such a freedom need not
necessarily be based on religious beliefs falling under Article 25. Informational traces
are also an area which is the subject-matter of huge debate in various jurisdictions
falling within the realm of the right to privacy, such data is as personal as that of the
choice of appearance and apparel. Telephone tappings and internet hacking by State,
of personal data is another area which falls within the realm of privacy. The instant
reference arises out of such an attempt by the Union of India to collect biometric data
regarding all the residents of this country. The abovementioned are some of the areas
where some interest of privacy exists. The examples given above indicate to some
extent the nature and scope of the right to privacy.
(Para 373)
Nobody in this country would like to have the officers of the State intruding into
their homes or private property at will or soldiers quartered in their houses without
their consent. Nobody would like to be told by the State as to what they should eat
or how they should dress or whom they should be associated with either in their
personal, social or political life. Freedom of social and political association is
guaranteed to citizens under Article 19(1)(c). Personal association is still a doubtful
area. The decision-making process regarding the freedom of association,
freedoms of travel and residence are purely private and fall within the realm of the
right to privacy. It is one of the most intimate decisions.
(Para 374)
All liberal democracies believe that the State should not have unqualified authority
to intrude into certain aspects of human life and that the authority should be limited
by parameters constitutionally fixed. Fundamental rights are the only constitutional
firewall to prevent State's interference with those core freedoms constituting liberty
of a human being. The right to privacy is certainly one of the core freedoms which is
to be defended. It is part of liberty within the meaning of that expression in Article 21.
(Para 375)
Right to privacy - Limitations
No legal right can be absolute. Every right has limitations. Therefore, even a
fundamental right to privacy has limitations. The limitations are to be identified on
case-to-case basis depending upon the nature of the privacy interest claimed. There
are different standards of review to test infractions of fundamental rights. While the
concept of reasonableness overarches Part III, it operates differently across Articles
(even if only slightly differently across some of them).
(Para 377)
To begin with, the options canvassed for limiting the right to privacy include an
Article 14 type reasonableness enquiry; limitation as per the express provisions of
Article 19; a just, fair and reasonable basis (that is, substantive due process) for
limitation per Article 21; and finally, a just, fair and reasonable standard per Article 21
plus the amorphous standard of "compelling State interest". The last of these four
options is the highest standard of scrutiny that a court can adopt. It is from this menu
that a standard of review for limiting the right to privacy needs to be chosen.
(Para 378)
At the very outset, if a privacy claim specifically flows only from one of the
expressly enumerated provisions under Article 19, then the standard of review would
be as expressly provided under Article 19. However, the possibility of a privacy claim
being entirely traceable to rights other than Article 21 is bleak. Without discounting
that possibility, Article 21 is the bedrock of the privacy guarantee. If the spirit of
liberty permeates every claim of privacy, it is difficult, if not impossible, to imagine
that any standard of limitation other than the one under Article 21 applies.
(Para 379)
The just, fair and reasonable standard of review under Article 21 needs no
elaboration. It has also most commonly been used in cases dealing with a privacy
standard in addition to the Article 21 reasonableness enquiry. From the United States,
where the terminology of "compelling State interest" originated, a strict standard of
scrutiny comprises two things-a "compelling State interest" and a requirement of
"narrow tailoring" (narrow tailoring means that the law must be narrowly framed to
achieve the objective). As a term, "compelling State interest"
does not have definite contours in the US. Hence, it is critical that this standard be
adopted with some clarity as to when and in what types of privacy claims it is to be
used. Only in privacy claims which deserve the strictest scrutiny is the standard of
compelling State interest to be used. As for others, the just, fair and reasonable
standard under Article 21 will apply. When the compelling State interest standard is to
be employed, must depend upon the context of concrete cases. However, this
discussion sets the ground rules within which a limitation for the right to privacy is to
be found.
(Para 380)
144 (1938), considered
Per Bobde, J. (concurring)
Right to privacy - Content
Privacy is the condition or state of being free from public attention to intrusion into
or interference with one's acts or decisions. The right to be in this condition has been
described as "the right to be let alone". What seems to be essential to privacy is the
power to seclude oneself and keep others from intruding it in any way. These
intrusions may be physical or visual, and may take any of several forms including
peeping over one's shoulder to eavesdropping directly or through instruments,
devices or technological aids.
(Para 402)
Pavesich V. New England Life Insurance Co., 50 SE 68 : 122 Ga 190 (1905)
(Supreme Court of Georgia), considered
Black's Law Dictionary (Bryan Garner Edition) 3783 (2004); Samuel D. Warren and
Louis D. Brandeis, "The Right To Privacy", 4 HARV L REV 193 (1890), referred to
Every individual is entitled to perform his actions in private. In other words, she is
entitled to be in a state of repose and to work without being disturbed, or otherwise
observed or spied upon. The entitlement to such a condition is not confined only to
intimate spaces such as the bedroom or the washroom but goes with a person
wherever he is, even in a public place. Privacy has a deep affinity with seclusion (of
our physical persons and things) as well as such ideas as repose, solitude,
confidentiality and secrecy (in our communications), and intimacy. But this is not to
suggest that solitude is always essential to privacy. It is in this sense of an individual's
liberty to do things privately that a group of individuals, however large, is entitled to
seclude itself from others and be private. In fact, a conglomeration of individuals in a
space to which the rights of admission are reserved-as in a hotel or a cinema hall-
must be regarded as private. Nor is the right to privacy lost when a person moves
about in public. The law requires a specific authorisation for search of a person even
where there is suspicion. Privacy must also mean the effective guarantee of a zone of
internal freedom in which to think. The disconcerting effect of having another peer
over one's shoulder while reading or writing explains why individuals would choose to
retain their privacy even in public. It is important to be able to keep one's work
without publishing it in a condition which may be described as private. The vigour and
vitality of the various expressive freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution depends
on the existence of a corresponding guarantee of cognitive freedom.
(Para 403)
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, Section 42, referred to
Even in the ancient and religious texts of India, a well-developed sense of privacy is
evident. Religious and social customs affirming privacy also find acknowledgement in
our laws, for example, in the Civil Procedure Code's exemption of a pardanashin
lady's appearance in court (Section 132).
(Para 404)
Kautilya's Arthashastra 180-90 (R. Shamasastri, trans. 1915); A.A. Maududi, Human
Rights in Islam (1982) at p. 27; Thessalonians 4 : 11 The Bible; James 5 : 16 The
Bible, referred to
Privacy, that is to say, the condition arrived at after excluding other persons, is a
basic prerequisite for exercising the liberty and the freedom to perform that activity.
The inability to create a condition of selective seclusion virtually denies an individual
the freedom to exercise that particular liberty or freedom necessary to do that
activity. It is not possible to truncate or isolate the basic freedom to do an activity in
seclusion from the freedom to do the activity itself. The right to claim a basic
condition like privacy in which guaranteed fundamental rights can be exercised must
itself be regarded as a fundamental right. Privacy, thus, constitutes the basic,
irreducible condition necessary for the exercise of personal liberty and freedoms
guaranteed by the Constitution. It is the inarticulate major premise in Part III of the
Constitution.
(Paras 405 and 406)
Right to privacy's connection with dignity and liberty
Privacy exists as a verifiable fact in all civilised societies. But privacy does not stop
at being merely a descriptive claim. It also embodies a normative one. The normative
case for privacy is intuitively simple. Nature has clothed man, amongst other things,
with dignity and liberty so that he may be free to do what he will consistent with the
freedom of another and to develop his faculties to the fullest measure necessary to
live in happiness and peace. The Constitution, through its Part III, enumerates many
of these freedoms and their corresponding rights as fundamental rights. Privacy is an
essential condition for the exercise of most of these freedoms. Ex facie, every right
which is integral to the constitutional rights to dignity, life, personal liberty and
freedom, as indeed the right to privacy is, must itself be regarded as a fundamental
right.
(Para 407)
It might be broadly necessary to determine the nature and content of privacy in
order to consider the extent of its constitutional protection. As in the case of "life"
under Article 21, a precise definition of the term "privacy" may not be possible.
However, definitional and boundary-setting challenges are not unique to the rights
guaranteed in Article 21. This feature is integral to many core rights, such as the right
to equality. Evidently, the expansive character of any right central to constitutional
democracies like ours has nowhere stood in the way of recognising a right and
treating it as fundamental where there are strong constitutional grounds on which to
do so.
(Para 399)
"Life" must mean something more than mere animal existence. This view of Article
21 is connected to the constitutional value of dignity. Liberty is closely connected to
dignity. Their relationship is to the effect of taking into the protection of "life" the
protection of faculties of thinking and feeling, and of temporary and permanent
impairments to those faculties. Privacy is, therefore, necessary in both its mental and
physical aspects as an enabler of guaranteed freedoms.
(Para 410)
It is difficult to see how dignity-whose constitutional significance is acknowledged
both by the Preamble and by the Supreme Court in its exposition of Article 21, among
other rights-can be assured to the individual without privacy. Both dignity and privacy
are intimately intertwined and are natural conditions for the birth and death of
individuals, and for many significant events in life between these events. Necessarily,
then, the right to privacy is an integral part of both "life" and "personal liberty" under
Article 21, and is intended to enable the rights bearer to develop her potential to the
fullest extent made possible only in consonance with the constitutional values
expressed in the Preamble as well as across Part III.
(Para 411)
The right to privacy is inextricably bound up with all exercises of human liberty-
both as it is specifically enumerated across Part III, and as it is guaranteed in the
residue under Article 21. It is distributed across the various Articles in Part III and,
mutatis mutandis, takes the form of whichever of their enjoyment its violation
curtails. The ineluctable conclusion must be that an inalienable constitutional right to
privacy inheres in Part III of the Constitution.
(Paras 428.2 and 428.1)
Privacy and various express fundamental rights and freedoms
The right to privacy is as inalienable as the right to perform any constitutionally
permissible act. Privacy in all its aspects constitutes the springboard for the exercise
of the freedoms guaranteed by Article 19(1). Freedom of speech and expression is
always dependent on the capacity to think, read and write in private and is often
exercised in a state of privacy, to the exclusion of those not intended to be spoken to
or communicated with. A peaceful assembly requires the exclusion of elements who
may not be peaceful or who may have a different agenda. The freedom to associate
must necessarily be the freedom to associate with those of one's choice and those
with common objectives. The requirement of privacy in matters concerning residence
and settlement is too well known to require elaboration. Finally, it is not possible to
conceive of an individual being able to practise a profession or carry on trade,
business or occupation without the right to privacy in practical terms and without the
right and power to keep others away from his work.
(Para 412)
Ex facie, privacy is essential to the exercise of freedom of conscience and the right
to profess, practise and propagate religion vide Article 25. The further right of every
religious denomination to maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, to
manage its own affairs and to own and administer property acquired for such
purposes vide Article 26 also requires privacy, in the sense of non-interference from
the State. Article 28(3) expressly recognises the right of a student attending an
educational institution recognised by the State, to be left alone. Such a student
cannot be compelled to take part in any religious instruction imparted in any such
institution unless his guardian has consented to it.
(Para 413)
The right to privacy is also integral to the cultural and educational rights whereby a
group having a distinct language, script or culture shall have the right to conserve the
same. It has also always been an integral part of the right to own property and has
been treated as such in civil law as well as in criminal law vide all the offences and
torts of trespass known to law.
(Para 414)
Therefore, privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the enjoyment of any
of the guarantees in Part III. As a result, when it is claimed by rights bearers before
constitutional courts, a right to privacy may be situated not only in Article 21, but also
simultaneously in any of the other guarantees in Part III. In the current state of things,
Articles 19(1), 20(3), 25, 28 and 29 are all rights helped up and made meaningful by
the exercise of privacy. This is not an exhaustive list. Future developments in
technology and social ordering may well reveal that there are yet more constitutional
sites in which a privacy right inheres that are not at present evident.
(Para 415)
Test of privacy
One way of determining what a core constitutional idea is, could be by considering
its opposite, which shows what it is not. Accordingly, privacy may be understood as
the antonym of publicity.
(Para 422)
Deoki Nandan V. Murlidhar, AIR 1957 SC 133 : 1956 SCR 756, considered
Privacy is always connected, whether directly or through its effect on the actions
which are sought to be secured from interference, to the act of associating with
others. In this sense, privacy is usually best understood as a relational right, even as
its content frequently concerns the exclusion of others from one's society.
(Para 423)
To exercise one's right to privacy is to choose and specify on two levels. It is to
choose which of the various activities that are taken in by the general residue of
liberty available to her she would like to perform, and to specify whom to include in
one's circle when performing them. It is also autonomy in the negative, and takes in
the choice and specification of which activities not to perform and which persons to
exclude from one's circle. Exercising privacy is the signalling of one's intent to these
specified others-whether they are one's co-participants or simply one's audience-as
well as to society at large, to claim and exercise the right. To check for the existence
of an actionable claim to privacy, all that needs to be considered is if such an intent to
choose and specify exists, whether directly in its manifestation in the right bearer's
actions, or otherwise.
(Para 424)
Such a formulation would exclude three recurring red herrings in the respondents'
arguments before the Court. Firstly, it would not admit of arguments that privacy is
limited to property or places. So, for example, taking one or more persons aside to
converse at a whisper even in a public place would clearly signal a claim to privacy,
just as broadcasting one's words by a loudspeaker would signal the opposite intent.
Secondly, this formulation would not reduce privacy to solitude. Reserving the rights
to admission at a large gathering place, such as a cinema hall or club, would signal a
claim to privacy. Finally, neither would such a formulation require to hold that private
information must be information that is inaccessible to all others.
(Para 425)
Review of privacy violations
The relationship between the right to privacy and the particular fundamental right
(or rights) involved would depend on the action interdicted by a particular law. At a
minimum, since privacy is always integrated with personal liberty, the
constitutionality of the law which is alleged to have invaded into a rights bearer's
privacy must be tested by the same standards by which a law which invades personal
liberty under Article 21 is liable to be tested. Under Article 21, the standard test at
present is the rationality review expressed in Maneka Gandhi case. This requires that
any procedure by which the State interferes with an Article 21 right to be "fair, just
and reasonable, not fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary". Once it is established that
privacy imbues every constitutional freedom with its efficacy and that it can be
located in each of them, it must follow that interference with it by the State must be
tested against whichever one or more Part III guarantees whose enjoyment is
curtailed. As a result, privacy violations will usually have to answer to tests in addition
to the one applicable to Article 21. Such a view would be wholly consistent with
Rustom Cavasjee Cooper case
(Paras 426 and 427)
Common Law Right
It is difficult to accept the submission that the right to privacy may at best be a
common law right, but not a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution.
Privacy eminently qualifies as an inalienable natural right, intimately connected to two
values whose protection is a matter of universal moral agreement : the innate dignity
and autonomy of man. When interests are worth protecting on moral grounds,
irrespective of the existence of a legal system or the operation of law, they are given
the name of a natural right. Where a natural law right could not have been enforced at
law, the common law right is evidently an instrument by which invasions into the
valued interest in question by one's fellow man can be addressed.
(Paras 391 to 393)
Semayne case, (1604) 5 Co Rep 91a : 1 Sm LC (13th Edn.) 104 at p. 105 : 77 ER
194, considered
P.J. Fitzgerald : Salmond on Jurisprudence (12th Edn., 1966) p. 217; Roscoe Pound :
The Spirit of the Common Law (1921) p. 88; Id, at p. 92, referred to
With the advent of democracy and of limited constitutional government came the
State, a new actor with an unprecedented capacity to interfere with natural and
common law rights alike. Constitutions like our own are means by which individuals-
the Preambular "People of India"-create "the State", a new entity to serve their
interests and be accountable to them, and transfer a part of their sovereignty to it.
The cumulative effect is that individuals governed by Constitution have the new
advantage of a governing entity that draws its power from and is accountable to
them, but they face the new peril of a diffuse and formless entity against whom
existing remedies at common law are no longer efficacious. The narrative of the
progressive expansion of the types of rights available to individuals seeking to defend
their liberties from invasion-from natural rights to common law rights and finally to
fundamental rights-is consistent with the account of the development of rights that
important strands in constitutional theory present.
(Paras 394 and 395)
The Court has already recognised the capacity of Constitutions to be the means
by which to declare recognised natural rights as applicable qua the State, and
of constitutional courts to enforce these declarations. The Supreme Court also
recognises the true nature of the relation between the citizen and the State as well as
the true character and utility of Part III. Accordingly, the objective of Part III is to place
citizens at centre stage and make the State accountable to them.
(Para 396)
Therefore, the assumption that a right must either be a common law right or a
fundamental right is erroneous. The only material distinctions between the two
classes of right-of which the nature and content may be the same-lie in the
incidence of the duty to respect the right and in the forum in which a failure to do so
can be redressed. Common law rights are horizontal in their operation when they are
violated by one's fellow man, he can be named and proceeded against in an ordinary
court of law. Constitutional and fundamental rights, on the other hand, provide
remedy against the violation of a valued interest by the "State", as an abstract entity,
whether through legislation or otherwise, as well as by identifiable public officials, being
individuals clothed with the powers of the State. It is perfectly possible for an interest
to simultaneously be recognised as a common law right and a fundamental right.
Where the interference with a recognised interest is by the State or any other like
entity recognised by Article 12, a claim for the violation of a fundamental right would
lie. Where the author of an identical interference is a non-State actor, an action at
common law would lie in an ordinary court. Privacy has the nature of being both a
common law right as well as a fundamental right. Its content, in both forms, is
identical. All that differs is the incidence of burden and the forum for enforcement for
each form. Any interference with privacy by an entity covered by Article 12's
description of the "State" must satisfy the tests applicable to whichever one or more
of the Part III freedoms the interference affects.
(Paras 397, 398 and 428.3)
Not just a derivative right but logically presupposed
There is nothing unusual in the judicial enumeration of one right on the basis of
another under the Constitution. By the process of enumeration, constitutional courts
merely give a name and specify the core of guarantees already present in the residue
of constitutional liberty. Over time, the Supreme Court has been able to imply by its
interpretative process that several fundamental rights including the right to privacy
emerge out of expressly stated fundamental rights. In the case of privacy, the case
for judicial enumeration is especially strong. It is no doubt a fair implication from
Article 21, but also more. Privacy is a right or condition, logically presupposed by
rights expressly recorded in the constitutional text, if they are to make sense. As a
result, privacy is more than merely a derivative constitutional right. It is the necessary
and unavoidable logical entailment of rights guaranteed in the text of the Constitution.
(Para 416)
Satwant Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam, (1967) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1967 SC
Not recognising character of privacy as a fundamental right is likely to erode the
very substratum of the personal liberty guaranteed by the Constitution. The decided
cases clearly demonstrate that particular fundamental rights could not have been
exercised without the recognition of the right to privacy as a fundamental right. Any
derecognition or diminution in the importance of the right to privacy will weaken the
fundamental rights which have been expressly conferred.
(Para 417)
Restrictions on privacy right
On the basis of cases holding that there is no fundamental right to trade on liquor
it is submitted by analogy that there can be no absolute right to privacy.
Apprehensions that the recognition of privacy would create complications for the
State in its exercise of powers is not well founded. The declaration of a right cannot
be avoided where there is good constitutional ground for doing so. It is only after
acknowledging that the right to privacy is a fundamental right, that how it affects the
plenary powers of the State can be considered. In any event, the State can always
legislate a reasonable restriction to protect and effectuate a compelling State interest,
like it may while restricting any other fundamental right. There is no warrant for the
assumption or for the conclusion that the fundamental right to privacy is an absolute
right which cannot be reasonably restricted given a sufficiently compelling State
interest.
(Para 419)
Legislations protecting privacy
There is no substance in the submission that in view of existence of several
statutes which protect right to privacy, it is neither necessary nor appropriate to
recognize privacy as a fundamental right. Several legislations protect and advance
fundamental rights, but their existence does not make the existence of a
corresponding fundamental right redundant. This is obviously so because legislations
are alterable and even repealable unlike fundamental rights, which, by design, endure.
(Para 420)
Per Nariman, J. (concurring)
Preamble of the Constitution
The Preamble of the Constitution can be said to reflect core constitutional values.
The core value of the nation being democratic, for example, would be hollow unless
persons in a democracy are able to develop fully in order to make informed choices
for themselves which affect their daily lives and their choice of how they are to be
governed. "Liberty" in the Preamble to the Constitution, is said to be of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship. This cardinal value can be found strewn all over
the fundamental rights chapter. It can be found in Articles 19(1)(a), 20, 21, 25 and
26. As is well known, this cardinal constitutional value
has been borrowed from the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of
1789, which defined "liberty" in Article 4. Even in this limited sense, privacy begins
where liberty ends - when others are harmed, in one sense, issues relating to
reputation, restraints on physical locomotion, etc. set in. It is, therefore, difficult to
accept the argument that "liberty" and "privacy" are interchangeable concepts.
Equally, it is difficult to accept the respondents' submission that there is no concept of
"privacy", but only the constitutional concept of "ordered liberty". Arguments of both
sides on this score must, therefore, be rejected.
(Paras 522 and 524)
John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1859), referred to
But most important of all is the cardinal value of fraternity which assures the
dignity of the individual. The dignity of the individual encompasses the right of the
individual to develop to the full extent of his potential. And this development can only
be if an individual has autonomy over fundamental personal choices and control over
dissemination of personal information which may be infringed through an unauthorised
use of such information. It is clear that Article 21, more than any of the other articles
in the fundamental rights chapter, reflects each of these constitutional values in full,
and is to be read in consonance with these values and with the international
covenants. In the ultimate analysis, the fundamental right to privacy, which has so
many developing facets, can only be developed on a case-to-case basis. Depending
upon the particular facet that is relied upon, either Article 21 by itself or in conjunction
with other fundamental rights would get attracted.
(Para 525)
Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure:) 'Revue Rpublicaine, referred to
The legislature has also recognised the fundamental right to privacy and, therefore,
it is too late in the day to go back on this. Much water has indeed flowed under the
bridge since the decisions in M.P. Sharma, AIR 1954 SC 300 and Kharak Singh, AIR
1963 SC 1295.
(Para 531)
M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra, AIR 1954 SC 300 : 1954 Cri LJ 865 : 1954 SCR
1077; Kharak Singh V. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 329 :
(1964) 1 SCR 332, overruled on this point
:
Not absolute right - Restrictions
However, the right to privacy is not an absolute right. This right is subject to
reasonable regulations made by the State to protect legitimate State interests or
public interest. However, when it comes to restrictions on this right, the drill of various
articles to which the right relates must be scrupulously followed. For example, if the
restraint on privacy is over fundamental personal choices that an individual is to
make, State action can be restrained under Article 21 read with Article 14 if it is
arbitrary and unreasonable; and under Article 21 read with Article 19(1)(a) only if it
relates to the subjects mentioned in Article 19(2) and the tests laid down by the
Supreme Court for such legislation or subordinate legislation to pass muster under the
said article. Each of the tests evolved by the Supreme Court, qua legislation or
executive action, under Article 21 read with Article 14; or Article 21 read with Article
19(1)(a) in the aforesaid examples must be met in order that State
action pass muster. In the ultimate analysis, the balancing act that is to be carried out
between individual, societal and State interests must be left to the training and
expertise of the judicial mind.
(Para 526)
The fundamental right to privacy once recognised, must yield in given
circumstances to legitimate State interests in combating crime. But this arises only
after recognition of the right to privacy as a fundamental right and not before. What
must be a reasonable restriction in the interest of a legitimate State interest or in
public interest cannot determine whether the intrusion into a person's affairs is or is
not a fundamental right. Every State intrusion into privacy interests which deals with
the physical body or the dissemination of information personal to an individual or
personal choices relating to the individual would be subjected to the balancing test
prescribed under the fundamental right that it infringes depending upon where the
privacy interest claimed is founded.
(Para 488)
Narula V. State of J&K, (1967) 3 SCR 50 : AIR 1967 SC 1368; Har Shankar V.
International conventions
It has always been the law of the Supreme Court that international treaties must
be respected. Our Constitution contains Directive Principle 51 (c) which says that the
State endeavour to foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the
dealings of organised peoples with one another." In order that legislation be effected
to implement an international treaty, Article 253 removes legislative competence
from all the States and entrusts only Parliament with such legislation in the absence of
any specific prohibition in municipal law, international law forms part of Indian law and
consequently must be read into or as part of our fundamental rights.
(Paras 458, 459 and 462)
Right to privacy - Inalienability
Given the international conventions and the fact that the right to privacy inheres in
every individual by virtue of his being a human being, such right is not conferred by
the Constitution but is only recognised and given the status of being fundamental. The
international covenants and declarations to which India is a party, namely, the 1948
Declaration and the 1966 Covenant both speak of the right to life and liberty as being
"inalienable". Given the fact that this has to be read as being part of Article 21 it is
clear that Article 21 would, therefore, not be the sole repository of these human
rights but only reflect the fact that they are "inalienable"; that they inhere in every
human being by virtue of the person being a human being. Section 2(1)(d) of the
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 recognises that the right to life, liberty, equality
and dignity referable to international covenants and enforceable by courts in India are
"human rights". And international covenants expressly state that these rights are
"inalienable" as they inhere in persons because they are human beings.
(Paras 532, 534.1 and 534.2)
The majority judgment in ADM, Jabalpur is expressly overruled. Moreover, the
majority opinion was done away with by the Constitution's 44th Amendment two
years after the judgment was delivered. By that Amendment, Article 359 was
amended to state that where a proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the
President may by order declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement
of rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution may remain suspended for the
period during which such proclamation is in force, excepting Articles 20 and 21. On
this score also, it is clear that the right to privacy is an inalienable human right which
inheres in every person by virtue of the fact that he or she is a human being.
(Para 525)
Seervai, Constitutional Law of India (4th Edn., Vol. II) Appendix p. 2219, relied on
SCR 587; Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 305 : (1962) 3
Right to privacy - Dimensions/Facets
In the Indian context, a fundamental right to privacy would cover at least the
following three aspects:
Privacy that involves the person i.e. when there is some invasion by the State
of a person's rights relatable to his physical body, such as the right to move freely;
Informational privacy which does not deal with a person's body but deals with
a
person's mind, and therefore recognises that an individual may have control over
the dissemination of material that is personal to him. Unauthorised use of such
information may, therefore lead to infringement of this right; and
The privacy of choice, which protects an individual's autonomy over
fundamental personal choices.
(Para 510)
The Court can ground physical privacy or privacy relating to the body in Articles 19
(1) )(d) and (e) read with Article 21; ground personal information privacy under Article
21; and the privacy of choice in Articles 19(1)(a) to (c), 20(3), 21 and 25. The
argument based on "privacy" being a vague and nebulous concept cannot therefore,
be accepted.
(Para 521)
OnLine US SC 152 : 18 L Ed 2d 1010 : 87 S Ct 1817 : 388 US 1 (1967); Skinner
21 : 51 L Ed 2d 64 : 429 US 589 (1977), considered
Due process and Constituent Assembly Debates
As regards the argument stating that the Framers of the Constitution had
expressly rejected the right to privacy being made part of the fundamental rights
chapter of the Constitution, while it may be correct that Constituent Assembly
Debates make interesting reading only to show what exactly the Framers had in
mind when they framed the Constitution of India, but the Constitution governs the
lives of 125 crore citizens of this country and must be interpreted to respond to the
changing needs of society at different points in time. The phrase "due process" was
distinctly avoided by the Framers of the Constitution and replaced by the colourless
expression "procedure established by law". Despite this, owing to changed
judgments, have read what was expressly rejected by the Framers into Article 21, so
was able to say that the wheel has turned full circle and substantive due process is
now part and parcel of Article 21. Given the technological revolution of the later part
of the 20th century and the completely altered lives that almost every citizen of this
country leads, thanks to this revolution, the right to privacy has to be judged in
today's context and not yesterday's.
(Paras 476 and 477)
Elitist Construct
There is no substance in the argument that between the right to life and the right
to personal liberty, the former has primacy and any claim to privacy which would
destroy or erode this basic foundational right can never be elevated to the status of a
fundamental right and further, that in a developing country where millions of people
are denied the basic necessities of life and do not even have shelter, food, clothing or
jobs, no claim to a right to privacy as a fundamental right would lie. First of all, there
is no conflict between the right to life and the right to personal liberty. Both rights are
natural and inalienable rights of every human being and are required in order to
develop his/her personality to the fullest. Indeed, the right to life and the right to
personal liberty go hand-in-hand, with the right to personal liberty being an extension
of the right to life. A large number of poor people are persons who in today's
completely different and changed world have cellphones, and would come forward to
press the fundamental right to privacy, both against the Government and against
other private individuals. There is no antipathy whatsoever between the rich and the
poor in this context. It seems that this argument is made through the prism of the
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services)
Act, 2016, by which the Aadhaar card is the means to see that various beneficial
schemes of the Government filter down to persons for whom such schemes are
intended. This nine-Judge Bench has not been constituted to look into the
constitutional validity of the Aadhaar Act, but it has been constituted to consider a
much larger question, namely, that the right to privacy would be found, inter alia, in
Article 21 in both "life" and "personal liberty" by rich and poor alike primarily against
State action. This argument, therefore, is rejected.
(Para 478)
Vague Concept
The argument that the right to privacy is so vague and amorphous a concept that
it cannot be held to be a fundamental right, has also no force. Mere absence of a
definition which would encompass the many contours of the right to privacy need not
deter the Court from recognising privacy interests. These interests are broadly
classified into interests pertaining to the physical realm and interests pertaining to the
mind. This concept has travelled far from the mere right to be let alone to recognition
of a large number of privacy interests, which apart from privacy of
one's home and protection from unreasonable searches and seizures have been
extended to protecting an individual's interests in making vital personal choices such
as the right to abort a foetus; rights of same sex couples-including the right to
marry; rights as to procreation, contraception, general family relationships, child
rearing, education, data protection, etc.
(Para 479)
Huckle V. Money, (1763) 2 Wils KB 205 : 95 ER 768; Da Costa V. Jones, (1778) 2
SC 70 : 76 L Ed 815 : 285 US 393 (1932); Extra Judicial Execution Victim
727, considered
Information already in public domain
As regards the argument that if information is already in the public domain and has
been parted with, there is no privacy right, it is to be stated that the question as to
"voluntary" parting with information has to be dealt with, as has been dealt with, in
by a Congressional Act of 1978. The Supreme Court in Canara Bank observed that
the statute (Right to Financial Privacy Act, 1978) accords customers of banks or
similar financial institutions, certain rights to be notified of and a right to challenge the
actions of Government in court at an anterior stage before disclosure is made.
(Paras 480 and 481)
(1976), referred to
Privacy not expressly stated fundamental right - Derivative right
The argument that rights have to be traced directly to those expressly stated in
the fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution for such rights to receive
protection, and privacy is not one of them, is not acceptable. It is too late in the day
to canvas that a fundamental right must be traceable to express language in Part III
of the Constitution. Neither is privacy as vague and amorphous as has been argued,
nor is it correct to state that unless it finds express mention in a provision in Part III of
the Constitution, it should not be regarded as a fundamental right. A Constitution has
to be read in such a way that words deliver up principles that are to be followed and if
this is kept in mind, it is clear that the concept of privacy is contained not merely
in
personal liberty, but also in the dignity of the individual.
(Paras 482 and 483)
(1969), relied on
14 L Ed 2d 510 : 85 S Ct 1678 : 381 US 479 (1965); Lamont V. Postmaster
1070 : 45 S Ct 571 : 39 ALR 468 : 268 US 510 (1925);
1498 : 354 US 476 (1957), cited
Personal liberty if different from civil liberty
The argument that personal liberty is different from civil liberty need not detain the
Court at all for the reason that at least qua the fundamental right to privacy - that
right being intimately connected with the liberty of the person would certainly fall
within the expression "personal liberty".
(Para 474)
Facets of privacy
The submission that every facet of privacy is not protected (e.g. taxation laws
requiring furnishing of information; in relation to a census; details and documents
required to be furnished for the purpose of obtaining passport, prohibitions pertaining
to viewing pornography) is really putting the cart before the horse.
(Para 476)
(1969), relied on
Reasonable expectation test
The "reasonable expectation of privacy" test laid down by the decisions of the
United States Supreme Court though followed in certain subsequent judgments, has
been the subject-matter of criticism. There is no doubt that such a test has no
plausible foundation in the text of Articles 14, 19, 20 or 21 of our Constitution. Also,
as has rightly been held, the test is circular in the sense that there is no invasion of
privacy unless the individual whose privacy is invaded had a reasonable expectation of
privacy. Whether such individual will or will not have such an expectation ought to
depend on what the position in law is. Also, this test is intrinsically linked with the test
of voluntarily parting with information, inasmuch as if information is voluntarily parted
with, the person concerned can reasonably be said to have no expectation of any
privacy interest. This is nothing other than reading of the "reasonable expectation of
information is voluntarily parted with, no right to privacy exists. In Canara Bank,
received in the country of its origin, and refused to apply it in the Indian context. Also,
soon after Miller, the Congress enacted the Right to Financial Privacy Act, 1978, doing
away with the substratum of this judgment.
(Para 483)
142 L Ed 2d 373 : 119 S Ct 469 : 525 US 83 (1998); Obergefell V. Hodges, 2015
2d 734 : 81 S Ct 679 : 365 US 505 (1961), cited
Legislations protecting privacy
The submission that since several statutes already protect the privacy rights of
individuals, it is unnecessary to read a fundamental right to privacy into Part III of the
Constitution merits rejection. Statutory law can be made and also unmade by a
simple parliamentary majority. In short, the ruling party can, at will, do away with any
or all of the protections contained in the statutes. Fundamental rights, on the other
hand, are contained in the Constitution so that there would be rights that the citizens
of this country may enjoy despite the governments that they may elect. This is all the
more so when a particular fundamental right like privacy of the individual is an
"inalienable" right which inheres in the individual because he is a human being. The
recognition of such right in the fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution is only a
recognition that such right exists notwithstanding the shifting sands of majority
governments. Statutes may protect fundamental rights; they may also infringe them.
In case any existing statute or any statute to be made in the future is an infringement
of the inalienable right to privacy, the Supreme Court would then be required to test
such statute against such fundamental right and if it is found that there is an
infringement of such right, without any countervailing societal or public interest, it
would be the duty of the Supreme Court to declare such legislation to be void as
offending the fundamental right to privacy.
(Paras 489 and 490)
Interpretation by Supreme Court
According to the doctrine of originalism the first inquiry to be made is whether the
Founding Fathers had accepted or rejected a particular right in the Constitution. The
contention that it is not open to the Supreme Court to interpret the fundamental
rights chapter in such a manner as to introduce a fundamental right to privacy, when
the Founding Fathers had rejected the same as it is only Parliament in its constituent
capacity that can introduce such a right, cannot be accepted. In our Constitution, it is
not left to all the three organs of the State to interpret the Constitution. When a
substantial question as to the interpretation of the Constitution arises, it is the
Supreme Court alone under Article 145(3) that is to decide what the interpretation of
the Constitution shall be, and for this purpose the Constitution entrusts this task to a
minimum of five Judges of this Court.
(Para 502)
McCulloch V. Maryland, 4 L Ed 579 : 17 US (4 Wheat) 316 (1819); Minister of Home
Affairs V. Fisher, 1980 AC 319 : (1979) 2 WLR 889 : (1979) 3 All ER 21 (PC),
relied on
SCEC 310, affirmed
Waiver
The argument that if the right to privacy is a fundamental right, then it would not
be possible to waive any part of such right and consequently would lead to several
complications, is devoid of substance. Statutory provisions that deal with aspects of
privacy would continue to be tested on the ground that they would violate the
fundamental right to privacy, and would not be struck down, if it is found on a
balancing test that the social or public interest and the reasonableness of the
restrictions would outweigh the particular aspect of privacy claimed. If this is so, then
statutes which would enable the State to contractually obtain information
The surest way t to legal research!"
about persons would pass muster in given circumstances, provided they safeguard
the individual right to privacy as well. A simple example would suffice. If a person was
to paste on Facebook vital information about himself/herself, such information, being
in the public domain, could not possibly be claimed as a privacy right after such
disclosure. But, in pursuance of a statutory requirement, if certain details need to be
given for the statutory purpose concerned, then such details would certainly affect the
right to privacy, but would on a balance, pass muster as the State action concerned
has sufficient inbuilt safeguards to protect this right-viz. the fact that such
information cannot be disseminated to anyone else, save on compelling grounds of
public interest.
(Para 495)
Behram Khurshid Pesikaka V. State of Bombay, (1955) 1 SCR 613 : AIR 1955 SC
545; Basheshar Nath V. CIT, 1959 Supp (1) SCR 528 : AIR 1959 SC 149,
explained
Per Sapre, J. (concurring)
Right to privacy - Natural right
Right to privacy of any individual is essentially a natural right, which inheres in
every human being by birth. Such right remains with the human being till he/she
breathes last. It is indeed inseparable and inalienable from human being. In other
words, it is born with the human being and extinguishes with the human being.
(Para 557)
Privacy - Meaning
Right to privacy is not defined in law except in the dictionaries. The courts,
however, by process of judicial interpretation, have assigned meaning to this right in
the context of specific issues involved on case-to-case basis. The most popular
meaning of "right to privacy" "the right to be let alone".
(Paras 559 and 560)
affirmed
Constitution of India - Expansionist interpretation
The Court should always make attempt to expand the reach and ambit of the
fundamental rights rather than to attenuate their meaning and the content by process
of judicial construction. The Preamble is a part of the Constitution and, therefore,
while interpreting any provision of the Constitution or examining any constitutional
issue or while determining the width or reach of any provision or when any ambiguity
or obscurity is noticed in any provision, which needs to be clarified, or when the
language admits of meaning more than one, the Preamble to the Constitution may be
relied on as a remedy for mischief or/and to find out the true meaning of the relevant
provision as the case may be the answer to the questions can be found in the law laid
down in the decided cases of the Supreme Court alone and one may not require
taking the help of the law laid down by the American courts.
(Paras 553 and 554)
It is true that while interpreting our laws, the English decisions do guide the Court
in reaching to a particular conclusion arising for consideration. The law reports also
bear the testimony that the Supreme Court especially in its formative years has taken
the help of English cases for interpreting the provisions of our Constitution and other
laws. However, in the last seven decades, the Supreme Court
has interpreted our Constitution keeping in view the socio, economic and political
conditions of the Indian Society, felt need of, We, the People of this country and the
country in general in comparison to the conditions prevailing in other countries. The
Indian courts will have to adjust and adapt, limit or extend, the principles derived from
English decisions, entitled as they are to great respect, suiting the conditions to the
Indian society as a whole.
(Paras 555 and 556)
Preamble of the Constitution
Perusal of the words in the Preamble would go to show that every word used
therein was cautiously chosen by the Founding Fathers and then these words were
arranged and accordingly placed in a proper order. Every word incorporated in the
Preamble has significance and proper meaning. The most important place of pride was
given to the "People of India" by using the expression, WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, in the
beginning of the Preamble. The Constitution was accordingly adopted, enacted and
then given to ourselves.
(Para 541)
The keynote of the Preamble was to lay emphasis on two positive aspects - one,
"the Unity of the Nation" and the second "Dignity of the individual". The expression
"dignity" carries with it moral and spiritual imports. It also implies an obligation on the
part of the Union to respect the personality of every citizen and create the conditions
in which every citizen would be left free to find himself/herself and attain self-
fulfilment. The incorporation of expression "Dignity of the individual" in the Preamble
is aimed essentially to show explicit repudiation of what people of this country had
inherited from the past. Dignity of the individual is always considered the prime
constituent of fraternity, which assures the dignity to every individual. Both
expressions are interdependent and intertwined. Unity and integrity of the nation
cannot survive unless the dignity of every individual citizen is guaranteed. It is
inconceivable to think of unity and integration without the assurance to an individual
to preserve his dignity. In other words, regard and respect by every individual for the
dignity of the other one brings the unity and integrity of the nation.
(Paras 539, 543 and 544)
One cannot conceive an individual enjoying meaningful life with dignity without the
right to privacy. Indeed, it is one of those cherished rights, which every civilised
society governed by rule of law always recognises in every human being and is under
obligation to recognise such rights in order to maintain and preserve the dignity of an
individual regardless of gender, race, religion, caste and creed. It is, of course, subject
to imposing certain reasonable restrictions keeping in view the social, moral and
compelling public interest, which the State is entitled to impose by law.
(Para 558)
The expressions "liberty", "equality" and "fraternity" incorporated in the Preamble
are not separate entities. They have to be read in juxtaposition while dealing with the
rights of the citizens. They, in fact, form a union. If these expressions are divorced
from each other it will defeat the very purpose of democracy. In other words, liberty
cannot be divorced from equality so also equality cannot be divorced from liberty and
nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. The meaning assigned to
these expressions
has to be given due weightage while interpreting articles of Part III of the Constitution.
(Paras 545 and 546)
It is, therefore, the duty of the courts and especially the Supreme Court as sentinel
on the qui vive to strike a balance between the changing needs of the society and the
protection of the rights of the citizens as and when the issue relating to the
infringement of the rights of the citizen comes up for consideration. Such a balance
can be achieved only through securing and protecting liberty, equality and fraternity
with social and political justice to all the citizens under rule of law.
(Para 547)
Right to privacy as a fundamental right
There is no difficulty in tracing the "right to privacy" emanating from the two
expressions of the Preamble, namely, "liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship" and "Fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual" and also emanating
from Article 19(1)(a) which gives to every citizen "a freedom of speech and
expression" and further emanating from Article 19(1)(d) which gives to every citizen
"a right to move freely throughout the territory of India" and lastly, emanating from
the expression "personal liberty" under Article 21. "Right to privacy" has multiple
facets and though such right can be classified as a part of fundamental right
emanating from Articles 19(1)(a) and (d) and Article 21, yet it is not absolute, and
secondly, it is always subject to certain reasonable restrictions on the basis of
compelling social, moral and public interest and lastly, any such right when asserted
by the citizen in the court of law then it has to go through a process of case-to-case
development. The right to privacy is inbuilt in these expressions and flows from each
of them and in juxtaposition.
(Paras 566 and 565)
referred to
Conclusion
The "right to privacy" is a part of fundamental right of a citizen guaranteed under
Part III of the Constitution. However, it is not an absolute right but is subject to
certain reasonable restrictions, which the State is entitled to impose on the basis of
social, moral and compelling public interest in accordance with law. Similarly, the "right
to privacy" has multiple facets, and, therefore, the same has to go through a process
of case-to-case development as and when any citizen raises his grievance
complaining of infringement of his alleged right in accordance with law.
(Paras 567 and 568)
The Reference Court cannot travel beyond the reference made and is confined to
answer only those questions that are referred.
(Para 571)
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar V. State of Maharashtra, (1966) 3 SCR 744 : AIR 1967 SC
1, followed
Per Kaul, J. (concurring)
Privacy - Inherent basic right
A human being, from an individual existence, evolved into a social animal. Society
thus envisaged a collective living beyond the individual as a unit to what came to be
known as the family. This, in turn, imposed duties and obligations towards the
society. The right to "do as you please" became circumscribed by norms commonly
acceptable to the larger social group. In time, the acceptable norms evolved into
formal legal principles. "The right to be", though not extinguished for an individual, as
the society evolved, became hedged in by the complexity of the norms. There has
been a growing concern of the impact of technology which breaches this "right to be"
or privacy. The importance of privacy may vary from person to person dependent on
his/her approach to society and his concern for being left alone or not. That some
The surest way't to legal research!"
people do not attach importance to their privacy cannot be the basis for denying
recognition to the right to privacy as a basic human right. Privacy is an inherent right.
It is thus not given, but already exists. It is about respecting an individual and it is
undesirable to ignore a person's wishes without a compelling reason to do so.
(Paras 575 to 577 and 582)
The right to privacy may have different aspects starting from "the right to be let
alone". One such aspect is an individual's right to control dissemination of his personal
information. There is nothing wrong in individuals limiting access and their ability to
shield from unwanted access. This aspect of the right to privacy has assumed
particular significance in this information age and in view of technological
improvements. A person-hood would be a protection of one's personality, individuality
and dignity. However, no right is unbridled and so is it with privacy. We live in a
society/community. Hence, restrictions arise from the interests of the community,
State and from those of others. Thus, it would be subject to certain restrictions
(Para 583)
The Right to Privacy, (1890) 4 Harv L Rev 193; Daniel Solove, "10 Reasons Why
Privacy Matters" published on 20-1-2014 <https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-
reasons-privacy-matters/>.referredto
Constitution of India
In Constitutional Law "the brooding spirit of law" is justice for all, being the
cherished value. In our country the spirit inspired our Founding Fathers - the
Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic of India was founded on her very
spirit. During the times of the Constituent Assembly, the great intellectuals of the day
sought to give this brooding spirit a form, and sought to invoke her in a manner that
they felt could be understood, applied and interpreted-they drafted the Indian
Constitution. The Constitution stands as a codified representation of the great spirit of
justice itself. It is because it represents that Supreme Goodness that it has been
conferred the status of the grund norm, that it is the Supreme Legal Document in the
country.
(Paras 596 and 597)
The Constitution was not drafted for a specific time period or for a certain
generation, it was drafted to stand firm, for eternity. The very incorporation of Article
368 as a plenary amending power in a separate part altogether is prima facie proof
that the Constitution, even during the times of its making was intended to be a
timeless document, eternal in nature, organic and living. Therefore, the theory of
original intent itself supports the stand that the original intention of the makers of the
Constitution was to ensure that it does not get weighed down by the originalist
interpretations/remain static/fossilised, but changes and evolves to suit the felt need
of the times. The original intention theory itself contemplates a Constitution which is
organic in nature.
(Paras 598, 601 and 602)
affirmed and followed
1173 : 250 US 616 (1919), cited
The notions of goodness, fairness, equality and dignity can never be satisfactorily
defined, they can only be experienced. They are felt. They were left abstract for the
reason that these rights, by their very nature are not static. They can never be
certainly defined or applied, for they change not only with time but also with
situations. The same concept can be differently understood, applied and interpreted
and therein lies their beauty and their importance. This multiplicity of interpretation
and application is the very core which allows them to be differently understood and
applied in changing social and cultural situations. Therefore, these core values, these
core principles, are all various facets of the spirit that pervades our Constitution and
they apply and read differently in various scenarios. They manifest themselves
differently in different ages, situations and conditions. Though being rooted in ancient
constitutional principles, they find mention and applicability as different rights and
social privileges. They appear differently, based on the factual circumstance. Privacy,
for example is nothing but a form of dignity, which itself is a subset of liberty.
(Paras 608 and 609)
Thus, from the one great tree, there are branches, and from these branches there
are sub-branches and leaves. Every one of these leaves are rights, all tracing back to
the tree of justice. They are all equally important and of equal need in the great social
order. They together form part of that "great brooding spirit". Denial of one of them
is the denial of the whole, for these rights, in manner of speaking, fertilise and nurture
each other. What is beautiful in this biological, organic growth is this : While the tree
appears to be great and magnificent, apparently incapable of further growth, there are
always new branches appearing, new leaves and buds growing. These new rights, are
the rights of future generations that evolve over the passage of time to suit and
facilitate the civility of posterity. They are equally part of this tree of rights and equally
trace their origins to those natural rights which we are all born with. These leaves,
sprout and grow with the passage of time, just as certain rights may get weeded out
due to natural evolution.
(Paras 610 and 611)
Each age and each generation brings with it the challenges and tribulations of the
times. But that supreme spirit of justice manifests itself in different eras, in different
continents and in different social situations, as different values to ensure that there
always exists the protection and preservation of certain eternally cherished rights and
ideals. It is a reflection of this divine "Brooding spirit of the law", "the collective
conscience", "the intelligence of a future day" that has found mention in the ideals
enshrined in, inter alia, Articles 14 and 21, which together serve as the heart stones
of the Constitution. The spirit that finds enshrinement in these articles manifests and
reincarnates itself in ways and forms that protect the needs of the society in various
ages, as the values of liberty, equality, fraternity, dignity, and various other
constitutional values, constitutional principles. It always grows stronger and covers
within its sweep the great needs of the times. This spirit can neither remain dormant
nor static and can never be allowed to fossilise.
(Para 614)
An issue like privacy could never have been anticipated to acquire such a level of
importance when the Constitution was being contemplated. Yet, today, the times we
live in necessitate that it be recognised not only as a valuable right, but as a right
fundamental in constitutional jurisprudence.
(Para 615)
Liberty and equality
Nariman, J. and Chandrachud, J., have emphasised the importance of the
protection of privacy to ensure protection of liberty and dignity. I agree with them.
Privacy is also the key to freedom of thought. A person has a right to think. The
thoughts are sometimes translated into speech but confined to the person to whom it
is made. For example, one may want to criticise someone but not share the criticism
with the world.
(Paras 618 and 619)
Campbell V. MGN Ltd., (2004) 2 AC 457 : (2004) 2 WLR 1232 : (2004) UKHL 22
(HL), relied on
Geoffrey Robertson, QC and Andrew Nicol, QC, Media Law, 5th Edn., p. 265, relied on
Restrictions
The right to privacy as already observed is not absolute. The right to privacy as
falling in Part III of the Constitution may, depending on its variable facts, vest in one
part or the other, and would thus be subject to the restrictions of exercise of that
particular fundamental right. National security would thus be an obvious restriction, so
would the provisos to different fundamental rights, dependent on where the right to
privacy would arise. The public interest element would be another aspect.
(Para 639)
Regulation No. (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4
-2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of
personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive No.
95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), referred to
Privacy and technology
The right to privacy is a fundamental right. It is a right which protects the inner
sphere of the individual from interference from both State and non-State actors and
allows the individuals to make autonomous life choices. The access to information,
which an individual may not want to give, needs the protection of privacy. The right to
privacy is claimed qua the State and non-State actors. Recognition and enforcement
of claims qua non-State actors may require legislative intervention by the State.
(Paras 644 and 584)
It was rightly expressed on behalf of the petitioners that technology has made it
possible to enter a citizen's house without knocking at his/her door and this is equally
possible both by the State and non-State actors. It is an individual's choice as to who
enters his house, how he lives and in what relationship. The privacy of the home must
protect the family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation which are all
important aspects of dignity.
(Para 645)
If the individual permits someone to enter the house it does not mean that others
can enter the house. The only check and balance is that it should not harm the other
individual or affect his or her rights. This applies both to the physical form and to
technology. In an era where there are wide, varied, social and cultural norms and
more so in a country like ours which prides itself on its diversity, privacy is one of the
most important rights to be protected both against State and non-State actors and
be recognised as a fundamental right. How it thereafter works out in its inter-play
with other fundamental rights and when such restrictions would become necessary
would depend on the factual matrix of each case. That it may give rise to more
litigation can hardly be the reason not to recognise this important, natural, primordial
right as a fundamental right.
(Para 646)
Privacy concerns against State
States are utilising technology in the most imaginative ways particularly in view of
increasing global terrorist attacks and heightened public safety concerns. One such
technique being adopted by the States is "profiling". The European Union Regulation of
2016 on data privacy defines "profiling" as any form of automated processing of
personal data consisting of the use of personal data to evaluate certain personal
aspects relating to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspects
concerning that natural person's performance at work, economic situation, health,
personal preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements. Such
profiling can result in discrimination based on religion, ethnicity and caste. However,
"profiling" can also be used to further public interest and for the benefit of national
security. The security environment, not only in our country, but throughout the world
makes the safety of persons and the State a matter to be balanced against this right
to privacy.
(Paras 585 and 586)
Regulation No. (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4
-2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of
personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive No.
95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), referred to
Privacy concerns against non-State actors
The capacity of non-State actors to invade the home and privacy has also been
enhanced. Technological development has facilitated journalism that is more intrusive
than ever before. Further, in this digital age, individuals are constantly generating
valuable data which can be used by non-State actors to track their moves, choices
and preferences. Data is generated not just by active sharing of information, but also
passively, with every click on the "world wide web".
(Paras 587 and 588)
Michael L. Rustad, SannaKulevska, "Reconceptualizing the right to be forgotten to
enable transatlantic data flow", (2015) 28 Harv JL & Tech 349; Tom Goodwin "The
Battle is for Customer Interface", <https://techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in-the-
age-of-disintermediation-the-battle-is-all-for-the-customer-interface/>,referred to
These digital footprints and extensive data can be analysed computationally to
reveal patterns, trends, and associations, especially relating to human behaviour and
interactions and hence, is valuable information. This is the age of "big data". A large
number of people would like to keep such search history private, but it rarely remains
private, and is collected, sold and analysed for purposes such as targeted advertising.
Of course, "big data" can also be used to further public interest. There may be cases
where collection and processing of big data is legitimate and proportionate, despite
being invasive of privacy otherwise.
(Para 590)
Knowledge about a person gives a power over that person. The personal data
collected is capable of effecting representations, influencing decision-making
processes and shaping behaviour. It can be used as a tool to exercise control over us
like the "big brother" State exercised. This can have a stultifying effect on the
expression of dissent and difference of opinion, which no democracy can afford.
(Para 591)
Thus, there is an unprecedented need for regulation regarding the extent to which
such information can be stored, processed and used by non-State actors. There is
also a need for protection of such information from the State. While such interception
may be desirable and permissible in order to ensure national security, it cannot be
unregulated.
(Para 592)
The concept of "invasion of privacy" is not the early conventional thought process
of "poking ones nose in another person's affairs". It is not so simplistic. In today's
world, privacy is a limit on the Government's power as well as the power of private
sector entities.
(Para 593)
Privacy - Right control dissemination of personal information
An aspect of privacy is the right to control dissemination of personal information.
The boundaries that people establish from others in society are not only physical but
also informational. There are different kinds of boundaries in respect to different
relations. Privacy assists in preventing awkward social situations and reducing social
frictions. Most of the information about individuals can fall under the phrase "none of
your business". On information being shared voluntarily, the same may be said to be
in confidence and any breach of confidentiality is a breach of the trust. This is more so
in the professional
relationships such as with doctors and lawyers which requires an element of candour
in disclosure of information. An individual has the right to control one's life while
submitting personal data for various facilities and services. It is but essential that the
individual knows as to what the data is being used for with the ability to correct and
amend it. The hallmark of freedom in a democracy is having the autonomy and
control over our lives which becomes impossible, if important decisions are made in
secret without our awareness or participation.
(Para 620)
From the right to privacy in this modern age emanate certain other rights such as
the right of individuals to exclusively commercially exploit their identity and personal
information, to control the information that is available about them on the "world
wide web" and to disseminate certain personal information for limited purposes alone.
(Para 621)
An individual has a right to protect his reputation from being unfairly harmed and
such protection of reputation needs to exist not only against falsehood but also
certain truths. It cannot be said that a more accurate judgment about people can be
facilitated by knowing private details about their lives - people judge us badly, they
judge us in haste, they judge out of context, they judge without hearing the whole
story and they judge with hypocrisy. Privacy lets people protect themselves from
these troublesome judgments.
(Para 623)
Daniel Solove, "10 Reasons Why Privacy Matters" published on 20-1-2014
<https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-privacy-matters/>,referred to
There is no justification for making all truthful information available to the public.
The public does not have an interest in knowing all information that is true. Truthful
information that breaches privacy may also require protection. Every individual should
have a right to be able to exercise control over his/her own life and image as
portrayed to the world and to control commercial use of his/her identity. This also
means that an individual may be permitted to prevent others from using his image,
name and other aspects of his/her personal life and identity for commercial purposes
without his/her consent. Aside from the economic justifications for such a right, it is
also justified as protecting individual autonomy and personal dignity. The right
protects an individual's free, personal conception of the "self". The right of publicity
implicates a person's interest in autonomous self-definition, which prevents others
from interfering with the meanings and values that the public associates with her.
(Paras 624 to 626)
Haelan Laboratories Inc. V. Topps Chewing Gum Inc., 202 F 2d 866 (2d Cir 1953),
referred to
Mark P. McKenna, "The Right of Publicity and Autonomous Self-Definition", 67 U PITT L
REV 225 at p. 282 (2005); William L. Prosser, "Privacy", 48 CAL L REV 383
(1960); Arthur R. Miller (The University of Michigan Press, 1971), referred to
The right of an individual to exercise control over his personal data and to be able
to control his/her own life would also encompass his right to control his existence on
the internet. This would not be an absolute right. The existence of such a right does
not imply that a criminal can obliterate his past, but that there are variant degrees of
mistakes, small and big, and it cannot be said that a person should be profiled to the
nth extent for all and sundry to know.
(Para 629)
Patricia Snchez Abril, "Blurred Boundaries : Social Media Privacy and the Twenty-First
-Century Employee", 49 Am Bus LJ 63 at p. 69 (2012), referred to
The impact of the digital age results in information on the internet being
permanent. Technology results almost in a sort of a permanent storage in some way
or the other making it difficult to begin life again giving up past mistakes. People are
entitled to re-invent themselves and reform and correct their mistakes. It is privacy
which nurtures this ability and removes the shackles of unadvisable things which may
have been done in the past. Children around the world create perpetual digital
footprints on social network websites on a 24/7 basis. They should not be subjected
to the consequences of their childish mistakes and naivety, their entire life. Privacy of
children will require special protection not just in the context of the virtual world, but
also the real world.
(Paras 631 and 633)
Ravi Antani, "The Resistance of Memory : Could the European Union's Right to be
Forgotten Exist in the United States?", 30 Berkeley Tech LJ 1173 (2015), referred
to
People change and an individual should be able to determine the path of his life and
not be stuck only on a path of which he/she treaded initially. An individual should have
the capacity to change his/her beliefs and evolve as a person. Individuals should not
live in fear that the views they expressed will forever be associated with them and
thus refrain from expressing themselves.
(Para 634)
Whereas this right to control dissemination of personal information in the physical
and virtual space should not amount to a right of total eraser of history, this right, as
a part of the larger right to privacy, has to be balanced against other fundamental
rights like the freedom of expression, or freedom of media, fundamental to a
democratic society.
(Para 635)
Thus, the European Union Regulation of 2016 has recognised what has been
termed as "the right to be forgotten". This does not mean that all aspects of earlier
existence are to be obliterated, as some may have a social ramification. If a similar
right is to be recognised, it would only mean that an individual who is no longer
desirous of his personal data to be processed or stored, should be able to remove it
from the system where the personal data/information is no longer necessary,
relevant, or is incorrect and serves no legitimate interest. Such a right cannot be
exercised where the information/data is necessary, for exercising the right of freedom
of expression and information, for compliance with legal obligations, for the
performance of a task carried out in public interest, on the grounds of public interest
in the area of public health, for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or
historical research purposes or statistical purposes, or for the establishment, exercise
or defence of legal claims. Such justifications would be valid in all cases of breach of
privacy, including breaches of data privacy.
(Para 636)
Data protection
Formulation of data protection is a complex exercise which needs to be
undertaken by the State after a careful balancing of privacy concerns and legitimate
State interests, including public benefit arising from scientific and historical research
based on data collected and processed. The European Union Regulation of 2016 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4-2016 on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data may provide useful guidance in this regard. The State must
ensure that information is not used without the consent of users and that it is used
for the purpose and to the extent it was disclosed. Thus, for e.g., if the posting on
social media websites is meant only for a certain audience, which is possible as per
tools available, then it cannot be said that all and sundry in public have a right to
somehow access that information and make use of it.
(Para 637)
Principle of proportionality and legitimacy
The concerns expressed on behalf of the petitioners arising from the possibility of
the State infringing the right to privacy can be met by the test suggested for limiting
the discretion of the State:
(i) The action must be sanctioned by law;
(ii) The proposed action must be necessary in a democratic society for a
legitimate aim;
(iii) The extent of such interference must be proportionate to the need for such
interference;
(iv) There must be procedural guarantees against abuse of such interference.
(Para 638)
Report of group of experts on privacy
The Planning Commission of India constituted the Group of Experts on Privacy
under the Chairmanship of Justice A.P. Shah, which submitted a report on 16-10-
2012. It dealt with Technological Neutrality and Interoperability with International
Standards; Multi-Dimensional Privacy; Horizontal Applicability; Conformity with
Privacy Principles; Co-Regulatory Enforcement Regime. The enactment of a law on
the subject is still awaited. This was preceded by the Privacy Bill of the year of 2005
but there appears to have been little progress. It was only in the course of the hearing
that an office memorandum of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
dated 31-7-2017 was presented, through which a Committee of Experts had been
constituted to deliberate on a data protection framework for India, under the
Chairmanship of Mr Justice B.N. Srikrishna, former Judge of the Supreme Court of
India, in order to identify key data protection issues in India and recommend methods
of addressing them. So there is hope!
(Paras 641 and 642)
The aforesaid aspect has been referred to for purposes that the concerns about
privacy have been left unattended for quite some time and thus an infringement of
the right to privacy cannot be left to be formulated by the legislature. It is a primal
natural right which is only being recognised as a fundamental right falling in Part III of
the Constitution of India.
(Para 643)
Thus, privacy is not just a common law right, but a fundamental right falling in Part
III of the Constitution of India. Privacy is a primal, natural right which is inherent to an
individual. Let the right to privacy, an inherent right, be unequivocally a fundamental
right embedded in Part III of the Constitution of India, but subject to the restrictions
specified, relatable to that part. This is the call of today. The old order changeth
yielding place to new.
(Paras 574 and 650)
ZC. Constitution of India - Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28 & 147 and
Preamble - Eight Judge Bench decision of Supreme Court in M.P. Sharma, AIR
1954 SC 300 - Correctness - Held, though case not directly concerned with
right to privacy, but to the extent it contradicts the present verdict that it is
an inherent fundamental right protected under Pt. III, it stands overruled
(Paras 27, 100, 316, 337, 341, 343, 344, 385 to 388, 417, 456, 469, 536
and 569)
ZD. Constitution of India - Arts. 21, 19, 14, 20, 25, 26, 28 & 147 and
Preamble - Six Judge Bench decision of Supreme Court in Kharak Singh, AIR
1963 SC 1295 - Correctness - Held, first part of majority judgment
correctly recognised right to privacy as a fundamental right, but second part
of it held to the contrary, thus giving rise to an apparent contradiction in the
judgment - Majority judgment to the extent of its inconsistency with the
present verdict that right to privacy is intrinsically protected fundamental right
under Pt. III, it stands overruled
(Paras 24, 28, 101, 317, 340 to 344, 379, 386, 387, 475, 536 and 569)
M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra, AIR 1954 SC 300 : 1954 Cri LJ 865 : 1954 SCR
1077; Kharak Singh V. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 329
:
(1964) 1 SCR 332, overruled on this point
held, overruled on this point
Ramarathnam, (1967) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1967 SC 1836; Olga Tellis V. Bombay
:
Semayne case, (1604) 5 Co Rep 91a : 1 Sm LC (13th Edn.) 104 at p. 105 : 77 ER
194, cited
ZE. Constitution of India - Arts. 21 and 14 - Right to privacy - Cannot be
denied even if only a miniscule fraction of country's population is affected by
violation of such right - Such de minimis hypotheses adopted in Suresh
De minimis hypothesis
Held :
Per Chandrachud, J. (for Khehar, C.J., Agrawal, J., himself and Nazeer, J.)
Court arose from a judgment of the Delhi High Court holding that Section 377 of the
Penal Code, insofar as it criminalises consensual sexual acts of adults in private is
violative of Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution. The Delhi High Court, however,
clarified that Section 377 will continue to govern non-consensual penile, non-vaginal
sex and penile non-vaginal sex involving minors. The Supreme Court, however, found
fault with the basis of the judgment of the High Court on the ground that only a
miniscule fraction of the country's population constitutes lesbians, gays, bisexuals or
transgenders and in last more than 150 years less than 200 persons have been
prosecuted (as per the reported orders) for committing offence under Section 377
IPC. Thus the decision in Suresh Kumar Koushal case presents a de minimis rationale
when it asserts that there have been only two hundred prosecutions for violating
Section 377. The de minimis hypothesis is misplaced because the invasion of a
fundamental right is not rendered tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number
of persons, are subjected to hostile treatment. The reason why such acts of hostile
discrimination are constitutionally impermissible is because of the chilling effect which
they have on the exercise of the fundamental right in the first place. For instance, pre-
publication restraints such as censorship are vulnerable because they discourage
people from exercising their right to free speech because of the fear of a restraint
coming into operation. The chilling effect on the exercise of the right poses a grave
danger to the unhindered fulfilment of one's sexual orientation, as an element of
privacy and dignity. The chilling effect is due to the danger of a human being subjected
to social opprobrium or disapproval, as reflected in the punishment of crime. Hence
the Koushal case rationale that prosecution of a few is not an index of violation is
flawed and cannot be accepted. Consequently, the manner in which Koushal case has
dealt with the privacy-dignity based claims of LGBT persons on this aspect is not
acceptable. Since the challenge to Section 377 is pending consideration before a
larger Bench of the Supreme Court, the constitutional validity is left to be decided in
an appropriate proceeding.
(Paras 142 to 147)
doubted
Per Kaul, J. (concurring)
Dr Chandrachud, J. has rightly held that the right to privacy cannot be denied, even
if there is a miniscule fraction of the population which is affected. The majoritarian
concept does not apply to constitutional rights and the courts are often called upon to
take what may be categorised as a non-majoritarian view, in the check and balance
of power envisaged under the Constitution of India. One's sexual orientation is
undoubtedly an attribute of privacy.
(Para 636)
Mosley V. News Group Papers Ltd., 2008 EWHC 1777 (QB), considered
doubted
DRJ 1, referred to
Von Hannover V. Germany, (2004) 40 EHRR 1, cited
R-D/59029/CRVL
Advocates who appeared in this case:
K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General, Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor
General, Jugal Kishore Gilda, Advocate General, D.K. Singh, Shiv Mangal
Sharma, Additional Advocates General, Arvind Datar, Ms Meenakshi
Arora, Anand Grover, Shyam Divan, Gopal Subramanium, C.A. Sundaram,
Rakesh Dwivedi, Sajan Poovayya, Jayant Bhushan, J.S. Attri, Kapil Sibal
and P.V. Surendra Nath, Senior Advocates [Anish Kr. Gupta, Avdhesh Kr.
Singh, R.K. Rajwanshi, Chandra Shekhar Suman, Ms Deep Shikha Bharti,
Ms Geetha Kovilan, Rahul Narayan, Apar Gupta, Ms Ananya, Shashwat
Goel, Ms Bhavna, Gautam Bhatia, Ms Krutika, Shadan Farasat, Ms Tripti
Tandon, Ms Lorraine Misquith, Ms Srinidhi Rao, Ms Priyam Cherian,
Prasanna S., Suraj, Vijayant Singh, Nipun Saxena, Anando Mukherjee,
Pratap Venugopal, Udayaditya Banerjee, Ms Niharika, Anuj Sharma, Ms
Kanika Kalaiyarasan, Ms Sameeksha G., Ms Kritika Bhardwaj, Apar Gupta
(for M/s K.J. John & Co.), Vipin Nair, P.B. Suresh, S. Prasanna, Ms
Samiksha Godiyal, Abhay Pratap Singh, Govind Manoharan, V.K. Biju, Ms
Nidhi Khanna, Dr Abhishek Atrey, Ravindra Lokhande, Ms Aishwarya
Bhati, Ms Neha Meena, Jaideep Singh, Anirban Sen, Ms Taniya, M/s
Meharia & Co., Jaideep Singh, Ms Archana Pathak Dave, Talha Abdul
Rahman, Prateek Chaddha, Ankur Kashyap, Pavan Bhushan, Zulnoor
Ahmed, Jayavardhan Singh, Eklavya Vasudev, Ms Ankita Chaudhary, Ms
Radhika Sharma, Prashant Bhushan, Chittaranjan Mishra, Bhanu Pratap
Singh, Sarthak Chodhury, Pranaya Kr. Mohapatra, Zoheb Hossain, Rajat
Nair, Kanu Agrawal, Manan Popli, Ms Shraddha Deshmukh, Ankur Talwar,
Piyush Goyal, Ms Devika Jain, Anil Kr. Gulati (for Ms Anil Katiyar), Ankit
Lal, Mishra Saurabh, Nishant R. Katneshwarkar, Ms Rohini Musa,
Abhishek Gupta, Zafar Inayat, Apoorv Tripathy, Arpit Rai, Ms Hemantika
Wahi, Ms Jesal Wahi, Ms Shodhika Sharma, Apoorva Garg, Ms Sansriti
Pathak, Amit Sharma, Dipesh Sinha, Ms Ayiala Imti, Saransh Kumar,
Priyadarshi Banerjee, Pratibhanu S. Kharola, Saransh Jain (for E.C.
Agrawala), Ms Reeja Verghese, Ketan Paul, Kuldeep S. Parihar, H.S.
Parihar, Adarsh Upadhyay, Ms Komal Mundra, Saurabh Agrawal, Varinder
Kr. Sharma, Chandra Nand Jha, Parmanand Gaur, J.M. Kalia, D.S. Mahra,
Lalit Bhasin, Ms Nina Gupta, Mudit Sharma, Soumitra G. Chaudhuri,
Chanchal K. Ganguli, Ms Vimla Sinha (for Gopal Singh), S. Udaya Kr.
Sagar, Mrityunjai Singh, Ranjan Mukherjee, Guntur Prabhakar, Ms Prerna
Singh, Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Zeeshan Diwan, Ms Savita Singh, Ms
Veera Mahuli, Shruthanjaya Bharadwaj, Jayant Mohan, Dr Arghya
Sengupta, Sanjay Kapur, T.G. Narayanan Nair, Ms Nitya
Madhusoodhanan, Puducherry V.G. Pragasam, Prabu Ramasubramanian,
Karan Bharihoke, Jagjit Singh Chhabra, Jatinder Kr. Bhatia, Ashutosh Kr.
Sharma, Sanjay Kr. Visen, A.P. Mayee, A. Selvin Raja, Avnish M. Oza,
Chirag Jain, Shrey Kapoor, T.A. Rehman (for Ms Ruchi Kohli), Tapesh Kr.
Singh, Sukant Vikram, Mohd. Waquas, Aditya Pratap Singh, Nishe Rajen
Shonker, Mohammed Saddique, Ms Resmitha R. Chandran, Ms Anu K.
Joy, M. Shoeb Alam, Ms Fauzia Shakil, Ujjwal Singh, Mojahid Karim Khan,
K.V. Jagdishvaran, Ms G. Indira, Sapam Biswajit Meitei, Naresh Kr. Gaur,
Ashok Kr. Singh, Gopal Singh, Rituraj Biswas, Manish Kumar, Pranab
Prakash, Shivam Singh, Aditya Raina, Shreyas Jain, Kumar Milind, Ms
Ambika Gautam, Chandan Kumar, J.K. Bhatia, Ashutosh Kr. Sharma, Mrs.
K. Enatoli Sema, Edward Belho, Amit Kr. Singh, K. Luikang Michael, Ms
Elix Gangmei, Z.H. Isaac Haiding, S. Mukerjee, Manoj K. Mishra, Umesh
Dubey, Ms Meghna Kalra, Ms Neela Gokhale, Aliam P, Ms K.S. Mehlwal, R.
Sudhinder, Ashok Mathur, Ms Amrita Sarkar, Nikhil Nayyar, Ms Julian
George, Arjun Ranganathan, Yatinder Garg, Yashwant Prasad, Pradeep
Gupta, Parinav Gupta, Ms Mansi Gupta and Moazzam Ali (for Dr (Ms)
Vipin Gupta), Advocates] for the appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
India
348c, 550g
Judicial Execution Victim Families Assn. V. Union
of India
567d-e
519b
Ghosh V. Union of India
406b-c
Record Assn. V. Union of India (affirmed)
398e-f
494c
7. 2016 UKSC 26 : (2016) 2 WLR 1253 (SC), PJS V.
News Group Newspapers Ltd.
432b-c
383, ABC V. State (NCT of Delhi) (affirmed)
398b-c
India
347e, 533d, 550c
Shabnam V. Union of India
406a
US
(2015), Obergefell V. Hodges
448f-g
-
12. 2015 UKSC 42 : (2015) 3 WLR 155 (SC), JR38, In
re
431e
13. Application No. 47143/06, decided on 4-12-2015
(ECHR) : (2016) 63 EHRR 17, Roman Zakharov V.
Russia
466b
14. Application No. 62498/11, decided on 27-10-2015 :
2015 ECHR 947, RE V. United Kingdom
465f
Arif V. Supreme Court of India
494a-b, 560e, 574d, 613b
396a-b
396f-g, 398a, 399c-d,
Authority V. Union of India (affirmed)
402a, 405g, 425a-b,
566f-g, 566g
Chauhan V. Union of India
586e-f
345d-e, 420d, 421b-c,
Kumar Koushal V. Naz Foundation (doubted)
422b, 422d, 422f, 422f-
g, 635c
573 US
(2014), Riley V. California
448b
458a-b
22. (2014) 3 WLR 1607 : C-293/12, decided on 8-4-
2014 (CJEU), Digital Rights Ireland Ltd. V. Minister
465a
Bank Ltd. V. State of Kerala (affirmed)
395c, 573e, 603b-c, 615a
V. State of Haryana
394g
A.P.
479c, 586e-f
Namit Sharma V. Union of India (affirmed)
495f-g
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande V. Central
Information Commr.
605b
Florida V. Jardines
447e
Public Service Commission V. Saiyed Hussain
Abbas Rizwi
394a, 394b
Nayyar Azam V. State of Chhattisgarh
405f-g
of M.P. V. Rakesh Kohli
495f-g
Private Schools of Rajasthan V. Union of India
539a
Maidan Incident, In re
393d-e, 586e-f
Authority V. Aircraft Employees' Coop. Society Ltd.
496a-b
decided on 28-11-2012 (Int-Am Ct HR), Artavia
Murillo ("In Vitro Fertilization") V. Costa Rica
466h
United States V. Jones
446e, 589e-f
of Allahabad
393b-c
Plantation (P) Ltd. V. State of Karnataka
495f-g, 496a-b
Jethmalani V. Union of India
392c, 402a
Singh V. Union of India
391f-g
Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi V. State Information
Commission
394b
:
562 US 134 (2011), National Aeronautics and
Space Admn. ("NASA") V. Nelson
445a, 445b
43. 2011 UKSC 21 : (2011) 1 WLR 1230 (SC), R. (GC)
V. Commr. of Police of the Metropolis
431a
44. C-468/10, decided on 24-11-2011, 2011 ECR I-
12181 : ECLI : EU : C : 2011 : 777, Asociacin
Nacional de Establecimientos Financieros de
Crdito (ASNEF) V. Spain
464e-f
Deo Chauhan V. Bani Kanta Das
568b-c
495f-g
Orissa State Commission for Women
391d
390d, 391c-d, 399c-d,
State of Karnataka
402a, 405e-f, 570d-e,
595a-b
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences V.
Satchikitsa Prasarak Mandal
405e-f
50. Application No. 35623/05, decided on 2-9-2010
(ECHR) : (2010) 53 EHRR 852, Uzun V. Germany
462a, 464b
Bhavesh Jayanti Lakhani V. State of Maharashtra
390a
Srivastava V. Chandigarh Admn.
388f-g, 389b, 389f-g, 402a
Nemo
389a
676, Chandigarh Admn. V. Nemo
389a
Foundation V. Govt. (NCT of Delhi)
420d, 420e-f, 635c-d
decided on 6-7-2009 (Inter-Am Ct HR), Escher V.
Brazil
467d-e
57. 2009 Ch 481 : (2008) 3 WLR 1360 (CA), Murray V.
Express Newspapers plc
430e, 431g
Shanti Lal Shah
388b, 395f-g, 532d, 603d
Mirzapur Moti Kuresh Jamat
387d, 402a
386f-g, 397f
Directorate of Revenue V. Mohd. Nisar Holia
386e-f
62. 2008 EWHC 1777 (QB), Mosley V. News Group
Papers Ltd.
635f-g
2008 ECHR 1581, S and Marper V. United Kingdom
461d, 463a
64. 2008 Ch 57 : (2007) 3 WLR 222 : 2006 EWCA Civ
1776 (CA), Prince of Wales V. Associated
Newspapers Ltd.
430b-c
65. Case C-450/06, 2008 ECR I-581, Varec SA V. tat
belge
461a
496a-b
420a, 586c, 608c-d, 636d-
e
386e
NM V. Smith
452f, 453c, 453e, 597g-h
Nagaraj V. Union of India
405a-b, 586d-e, 608d-e
Habibullah Sheikh (5) V. State of Gujarat
586e-f
72. 2006 QB 125 : (2005) 3 WLR 881 (CA), Douglas V.
Hello! Ltd. (No. 3)
430a
Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat
495f-g
586e-f
538g-h
584a
V. Canara Bank (affirmed)
d, 385g, 386d, 386d-e,
386e-f, 399c-d, 401f-g,
532d, 540c, 570a, 573d
-e, 575e-f, 576f-g, 582e
-f, 594b, 615a, 615c
(CC), Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie
452c
Andolan
496a-b
of India
495f-g
623g-h
82. (2004) 40 EHRR 1, Von Hannover V. Germany
636b-c
457f
84. (2004) 2 AC 457 : (2004) 2 WLR 1232 : (2004)429a, 429c, 429e, 430a-b,
UKHL 22 (HL), Campbell V. MGN Ltd.
626f, 627b-c
85. (2004) 2 AC 406 : (2003) 3 WLR 1137 (HL),
Wainwright V. Home Office
427d, 427f-g, 428a
Reddy
495f-g
Advani
519a
382a, 382e, 383a, 569d,
593f
539 US 558 (2003), Lawrence V. Texas
444d-e, 444f
90. 2003 QB 195 : (2002) 3 WLR 542 : (2002) EWCA
Civ 337 (CA), A V. B plc
429c, 429f
Union of India
586a
Sudhansu Sekhar Sahoo V. State of Orissa
(affirmed)
382a
Commr. of Official Languages V. Lavigne
455a, 458e
(CC), Minister of Health V. Treatment Action
Campaign
483f-g
US 27 (2001), Kyllo V. United States
444a-b, 581e-f
96. 2001 QB 967 : (2001) 2 WLR 992 (CA), Douglas V.
Hello! Ltd.
427f, 428a
519a
Karnataka V. Krishnappa (affirmed)
381f-g
(CC), Investigating Directorate : Serious Economic
Offences V. Hyundai Motor Distributors (Pty) Ltd.
451e-f
377g, 378d-e, 378e-f,
379b, 382f, 401f-g,
573d-e, 615a
119 S Ct 469 : 525 US 83 (1998), Minnesota V.
443b-c, 443d-e, 581b,
Carter
582a
National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V.
Minister of Justice
450g
612d-e
State of Gujarat
519a
V. State of Rajasthan
425a-b, 566f, 586e-f
Distillery Ltd.
495f-g
(affirmed)
C, 381b-c, 381d, 382f,
393g, 395f-g, 399c-d,
401f, 570a, 573d-e,
593a, 603d, 614g
Forum V. Union of India
586e-f
Co.
494d-e, 496a-b
(CC), Bernstein V. Bester
450c
111. (1996) 3 SA 262 (A), National Media Ltd. V.
Jooste
449g
Consumer Education and Research Centre V. Union
of India
586e-f
Haryana
479b-c, 586e-f
State of Karnataka
579f-g
(affirmed)
-b, 376c, 377c-d, 377d-
e, 377e, 377e-f, 377f,
378d-e, 381b-c, 382f,
388a, 395f-g, 396c,
399c-d, 401f, 570a,
591e-f, 603d, 604a
Mazdoor Chetna Sangath V. State of M.P.
404g
Joginder Kumar V. State of U.P.
396c-d, 586e-f
India
584b-c
Record Assn. V. Union of India
585a
A.P. (affirmed)
414a-b, 519a, 545f-g, 545g
Plant V. R.
457a, 457d, 458a
122. (1993) 19 EHRR 112, Costello-Roberts V. United
Kingdom
461c-d
123. 1993 AC 1 : (1992) 3 WLR 66 (HL), R. V. Director
of Serious Fraud Office, ex p Smith
426g
Kamataka
519a
375c
Rehman Antulay V. R.S. Nayak
586e-f
505 US 833 (1992), Planned Parenthood V. Casey
442d-e, 442e
128. (1992) 16 EHRR 97, Niemietz V. Germany
461b
Raedt V. Union of India
526a-b
Bihar
586e-f
Maharashtra V. Madhukar Narayan Mardikar
(affirmed)
374e-f
132. 1991 FSR 62 (CA), Kaye V. Robertson
426e-f
Khimalal Totame
479b, 519a, 546d-e, 586e-f
495 US 91 (1990), Minnesota V. Olson
443c-d, 444a
Parmanand Katara V. Union of India
586e-f
Attorney General of India V. Lachma Devi
479a, 546d, 586e-f
V. Indian Express Newspapers Bombay (P) Ltd.
586e-f
R. V. Dyment
627d-e
R. V. Brandon Roy Dyment
455f, 456e-f, 456f
Kerala
529a-b
478 US 186 (1986), Bowers V. Hardwick
444e-f
Municipal Corpn.
583a, 586e-f
Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. V. Union of
India
375c, 375c-d
Chadha
494a, 531b-c
Secondary and Higher Secondary Education V.
Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth
496a-b
Bandhua Mukti Morcha V. Union of India
404d
Hunter V. Southam Inc.
455a-b, 585c
Sah V. State of Bihar
479b-c, 586e-f
492d-e, 497a, 518c-d,
State of Punjab
561d-e
Barse V. State of Maharashtra
479a, 546c-d, 586e-f
Vatheeswaran V. State of T.N.
519b, 546c-d
Textile Workers' Union V. P.R. Ramakrishnan
625b-c
Sareetha V. T. Venkata Subbaiah
531b-c
Singh V. State of Punjab
492c
V. Union of India
493d
Garg V. Union of India
495f-g, 496a-b
Coralie Mullin V. UT of Delhi
-e, 543e, 566f
Singh V. State of P&H (affirmed)
378d-e
India
411g
Shankar Shukla V. Delhi Admn.
586e-f
Singh V. State of Punjab
561e-f, 566f
of Cochin
577d-e, 586e-f
Khatoon (1) V. State of Bihar
478f-g, 519a-b, 546b-c
164. 1980 AC 319 : (1979) 2 WLR 889 : (1979) 3 All ER
21 (PC), Minister of Home Affairs V. Fisher
585g-h
442 US 735 (1979), Smith V. Maryland
440e, 441a, 441d-e, 441f
Batra V. Delhi Admn. (affirmed)
543d, 544a-b, 546a-b,
561e, 577e, 586e-f
Sobraj V. Supt., Central Jail
586c, 608c-d, 636e-f
Hoskot V. State of Maharashtra
479b, 546b-c, 586e-f
495f-g
Singh V. State of U.P.
586e-f
345b-c, 347b-c, 357a,
India
357f, 357f-g, 358e-f,
358g, 359a-b, 414b-c,
477g-h, 490a, 491b,
491d-e, 491e, 491e-f,
492a, 508c, 513a-b,
514c, 522e-f, 522f,
530c, 535d-e, 536a,
536b-c, 549b-c, 549c,
551b, 554e-f, 560e-f,
561d-e, 561f, 561f-g,
565e-f, 571a, 571d,
574d, 586e, 586e-f,
594e-f, 609d, 614g
99 S Ct 421 : 439 US 128 (1978), Rakas V. Illinois
582a
India V. Bhanudas Krishna Gawde (overruled)
419f-g
433 US 425 (1977), Nixon V. Administrator of
General Services
445a-b
431 US 678 (1977), Carey V. Population Services
International
440a
US 589 (1977), Whalen V. Roe
445a-b, 596e-f
Raghunath Prasad Jhunjhunwalla
614b-c
Shukla (overruled)
417d-e, 418e, 418f-g,
419f-g, 419g, 420a,
420a-b, 517c-d, 605f-g,
608c-d, 610b-c, 610d-e,
636d-e, 636e-f, 636f
384f-g, 457c-d, 575e-f,
US 435 (1976), United States V. Miller
575f, 575f-g, 576a,
576f, 576f-g, 576g, 576g
-h, 582e-f, 582f, 594d
V. State of M.P. (affirmed)
370d-e, 371a, 371c-d,
371f, 372c-d, 372d-e,
372e, 372f-g, 375f-g,
375g, 376a-b, 376b-c,
378c-d, 378d-e, 379b-c,
380b, 381b-c, 382f,
384d, 384d-e, 384f,
385g-h, 390b-c, 399c-d,
400f, 400f-g, 400g,
401a, 401a-b, 401c,
401c-d, 402b-c, 527a-b,
532d, 536c, 546a, 552g
-h, 553a, 589f-g, 590a,
591d-e, 591e, 594c,
614f, 614g, 615a, 615a-
b, 615d
Taxation Commr.
580a
Narain
411d
Royappa V. State of T.N.
532a
of Kerala
410a-b, 411d-e, 418g,
517a, 520b-c, 538d,
613e, 622c-d, 623d
Malkani V. State of Maharashtra
369a-b, 369b, 369c-d
413 US 49 (1973), Paris Adult Theatre / V. Slaton
438a, 438b
370a-b, 376a, 438c-d,
410 US 113 (1973), Roe V. Wade
438e-f, 442e, 443b,
512e-f, 589d, 590a,
596g
S Ct 1029 : 405 US 438 (1972), Eisenstadt V. Baird
437e, 437e-f, 589e
Union of India
357b-c, 357f, 357f-g,
358e, 359a-b, 478a,
491e-f, 495c, 508c,
514c, 522e-f, 522f,
523a, 535d-e, 536b-c,
549d, 551b, 554e-f,
559f, 560d-e, 561e-f,
565e-f, 571c-d, 572f,
613d, 614g
394 US 557 (1969), Stanley V. Georgia
579f
88 S Ct 507 : 389 US 347 (1967), Katz V. United
441a, 441a-b, 441d-e,
States
441e, 441g, 442a, 581a
-b, 581c, 581c-d, 581f-
g, 582a, 589b-c
87 S Ct 1817 : 388 US 1 (1967), Loving V. Virginia
589d-e
193. (1967) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1967 SC 1836, Satwant
356a-b, 356b-c, 358f-g,
Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam
478e, 519a-b, 546a
194. (1967) 3 SCR 50 : AIR 1967 SC 1368, Krishan
Kumar Narula V. State of J&K
579g-h
195. (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643, Golak
Nath V. State of Punjab
407b
196. (1966) 3 SCR 744 : AIR 1967 SC 1, Naresh
Shridhar Mirajkar V. State of Maharashtra
616f
85 S Ct 1678 : 381 US 479 (1965), Griswold V.
437e, 437f, 438d-e,
Connecticut
470a, 512e-f, 528c-d,
546a, 578a-b, 589c,
590a
85 S Ct 1493 : 381 US 301 (1965), Lamont V.
Postmaster General
578a-b
199. (1965) 1 SCR 933 : AIR 1965 SC 845, Sajjan
Singh V. State of Rajasthan
402e
200. 381 US 479 (1965), Griswold V. Connecticut
528d
201. AIR 1964 SC 1140 : (1964) 2 Cri LJ 234, Indo-
China Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. V. Collector of
Customs
526a-b
202. (1963) 1 SCR 778 : AIR 1962 SC 1621, Ujjam Bai
V. State of U.P.
409a-b
203. AIR 1963 SC 1811, State Trading Corpn. of India
Ltd. V. CTO
526a-b
204. AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 329 : (1964) 1345b, 347a, 347a-b, 347b-
SCR 332, Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. (partly
C, 347d, 347f, 348b,
overruled)
348d-e, 349a, 350e-f,
351c, 351d, 351e-f,
352a-b, 352c, 352f,
353c, 353g, 354g, 356b,
356b-c, 356f-g, 356g,
357f-g, 357g, 359a,
359b, 359b-c, 359d,
360b-c, 360d, 360d-e,
369a-b, 369c, 369g,
371e-f, 372d, 372f-g,
375f-g, 375g, 376a-b,
376b, 376b-c, 377c-d,
378c, 378d-e, 379b,
379g-h, 380a-b, 381b-c,
382e-f, 383f-g, 384a,
385g-h, 390b-c, 393g,
395f, 399c-d, 400a-b,
400c-d, 400e-f, 401a,
401a-b, 401b-c, 402b-c,
508a, 508b, 508b-c,
508c, 508c-d, 509g,
510f, 510f-g, 513c,
513d-e, 513f-g, 514a,
515a, 515c-d, 515d,
515e-f, 516a, 522f,
523a, 524a, 524b,
528a, 533c-d, 533e,
533g-h, 534c, 534f,
534g, 535a, 535a-b,
535c, 535c-d, 536a,
536b-c, 543e-f, 543f-g,
549e-f, 550d, 550f-g,
551a-b, 552g, 554e,
563a, 563e, 564d, 569f,
571b, 572a, 572b-c,
572c, 572f-g, 573a-b,
590a, 603d, 605d, 610g,
611b-c, 637b-c, 637c
205. AIR 1962 SC 305 : (1962) 3 SCR 842, Sakal
Papers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India
517d, 518a, 609a-b
S Ct 679 : 365 US 505 (1961), Silverman V. United
States
582b-c
207. AIR 1961 SC 954, Burrakur Coal Co. Ltd. V. Union
of India
495f-g
208. 1959 Supp (1) SCR 528 : AIR 1959 SC 149,
Basheshar Nath V. CIT
583a
209. AIR 1958 SC 956, Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In
re
520b-c
210. AIR 1958 SC 538, Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R.
Tendolkar
495f-g
354 US 476 (1957), Roth V. United States
578f
212. AIR 1957 SC 133 : 1956 SCR 756, Deoki Nandan
V. Murlidhar
548a
213. 1957 SCR 399 : AIR 1957 SC 297 : 1957 Cri LJ
409, A.S. Krishna V. State of Madras
494f
214. AIR 1956 SC 479, Bidi Supply Co. V. Union of
India
520c, 521e
215. (1955) 1 SCR 613 : AIR 1955 SC 123 : 1955 Cri
LJ 215, Behram Khurshid Pesikaka V. State of
Bombay
412e, 583a
216. AIR 1955 SC 367 : 1955 Cri LJ 876, Hans Muller
of Nurenburg V. Supt., Presidency Jail
526a-b
217. AIR 1954 SC 300 : 1954 Cri LJ 865 : 1954 SCR 345b, 346h, 347a, 347d,
1077, M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra (partly
347f, 348b, 348d-e,
overruled)
349a, 349d, 349g-h,
354f-g, 359a, 359b-c,
359d, 359e, 359f-g,
360a, 382e-f, 383f,
391c, 399c-d, 399d-e,
400a, 400a-b, 401a,
401b-c, 402b, 402b-c,
507g, 508a, 510f, 510f-
g, 510g, 511b-c, 512b,
512d-e, 513a, 513a-b,
513b, 513b-c, 528a,
533c, 533e, 533g-h,
534c, 534c-d, 534e,
535d, 535e, 535f, 536a,
536b-c, 549e, 550d,
550f-g, 551a, 551a-b,
554e, 564c-d, 564d,
564f-g, 569c-d, 569d-e,
570a-b, 570e, 570f,
605d, 610g, 611b, 637b
587, State of W.B. V. Subodh Gopal Bose
408e, 408f, 408g
510 : 1952 SCR 284, State of W.B. V. Anwar Ali
Sarkar
622a-b
196 : 1952 Cri LJ 966, State of Madras V. V.G. Row
496b-c
Chowdhury V. Union of India
495f-g
Lal V. State of U.P.
409c
223. AIR 1950 SC 124 : (1950) 51 Cri LJ 1514,
Romesh Thappar V. State of Madras
396d, 518a
345b, 347a-b, 351c-d,
A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras (held, partly
351e, 354f-g, 354g,
overruled)
355a-b, 355f, 357a,
357b, 357f, 359a-b,
408d, 489c-d, 489g-h,
508c, 513a, 514c, 515b
-C, 517c-d, 522e-f,
526a, 535d-e, 535f,
554e-f, 557d-e, 560d-e,
565e-f, 570f, 571c,
571e-f, 607e-f, 609b-c,
609d, 613a-b
352a-b, 352b-c, 354c,
338 US 25 (1949), Wolf V. Colorado
354e-f, 360c-d, 378d,
384c, 400b-c, 513f-g,
514a, 564a-b, 572g
Ct 665 : 333 US 507 (1948), Winters V. New York
578b
US 214 (1944), Korematsu V. United States
419f
Ct 438 : 321 US 158 (1944), Prince V.
Massachusetts
589e
Ct 862 : 319 US 141 (1943), Martin V. City of
Struthers
578a
S Ct 1110 : 316 US 535 (1942), Skinner V.
Oklahoma
530a, 589d-e
US 144 (1938), United States V. Carolene Products
Co.
532a-b
US 1 (1937), National Labor Relations Board V.
Jones & Laughlin Steel Corpn.
486a-b
Ct 578 : 300 US 379 (1937), West Coast Hotel Co.
V. Parrish
486a-b
US 393 (1932), Burnet V. Coronado Oil & Gas Co.
557b-c
Ct 371 : 285 US 262 (1932), New State Ice Co. V.
Liebmann
486a
370b-c, 383e-f, 434c,
US 438 (1928), Olmstead V. United States
435g, 436d, 588b, 588f,
604g-h
274 US 357 (1927), Whitney V. California
524f
274 US 200 (1927), Buck V. Bell
419e
Ct 426 : 273 US 418 (1927), Tyson & Bro. V. Banton
486a
S Ct 571 : 39 ALR 468 : 268 US 510 (1925), Pierce 434a-b, 434b-c, 578a-b,
V. Society of Sisters
589e-f
262 US 390 (1923), Meyer V. Nebraska
433e, 434b
Ct 22 : 261 US 525 (1923), Adkins V. Children's
Hospital
486a
250 US 616 (1919), Abrams V. United States
623f-g
233 US 604 (1914), Gompers V. United States
623a-b
Ct 277 : 208 US 161 (1908), Adair V. United States
486a
US 45 (1905), Lochner V. New York
485f-g
247. 50 SE 68 : 122 Ga 190 (1905) (Supreme Court of
Georgia), Pavesich V. New England Life Insurance
Co.
540a
US 270 (1900), Williams V. Fears
530c-d
349f-g, 383e-f, 433a-b,
US 616 (1886), Boyd V. United States
511c-d, 512a
113 (1877), Munn V. Illinois
571b-c
251. (1849) 1 Mac & G 25 : 41 ER 1171, Albert V.
Strange
426d, 426e-f
252. 4 L Ed 579 : 17 US (4 Wheat) 316 (1819),
McCulloch V. Maryland
583g, 584f-g, 584g-h
253. (1778) 2 Cowp 729 : 98 ER 1331, Da Costa V.
Jones
555e-f
254. (1765) 19 St Tr 1029 : 95 ER 807, Entick V.
Carrington
426b-c, 555e
255. (1763) 2 Wils KB 205 : 95 ER 768, Huckle V.
Money
555c-d
256. (1604) 5 Co Rep 91a : 1 Sm LC (13th Edn.) 104 :
352d-e, 352e, 426a-b,
77 ER 194, Semayne case
514a-b, 535a-b, 535b,
537b-c, 537c-d, 555a,
555b
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS
I. Mr Kapil Sibal, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners.
p. 85
II. Mr Gopal Subramanium, Senior Advocate, for the p.
petitioners.
103
III. Mr Shyam Divan, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners
p.
120
IV. Ms Meenakshi Arora, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners
p.
136
V. Mr Sajan Poovayya, Senior Advocate, for the intervenors.
p.
148
VI. Mr K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General for India, for the
p.
respondents.
165
VII. Mr Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor General of India,
p.
for the respondents
180
VIII. Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, Senior Advocate, for the p.
respondents.
266
IX. Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Advocate, for the p.
respondents
300
X. Dr. Arghya Sengupta, Advocate, for the respondents
:
p.
312
I. Mr Kapil Sibal, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners
1. The present submissions are being filed for the limited purpose of
assisting this Hon'ble Court on the question of whether "the right to
privacy" is a fundamental right under Part III of the Constitution. The
instant submissions do not concern the merits of the main matters and
the validity of the Aadhar legislation. These submissions address the
questions raised in the order dated 18-7-2017-, the relevant portion of
which reads as under:
"In our opinion to give a quietus to the kind of controversy raised in
this batch of cases, once and for all, it is better that the ratio decidendi
of M.P. Sharma Kharak Singh is scrutinised and the jurisprudential
correctness of the subsequent decisions of this court where the right to
privacy is either asserted or referred be examined and authoritatively
decided by a bench of appropriate strength
During the course of the hearing today, it seems that it has become
essential for us to determine whether there is any fundamental right of
privacy under the Indian Constitution"
2. The instant submissions are broadly divided into two parts:
2.1. Part I deals with the legal and practical aspects relating to the
right to privacy in today's context; and
2.2. Part II deals with decisions of this Hon'ble Court on the right to
privacy.
Part I
Delineating the right to privacy in today's context
3. At the outset, it may be noted that the challenges confronting both
citizens and State today are quintessentially different from those
addressed by the Supreme Court in M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra 2 and
Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. The aforesaid decisions cannot possibly be
relevant to appreciate the contours of the right to privacy in the present
societal context where advances in the technology and communication
have transformed the relationship between stakeholders inter se and in
particular the relationship between the State and its citizens. This
Hon'ble Court should, therefore, in the context of changed circumstances
address the issue of privacy afresh and ought not to consider the issue of
privacy from the prism of an era where issues confronting temporary
society did not exist.
4. The right to privacy as an inalienable natural right is based on the
classic premise of the individual's wish to be alone4. However, the
contours of the right needs to be understood with changing times. Rapid
advances in science and technology pose considerable challenges in
delineating the exact contours of the right.
5. Thus, a simplistic definition of the right to privacy as "to be let
alone" is under-inclusive. Privacy is a right which protects the inner
sphere of the individual from interference from State and non-State
actors and allows the individual to make autonomous life choices
regarding the construction of her identity, not only in seclusion from
others but in the personal, familial and social contexts. Privacy expands
or contracts depending on the way the three basic variables of subject-
matter, relations, and space present themselves in the context of a
concrete case. 5
6. Thus, privacy relates to one's physical being, one's thoughts, and
inter-personal relationships, private communication, information and data
which one does not wish to be shared and be put in the public domain.
7. With advances in technology the State in the 21st century is far
more powerful than it ever was, and is capable of entering a citizens'
house without
knocking at his/her door. Evolution of technology has facilitated easy
intrusion into the life of individuals by the State and non-State actors.
8. To address the issue of the right to privacy, we must be cognizant
of the fact that in accessing technology, a citizen willy-nillly shares a lot
of his data. This applies to mobile phones, smart phones6, tablets, smart
TVs, taking a ride with app-based cabs, giving information through
government mandate to banks, for public distribution networks, etc.
9. The concept of privacy therefore has to be viewed in light of two
qualitative relationships : one between the citizen and the State; the
other between citizens and non-State actors- Issues of privacy in respect
of both have to be dealt with separately. The first has constitutional
implications and the second relates to confidentiality. Thus, the right to
privacy has both horizontal and vertical attributes.
10. The State may at times, require access to personal information for
public good. In this context, the citizen may be obliged to give to such
information for enhancing citizens' entitlements, access to services,
prevention or detection of crime, national investigation and prosecution of
criminal offences.
11. In respect of data shared with the State on account of a legal
mandate or otherwise, the issue of privacy is directly linked with
fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution. If for example, an
individual's movements throughout the country are tracked, even though
he has a fundamental right to move freely throughout the territory of
India, State interference by any means
whatsoever including through technology would directly impact the
citizen's right to privacy This is also true if the State through technology
accesses conversations of individuals sitting in their homes, in respect of
which every individual has a legitimate expectation of privacy.
Consequently, the right to privacy is inherent in the right to life and
personal liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution.
9
12. The second aspect relating to the right to privacy in the context of
State action relates to data, which is shared either by law or otherwise
with
the State. Such data is shared for specific purposes. For instance, the
data shared for getting a passport is for the specific purpose of exercising
the fundamental right of citizens to travel. If any other organ of the State
accesses that data and breaches confidentiality between citizens and
such authority, that per se would be an invasion of the right to privacy. It
is also true of data relating to a person's physical attributes shared with a
government hospital. Access to such data by another government
agency, to which the citizen has not consented, would also infringe the
citizen's right to privacy.
13. It is submitted that though the right to privacy is a fundamental
right, the same is not absolute. However, the ability of the State to
assume or exercise any power that would impinge upon the right to
privacy is limited. Where the State infringes the right to privacy, it should
atleast meet the following tests, which limit the discretion of the State10
(i) The action must be sanctioned by law;
(ii) The proposed action must be necessary in a democratic society
for a legitimate aim;
(iii) The extent of such interference must be proportionate to the
need for such interference;
(iv) There must be procedural guarantees against abuse of such
interference.
14. These are some of the safeguards to protect the privacy of
citizens. Whether a person's right to privacy has been infringed by the
State will have to be determined in light of limitations on the
discretionary exercise of power by the State, as enunciated above. That
determination will ultimately depend on the issues that arise in the facts
and circumstances of each case.
15. The relationship between citizens and non-State actors qua which
data is willingly provided by the citizen for enhancing the citizen's own
experience is subject to confidentiality to the extent confidentiality can
be maintained. There may be platforms where such confidentiality cannot
be maintained. In such cases, where there is a dilution of the right to
confidentiality, the citizen should be made aware that when sharing such
data, there may be a possibility of it being further shared. Knowledge of
such
possibility would enable an informed exercise of the right to
confidentiality by citizens.
16. The right to privacy also enjoins the State to put in place a robust
data protection law, that obligates non-State actors to ensure that data
shared by citizens is secure and that the breach of any confidentiality
would be visited with legal consequences. The principles underlying such
data protection law should cover the following amongst others:
(i) That the entity or individual housing confidential information will
need to put in place an open and transparent system for management
of personal information including putting in place a privacy policy;
(ii) Collection of solicited personal information and receipt of
unsolicited personal information including giving notice about the
collection of information.
(iii) How personal information can be used and disclosed (including
overseas).
(iv) Maintaining the quality of personal information secured.
(v) The right of individuals to access and correct their personal
information.
17. Instances of statutes that protect privacy in the context of data
shared by citizens with non-State actors can be found in different
jurisdictions 11
Part II
Case law analysis of the right to privacy as fundamental right
under Article 21
18. It is respectfully submitted that right to privacy is a quintessential
right flowing out of the bouquet of rights under enshrined under Article
21.
19. The judgments in M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra, (8 Hon'ble
Judges) and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P., (6 Hon'ble Judges) which
had made certain observations that right to privacy was not a
"guaranteed right" under Part III were premised on an understanding of
Part III as per the law laid down in A.K. Gopalan12.
20.
A.K.
Gopalan12
was specifically overruled in Rustom Cavasjee.
Cooper
V.
Union of India3 (11 Hon'ble Judges) and thereafter further
clarified to be so in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India 14 (7 Hon'ble
Judges).
21. Thereafter, consistently for almost four and half decades, this
Hon'ble Court has in a catena of judgments held that A.K Gopalan12 is
bad law15. It is too late in the day to urge that the distinctive rights test
of Gopalan ought to be applied.
22. More importantly, once Gopalan12 was held to be bad law by an
eleven-Judge Bench in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper13, smaller Benches of
this Hon'ble Court have consistently and rightly that the observations in
M.P. Sharma and the majority judgment in Kharak Singh 3 on the right to
privacy were not good law.
23. This Court has applied the doctrine of implied overruling in a
catena of decisions and has held once the decision of the smaller Bench
has been overruled by a larger Bench; the decisions following the
decision of the smaller Bench will not be considered the good law. 16
24. In any event, it is submitted that the reliance on the observations
in M.P. Sharma to hold that the there is no fundamental right to privacy
is completely misconceived as the observations of this Court on privacy
were made in the context of Article 20(3) and the power of search and
seizure. This Court did not examine the extent and cantours of Article 21.
Further, the said decision was rendered when A.K. Gopalan12 12 was the law
of land which was premised on the basis of distinctiveness of each of
fundamental rights.
25. The judgment in Kharak Singh (per the majority of four Judges)
relied upon Gopalan12 (p. 345). The majority struck down domiciliary
visits under clause (b) of Regulation 236 as violative of Article 21.
However, clauses (c), (d), and (e) which dealt with periodic enquiries by
officers not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector, reporting by constables
and chowkidars of movement and verification of movement and absences
was held to be not covered under Part III. In that context, it was
observed that the right to privacy is not a "guaranteed" right under the
Constitution.
26. However, the minority view of Subba Rao, J. relying upon
judgment in Wolf V. Colorado7, rightly observed that:
"
Further, the right to personal liberty takes only a right to be free
from restrictions placed on movements, but also free from
encroachments
on his private life. It is true our Constitution does not expressly declare a
right to privacy as a fundamental right, but the said right is an essential
ingredient of personal liberty. Every democratic country sanctifies
domestic life; it is expected to give him rest, physical happiness, peace
of mind and security. In the last resort, a person's house where he lives
with his family, is his "castle" : it is rampart against encroachment on his
personal liberty. The pregnant words of that famous Judge, Frankfurter J.,
in Wolf V. Colorado7, pointing out the importance of the security of one's
privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the police, could have no less
application to an Indian home as to an American one. If physical
restraints on a person's movements affect personal liberty, physical
encroachments on his private life would affect it in a larger degree.
Indeed, nothing is more deleterious to a man's physical happiness and
health than a calculated interference with his privacy. We would,
therefore, the right of personal liberty in Article 21 as a right of an
individual to be free from restrictions or encroachments on his person,
whether those restrictions or encroachments are directly imposed or
indirectly brought about by calculated measures. If so understood, all the
acts of surveillance Regulation 236 infringe the fundamental right of the
petitioner under Article 21 of the Constitution" (page 359)
The surest way legal research!"
27. In Gobind V. State of M.P. 18 (three Judges), Mathew, J. in
unequivocal terms after noticing Kharak Singh3 holds that the right
to
privacy is implicit in the concept of individual autonomy and liberty.
However, the Court categorically states that it is not an absolute right
and can be subjected to restrictions based on compelling public interest.
(see paras 19 to 31). The Court observed that the contours of the right
will have to go through a process of case-by-case developments. this
context para 28 is relevant and reads as follows:
"28. The right to privacy in any event will necessarily have to go
through a process of case-by-case development. Therefore, even
assuming that the right personal liberty, the right to move freely
throughout the territory of India and the freedom of speech create an
independent right of privacy as an emanation from which one can
characterize as a fundamental right, we do not think that the right is
absolute."
28. It is relevant to note that Gobind18 was post Rustom Cavasjee
Cooper13 and therefore the Court rightly departed from the view in M.P.
Sharma and Kharak Singh 3 which impliedly stood overruled as far as the
observations made on the to privacy are concerned.
29. This Hon'ble Court in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India clearly
and in unequivocal terms held that Gopalan12 stood overruled by Rustom
Cavasjee Cooper13. The minority view in Kharak Singh was held to be
the
correct view. The Court in this regard held there can be no doubt that in
view of the decision of this Hon'ble Court in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper13,
the minority view must be regarded as correct and the majority view
must be held to have been overruled (see para 5 of the judgment).
30. Accordingly, the approval of minority view of Subba Rao, J. in
Kharak Singh3 by Maneka Gandhi14 set the matter at rest on the status of
the right to privacy as a fundamental right. It is therefore incorrect to
contend that the issue as to the status of the right to privacy is res
integra.
31. This Hon'ble Court has thereafter in almost 24 judgments (two
Judges and three Judges as well as five Judges) has consistently held
that right to privacy was a facet of personal liberty. In this regard,
following may be seen:
31.1. In State of Maharashtra V. Madhukar Narayan Mardikar19, the
Division Bench held as follows:
"Even a woman of easy virtue is entitled to privacy and no one can
invade her privacy as and when he likes." (see para 9)
31.2. In R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 20 , the Division Bench held as
follows:
"The right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by Article 21. (see para 26
(1))
31.3. In People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) V. Union of India ,
the Division Bench held as follows:
"It is no doubt correct that every Government, howsoever
democratic, exercises some degree of sub rosa operation as a part of
its intelligence outfit but at the same time citizen's right to privacy has
to be protected from being abused by the authorities of the day". (see
para 1)
"We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that right to privacy is
a part of the right to "life" and "personal liberty" enshrined under
Article 21 of the Constitution." (see para 17)
31.4. In Mr 'X' V. Hospital 'Z 22, the Division Bench held as follows:
"Disclosure of even true private facts has the tendency to disturb a
person's tranquillity. It may generate many complexes in him and may
even lead to psychological problems. He may, thereafter, have a
disturbed life all through. In the face of these potentialities, and as
already held by this Court in its various decisions referred to above,
the right of privacy is an essential component of the right to life
envisaged by Article 21. The right, however, is not absolute and may
be lawfully restricted for the
prevention of crime, disorder or protection of health or morals or
protection of rights and freedom of others." (see para 28)
31.5. In Sharda V. Dharmpal , a Bench of 3 Hon'ble Judges held as
follows:
"With the expansive interpretation of the phrase "personal liberty",
this right has been read into Article 21 of the Indian Constitution. (See
R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 20 and People's Union for Civil Liberties V.
Union of India. In some cases the right has been held to amalgam of
various rights. (see para 56)
"But the right to privacy in terms of Article 21 of the Constitution is
not an absolute right." (see para 57)
31.6. In District Registrar and Collector V. Canara Bank24, , Division
Bench held as follows:
"We have referred in detail to the reasons given by Mathew, J. in
Gobind18 to show that, the right to privacy has been implied in Articles
19(1)(a) and (d) and Article 21; that, the right is not absolute and
that any State intrusion can be a reasonable restriction only if it has
reasonable basis or reasonable materials to support it." (see para 39)
"A two-Judge Bench in R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 20 held the right
of privacy to be implicit in the right to life and liberty guaranteed to
the citizens of India by Article 21. "It is the right to be let alone."
Every citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own. However,
in the case of a matter being part of public records, including court
records, the right of privacy cannot be claimed. The right to privacy
has since been widely accepted as implied in our Constitution, in other
cases, namely, People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India Mr
'X' V. Hospital 'Z 22 , People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India2 25
and Sharda V. Dharmpal . " (see para 40)
31.7. In Directorate of Revenue V. Mohd. Nisar Holia6 , the Division
Bench held as follows:
"An authority cannot be given an untrammelled power to infringe
the right of privacy of any person." (see para 14)
"A person, if he does not break a law would be entitled to enjoy his
life and liberty which would include the right to not to be disturbed. A
right to be let alone is recognised to be a right which would fall under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India." (see para 15)
31.8. In Hinsa Virodhak Sangh V. Mirzapur Moti Kuresh Jamat 27 the
Division Bench held as follows:
"What one eats is one's personal affair and it is a part of his right to
privacy which is included in Article 21 of our Constitution as held by
several decisions of this Court. In R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 20 (vide
implicit in the right to life and liberty guaranteed by Article 21. It is a
"right to be let alone". (see para 27)
31.9. In State of Maharashtra V. Bharat Shanti Lal Shah28 the Division
Bench held as follows:
"The right to privacy has been developed by the Supreme Court
over a period of time and with the expansive interpretation of the
phrase "personal liberty", this right has been read into Article 21. It
was stated in Gobind V. State of M.P. 18 that right to privacy is a "right
to be let alone" and a citizen has a right "to safeguard privacy of his
own, his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child-bearing and
education among other matters". The term privacy has not been
defined and it was in People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) V. Union
of India, that as a concept it may be too broad and moralistic to
define it judicially and whether right to privacy can be claimed or has
been infringed in a given case would depend on the facts of the said
case." (see para 57)
31.10. In Bhavesh Jayanti Lakhani V. State of Maharashtra 9, the
Division Bench held as follows:
"Surveillance per se under the provisions of the Act may not violate
individual or private rights including the right to privacy. Right to
privacy is not enumerated as a fundamental right either in terms of
Article 21 of Constitution of India or otherwise. It, however, by reason
of an elaborate interpretation by Court in Kharak Singh V. State of
U.P. 3 was held to be an essential ingredient of "personal liberty"." (see
para 102)
31.11. In Bhabani Prasad Jena V. Orissa State Commission for
Women30, the Division Bench held as follows:
"In a matter where paternity of a child is in issue before the court,
the use of DNA test is an extremely delicate and sensitive aspect. One
view is that when modern science gives the means of ascertaining the
paternity of a child, there should not be any hesitation to use those
means whenever the occasion requires. The other view is that the
court must be reluctant in the use of such scientific advances and tools
which result in invasion of right to privacy of an individual and may
not only be prejudicial to the rights of the parties but may have
devastating effect on
the child. Sometimes the result of such scientific test may bastardise an
innocent child even though his mother and her spouse were living
together during the time of conception." " (see para 21)
31.12. In Selvi V. State of Karnataka1 a Bench of 3 Hon'ble Judges
noticed that the judgment in Kharak Singh3 was endorsed by Maneka
Gandhi14 and subsequently followed in Gobind18. In para 209 it was held
as below:
"209. Following the judicial expansion of the idea of "personal
liberty", the status of the "right to privacy" as a component of Article
21 has been recognised and reinforced." held as follows:
31.13. In Amar Singh V. Union of India   , the Division Bench held as
follows:
"Considering the materials on record, this Court is of the opinion
that it is no doubt true that the service provider has to act on an
urgent basis and has to act in public interest. But in a given case, like
the present one, where the impugned communication dated 9-11-
2005 is full of gross mistakes, the service provider while immediately
acting upon the same, should simultaneously verify the authenticity of
the same from the author of the document. This Court is of the opinion
that the service provider has to act as a responsible agency and cannot
act on any communication. Sanctity and regularity in official
communication in such matters must be maintained especially when
the service provider is taking the serious step of intercepting the
telephone conversation of a person and by doing so is invading the
privacy right of the person concerned and which is a fundamental right
protected under the Constitution, as has been held by this Court." (see
para 39)
31.14. In Ram Jethmalani V. Union of India33 the Division Bench held
as follows:
"Right to privacy is an integral part of right to life. This is a
cherished constitutional value, and it is important that human beings
be allowed domains of freedom that are free of public scrutiny unless
they act in an unlawful manner. We understand and appreciate the
fact that the situation with respect to unaccounted monies is
extremely grave. Nevertheless, as constitutional adjudicators we
always have to be mindful of preserving the sanctity of constitutional
values, and hasty steps that derogate from fundamental rights,
whether urged by Governments or private citizens, howsoever well
meaning they may be, have to be necessarily very carefully
scrutinised. The solution for the problem of abrogation of one zone of
constitutional values cannot be
&
creation of another zone of abrogation of constitutional values." (see para
83)
31.15. In Hindustan Times V. High Court of Allahabad this Hon'ble
Court held that the power of the media to provide the readers and the
public in general with information should reconcile with the persons
fundamental right to privacy. The Division Bench held as follows:
"The unbridled power of the media can become dangerous if checks
and balances are not inherent it. The role of the media is to provide to
the readers and the public in general with information and views
tested and found as true and correct. This power must be carefully
regulated and must reconcile with a person's fundamental right to
privacy. Any wrong or biased information that is put forth can
potentially damage the otherwise clean and good reputation of the
person or institution against whom something adverse is reported.
Prejudging the issues and rushing to conclusions must be
avoided." (see para 6)
31.16. In Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re35, the Division Bench held as
follows:
"Right to privacy has been held to be a fundamental right of the
citizen being an integral part of Article 21 of the Constitution of India
by this Court. Illegitimate intrusion into privacy of a person is not
permissible as right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed under our Constitution. Such a right has been extended
even to woman of easy virtues as she has been held to be entitled to
her right of privacy. However, right of privacy may absolute and in
exceptional circumstance particularly surveillance in consonance with
the statutory provisions may not violate such a right. [Vide Malak
Singh V. State of P&H36 State of Maharashtra V. Madhukar Narayan
Mardikar19 R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N.20, People's Union for Civil
Liberties V. Union of India Mr 'X' V. Hospital 'Z 22, Sharda V.
Dharmpal , People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India 5,
District Registrar and Collector V. Canara Bank24 Bhavesh Jayanti
Lakhani V. State of Maharashtra 9 and Selvi V. State
of
Karnataka1. ]" (see para 312)
31.17. In Sahara India Real Estate Corpn. Ltd. V. SEBI the
37
Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court approved the minority judgment
of Subba Rao, J. in para 24 and relying upon Blackstone's Commentaries
on the Laws of England observed in para 26 as follows:
"Personal liberty" includes "the power to locomotion of changing
situation, or removing one's person to whatsoever place one's
inclination may direct, without imprisonment or restraint, unless by
due course of
law." In A.K. Gopalan case12 it is described to mean liberty relating to or
concerning the person or body of the individual; and personal liberty in
this sense is the antithesis of physical restraint or coercion. The
expression is wide enough to take in a night to be free from restrictions
placed on his movements. The expression "coercion" in the modern age
cannot be construed in a narrow sense. In an uncivilised society where
there are no inhibitions, only physical restraints may detract from
personal liberty, but as civilisation advances the psychological restraints
are more, effective than physical ones. The scientific methods used to
condition a man's mind are in a real sense physical restraints, for they
engender physical fear channelling one's actions through anticipated and
expected groves. So also the creation of conditions which necessarily
engender inhibitions and fear complexes can be described as physical
restraints. Further, right to personal liberty takes in not only a right be
free from restrictions placed on his movements, but also free from
encroachments on his private life. It is true our Constitution does not
expressly declare a right to privacy as a fundamental right, but the said
right is an essential ingredient of personal liberty. Every democratic
country sanctifies domestic life; it is expected to give him rest, physical
happiness, peace of mind and security.
If physical restraints on a person's movements affect his personal
liberty, physical encroachments on his private life would affect it in a
larger degree. Indeed, nothing is more deleterious to a man's physical
happiness and health than a calculated interference with his privacy.
We would, therefore, define the right of personal liberty in Article 21
as a right of an to be free from restrictions or encroachments on his
person, whether those restrictions or encroachments are directly
imposed or indirectly brought about by calculated measures. If so
understood, all the acts of surveillance under, Regulation 236 infringe
the fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 21 of the
Constitution.
namely, whether the petitioner's fundamental right under Article
19(1)(d) is also infringed. What is the content of the said fundamental
right? It is argued for the State that it means only that a person can
move physically from one point to another without any restraint." This
argument ignores the adverb "freely" in clause (d). If that adverb is
not in the clause, there may be some justification for this contention;
but the adverb "freely" gives a larger content to the freedom mere
movement unobstructed by physical restrictions cannot itself be the
object of a person's travel. A person travels ordinarily in quest of some
objective. He goes to a place to enjoy, to do business, to meet friends,
to have secret and intimate consultations with others and to do many
other such things. If a man is shadowed, his movements are obviously
constricted. He can move physically, but it can only be a movement of
an automation. How could a movement under the scrutinising gaze of
the policemen be
described as a free movement? The whole country is his jail. The freedom
of movement in clause (d) therefore must be a movement in a free
country i.e. in a country where he can do whatever he likes, speak to
whomsoever he wants, meet people of his own choice without any
apprehension, subject of course to the law of social control. The petitioner
under the shadow of surveillance is certainly deprived of this freedom. He
can move physically, but he cannot do so freely, for all his activities are
watched and noted. The shroud of surveillance cast upon him perforce
engender inhibitions in him and cannot act freely as he would like to
do." (see para 26)
31.18. In Bihar Public Service Commission V. Saiyed Hussain Abbas
Rizwi38, the Division Bench held as follows:
"Another right of a citizen protected under the Constitution is the
right to privacy. This right is enshrined within the spirit of Article 21 of
the Constitution. Thus, the right to information has to be balanced
with the right to privacy within the framework of law." (see para 10)
"The information may come to knowledge of the authority as a
result of disclosure by others who give that information in confidence
and with complete faith, integrity and fidelity. Secrecy of such
information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it within the ambit of
fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be cases where the disclosure
has no relationship to any public activity or interest or it may even
cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual. All these
protections have to be given their due implementation as they spring
from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a
constitutional protection is available to a person with regard to the
right to privacy. Thus, the public interest has to be construed while
keeping in mind the balance factor between right to privacy and right
to information with the purpose sought to be achieved and the
purpose that would be served in the larger public interest, particularly
when both these rights emerge from the constitutional values under
the Constitution of India. " (see para 23)
31.19. In Thalappalam Service Coop. Bank Ltd. V. State of Kerala a
Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court held that the right to privacy was not
an absolute right and can be regulated, restricted and curtailed in larger
public interest. In this regard it was held as follows:
"The right to privacy is also not expressly guaranteed under the
Constitution of India. However, the Privacy Bill, 2011 to provide for the
right to privacy to citizens of India and to regulate the collection,
maintenance and dissemination of their personal information and for
penalisation for violation of such rights and matters connected
therewith,
is pending. In several judgments including Kharak Singh V. State of
U.P., R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 20 , People's Union for Civil Liberties
V.
Union of India1 and State of Maharashtra V. Bharat Shanti Lal Shah28
this Court has recognised the right to privacy as a fundamental right
emanating from Article 21 of the Constitution of India." (see para 57)
"The right to information and right to privacy are, therefore, not
absolute rights, both the rights, one of which falls under Article 19(1)
(a) and the other under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, can
obviously be regulated, restricted and curtailed in the larger public
interest. Absolute or uncontrolled individual rights do not and cannot
exist in any modern State. Citizens' right to get information is
statutorily recognised by the RTI Act, but at the same time limitations
are also provided in the Act itself, which is discernible from the
Preamble and other provisions of the Act. First of all, the scope and
ambit of the expression "public authority" has been restricted by a
statutory definition under Section 2(h) limiting it to the categories
mentioned therein which exhaust itself, unless the context otherwise
requires. Citizens, as already indicated by us, have a right to get
information, but can have access only to the information "held" and
under the "control of public authorities", with limitations. If the
information is not statutorily accessible by a public authority, as
defined in Section 2(h) of the Act, evidently, those information will not
be under the "control of the public authority". Resultantly, it will not
be possible for the citizens to secure access to those information which
are not under the control of the public authority. The citizens, in that
event, can always claim a right to privacy, the right of a citizen to
access information should be respected, so also a citizen's right to
privacy." (see para 61)
31.20. In National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India40 a
Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court while upholding the fundamental
rights of the transgender community held as follows:
"Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal
identity, gender expression and presentation and, therefore, it will
have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of
India. A transgender's personality could be expressed by the
transgender's behaviour and presentation. State cannot prohibit,
restrict or interfere with a transgender's expression of such
personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often the State
and its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest
the innate character and identity of such persons. We, therefore, hold
that values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy and personal integrity
are fundamental rights guaranteed to members of the transgender
community under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India and the
State is bound to protect and recognise those rights." (see para 72)
31.21. In Manoj Narula V. Union of India41, a Constitution Bench in
para 69 held that Article 21 has many facets and relying upon R.
Rajagopal0 it was held that the right to privacy is inferred from Article
21. In this regard it was observed that:
"In this regard, inclusion of many a facet within the ambit of Article
21 is well established. In R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. , right
20
to
privacy has been inferred from Article 21. Similarly, in Joginder Kumar
V. State of U.P.42, , inherent rights under Articles 21 and 22 have been
stated. Likewise, while dealing with freedom of speech and expression
and freedom of press, the Court, in Romesh Thappar V. State of
Madras43 , has observed that freedom of speech and expression
includes freedom of propagation of ideas." (See para 69)
31.22. In ABC V. State (NCT of Delhi)44, the Division Bench held as
follows:
"It is imperative that the rights of the mother must also be given
due consideration. As Ms Malhotra, learned Senior Counsel for the
appellant, has eloquently argued, the appellant's fundamental right of
privacy would be violated if she is forced to disclose the name and
particulars of the father of her child." (see para 20)
31.23. This Hon'ble Court in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Assn. V. Union of India45 (Lokur, J.), held that the 99th Constitution
Amendment Act and the NJAC Act have not taken note of the privacy
concerns of an individual. In this regard, the Constitution Bench held as
follows:
"The balance between transparency and confidentiality is very
delicate and if some sensitive information about a particular person is
made public, it can have a far-reaching impact on his/her reputation
and dignity. The 99th Constitution Amendment Act and the NJAC Act
have not taken note of the privacy concerns of an individual. This is
important because it was submitted by the learned Attorney General
that the proceedings of NJAC will be completely transparent and
anyone can have access to information that is available with NJAC.
This is a rather sweeping generalisation which obviously does not take
into account the privacy of a person who has been recommended for
appointment, particularly as a Judge of the High Court or in the first
instance as a Judge of the Supreme Court. The right to know is not a
fundamental right but at best it is an implicit fundamental right and it
is hedged in with the implicit fundamental right to privacy that all
people enjoy. The balance between the two implied fundamental rights
is difficult to maintain, but the 99th Constitution Amendment Act and
the NJAC Act do not even attempt to consider, let alone achieve that
balance." (see para 953)
31.24. Asha Ranjan V. State of Bihar46 the Division Bench held as
follows:
"In this context, it is also appropriate to refer to certain other
decisions where the Court has dealt with the concept of competing
rights. We are disposed to think that dictum laid therein has to be
appositely appreciated. In Mr 'X' V. Hospital 'Z 22, the issue arose with
regard to right to privacy as implicit in the right to life and liberty as
guaranteed to the citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution and the
right of another to lead a healthy life. Dealing with the said
controversy, the Court held that as a human being, Ms 'Y' must also
enjoy, as she obviously is entitled to all the human rights available to
any other human being. This is apart from, and in addition to, the
fundamental right available to her under Article 21, which guarantees
"right to life" to every citizen of this country. The Court further held
that where there is a clash of two fundamental rights, namely, the
appellant's right to privacy as part of right to life and Ms Y's right to
lead a healthy life which is her fundamental right under Article 21, the
right which would advance the public morality or public interest, would
alone be enforced through the process of court, for the reason that
moral considerations cannot be kept at bay and the Judges are not
expected to sit as mute structures of clay in the hall known as the
courtroom, but have to be sensitive." (see para 56)
32. Thus, the status of the right to privacy as a fundamental right has
been settled by a catena of judgments, not only of two and three judges,
but also by Constitution Benches as well. Thus, A.K. Gopalan12 being held
as bad law by an eleven-Judge Bench in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper13 the
13
foundation and the basis of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh3 which were
premised on Gopalan12 , by necessary implication could not be good law
12
and therefore the subsequent Benches have rightly disregarded the same
and held that the right to privacy is a fundamental right emanating from
Article 21.
33. In view of the above, it is submitted that these judgments which
have rightly held the field should not be unsettled as Lord Coke aptly
described that "those things which have been so often adjudged ought to
rest in peace"47.
34. Even otherwise, as pointed out hereinabove, the right to privacy
has to be delineated and understood in the context of the current
advances made by society in the field of technology and communications
and not merely from the paradigm of issues of search and seizure arising
in M.P. Sharma or personal surveillance issues in Kharak Singh.
II. Mr Gopal Subramanium, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners
1. It is submitted that the decisions in M.P. Sharma V. Satish
Chandra and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 2 to the extent they interpret
fundamental rights on a distinctive basis (as recognised in A.K. Gopalan
V. State of Madras3 are no longer good law. In view of the fact that A.K.
Gopalan case3 stands overruled in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of
India 4 it follows a fortiori that neither of the above decisions are effective.
2. It is submitted that the ratio of the judgment in M.P. Sharma1
merely observed that there is no right to privacy located in Article 20(3)
of the Constitution; it did not extinguish a general right to privacy. This
arose in the context of searches in a criminal investigation and whether
the same amounted to a violation of the right in Article 20(3). Thus, it
cannot be said that the decision in M.P. Sharma is an authority for the
proposition that there is no fundamental right to privacy in the
Constitution. The observations in M.P. Sharma being relied upon by the
respondents must be read in the context in which they were made:
"17.
A power of search and seizure is in any system of
Jurisprudence an overriding power of the State for the protection of
social security and that power is necessarily regulated by law. When
the Constitution makers have thought fit not to subject such
regulation to constitutional limitations by recognition of a fundamental
right to privacy analogous to the Fourth Amendment, we have no
justification to import it, into a totally different fundamental right, by
some process of strained construction. Nor is it legitimate to assume
that the constitutional protection under Article 20(3) would be
defeated by the statutory provisions for searches. It is to be
remembered that searches of the kind we are concerned with are
under the authority of a Magistrate (excepting in the limited class of
cases falling under Section 165 of the Criminal Procedure Code).
Therefore, issue of a search warrant is normally the judicial function of
the Magistrate. When such judicial function is interposed between the
individual and the officer's authority for search, no circumvention
thereby of the fundamental right is to be assumed. We are not
unaware that in the present set up of the Magistracy in this country, it
is not infrequently that the exercise of this judicial function is liable to
serious error, as is alleged in the present case. But the existence of
scope for such occasional error is no ground to assume circumvention
of the constitutional guarantee."
3. The dissenting judgment of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh* states
clearly that:
3.1. The question was, in the absence of any law, what was the
fundamental right of the petitioner that was infringed?
3.2. Clauses (a) to (f) of Regulation 236 contained in Chapter 22 of
the U.P. Police Regulations were measures adopted for the purpose of
supervision or close observation of his movements and therefore parts of
surveillance. The question was whether such a surveillance infringed any
of the petitioner's fundamental rights.
3.3. Even though fundamental rights may be distinct, they could yet
be overlapping. The fundamental right of life and personal liberties have
many attributes and some of them are part of Article 19.
3.4. If an action violated Article 19(1) of the Constitution, it could be
argued that there was a law to sustain that action "but that cannot be a
complete answer unless the said law satisfies the test laid down in Article
19(B) so far as the attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned".
3.5. The expression "life" in Article 21 meant more than mere "animal
existence". The expression "liberty" is given a very wide meaning in the
USA. It takes in all the freedoms.
3.6. In A.K. Gopalan, liberty was described to mean liberty
concerning the person or body of the individual. Subba Rao, J. observed
that the right to personal liberty takes in not only a right to be free from
restrictions placed on his movement but also free from encroachments on
his private life. He further continues to say that while it is true that our
Constitution does not expressly declare right to privacy as a fundamental
right, but the said right is an essential ingredient of personal liberty.
Every democratic country sanctifies domestic life; it is expected to give
him/her rest, physical happiness, peace of mind and security. In the last
resort a person's house where he lives with his family is "his castle". He
observed:
"28.
Indeed, nothing is more deleterious to a man's physical
happiness and health than a calculated interference with his privacy.
We would, therefore, define the right of personal liberty in Article 21
as a right of an individual to be free from restrictions or
encroachments on his person, whether those restrictions or
encroachments are directly imposed or indirectly brought about by
calculated measures. It so understood, all the acts of surveillance
under Regulation 236 infringe the fundamental right of the petitioner
under Article 21 of the Constitution."
4. In fact, in some sense Subba Rao, J. also noticed that privacy was a
facet of Article 19(1)(d)
"29.
The freedom of movement in clause (d) therefore must be a
movement in a free country i.e. in a country where he can do whatever
he likes, speak to whomsoever he wants, meet people of his own
choice without any apprehension, subject of course to the law of social
control.
The petitioner under the shadow of surveillance is certainly deprived of
this freedom. He can move physically, but he cannot do so freely, for all
his activities are watched and noted. The shroud of surveillance cast upon
him perforce engender inhibitions in him and he cannot act freely as he
would like to do. We would, therefore, hold that the entire Regulation 236
offends also Article 19(1)(d) of the Constitution"
5. A.K. Gopalan proceeded both on the distinctiveness of each of the
fundamental rights; that "procedure established by law" under Article 21
was not used approximately to mean "due process of law" as interpreted
by the Supreme Court of the United States. In A.K. Gopalan, it was held
that:
"17. In my opinion, this line of approach is not proper and indeed is
misleading. As regards the American Constitution its general structure
is noticed in these words in The Government of the United States by
Munro (5th Edn.) at p. 53: "The architects of 1787 built only the
basement. Their descendants have kept adding walls and windows,
wings and gables, pillars and porches to make a rambling structure
which is not yet finished. Or, to change the metaphor, it has a fabric
which, to use the words of James Russell Lowell, is still being 'woven
on the roaring loom of time'. That is what the framers of the original
Constitution intended it to be. Never was it in their mind to work out a
final scheme for the Government of the country and stereotype it for
all time. They sought merely to provide a starting point". The same
aspect is emphasized in Professor Willis's book on Constitutional Law
and Cooley's Constitutional Limitations. In contrast to the American
Constitution, the Indian Constitution is a very detailed one. The
Constitution itself provides in minute details the legislative powers of
Parliament and the State Legislatures. The same feature is noticeable
in the case of the judiciary, finance, trade, commerce and services. It
is thus quite detailed and the whole of it has to be read with the same
sanctity, without giving undue weight to Part III or Article 246, except
to the extent one is legitimately and clearly limited by the other."
6. The Court held that Article 19(1)(d) was distinct of personal liberty
under Article 21 and the freedom to move freely in Article 19(1)(d) was
not a facet of Article 21 and since a detention was duly authorised under
the impugned law, the requirement of reasonableness for examining such
action under Article 19(1)(d) did not arise. Further, the contention to
correlate Articles 19 and SI was rejected.
7. It may be noted in fairness that in A.K. Gopalan the following
words occur in para 122, which contain footprints of future evolution:
"122. There can be no doubt that the people of India have, in
exercise of their sovereign will as expressed in the preamble, adopted
the democratic ideal which assures to the citizen the dignity of the
individual and other cherished human values as a means to the full
evolution and expression of his personality, and in delegating to the
legislature, the
executive and the judiciary their respective powers in the Constitution,
reserved to themselves certain fundamental rights, so called, I
apprehend, because they have been retained by the people and made
paramount to the delegated powers, as in the American model. Madison
(who played a prominent part in framing the First Amendment of the
American Constitution) pointing out the distinction, due to historical
reasons, between the American and the British ways of securing "the
great and essential rights of the people", observed "Here they are
secured not by laws paramount to prerogative but by Constitutions
paramount to laws:" Report on the Virginia Resolutions, quoted in Near V.
Minnesota5. This has been translated into positive law in Part III of the
Indian Constitution, and I agree that in construing these provisions the
high purpose and spirit of the preamble as well as the constitutional
significance of a declaration of fundamental rights should be borne in
mind. This, however, is not to say that the language of the provisions
should be stretched to square with this or that constitutional theory in
disregard of the cardinal rule of interpretation of any enactment,
constitutional or other, that its spirit, no less than its intendment should
be collected primarily from the natural meaning of the words used."
(emphasis supplied)
8. It is submitted however that although the learned Judges in A.K.
Gopalan understood the values of the Preamble of the Constitution to be
relevant, yet they were constrained to hold that the fundamental rights
were distinctive in character. The interpretation was informed by
formalism.
9. In R.C. Cooper4, it is respectfully submitted that the issues relating
to interrelation between the diverse provisions affording the guarantee of
fundamental rights in Part III fell to be determined. A reference was
made to the decision in A.K. Gopalan. This Hon'ble Court held in para 45
as under:
"45. Early in the history of this Court the question of inter-relation
between the diverse provisions affording the guarantee of fundamental
rights in Part III fell to be determined. In A.K. Gopalan V. State of
Madras a person detained pursuant to an order made in exercise of
the power conferred by the Preventive Detention Act, 4 of 1950
applied to this Court for a writ of habeas corpus claiming that the Act
contravened the guarantee under Articles 19, 21 and 22 of the
Constitution. The majority of the Court (Kania, C.J., and Patanjali
Sastri, Mahajan, Mukherjea and Das, JJ.), held that Article 22 being a
complete code relating to preventive detention, the validity of an order
of detention must be determined strictly according to the terms and
"within the four corners of that Article". They held that a person
detained may not claim that the freedom guaranteed under Article 19
1)(d) was infringed by his detention, and that validity of the law
providing for making orders of detention will not be tested in the light
of the reasonableness of the restrictions imposed
thereby on the freedom of movement, nor on the ground that his right to
personal liberty is infringed otherwise than acceding to the procedure
established by law. Fazl Ali, J., expressed a contrary view. This case has
formed the nucleus of the theory that the protection of the guarantee of a
fundamental freedom must be adjudged in the light of the object of State
action in relation to the individual's right and not upon its influence upon
the guarantee of the fundamental freedom, and as a corollary thereto,
that the freedoms under Articles 19, 21, 22 and 31 are exclusive - each
article enacting a code relating to protection of distinct rights."
10. In particular, Shah J. analysed how each one of the learned Judges
referred to an examination of legislation to be directly in respect of one of
the rights mentioned in the sub-clauses. In fact the observation of Sastri,
J. that the fundamental or personal freedoms rested only in Article 19
while Articles 20 to 22 secure constitutional guarantees was also noticed.
The view of Mahajan, J. that Article 22 was self-contained in respect of
the laws on the subject of preventive detention was noticed. Similarly,
the observation of Mukherjea, J. that there was no conflict between
Article 19(1)(d) and Article 22 because the former did not contemplate
freedom from detention either punitive or preventive but speaks of a
different aspect of civil liberties. In the view of Mukherjea, J., Articles 20
to 22 provided for the entire protection both in relation to deprivation of
life and personal liberty with regard to substantive as well as procedural
law. (See para 46, R.C. Cooper 4).
11. It is respectfully submitted that Shah, J. enunciated the theory of
"direct effect upon individual freedom". It was held:
"49. We have carefully considered the weighty pronouncements of
the eminent Judges who gave shape to the concept that the extent of
protection of important guarantees, such as the liberty of person, and
right to property depends upon the form and object of the State
action, and not upon its direct operation upon the individual's
freedom. But it is not the object of the authority making the law
impairing the right of a citizen, nor the form of action taken that
determines the protection he can claim : it is the effect of the law and
of the action upon the right which attracts the jurisdiction of the Court
to grant relief. If this be the true view and we think it is, in
determining the impact of State action upon constitutional guarantees
which are fundamental, it follows that the extent of protection against
impairment of a fundamental right is determined not by the object of
the Legislature nor by the form of the action, but by its direct
operation upon the individual's rights.
50. We are of the view that the theory that the object and form of
the State action determine the extent of protection which the
aggrieved party may claim is not consistent with the constitutional
scheme. Each freedom has different dimensions or facets.
"
(emphasis supplied)
12. Thus, A.K. Gopalan 3 was overruled by R.C. Cooper4 in the following
words:
"55.
In our judgment, the assumption in A.K. Gopalan case3 that
certain articles in the Constitution exclusively deal with specific
matters and in determining whether there is infringement of the
individual's guaranteed rights, the object and the form of the State
action alone need be considered, and effect of the laws on
fundamental rights of the individuals in general will be ignored cannot
be accepted as correct."
13. It is respectfully submitted in the light of the above, the majority
opinion in Kharak Singh 2 delivered by Rajagopala Ayyangar, J. has
proceeded upon the basis that express constitutional guarantee like the
Fourth Amendment being absent. Hence, it was not possible to read in
Article 19(1)(d) any such right of privacy since the right to privacy in the
US was derived from the Fourth Amendment (set out below):
"The right of the people to be secure in. Their persons, houses,
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall
not be violated; and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause,
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized."
14. Hence, Rajagopala Ayyangar, J. fell back on the theory of common
law to hold that the common law embodied in a binding principle
transcends mere protection of property rights and expounds a concept of
personal liberty. It may also be noted that to the extent Rajagopala
Ayyangar, J. (i.e. majority) held that:
"We feel unable to hold that the term [personal liberty] was
intended to bear only this narrow interpretation but on the other hand
consider that "'personal liberty' is used in the Article as a compendious
term to include within itself all the-varieties of rights which go to make
up the "personal liberties" of man other than those deal with in the
several clauses of Article 19(1)."
15. Hence, the majority held that Article 21 could not in any event
influence Article 19(1)(d). The majority further held that:
"The right of privacy is not a guaranteed right under our
Constitution, and therefore the attempt to ascertain the movements of
an individual is merely a manner in which privacy is invaded and is not
an infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed in Part III..."
"
(emphasis supplied)
16. According to the judgment of Subba Rao, J. the following
consequences will emerge:
(a) The expression liberty is not a residuary expression.
(b) It is a substantive expression;
(c) It contemplates right to privacy;
(d) If it is to be read as informed by Preambular values of dignity,
liberty and freedom - which expressions are contained in the
Preamble. There can be no manner of doubt that right to privacy is an
established fundamental right under the Constitution.
at p. 154, the Court noticed the decision of Griswold V. Connecticut , US
at p. 510 and noted that:
"In an opinion by Douglas, J., expressing view of five members of
the Court, it was held that the statute was invalid as an
unconstitutional invasion of the right of privacy of married persons. He
said that the right of freedom of speech press includes not only the
right to utter or to print but also the right to distribute. the right to
receive, the right to read and that without those peripheral rights the
specific right would be less secure and that likewise, the other specific
guarantees in the Bill of Rights have penumbras, formed by
emanations from those guarantees that help give them life and
substance, that the various guarantees create zones of privacy, and
that protection against all governmental invasion "of the sanctity of a
man's home and the privacies of life" was fundamental. He further said
that the inquiry is whether a right involved "is of such a character that
it cannot be denied without violating those `fundamental principles of
liberty and justice which lie at the base of all our civil and political
institutions' and that 'privacy is a fundamental personal right,
emanating from the totality of the Constitutional scheme under which
we (Americans) live'"".
(emphasis supplied)
18. This Hon'ble Court also noticed the decision of Roe V. Wade8,
where the litigant wanted to exercise the right to abortion and the Court
recognised "that a right of personal privacy or a guarantee of certain
areas or zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution".
19. The judgment in Gobind6 clearly noticed that right to privacy
contained multiple aspects, such as : (See paras 21 to 25, Gobind6)
a. Spatial privacy;
b. Informational privacy;
C. Decisional autonomy; and,
d. Full development of personality;
20. It may be said that in Gobind6 Mathew, J. realised that the law
relating to privacy was still in a state of evolution which is why he clearly
noted that:
"
28. The right to privacy in any event will necessarily have to go
through a process of case-by-case development."
21. Mathew, J. referred to Arts. 8(1) and (2) of the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Hence, the
regulations authorising surveillance were necessarily read down.
22. It is submitted that in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India s, the issue
was fully settled. It was clearly held that:
(a) A.K. Gopalan stands overruled by R.C. Cooper4
(b) Therefore, there is an indivisible connection between all the
fundamental rights, and any law creating restrictions on rights must
be in conformity with Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
(c) The law must satisfy the test of substantive as well as
procedural due process.
(d) In particular, Bhagwati, J. affirmed the minority view expressed
by Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh2:
"5. It is obvious that Article 21, though couched in negative
language, confers the fundamental right to life and personal liberty.
So far as the right to personal liberty is concerned, it is ensured by
providing that no one shall be deprived of personal liberty except
according to procedure prescribed by law. The first question that
arises for consideration on the language of Article 21 is : what is the
meaning and content of the words "personal liberty" as used in this
article? This question incidentally came up for discussion in some of
the judgments in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras, and the
observations made by Patanjali Sastri, J., Mukherjea, J., and S.R.
Das, J., seemed to place a narrow interpretation on the words
"personal liberty" so as to confine the protection of Article 21 to
freedom of the person against unlawful detention. But there was no
definite pronouncement made on this point since the question
before the Court was not so much the interpretation of the words
"personal liberty" as the inter-relation between Articles 19 and 21.
It was in Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 2 that the question as to the
proper scope and meaning of the expression "personal liberty" came
up pointedly for consideration for the first time before this Court.
The majority of the Judges took the view "that "personal liberty" is
used in the article as a compendious term to include within itself all
the varieties of rights which go to make up the "personal liberties"
of man other than those dealt with in the several clauses of Article
19(1). In other words, while Article 19(1) deals with particular
species or attributes of that freedom, 'personal liberty' in Article 21
takes in and comprises the residue. The minority Judges, however,
disagreed with this view taken by the majority and explained their
position in the following words: "No doubt the expression 'personal
liberty' is a comprehensive one and the right to move freely is an
attribute of personal liberty. It is said that the freedom to move freely is
carved out of personal liberty and, therefore, the expression 'personal
liberty' in Article 21 excludes that attribute. In our view, this is not a
correct approach. Both are independent fundamental rights, though there
is overlapping. There is no question of one being carved out of another.
The fundamental right of life and personal liberty has many attributes
and some of them are found in Article 19. If a person's fundamental right
under Article 21 is infringed, the State can rely upon a law to sustain the
action, but that cannot be a complete answer unless the said law satisfies
the test laid down in Article 19(2) so far as the attributes covered by
Article 19(1) are concerned." There can be no doubt that in view of
the decision of this Court in Rustom Cowasjee Cooper V. Union of
India0 the minority view must be regarded as correct and the majority
view must be held to have been overruled.
(emphasis supplied)
23. Further, in para 96, Krishna Iyer, J., in his inimitable style stated
as under:
"96. A thorny problem debated recurrently at the bar, turning on
Article 19, demands some juristic response although avoidance of
overlap persuades me to drop all other questions canvassed before us.
The Gopalan verdict, with the cocooning of Article 22 into a self-
contained code, has suffered suppression at the hands of R.C. Cooper4.
By way of aside, the fluctuating fortunes of fundamental rights, when
the proletarist and the proprietarist have asserted them in Court,
partially provoke sociological research and hesitantly project the
Cardozo thesis of subconscious forces in judicial noesis when the
cycloramic review starts from Gopalan, moves on to Kerala Education
Bill, 1957, In re11 and then on to All-India Bank Employees' Assn. 12
next to Sakal Papers13, crowning in Cooper4 and followed by Bennett
Coleman14 and Sambhu Nath Sarkar15. Be that as it may, the law is
now settled, as I apprehend it, that no article in Part HI is an island
but part of a continent, and the conspectus of the whole part gives the
direction and correction needed for interpretation of these basic
provisions. Man is not dissectible into separate limbs and, likewise,
cardinal rights in an organic constitution, which make man human
have a synthesis. The proposition
is indubitable that Article 21 does not, in a given situation, exclude
Article 19 if both rights are breached."
24. In Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala6, Sikri, C.J. noticed:
(a) The Preamble is a part of the Indian Constitution.
(b) The Preamble constitutes India into a sovereign democratic
republic and to secure to all its citizens and guarantees
"
JUSTICE social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among
them all;
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual.
"
(c) "The Preamble of our Constitution, is of extreme importance and
the Constitution should be read and interpreted in the light of the
grand and noble vision expressed in the Preamble
"
(d) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 was
considered and it was held as follows:
"148-49. I may here mention that while our fundamental rights
and directive principles were being fashioned and approved of by
the Constituent Assembly on 10-12-1948, the General Assembly of
the United Nations adopted a Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The Declaration may not be a legally binding instrument but
it shows how India understood the nature of human rights."
(e) Regard may be had to the following recital in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 "Whereas the peoples of the United
Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom".
(f) Further, that certain inalienable right ought to be guaranteed,
and held:
"150. In the Preamble to the International Covenant on Economic
and Social and Cultural Bights, 1966, inalienability of rights is
indicated in the first para as follows:
"Considering that, in accordance with the principles
proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of
the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all
members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world." "
25. The fundamental proposition that was held in Kesavananda- was
16
that certain rights are basic and inalienable.
26. While describing the Basic Structure, Sikri, C.J. remarked:
"292. The learned Attorney-General said that every provision of the
Constitution is essential; otherwise it would not have been put in the
Constitution. This is true. But this does not place every provision of the
Constitution in the same position. The true position is that every
provision of the Constitution can be amended provided in the result
the basic foundation and structure of the constitution remains the
same. The basic structure maybe said to consist of the following
features:
(1) Supremacy of the Constitution;
(2) Republican and Democratic form of Government;
(3) Secular character of the Constitution;
(4) Separation of powers between the legislature, the executive
and the judiciary;
(5) Federal character of the Constitution.
293. The above structure is built on the basic foundation i.e. the
dignity and freedom of the individual. This is of supreme importance.
This cannot by any form of amendment be destroyed."
(emphasis supplied)
27. Sikri, C.J. held that some rights were natural and inalienable and
he cited a large number of decisions to describe what could be natural
and inalienable rights. The liberty of the person and his essential
freedoms for whom the Constitution is intended and from which the State
is injuncted from interfering, and must be viewed as a part of the Basic
Structure. In this respect Sikri, C.J. held as under:
"299. I am unable to hold that these provisions show that some
rights are not natural or inalienable rights. As a matter of fact, India
was a party to the Universal Declaration of Rights which I have already
referred to and that Declaration describes some fundamental rights as
inalienable."
28. It is submitted that the right to privacy invariably means the
inviolability of the person. The expression "person" includes the body as
well as the inviolate personality. It is submitted that privacy really is
intended to indicate the realm of inviolable sanctuary that most of us
sense in our beings. It refers to spatial sanctity, freedom in decisional
autonomy, informational privacy as well as the ability to freely develop
one's personality and exercise discretion and judgment. It may be noted
that both in Abington School District V. Schempp17, US and Fisher V.
United States18, US at pp. 416, the expression on inviolability uses
spatial imagery of the castle or the sanctuary to convey the appropriate
inaccessibility of the person, the inviolable citadel
of a person's heart and mind, or the inner sanctum of individual feeling
and thought. The usage of the term "personhood" in privacy
jurisprudence is attributed to Professor Freund, who in 1975 made the
following observations:
"The theme of personhood is. emerging. It has been groping, I
think, for a rubric. Sometimes it is called privacy, inaptly it would
seem to me; autonomy perhaps, though that seems too dangerously
broad. But the idea is that of personhood in the sense of those
attributes of an individual which are irreducible in his selfhood.
,19
29. In the context of the Indian Constitution, three articles i.e. Articles
14, 19 and 21-form its sanctum sanctorum. Identifying the special
status of these three articles, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Minerva Mills
Ltd. V. Union of India0 observed:
"74. Three Articles of our Constitution, and only three, stand
between the heaven of freedom into which Tagore wanted his country
to awake and the abyss of unrestrained power. They are Articles 14, 19
and 81. Article 31-C has removed two sides of that golden triangle
which affords to the people of this country an assurance that the
promise held forth by the preamble will be performed by ushering an
egalitarian era through the discipline of fundamental rights, that is,
without emasculation of the rights to liberty and equality which alone
can help preserve the dignity of the individual."
(emphasis supplied)
30. Laurence Tribe, in order to show the underlying purpose of the
right to privacy and why it is one of the foundational elements of a
democratic nation, wrote in his book22 as under:
"Finally, the right to privacy is a requirement of democracy. When
none of us can be certain what the state knows about us or how it
might use that information, the relationship between the governed and
the Government is fundamentally altered. The State's unlimited access
to whatever information it wishes to obtain about each citizen can
create a profound power imbalance and feeling of vulnerability. As
Justice Robert Jackson once wrote of searches and seizures, "Among
deprivations of rights, none is so effective in cowing a population,
crushing the spirit of the individual and putting terror in every heart."
This is especially true when the State develops the ability to combine
many small pieces of data into a full picture of our lives. Even if we
trust the State not to abuse the information and search only for true
threats, the risk that our vast intelligence bureaucracy will make an
egregious error is unavoidable. Entirely innocent personal information
can be abused, leaked, distorted,
and put to mischievous use in unpredictable ways. Without protection of
privacy, democratic life could suffer a dangerous chill."
31. Roscoe Pound, while expounding on natural rights, observed that
"the law does not create them, it only recognises them. "22 He farther
observed:
"Individual interests which it is conceived the law ought to secure
are usually called "natural rights" because they are not the creatures
of the State and it is held that the pressure of these interests has
brought about the State. In the stage of equity or natural law, when
what ought to be law is made the test of what is, it is natural to
confuse the interests which the law does secure, the interests it ought
to secure, and the means of securing them under the one name of
"rights". Those which are secured and the means; whereby they are
secured are called legal rights; those which ought to be secured are
called natural rights."
32. Privacy is a part of personhood and is therefore a natural right.
This is why the natural right is not conferred but only recognised by the
Constitution.
23
33. In I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N.
the Court observed:
"56. The fundamentalness of fundamental rights has thus to he
examined having regard to the enlightened point of view as a result of
development of fundamental rights over the years. It is, therefore,
imperative to understand the nature of guarantees under fundamental
rights as understood in the years that immediately followed after the
Constitution was enforced when fundamental rights were viewed by
this Court as distinct and separate rights. In early years, the scope of
the guarantee provided by these rights was considered to be very
narrow. Individuals could only claim limited protection against the
State. This position has changed since long. Over the years, the
jurisprudence and development around fundamental rights has made
it clear that they are not limited, narrow rights but provide a broad
check against the violations or excesses by the State authorities. The
fundamental rights have in fact proved to be the most significant
constitutional control on the Government, particularly legislative
power. This transition from a set of independent, narrow rights to
broad checks on State power is demonstrated by a series of cases that
have been decided by this Court. In State of Bombay V. Bhanji
Munji24 relying on the ratio of Gopalan, it was held that Article 31
was independent of Article 19(1)(f). However, it was in Rustom
Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India4 (popularly known as
Bank Nationalisation case) that the viewpoint of Gopalan was seriously
disapproved While examining this question the Court stated that the
actual effect of the law on the right guaranteed must be taken into
account. This ratio was applied in Bank Nationalisation case4. The Court
examined the relation between Article 19(1)(f) and Article 13 and held
that they were not mutually exclusive. The ratio of Gopalan 3 was not
approved.
60. It is evident that it can no longer be contended that protection
provided by fundamental rights comes in isolated pools. On the
contrary, these rights together provide a comprehensive guarantee
against excesses by State authorities. Thus post-Maneka Gandhi case9
it is clear that the development of fundamental rights has been such
that it no longer involves the interpretation of rights as isolated
protections which directly arise but they collectively form a
comprehensive test against the arbitrary exercise of State power in
any area that occurs as an inevitable consequence. The protection of
fundamental rights has, therefore, been considerably widened.
61. The approach in the interpretation of fundamental rights has
been evidenced in a recent case M. Nagaraj V. Union of India 25
in
"20. This principle of interpretation is particularly apposite to the
interpretation of fundamental rights. It is a fallacy to regard
fundamental rights as a gift from the State to its citizens.
Individuals possess basic human rights independently of any
Constitution by reason of the basic fact that they are members of
the human race. These fundamental rights are important as they
possess intrinsic value. Part III of the Constitution does not confer
fundamental rights. It confirms their existence and gives them
protection. Its purpose is to withdraw certain subjects from the area
of political controversy to place them beyond the reach of majorities
and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied
by the courts. Every right has a content. Every foundational value is
put in Part III as a fundamental right as it has intrinsic value. The
converse does not apply. A right becomes a fundamental right
because it has foundational value An instance of literal and narrow
interpretation of a vital fundamental right in the Indian Constitution
is the early decision of the Supreme Court in A.K. Gopalan V. State
of Madras. Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person
shall be deprived of Ms life and personal liberty except according to
procedure established by law. The Supreme Court by a majority
held that 'procedure established by law' means any procedure
established
by law made by Parliament or the legislatures of the State. The Supreme
Court refused to infuse the procedure with principles of natural justice. It
concentrated solely upon the existence of enacted law. After three
decades, the Supreme Court overruled its previous decision in A.K.
Gopalan and held in its landmark judgment in Maneka Gandhi V. Union
of India that the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the
test of reasonableness. The Court further held that the procedure should
also be in conformity with the principles of natural justice. This example
is given to demonstrate an instance of expansive interpretation of a
fundamental right. The expression 'life' in Article 21 does not connote
merely physical or animal existence. The right to life includes right to live
with human dignity. This Court has in numerous cases deduced
fundamental features which are not specifically mentioned in Part III on
the principle that certain unarticulated rights are implicit in the
enumerated guarantees." "
(emphasis supplied)
34. In Selvi V. State of Karnataka the Court reaffirmed the position
laid down in Maneka 9 case and clarified that the decision of Bhagwati, J.
in Maneka9 had effectively made it clear that the minority opinion of
Subba Rao, J. was the correct exposition of law. In fact, it may not be out
of place to suggest that the understanding of M.P. Sharma and Kharak
Singh being urged by the Attorney General is no longer tenable in view
of the decision in Selvi26 having firmly closed the door on such an
argument and having held that there is a fundamental right to privacy
notwithstanding the decisions in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh2 The
Court made the following observations:
"205. In M.P. Sharma it had been noted that the Indian
Constitution did not explicitly include a "right to privacy" in a manner
akin to the Fourth Amendment of the US Constitution. In that case,
this distinction was one of the reasons for upholding the validity of
search warrants issued for documents required to investigate charges
of misappropriation and embezzlement.
206. Similar issues were discussed in Kharak Singh V. State of
U.P.4 where the Court considered the validity of the Police Regulations
that authorised police personnel to maintain lists of "history-sheeters"
in addition to conducting surveillance activities, domiciliary visits and
periodic inquiries about such persons. The intention was to monitor
persons suspected or charged with offences in the past, with the aim
of preventing criminal acts in the future. At the time, there was no
statutory basis for these Regulations and they had been framed in the
exercise of administrative functions. The majority opinion (Ayyangar,
J.) held that
these Regulations did not violate "personal liberty", except for those
which permitted domiciliary visits. The other restraints such as
surveillance activities and periodic inquiries about "history-sheeters" were
justified by observing : (AIR p. 1303, para 20)
"20.
the right of privacy is not a guaranteed right under our
Constitution and therefore the attempt to ascertain the movements
of an individual which is merely a manner in which privacy is
invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed
by Part III."
207. Ayyangar, J. distinguished between surveillance activities
conducted in the routine exercise of police powers and the specific act
of unauthorised intrusion into a person's home which violated
"personal liberty". However, the minority opinion (Subba Rao, J.) in
Kharak Singh2 took a different approach by recognising the
interrelationship between Articles 21 and 19, thereby requiring the
State to demonstrate the "reasonableness" of placing such restrictions
on "personal liberty". (This approach was later endorsed by Bhagwati,
J. in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India9, see AIR p. 622.) Subba Rao, J.
held that the right to privacy "is an essential ingredient of personal
liberty" and that the right to "personal liberty" is "a right of an
individual to be free from restrictions or encroachments on his person,
whether those restrictions or encroachments are directly imposed or
indirectly brought about by calculated measures". (AIR at p. 1306,
para 31)
209. Following the judicial expansion of the idea of "personal
liberty", the status of the "right to privacy" as a component of Article
21 has been recognised and reinforced..."
"
35. Rohinton Nariman, J. in Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of India" in
a concise and lucid summary identified the change from the Gopalan era
to the Maneka Gandhi9 era in the following passages:
"25. In Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. Gopalan3's reading of
fundamental rights in watertight compartments was reiterated by the
majority. However, they went one step further to say that "personal
liberty" in Article 21 takes in and comprises the residue after all the
rights granted by Article 19.
Justices Subba Rao and Shah disagreed. They held:
"The fundamental right of life and personal liberty have many
attributes and some of them are found in Article 19. If a person's
fundamental right under Article 21 is infringed, the State can rely
upon a law to sustain the action; but that cannot be a complete
answer unless the said law satisfies the test laid down in Article 19(2)
so far as the attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned. In
other words, the State must satisfy that both the fundamental rights
are not infringed by
showing' that there is a law and that it does amount to a reasonable
restriction within the meaning of Article 19(2) of the Constitution. But in
this case no such defence is available, as admittedly there is no such law.
So the petitioner can legitimately plead that his fundamental rights both
under Article 19(1)(d) and Article 21 are infringed by the State." (at
pages 356-357)
26. The minority judgment of Subba Rao and Shah, JJ. eventually
became law in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper4, where the 11-Judge Bench
finally discarded Gopalan3 view and held that various fundamental
p. 289, para 53)
"53. We are therefore unable to hold that the challenge to the
validity of the provision for acquisition is liable to be tested only on
the ground of non-compliance with Article 31(2). Article 31(2)
requires that property must be acquired for a public purpose and
that it must be acquired under a law with characteristics set out in
that Article. Formal compliance with the conditions under Article 31
(2) is not sufficient to negative the protection of the guarantee of
the right to property Acquisition must be under the authority of a
law and the expression "law" means a law which is within the
competence of the Legislature, and does not impair the guarantee
of the rights in Part III. We are unable, therefore, to agree that
Articles 19(1)(f) and 31 (B) are mutually exclusive."
27. The stage was now set for the judgment in Maneka Gandhi-Superscript 2
Several judgments were delivered, and the upshot of all of them was
that Article 21 was to be read along with other fundamental rights,
and so read not only has the procedure established by law to be just,
fair and reasonable, but also the law itself has to be reasonable as
Articles 14 and 19 have now to be read into Article 21. [See at SCR
per Krishna Iyer, J.]
36. In view of the above submissions, it is respectfully submitted that
the right to privacy is recognised as a fundamental right under Article 21
of the Constitution. It is also submitted that this has been the settled
3
position of law since the overturning of the decision in A.K. Gopalan by
way of judgments in R.C. Cooper and Maneka Gandhi9. The concept of
28
privacy is embedded in liberty as well as honour of a person.
III. Mr Shyam Divan, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners
1. These submissions are filed on behalf of the writ petitioners in the
following petitions:
1.1. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 829 of 2013 - 'SG Vombatkere V. Union
of India' - challenging the Aadhaar programme initiated under a
Notification dated 28-1-2009.
1.2. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 797 of 2016 - 'SG Vombatkere V. Union
of India' - challenging the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and
Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 ("the Aadhaar Act").
1.3. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 342 of 2017 - 'Shantha Sinha V. Union of
India' - challenging the Aadhaar Act and the notifications issued under
Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act.
2. By an order dated 11-8-20151, a three-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble
Court referred the petitions challenging the Aadhaar programme
(including WP (Civil) No. 829 of 2013) to a Bench of appropriate
strength, inter alia, to scrutinise the ratio decidendi in M.P. Sharma V.
Satish Chandra (eight-Judge) and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 3 (six-
Judge) and the jurisprudential correctness of the subsequent decisions of
the Supreme Court where the right to privacy is asserted or referred.
3. The Aadhaar Act, 2016 was enacted on 26-3-2016. Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 797 of 2016 and Writ Petition (Civil) No. 342 of 2017
challenge the Aadhaar Act.
4. Rule nisi was issued in these two writ petitions on 28-10-2016 and
9-5-2017 respectively. By the same orders, these writ petitions were
tagged with the batch of matters referred to a larger Bench.
I. Scope of hearing
5. The matter is placed before this five-Judge Bench to consider
whether Part III of the Constitution of India protects the right to privacy
as contended by the petitioners on the strength of over 30 judgments of
this Court or whether this issue needs to be authoritatively determined
by a Bench comprising more than 5 Judges.
6. The petitioners submit that the present Bench of 5 Judges can
authoritatively affirm that the right to privacy is guaranteed under Part
III of the Constitution and there is no necessity to refer the case to a
larger Bench.
II. Global perspective on the right to privacy
7. The right to privacy is an internationally recognised human right
and is protected in almost all liberal democracies either constitutionally or
statutorily. The United Nations has emphasised that States must respect
international human rights obligations regarding the right to privacy.
8. A human right is enjoyed by every human being by virtue of his or
her existence. It depends on no instrument or charter. A human right is
enjoyed by a person by being alive. The human right to privacy in India
is protective under Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India
whether the right to privacy is violated in a particular case, depends on
the fact of that case.
9. The Report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur (Joseph A.
Cannataci) on the Right to Privacy dated 8-3-2016 states that Article 12
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 ("the UDHR") and
Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966
("the ICCPR") constitute the basis of the right to privacy in international
human rights law. Taken together with a number of other international
and national legal instruments including constitutions and legislation,
there exists worldwide, a considerable legal framework for the protection
and promotion of privacy.
III. The existence of a 'Right to Privacy' is not disputed
10. The existence of a "right to privacy" particularly in the context of
the Aadhaar programme and the Aadhaar Act, is not a disputed issue
between the parties. The Aadhaar Act itself acknowledges the existence
of this right as is evident from the following:
10.1. Chapter VI of the Aadhaar Act purports to provide a mechanism
for the protection of identity information and authentication records
collected under the Aadhaar Act and restrictions on the sharing of such
information.
10.2. Section 30 of the Aadhaar Act provides that biometric
information (photographs, fingerprints and iris scans) collected and
stored under the Aadhaar Act will be deemed to be "sensitive personal
information".
10.3. Sections 37 to 40 of the Aadhaar Act provide penalties for
unauthorised disclosure and use of identity information.
10.4. The Statement of Objects and Reasons in respect of the Aadhaar
Bill, inter alia, provides:
"The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016 inter alia, provides for establishment
of Unique Identification Authority of India, issuance of Aadhaar
number to individuals, maintenance and updating of information in the
Central Identities Data Repository, issues pertaining to security,
privacy and confidentiality of information as well as offences and
penalties for contravention of relevant statutory provisions."
(emphasis supplied)
11. Further, as recorded in para 50 of the judgment of the Supreme
Court dated 9-6-2017 in Binoy Viswam V. Union of India6 relating to the
linking of PAN cards and Aadhaar numbers, the Union's contention was
that the right to privacy is not absolute.
12. In view of the aforesaid, there is no controversy between the
parties that a right to privacy exists, but only whether it is protected
under Part III of the Constitution of India.
IV. Recognition of the Right to Privacy under Part III
13. While numerous Supreme Court judgments recognise diverse
facets of what broadly falls under the right to privacy, since 1975 there is
an unbroken line of decisions that expressly recognises the existence of a
right to privacy as being protected under Part III of the Constitution,
more specifically Article 21.
14. In Gobind V. State of M.P. Z [3 Judge] the Court held:
"14. Subba Rao, J. writing for the minority [in Kharak Singh], was
of the opinion that the word "liberty" in Article 21 was comprehensive
enough to include privacy also. He said that although it is true our
Constitution does not expressly declare a right to privacy as a
fundamental right, but the right is an essential ingredient of personal
liberty, that in the last resort, a person's house, where he lives with
his family, is his "castle", that nothing is more deleterious to a man's
physical happiness and health than a calculated interference with his
privacy and that all the acts of surveillance under Regulation 236
infringe the fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 21 of the
Constitution "
23.
Individual autonomy, perhaps the central concern of any
system of limited Government, is protected in part under our
Constitution by explicit constitutional guarantees. In the application of
the Constitution our contemplation cannot only be of what has been
but what may be. Time works changes and brings into existence new
conditions. Subtler and far-reaching means of invading privacy will
make it possible to be heard in the street what is whispered in the
closet. Yet, too broad a definition of privacy raises serious questions
about the propriety of judicial reliance on a right that is not explicit in
the Constitution. Of course, privacy primarily concerns the individual.
It therefore relates to and overlaps with the concept of liberty. The
most serious advocate of privacy must confess that there are serious
problems of defining the essence and scope of the right. Privacy
interest in autonomy must also be placed in the context of other rights
and values."
(emphasis supplied)
15. In R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 8 [2 Judge] the Court explained the
contours of the right to privacy:
"9. The right to privacy as an independent and distinctive concept
originated in the field of Tort law, under which a new cause of action
for damages resulting from unlawful invasion of privacy was
recognised. This right has two aspects which are but two faces of the
same coin - (1) the general law of privacy which affords a tort action
for damages resulting from an unlawful invasion of privacy, and (2)
the constitutional recognition given to the right to privacy which
protects personal privacy against unlawful governmental invasion. The
first aspect of this right must be said to have been violated where, for
example, a person's name or likeness is used, without his consent, for
advertising-or non-advertising-purposes or for that matter, his life
story is written-whether laudatory or otherwise-and published
without his consent as explained hereinafter. In recent times, however,
this right has acquired a constitutional status. We shall proceed to
explain how. Right to privacy is not enumerated as a fundamental
right in our Constitution but has been inferred from Article 21.
*
*
*
26. We may now summarise the broad principles flowing from the
above discussion:
(1) The right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by Article 21. It is a "right to
be let alone". A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own,
his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child-bearing and
education among other matters. None can publish anything concerning
the above matters without his consent-whether - truthful or otherwise
and whether laudatory or critical. If he does so, he would be violating
the right to privacy of the person concerned and would be liable in an
action for damages. Position may, however, be different, if a person
voluntarily thrusts himself into controversy or voluntarily invites or
raises a controversy
"
(emphasis supplied)
16. In PUCL V. Union of India9 [2 Judge] the Court held:
"14. Article 21 of the Constitution has, therefore, been interpreted
by all the seven learned Judges in Kharak Singh case3 (majority and
the minority opinions) to include that "right to privacy" as a part of the
right to "protection of life and personal liberty" guaranteed under the
said Article.
*
*
*
17. We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that right to privacy
is a part of the right to "life" and "personal liberty" enshrined under
Article 21 of the Constitution. Once the facts in a given case constitute
a
right to privacy, Article 21 is attracted. The said right cannot be curtailed
"except according to procedure established by law".
18. The right to privacy-by itself-has not been identified under
the Constitution. As a concept it may be too broad and moralistic to
define it judicially. Whether right to privacy can be claimed or has
been infringed in a given case would depend on the facts of the said
case. But the right to hold a telephone conversation in the privacy of
one's home or office without interference can certainly be claimed as
"right to privacy". Conversations on the telephone are often of an
intimate and confidential character. Telephone conversation is a part of
modern man's life. It is considered so important that more and more
people are carrying mobile telephone instruments in their pockets.
Telephone conversation is an important facet of a man's private life.
Right to privacy would certainly include telephone conversation in the
privacy of one's home or office. Telephone-tapping would, thus, infract
Article 21 of the Constitution of India unless it is permitted under the
procedure established by law."
(emphasis supplied)
17. In Mr 'X' V. Hospital 'Z 10 [2 Judge] the Supreme Court discussed
the right to privacy:
"21. Right to privacy has been culled out of the provisions of Article
21 and other provisions of the Constitution relating to the
Fundamental Rights read with the Directive Principles of State Policy.
It was in this context that it was held by this Court in Kharak Singh V.
State of U.P. 3 that police surveillance of a person by domiciliary visits
would be violative of Article 21 of the Constitution. This decision was
considered by Mathew, J. in his classic judgment in Gobind V. State of
M.P. in which the origin of "right to privacy" was traced and a number
of American decisions, including Munn V. Illinois11, Wolf V. Colorado2
and various articles were considered and it was laid down ultimately,
*
*
*
26. As one of the basic human rights, the right of privacy is not
treated as absolute and is subject to such action as may be lawfully
taken for the prevention of crime or disorder or protection of health or
morals or protection of rights and freedoms of others.
*
*
*
28. Disclosure of even true private facts has the tendency to disturb
a person's tranquillity. It may generate many complexes in him and
may even lead to psychological problems. He may, thereafter, have a
disturbed life all through. In the face of these potentialities, and as
already held by this Court in its various decisions referred to above,
the
right of privacy is an essential component of the right to life envisaged by
Article 21. The right, however, is not absolute and may be lawfully
restricted for the prevention of crime, disorder or protection of health or
morals or protection of rights and freedom of others."
(emphasis supplied)
18. Ram Jethmalani V. Union of India3 13 [2 Judge] the Court held:
"83. Right to privacy is an integral part of right to life. This is a
cherished constitutional value, and it is important that human beings
be allowed domains of freedom that are free of public scrutiny unless
they act in an unlawful manner. We understand and appreciate the
fact that the situation with respect to unaccounted for monies is
extremely grave. Nevertheless, as constitutional adjudicators we
always have to be mindful of preserving the sanctity of constitutional
values, and hasty steps that derogate from fundamental rights,
whether urged by Governments or private citizens, howsoever well
meaning they may be, have to be necessarily very carefully
scrutinised. The solution for the problem of abrogation of one zone of
constitutional values cannot be the creation of another zone of
abrogation of constitutional values.
84. The rights of citizens, to effectively seek the protection of
fundamental rights, under clause (1) of Article 32 have to be balanced
against the rights of citizens and persons under Article 21. The latter
cannot be sacrificed on the anvil of fervid desire to find instantaneous
solutions to systemic problems such as unaccounted for monies, for it
would lead to dangerous circumstances, in which vigilante
investigations, inquisitions and rabble rousing, by masses of other
citizens could become the order of the day. The right of citizens to
petition this Court for upholding of fundamental rights is granted in
order that citizens, inter alia, are ever vigilant about the functioning of
the State in order to protect the constitutional project. That right
cannot be extended to being inquisitors of fellow citizens. An
inquisitorial order, where citizens' fundamental right to privacy is
breached by fellow citizens is destructive of social order. The notion of
fundamental rights, such as a right to privacy as part of right to life, is
not merely that the State is enjoined from derogating from them. It
also includes the responsibility of the State to uphold them against the
actions of others in the society, even in the context of exercise of
fundamental rights by those others."
(emphasis supplied)
19. There are several subsequent judgments of the Supreme Court
that have explained various facets of the right to privacy including
autonomy, dignity, informational privacy, privacy and the right to know
and privacy and confidentiality. A list of these judgments is set out in a
table at p. 66/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation.
V. Milestones in the evolution of Part III
20. The evolution and the expansion of the rights guaranteed under
Part III of the Constitution can be traced through the following
judgments:
(i) A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras14 (6 Judge) - decided on 19-5-
1950 (p. 53/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(ii) M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra (8 Judge) - decided on 15-3-
1954 (p. 72/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(iii) Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.3 (6 Judge) - decided on 18-12-
1962 (p. 93/Vol.I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(iv) Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India5 (11 Judge) -
decided on 10-2-1970 (p. 55/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(v) Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India 16 (7 Judge) - decided on 25-1
-1978 (p. 57/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(vi) I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N. 17 (9 Judge) - decided on 11-1-
2007 (p. 62/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(vii) Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of India8 (5 Judge) - decided on
2-9-2014 (p. 63/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
VI. No conflict between M.P. Sharma, Kharak Singh3 3 and the
subsequent Supreme Court decisions
A. M.P. Sharma
21. The discussion on the fundamental right to privacy in M.P.
Sharma was restricted in context inasmuch as it related to the State's
power to conduct search and seizure vis--vis Article 20(3) and Article 19
(1)(f) of the Constitution of India.
22. The eight-Judge Bench did not consider or rule upon the existence
of the right to privacy under Article 21 and Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India. Examining the American Fourth Amendment, the
Supreme Court merely observed that there was no fundamental right to
privacy "analogous to the American Fourth Amendment".
B. Kharak Singh3
23. The majority judgment of Ayyanagar, J. in Kharak Singh 3 struck
down Regulation 236(b) of the U.P. Police Regulations concerning
domiciliary visits at night as violating Article 21, expressly recognising
the notion of privacy in the context of
"an abiding principle which transcends mere protection of property rights and
expounds a concept of "personal liberty" which does not rest on any element of
feudalism or any theory of freedom which has ceased to be of value." (p. 349).
24. The ratio of the majority judgment in Kharak Singh* is explained
by a five-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in State of W.B. V.
"It is trite that the words "life" and "personal liberty" are used in
the article as compendious terms to include within themselves all the
varieties of life which go to make up the personal liberties of a man
and not merely the right to the continuance of a person's animal
existence. (See Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.)"
25. Further, the minority judgment of Subba Rao and Shah, JJ. in
Kharak Singh3 held:
"Indeed, nothing is more deleterious to man's physical happiness
and health than a calculated interference with his privacy. We would,
therefore, define the right of personal liberty in Article 21 as a right of
an individual to be free from restrictions or encroachments on his
person, whether those restrictions or encroachments are directly
imposed or indirectly brought about by calculated measures. If so
understood, all the acts of surveillance under Regulation 236 infringe
the fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 21 of the
Constitution."
26. The following subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court have
expressly held that the minority view in Kharak Singh* 3 must be regarded
as correct:
(i) Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India 5 , 11 Judge (p.
55/Vol. I/Petitioners' Compilation)
(ii) Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India 16 7 Judge (p.
57/Vol.I/Petitioners' Compilation)
"5.
... There can be no doubt that in view of the decision of this
Court in R.C. Cooper V. Union of India0 the minority view must be
regarded as correct and the majority view must be held to have
been overruled."
(iii) Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of India8, 5 Judge (p. 63/Vol.
I/Petitioners' Compilation)
"26.
The minority judgment of Subba Rao and Shah, J].
eventually became law in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of
India 5, where the eleven Judge Bench finally discarded Gopalan14
view and held that various fundamental rights contained in different
Articles are not mutually exclusive. "
*
*
*
"28.
The wheel has turned full circle. Substantive due process
is now to be applied to the fundamental right to life and liberty."
27. In view of the decisions in R.C. Cooper15 and Maneka Gandhi16,
delivered by Benches larger than Kharak Singh, the majority view in
Kharak Singh3 is expressly overruled.
28. Further, the decisions in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh were
rendered on principles of constitutional interpretation set out in A.K.
Gopalan V. State of Madras14. An eleven Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court in R.C. Cooper15 has expressly overruled the A.K. Gopalan14
judgment (as affirmed by a seven-Judge Bench in Maneka Gandhi16).
VII. Expansion of Part III Rights
29. The eleven Judge Bench in R.C. Cooper15 upheld a wider and more
expansive interpretation of Part III rights. The Court (per J.C. Shah, J. for
the majority), inter alia, held:
"52.
The enunciation of rights either express or by implication
does not follow a uniform pattern. But one thread runs through them :
they seek to protect the rights of the individual or groups of
individuals against infringement of those rights within specific limits.
The surest way t to legal research!
Part III of the Constitution weaves a pattern of guarantees on the
texture of basic human rights. The guarantees delimit the protection of
those rights in their allotted fields : they do not attempt to enunciate
distinct rights."
*
*
*
"55. We have found it necessary to examine the rationale of the two
lines of authority and determine whether there is anything in the
Constitution which justifies this apparently inconsistent development
of the law. In our judgment, the assumption in A.K. Gopalan case14
that certain articles in the Constitution exclusively deal with specific
matters and in determining whether there is infringement of the
individual's guaranteed rights, the object and the form of the State
action alone need be considered, and effect of the laws on
fundamental rights of the individuals in general will be ignored cannot
be accepted as correct."
30. In Maneka Gandhi16, the Supreme Court held:
"5. It is indeed difficult to see on what principle we can refuse to
give its plain natural meaning to the expression "personal liberty" as
used in Article 21 and read it in a narrow and restricted sense so as to
exclude those attributes of personal liberty which are specifically dealt
with in Article 19. We do not think that this would be a correct way of
interpreting the provisions of the Constitution conferring fundamental
rights. The attempt of the Court should be to expand the reach and
ambit of the fundamental rights rather than attenuate their meaning
and content by a process of judicial construction. The wavelength for
comprehending the scope and ambit of the fundamental rights has
been set by this Court in R.C. Cooper case2 and our approach in the
interpretation of the fundamental rights must now be in tune with this
wavelength. We may point out even at the cost of repetition that this
Court has said in so many terms in R.C. Cooper case20 that each
freedom has different dimensions and there may be overlapping
between different fundamental rights and therefore it is not a valid
argument to say that the
expression "personal liberty" in Article 21 must be so interpreted as to
avoid overlapping between that article and Article 19(1). The expression
"personal liberty" in Article 21 is of the widest amplitude and it covers a
variety of rights which go to constitute the personal liberty of man and
some of them have been raised to the status of distinct fundamental
rights and given additional protection under Article 19
"
31. Further, a nine Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in I.R. Coelho
V. State of T.N. 17 has held that the Constitution of India is a living
document and its interpretation should be dynamic and evolve with time.
The Supreme Court has also held:
"140.
Article 21 is the heart of the Constitution. It confers right to
life as well as right to choose. When this triangle of Article 21 read
with Article 14 and Article 19 is sought to be eliminated not only the
"essence of right" test but also the "rights test" has to apply,
particularly when Kesavananda Bharati21 and Indira Gandhi 22 cases
have expanded the scope of basic structure to cover even some of the
fundamental rights."
VIII. Right to Privacy in the post-R.C. Cooper era
32. In the aforesaid background regarding the interpretation of Part
III rights and particularly Article 21, the decision of the Supreme Court in
Selvi V. State of Karnataka 3 [3 Judge] and its express assertion of a
fundamental right to privacy is extremely important.
33. In Selvi, the Court considered the right to privacy exhaustively
in paras 204-226 (pp. 363-70) of the judgment. The decision dealt with
M.P. Sharma, Kharak Singh3 and Maneka Gandhi16 and held:
"209. Following the judicial expansion of the idea of 'personal
liberty', the status of the 'right to privacy' as a component of the
Article 21 has been recognised and reinforced."
*
*
*
"225. So far, the judicial understanding of privacy in our country
has mostly stressed on the protection of the body and physical spaces
from intrusive actions by the State. While the scheme of criminal
procedure as well as evidence law mandates interference with physical
privacy through statutory provisions that enable arrest, detention,
search and seizure among others, the same cannot be the basis for
compelling a person "to impart personal knowledge about a relevant
fact". The theory of interrelationship of rights mandates that the right
against self-incrimination should also be read as a component of
"personal liberty" under Article 21. Hence, our understanding of the
"right to privacy" should account for its intersection with Article 20(3)
A conjunctive
reading of Articles 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution along with the
principles of evidence law leads us to a clear answer. We must recognise
the importance of personal autonomy in aspects such as the choice
between remaining silent and speaking. An individual's decision to make
a statement is the product of a private choice and there should be no
scope for any other individual to interfere with such autonomy, especially
in circumstances where the person faces exposure to criminal charges or
penalties.
226. Therefore, it is our considered opinion that subjecting a person
to the impugned techniques in an involuntary manner violates the
prescribed boundaries of privacy. Forcible interference with a person's
mental processes is not provided for under any statute and it most
certainly comes into conflict with the "right against self-incrimination".
However, this determination does not account for circumstances where
a person could be subjected to any of the impugned tests but not
exposed to criminal charges and the possibility of conviction. In such
cases, he/she could still face adverse consequences such as custodial
abuse, surveillance, undue harassment and social stigma among
others. In order to address such circumstances, it is important to
examine some other dimensions of Article 21."
(emphasis supplied)
34. Even prior to Selvi3, in District Registrar and Collector V. Canara
Bank24, a two Judge Bench of the Supreme Court (after considering the
judgments in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh) held:
"39... the right to privacy has been implied in Articles 19(1) (a) and
(d) and Article 21
"40. A two Judge Bench in R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 8 held the
right of privacy to be implicit in the right to life and liberty guaranteed
to the citizens of India by Article 21, "It is the right to be let alone."
Every citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own. However,
in the case of a matter being part of public records, including court
records, the right of privacy cannot be claimed. The right to privacy
has since been widely accepted as implied in our Constitution, in other
cases, namely, People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India9 Mr
'X' V. Hospital 'Z'10, People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India5
and Sharda V. Dharmpal 6." "
(emphasis supplied)
35. These decisions, subsequent to M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh,
reinforced the right to privacy after due consideration of the existing case
law. The Supreme Court over the last four decades has consistently
recognised the right to privacy.
36. The ratio decidendi of previous decisions must be determined in
the context of the understanding of subsequent Benches. Salmond on
Jurisprudence, (P.J. Fitzgerald, 12th Edn.) at pp. 178-79 states:
"But while the freedom to distinguish previous decision makes the
operation of precedent more flexible, it has given rise to the view that
the ratio decidendi of a case is in fact what later cases consider it to be
Cases cannot be looked at in isolation but must be interpreted in the
light of later authority which may have widened, restricted,
distinguished or explained them..
"
(emphasis supplied)
IX. International norms on the Right to Privacy
A. International instruments
37. The right to privacy is internationally recognised as a fundamental
human right and has been incorporated as such in the following:
37.1. Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
("UDHR") provides:
"12. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his
privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his
honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the
law against such interference or attacks." (p. 378/Vol. II/Petitioners'
Compilation)
37.2. Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 1966 (`ICCPR') provides:
"17. 1. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to
unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such
interference or attacks." (p. 3.72/Vol. II/Petitioners' Compilation)
India signed and ratified the ICCPR on 10-4-1979 without any reservation
with respect to Article 17.
37.3. UN General Assembly Resolution No. 28/16 dated 1-4-2015,
appointing the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Privacy along with his
Report on the Right to Privacy dated 8-3-2016.
37.4. Article 8 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms (European Union), 1950- European
Convention on Human Rights provides:
"8. Right to respect for private and family life.- 1. Everyone
has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and
his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and
is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others." (p.
385/Vol. II/Petitioners' Compilation)
37.5. Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union, 2012 provide:
"7. Respect for private and family life. - Everyone has the right
to respect for his or her private and family life, home and
communications.
8. Protection of personal data.- - Everyone has the right to the
protection of personal data concerning him or her.
2. Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on
the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other
legitimate basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to
data which has been collected concerning him or her, and the right to
have it rectified.
3. Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an
independent authority." (Page 391/Vol.II/Petitioners Compilation)
37.6. Article 8 of Schedule I of the UK Human Rights Act, 1998
provides:
"8. Right to respect for private and family life.- 1. Everyone
has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and
his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and
is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of
others." (Page 395/Vol. II/Petitioners' Compilation)
38. In the absence of any domestic law to the contrary, India's
international obligations must be enforced. In this regard, reliance is
placed on the following judgments:
(i) Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan [3 Judge] at para 7.
(ii) Pratap Singh V. State of Jharkhand28, [5 Judges], (per S.B.
Sinha, J. in his part concurring opinion) at para 64.
B. Relevant literature and case Jaw
39. Relevant literature on the subject emphasises that privacy has a
core Anglo-Commonwealth meaning which includes both informational
and physical privacy. If privacy is to be protected comprehensively, both
these aspects need to be protected (p. 398 at 400, 403, 412/Vol.
II/Petitioners' Compilation).
40. Privacy rights, in their most elementary sense, are about
restricting access to oneself or one's "private space" in which the
individual is free to be him/herself. Infringement of privacy is an affront
to an individual's personality and dignity and is damaged both by the
violation and by the demonstration that the personal space is not
inviolate. This idea of privacy as the protection of an "inviolate
personality" was articulated by Samuel Warren
and Louis Brandeis in 1890 and they defined privacy as "the right to be
let alone" (p. 463 at 463, 465, 475, 481/Vol. II/Petitioners' Compilation).
41. Over the next century, the right of privacy evolved from a tortious
remedy to a statutory and constitutional right providing protection
against and control over unwanted access to the physical self as well as
personal information. Alan Westin's oft-cited definition describes privacy
as "the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine for
themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is
communicated to others." (p. 398 at 405/Vol. II/Petitioners'
Compilation).
42. The modern conception of privacy law is formulated in response to
new technologies and practices by businesses and governments that
enhance their power by giving rise to enormous data gathering and data
analysis, without means of oversight or accountability (p. 435 at 461/Vol.
II/Petitioners' Compilation).
43. In view of this, privacy rights against the government demand
that State power is limited and unobtrusive in a manner that liberal
democracy requires. As Gary Marx argues,
"
a thread running through all totalitarian systems from the prison
to the authoritarian State is lack of respect for the individual's right to
control information about the self. It has been said that the mark of a
civilisation can be seen in how it treats its prisoners; it might also be
seen in how it treats personal privacy."
Thus, privacy rights protect against totalitarian governments (p. 435 at
437, 438, 457/Vol.II/Petitioners Compilation).
44. Scholars have endorsed a presumption in favour of liberty which
places the burden of proof on the State to justify any interference.
Accordingly,
" "... the question of justice is not, why privacy, but rather why not?
Coercion, not privacy or private choice, needs legitimising." (p. 435 at
444-445/Vol. I1/Petitioners' Compilation).
45. Further, the highest courts across jurisdictions have recognised
the individual's right to privacy against the State as well as private
bodies. The most recent international judgments in this regard are:
(i) Court of Justice of European Union - Tele2 Sverige AB V. Post-
och telestyrelsen9
(ii) US Supreme Court - Obergefell V. Hodges30
(iii) UK Supreme Court - R. V. Commr. of Police of the Metropolis31
(iv) Canadian Supreme Court - R. V. Spencer32
46. These submissions supplement the written submissions dated 15-
7-2017 filed by the petitioners.
47. At the outset, it is submitted that, as recognised by an unbroken
line of decisions of this Court since 1975 the "right to privacy" is
protected under Part III of the Constitution of India 3 3 It is submitted
that this Court has recognised several unenumerated rights as facets of
Article 2134 Similarly, the right to privacy has also been recognised as
flowing from Article 21.
48. The "right to privacy" itself cannot be defined with any specificity.
However, it extends to several aspects, including-
(a) Bodily integrity
(b) Personal autonomy
(c) Right to be let alone
(d) Informational self-determination
(e) Protection from State surveillance
(f) Dignity
(g) Confidentiality
(h) Compelled speech
(i) Freedom to dissent
(j) Freedom of movement
(k) Freedom to think
49. There can be no exhaustive enumeration of aspects of the "right to
privacy", and it must be determined on a case-to-case basis5.
50. It is submitted that in a technologically dynamic society it is
imperative to keep dimensions of "tight to privacy" flexible to adapt and
adjust with the new scenarios. A nine-Judge Bench of this Court in I.R.
Coelho V. State of T.N. 36 has held that the "... Constitution is a living
document, its interpretation may change as the time and circumstances
change to keep pace with it".
51. In Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union of
Pandian, J. in his concurring view opined,
"15. The exploration of the new principles are essential in those
areas not before explored; more so when the old principles are found
to be not
responding to the unresolved and unforeseen modern challenges or to
have become inapplicable to the new situations or found to be unsound
16. The proposition that the provisions of the Constitution must be
confined only to the interpretation which the Framers, with the
conditions and outlook of their time would have placed upon them is
not acceptable and is liable to be rejected for more than one reason -
firstly, some of the current issues could not have been foreseen;
secondly, others would not have been discussed and thirdly, still
others may be left over as controversial issues, i.e. termed as deferred
issues with conflicting intentions. Beyond these reasons, it is not easy
or possible to decipher as to what were the factors that influenced the
mind of the Framers at the time of framing the Constitution when it is
juxtaposed to the present time. The inevitable truth is that law is not
static and immutable but ever increasingly dynamic and grows with
the ongoing passage of time."
52. It is submitted that the right to privacy emanates from a conjoint
reading of the golden triangle of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution. It is submitted, that many of the fundamental rights
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution cannot be enjoyed to the
fullest, in the absence of a fundamental right to privacy.
53. It is submitted that recognition of the fundamental right to privacy
is consistent with international norms and India's international
obligations under different conventions and treaties. It is an accepted
proposition of law that the rules of customary international law which are
not contrary to the municipal law shall be deemed to be incorporated in
the domestic law. Article 51 of the Constitution directs that the State
shall endeavour to inter alia, foster respect for international law and
treaty obligations. Article 1738 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) is not contrary to any municipal law. In this
backdrop, Part III, more particularly Article 21, must be interpreted in
conformity with international law.
54. It is submitted that in view of the decisions in Rustom Cavasjee
Cooper V. Union of India 39 (11-Judge) and Maneka Gandhi V. Union of
India4 (7-Judge), the law laid down in M.P. Sharma41 and Kharak
Singh42, is no longer good law.
IV. Ms Meenakshi Arora, Senior Advocate, for the petitioners
Part A : Privacy generally
1. Privacy did not emerge one fine day fully formed and structured
from the theoretical penumbras of various constitutional articles. Rather
it is an amorphous and a protean concept that emerges from values and
principles that have evolved from case law over hundreds of years.
2. One workable definition of the right to privacy, one recognised by
Brandeis in his seminal article "The right to privacy"1 is the right to be
left alone. The right to be left alone can be described merely as an
expression at a higher level of abstraction of several rights that flow
directly from the principles of life and liberty that were enshrined in
Clause 39 of the Magna Carta (1215).
3. In England, eavesdropping was criminalised under the Justices of
Peace Act, 1361. In his seminal "Commentaries on the Laws of
England" (8th Edn., 1778, Vol. IV, p. 167,168), Blackstone writes of
common nuisances which he states are such inconvenient or troublesome
offences, as annoy the whole community in general, and not merely some
particular person; and are indictable only In this category he includes,
"6. Eavesdroppers, or such as listen under walls or windows, or the
eaves of a house, to hearken after recourse, and thereupon to frame
slanderous and mischievous tales, are a common nuisance and
presentable at the court-leet; or are indictable at the sessions, and
punishable by fine and finding sureties for their good behavior."
4. Nowadays privacy rights are explicitly recognised or are recognised
The surest way legal research!"
by implication under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)
(arguably part of customary international law and therefore part of the
law of India s, the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights
(ratified by India and so to be read into the Constitution1), the European
Convention of Human Rights, the Constitutions of the United States, the
United Kingdom and virtually every other democratic or liberal
Constitution. Constitutional courts in India have explicitly recognised a
right to privacy for over 40 years. Our statutes recognise privacy interests
as well. In particular the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 is
relevant.
5. Privacy or the right to be left alone has the following, amongst other
important components:
A. Privacy of one's home and residence. This flows directly from
Semayne case5, which famously held that "every man's home is his
castle" and has been applied to India by the Privy Council in Aga
Kurboolie Mohamed V. R. 6 It was also specifically endorsed in the
majority by Justice Ayyangar in Kharak Singh- judgment.
B. Privacy of personal belongings and freedom from arbitrary
searches and seizures. This flows from the landmark judgments of Lord
Camden in Huckle V. Money8 (cited in Common Cause V. Union of
India on damages for tort) and Entick V. Carrington 10 (cited in M.P.
Sharma1, District Registrar & Collector V. Canara Bank and many
other cases) and also includes the law of protection of confidential
information in cases like Albert V. Strange. This forms the basis of
the Fourth Amendment and Fifth Amendment in the United States. In
India as well there is a long line of judgments by which arbitrary
searches and seizures have been quashed and stringent guidelines
have been laid down in cases like DGIT V. Spacewood Furnishing (P)
Ltd.
and
ITO V. Seth Bros. 15 each dealing with powers under Section
134 of the IT Act or the Constitution Bench decision in Karnail Singh V.
State of Haryana1 dealing with powers under Section 50 of the NDPS
Act.
C. Privacy of personal data, and freedom from surveillance. This
flows from the cases such as the phone tapping case, PUCL V. Union of
India as well as the duty of State Authorities to protect confidential
information in Marcel V. Commr. of Police18 and S and Marper V. United
Kingdom 9. Also relevant is the decision of the German Federal Court
in the Census case (1983). An important Indian case is Selvi V. State
of Karnataka9
D. Privacy of personal choice. This includes judgments the landmark
decision of Lord Mansfield in Da Costa V. Jones21 wherein his Lordship
was pleased to hold unenforceable a wager between 2 persons over
the biological sex of a third person, as well as landmarks such as
Griswold V. Connecticut (contraceptives for married couples),
Eisenstadt V. Baird23 (contraceptives for unmarried couples), Roe V.
Wade24 (abortion), Planned Parenthood V. Casey (abortion),
Lawrence V. Texas26 (gay rights), Obergefell V. Hodges27 (gay
marriage) et al. In fact a curative petition is pending in this Hon'ble
Court on the gay rights in the Naz Foundation case28.
6. Each of these liberties forms an important core or at the very least a
penumbra of fundamental rights guarantees in Part III of the
Constitution, whether considered historically or even in terms of
jurisprudence.
A and B : Articles 21 (right to personal liberty), 300-A (right to
property)
C : Articles 20(3), 21, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(a)
D : Articles 14, 19, 21 (right to life)
7. The correctness and validity of M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra1
("M.P. Sharma") and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.7 ("Kharak Singh")
need to be evaluated in this background.
Part B : M.P. Sharma1 and Kharak Singh
8. The stray observations in the judgment in M.P. Sharma1 11 about the
lack of a right of privacy were inaccurate as being somewhat overbroad in
1954 and are clearly erroneous today. As such, this Hon'ble Court may
clarify the same and limit the ratio of the judgments to the facts of that
case.
8.1. It is axiomatic that judgments are not be interpreted as Euclid's
theorems but are authorities to what was argued and what was decided.
In M.P. Sharma1 the petitioners argued that the provisions of search and
seizure contained in the Criminal Procedure Code were bad in view of the
provisions of Article 20(3) on the basis of Boyd V. United States29 States
29
which in turn was based on the 4th and 5th Amendments to the US
Constitution and on Entick V. Carrington 0. The Court rejected this
argument stating that there was no 4th Amendment in the Indian
Constitution. In doing so, the Court wrongly conflated the 4th
Amendment with the right to privacy. The 4th Amendment is an
important part of privacy (point 5B above) but not the only component.
Other components were not required to be considered, were not
argued and were thus not considered. Thus the stray observation in M.P.
Sharma needs to be clarified as obiter and not a proposition against the
right to privacy.
8.2. The provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code and other statutes
such as the NDPS, the IT Act, etc. dealing with search and seizure may
be struck down or read down on a case-to-case basis if they confer
arbitrary or uncanalised powers or if they are draconian and thus bad
under Article 21 or even under Article 20(3). However, there is no general
prohibition on search and seizure provisions imposed by Articles 21 and
20(3). This merits some clarification by this Hon'ble Court.
9. The observations and findings contained in the majority judgment
of Kharak Singh that limit the right to privacy and deny the right against
surveillance cannot be sustained in the light of the judgment in R.C.
Cooper V. Union of India 30 (11 Judges), and Maneka Gandhi V. Union of
India  1 (7 Judges), and in particular the finding in paragraph 5 of the
judgment in Maneka Gandhi1 by which the minority view of then Justice
Subba Rao is deemed as correct and the majority view overruled merits
reaffirmation and clarification.
9.1. The majority in Kharak Singh relies upon the reasoning in A.K.
Gopalan V. State of Madras32 dealing with the exclusivity of fundamental
rights, a view set aside by R.C. Cooper30 (11 Judges) and clarified by
Maneka Gandhi1 (7 Judges)
9.2. The majority in Kharak Singh 7 fails to correctly interpret the word
"freely" in Article 19(1)(c) and errs in confining it to physical restraints
alone. It also ignores the impact a lack of privacy has on free speech
under Article 19(1)(a). This is both historical and problematic in terms of
jurisprudence and theory.
9.2.1. Blackstone (8th Edn., 1778) Vol. I, page 134-1337) states that
"personal liberty consists in the power of locomotion, of changing
situation, or removing one's person to whatsoever place one's
inclination may direct, without imprisonment or restraints, unless by
due course of law the confinement of the person in any wise, is an
imprisonment And the law so much discourages unlawful
confinement, that if a man is under duress of imprisonment, which we
before explained to mean a compulsion by an illegal restraint of
liberty, until he seals a bond or the like; he may allege this duress,
and avoid the extorted bond."
9.2.2. Bentham, the father of legal positivism, (and who dismissed
Blackstone's Natural Law predilections as nonsense upon stilts!!)
conceptualised the idea of an ideal or model security institution, known
as the Panopticon. The Panopticon is an architectural creation, within
which constant and round-the-clock watch can be kept on the inmates,
workers or
patients. The characteristic feature of this arrangement is that there is a
complete asymmetry of knowledge, and hence power : the guards in the
central tower can see into any of the cells at any given time, but due to
special blinds the inmates cannot see the guards, or if they are being
watched at any specific moment. In his own words,
"I think, without exception, to all establishments whatsoever, in
which, within a space not too large to be covered or commanded by
buildings, a number of persons are meant to be kept under inspection.
No matter how different, or even opposite the purpose : whether it be
that of punishing the incorrigible, guarding the insane, reforming the
vicious, confining the suspected, employing the idle, maintaining the
helpless, curing the sick, instructing the willing in any branch of
industry, or training the rising race in the path of education : in a
word, whether it be applied to the purposes of perpetual prisons in the
room of death, or prisons for confinement before trial, or penitentiary-
houses, or houses of correction, or work-houses, or manufactories, or
mad-houses, or hospitals, or schools. It is obvious that, in all these
instances, the more constantly the persons to be inspected are under
the eyes of the persons who should inspect them, the more perfectly
will the purpose X of the establishment have been attained. Ideal
perfection, if that were the object, would require that each person
should actually be in that predicament, during every instant of time.
This being impossible, the next thing to be wished for is, that, at every
instant, seeing reason to believe as much, and not being able to
33,,
satisfy himself to the contrary, he should conceive himself to be so.
Bentham's ideas for a prison form a philosophical base for a surveillance
state with the State as a Panopticon all seeing and all knowing34. Michael
Foucault contended that the nature of the oneway surveillance in the
Panopticon - what he referred to as the gaze - resulted in an
asymmetry of knowledge, and hence power. Ultimately, Foucault argued,
the omniscient surveillance created conditions whereby the observed
themselves became instruments of their own suppression. So whereas
Bentham viewed his Panopticon as a technology for reforming men,
Foucault saw a method for creating "docile bodies. 35,
9.2.3. Twentieth Century totalitarian dictatorships such as Nazi
Germany or the Stalinist Soviet Union or even Communist East Germany
point to the impact of perpetual surveillance on human conduct and
human morals. The same is also reflected in George Orwell's 1984, or the
recent award winning movie "The Lives of Others".
9.2.4. Justice Subba Rao's dissenting opinion in Kharak Singh merits
reaffirmation, particularly where he states,
"If a man is shadowed, his movements are obviously constricted. He
can move physically, but it can be a movement of an automaton. How
could a movement under the scrutinizing gaze of the policeman be
described as a free movement? The whole country is his jail. The freedom
of movement in clause (d) [of Article 19] therefore must be a movement
in a free country i.e. in a country where he can do whatever he likes,
speak to whomsoever he wants, meet people of his own choice without
any apprehension, subject of course to the law of social control. The
petitioner under the shadow of surveillance is certainly deprived of this
freedom."
9.2.5. In Fali Nariman's book, Before Memory Fades36 at pp. 189-190,
he writes about the impact of the emergency upon lawyers:
"CK Daphtary (CK) and ST Desai (ST) were distinguished
contemporaries, very senior and both Gujarati speaking. They always
came in early to the Bar library, sat opposite each other, occasionally
exchanging pleasantries. One morning in August 1975, I was the sole
witness to the following conversation:
ST Desai : (holding a cigarette between his third and fourth fingers,
with loosely clenched fists, as was his habit, and occasionally inhaling)
Chandubhai-bolo (Chandubhai - speak)
CK Daphtary : (puffing away at his pipe; his eyes sparkling with
mischief) Sunderlal-tame pehle bolo (Sunderlal-you speak first).
In those dark days of emergency when informers were around, you
only spoke, within the hearing of others, when you had to. Unwittingly
these stalwarts of the Bar had encapsulated, in an innocent,
spontaneous one-act play, the entire climate of the times!"
9.2.6. The judgment in the phone tapping case clearly points out the
detrimental impact on free speech that unauthorised tapping can have.
The decision of the US Supreme Court in Katz V. United States37
as well
as the dissent in Olmstead V. United States38 are also illustrative.
9.2.7. The importance of privacy for the right to association can also
be gleaned by the US Supreme Court decision in NAACP V. Alabama 39
wherein the Court was faced with the legality of the demand of the State
of Alabama of the member list of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People. In those days because of widely
prevalent attitudes of pro segregation in Alabama, disclosure of such
membership lists would have had a detrimental impact on the people.
The Supreme Court in a unanimous decision struck down the law holding
per Justice Harlan:
"It is hardly a novel perception that compelled disclosure of
affiliation with groups engaged in advocacy may constitute as effective
a restraint on freedom of association as the forms of governmental
action in the cases above were thought likely to produce upon the
particular constitutional rights there involved. This Court has
recognized the vital relationship between freedom to associate and
privacy in one's associations. When referring to the varied forms of
governmental action which might interfere with freedom of assembly,
it said in American Communications Assn. V. Douds40: `A requirement
that adherents of particular religious faiths or political parties wear
identifying arm-bands, for example, is obviously of this nature.'
Compelled disclosure of membership in an organization engaged in
advocacy of particular beliefs is of the same order. Inviolability of
privacy in group association may in many circumstances be
indispensable to preservation of freedom of association, particularly
where a group espouses dissident beliefs We think that the
production order, in the respects here drawn in question, must be
regarded as entailing the likelihood of a substantial restraint upon the
exercise by petitioner's members of their right to freedom of
association. Petitioner has made an uncontroverted showing that on
past occasions revelation of the identity of its rank-and-file members
has exposed these members to economic reprisal, loss of employment,
threat of physical coercion, and other manifestations of public hostility.
Under these circumstances, we think it apparent that compelled
disclosure of petitioner's Alabama membership is likely to affect
adversely the ability of petitioner and its members to pursue their
collective effort to foster beliefs which they admittedly have the right
to advocate, in that it may induce members to withdraw from the
Association and dissuade others from joining it because of fear of
exposure of their beliefs shown through their associations and of the
consequences of this exposure We hold that the immunity from
state scrutiny of membership lists which the Association claims on
behalf of its members is here so related to the right of the members to
pursue their lawful private interests privately and to associate freely
with others in so doing as to come within the protection of the
Fourteenth Amendment.
9.3. Kharak Singh , while quoting with approval the famous "limb and
faculty test" of Munn V. Illinois41 per Field, J., proceeds to completely
ignore that privacy is a vital "limb and faculty" without which we are
indeed reduced to animal existence. Kharak Singh 7 espouses a cribbed,
cabined and confined view of privacy - the right to be secure in one's
home [Semayne case S], and the right to be free from arbitrary search
and seizure [Wolf V. Colorado42] are upheld but the right to be free of
surveillance or the valuable
aspect of "life" in terms of personal choices are ignored (See 5A-D
above). In this regard, it is pertinent to consider the dissenting view of
Justice Harlan in Poe V. Ullman43, which echoes our own Maneka
Gandhi31 interpreting the term "liberty" in terms of the 5th and 14th
Amendments to the US Constitution to mean "a rational continuum
which, broadly speaking, includes a freedom from all substantial arbitrary
impositions and purposeless restraints."
10. The line of judgments from Gobind V. State of M.P. 44 , R. Rajagopal
V.
State
of
45
T.N.
,
PUCL V. Union of India7 , Sharda V. Dharampa46,
District Registrar & Collector V. Canara Bank12 ; Selvi V. State of
Karnataka etc. are not per incuriam but instead correctly lay down the
law and need to be reaffirmed.
10.1. This Hon'ble Court has correctly interpreted the provisions of
Part III to uphold the rights contained in Para 5A-D. For 40 years they
have formed a vibrant and important part of our law and our national
culture. An invitation to hold them per incuriam is an invitation to
government led lawlessness and to medieval despotism and tyranny. In
the words of Lord Camden in Huckle V. Money8 or Entick V. Carrington 10
eg. "worse than the Spanish inquisition". To paraphrase Senator
Kennedy's famous speech about Judge Robert Bork, an India without the
right to privacy is a land in which women would be forced into back alley
abortions, and where rogue police could break down citizens doors in
midnight raids.
10.2. A table encapsulating only some of the law laid down by this
Hon'ble Court based on the right to privacy is as under:
Case title
Issue(s) Involved
Guidelines developed
Gobind V. State
Surveillance of an
Regulations
permitting
of M.P. 44
individual, including
surveillance of an individual
domiciliary visits and
were upheld, if sufficient
picketing of residences
evidence is present indicating
that the person under
surveillance could lead a life
of crime or cause social
unrest in the future.
"Compelling State Interest"
test evolved.
Para 22- "There can be no
doubt that privacy-dignity
claims deserve to be
examined with care and to be
denied only when an
important countervailing
interest is shown to be
superior. If the Court does
find that a claimed right is
entitled to protection as a
fundamental privacy right, a
law infringing it must satisfy
the compelling State interest
test."
Para 33- "Mere convictions in
criminal cases where nothing
gravely imperilling safety of
society cannot be regarded as
warranting sur-veillance
under this regulation.
Similarly, domiciliary visits
and picketing by the police
should be reduced to the
clearest cases of danger to
community security and not
routine follow-up at the end
of a conviction or release
from prison or at the whim of
a police officer.' "
PUCL V. Union
(a) Interception
of
The Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India 17
phone messages
created guidelines, in respect
(b) Challenge to the
of interception of telephonic
constitutional validity
messages, which mandatorily
of S. 5(2) of the
have to be observed, in
Telegraph Act
addition to the requirements
contained in S. 5(2) of the
Telegraph Act.
Para 30- "The above analysis
of Section 5(2) of the Act
shows that so far the power
to
intercept
messages/conversations
is
concerned the section clearly
lays
down
the
situations/conditions under
which it can be exercised. But
the
substantive law as laid down
in Section 5(2) of the Act
must
have
procedural
backing so that the exercise
of
power
is
fair
and
reasonable.
The
said
procedure itself must be just,
fair and reasonable."
District
Challenge
to
the
The Hon'ble Supreme Court
Registrar
&
constitutionality of S.
declared S. 73 of the Indian
Collector
V.
73
of
the
Indian
Stamp Act to be ultra vires
Canara Bank12
Stamp Act, 1989, as
the Constitution of India.
amended by the State
Para 58- "Under the garb of
of Andhra Pradesh,
the
power
conferred
by
empowering (a) the
Section
73
the
person
Collector to carry out
authorised may go on a
inspection
of
rampage searching house
documents in private
after house i.e. residences of
custody and (b) the
the persons or the places
Collector to allow "any
used
for
the
custody
of
person"
to
inspect,
documents. The possibility of
make
notes
from
any wild exercise of such
papers
in
public
power may be remote, but
offices
then
on
the
framing
of
Section
73,
the
provision
impugned
herein,
the
possibility cannot be ruled
out."
State
of
Challenge
to
the
The Hon'ble Supreme Court
Maharashtra
V.
constitutional validity
held that the MCOCA does
Bharat Shanti
of the MCOCA
not contravene Constitutional
Lal Shah 47
provisions.
Para 61- "The object of
MCOCA is to prevent the
organised
crime
and
a
perusal of the provisions of
the
Act
under
challenge
would indicate that the said
law
authorises
the
interception
of
wire,
electronic
or
oral
communication only if it is
intended to prevent the
commission of an organised
crime Thus as the Act under
challenge contains sufficient
safeguards and also satisfies
the aforementioned mandate
the contention of the
respondents that provisions
of Sections 13 to 16 are
violative of the Article 21 of
the Constitution cannot also
be accepted."
Selvi V. State
Use of narco-analysis,
Guidelines were published by
of Karnataka 20
polygraph
tests
and
the National Human Rights
Brain
Electrical
Commission
in
2000,
Activation
Profile,
suggesting the procedure to
against the will of the
be
followed
while
accused
administering a polygraph
test and the same were
adopted by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court.
Para 226- "Therefore, it is our
considered opinion that
subjecting a person to the
impugned techniques in an
involuntary manner violates
the prescribed boundaries of
privacy. Forcible interference
with a person's mental
processes is not provided for
under any statute and it most
certainly comes into conflict
with the "right against self-
incrimination"."
Bhabani Prasad
Whether
the
High
Para 22- "In our view, when
Jena V. Orissa
Court possesses the
there is apparent conflict
State
power to order the between the right to privacy
Commission for
administration
of
a
of a person not to submit
Women48
48
DNA test of a child
himself forcibly to medical
examination and duty of the
court to reach the truth, the
court must exercise its
discretion
only
after
balancing the interests of the
parties and on due
consideration whether for a
just decision in the matter,
DNA
test
is
eminently
needed."
Girish
Whether
the
CIC
The Hon'ble Supreme Court
Ramchandra
correctly classified the
held that the Petitioner did
Deshpande
V.
information sought as
not exhibit bonafide public
Central
"personal information"
interest
in
seeking
Information
information.
Commr. 49
Para 12- "The performance of
an employee/officer in an
organisation is primarily a
matter between the employee
and the employer and
normally those aspects are
governed by the service rules
which fall under the
expression
"personal
information", the disclosure
of which has no relationship
to any public activity or
public interest. On the other
hand, the disclosure of which
could cause unwarranted
invasion of privacy of that
individual."
10.3. These judgments insofar as they incorporate customary
international law and various international conventions to which India is a
party are a part of the law of India.
10.4. The judgments in M.P. Sharma1 and Kharak Singh , to the
extent that they contradict these judgments require clarification and/or
setting aside.
V. Mr Sajan Poovayya, Senior Advocate, for the intervenors
1. The following written submissions are placed for the kind
consideration and perusal of this Hon'ble Court in furtherance and
addition to the arguments already canvassed on behalf of the petitioners:
A. A liberal interpretation of the Constitution should be preferred
2. A narrow and stilted interpretation of the Constitution should be
discarded in favour of an interpretation which is broad-based and liberal.
The latter would bring out in full measure the purpose which the framers
of the Constitution had in mind viz. to confer the fullest degree of
personal liberty to its subjects as gathered from the language they used
and the spirit their words convey.
3. In any event, where "even in the absence of Article 21 in the
Constitution the State has no power to deprive a person of his life or
liberty without the authority of law"3 the mere fact that the fundamental
right to privacy is absent in letter is wholly irrelevant for determining its
existence. Even the language deployed by the Constitution reiterates the
understanding that an inalienable natural right inherent in every human
being is "recognised" under Article 21 as opposed to such article being
the fountainhead of the right to life and personal liberty.
4. A cardinal reason for the Constitution to be considered, and rightly
so, as a "living document"4 and the "usufruct of the living and not the
property of the dead", is because its framers could not have known all the
components of liberty and its manifold possibilities. 5 Further, by
legitimising the process of constitutional amendments, its framers
intentionally discarded any presumption of having an insight into all
6
components of constitutional governance particularly, personal liberty.
Therefore, it becomes imperative to construe the provisions of the
Constitution in the light of prevailing circumstances, which have
considerably changed since the early years of its working in the 1950s to
1960s. The most prominent example being the advent of information
technology and the ushering in of a digital economy. Indeed, times can
&
blind us to certain truths and later generations can see that laws once
thought of as necessary and proper in fact serve only to oppress. As the
Constitution endures, persons in every generation can invoke its
principles in their own search for greater freedom.-
5. The framers of the Constitution perhaps viewed fundamental rights
as "isolated islands of individual articles in Part III", in a manner similar
to their Lordships in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras8. This is evidenced
by the Drafting Committee's approach of qualifying the term "liberty"
with the word "personal" so as to prevent any overlapping of rights
between Articles 19 and 21. However, the evolution of constitutional
interpretation from the aforesaid approach to a "syncretic and holistic
understanding of fundamental rights" removes the requirement of
identifying privacy in a watertight compartment of a singular article in
the Constitution. 9 Therefore, what ought to be accomplished through the
present reference is the identification of this basic human right of privacy
across the length and breadth of the Constitution.
B. The march of law
6. The decisions of the 1970s of the Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble
Court, which favoured a liberal interpretation of the Part III rights,
rendered the dissenting opinion of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh 10 to be
sound law. Furthermore, this set the stage for an evolution of the judicial
understanding of privacy which posited that the "right to privacy" : (i) is
a fundamental right; and, (ii) that it deals with "persons" and not merely
"places." 11
7. In the year 1975, this Hon'ble Court, while examining the existence
of a fundamental right to privacy in Gobind V. State of M.P. 12 observed
thus:
"20. There can be no doubt that the makers of our Constitution
wanted to ensure conditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness.
They certainly realized as Brandeis, J. said in his dissent in Olmstead
V. United States1 [277 US 438, 471] the significance of man's
spiritual nature, of his feelings and of his intellect and that only a part
of the pain, pleasure, satisfaction of life can be found in material
things and therefore they must be deemed to have conferred upon the
individual as against the Government a sphere where he should be let
alone."
8. More specifically, this Hon'ble Court in District Registrar and
Collector V. Canara Bank14 expounded on the importance of the
fundamental right to privacy as a facet, inter alia, of life and personal
liberty under Part III of the Constitution of India. This was done on the
strength of : (i) its earlier decisions including Gobind V. State of M.P.
15.
and (ii) decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States which were
in tune with Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India6
9. Furthermore, the authoritative pronouncement of a Bench
consisting of eleven Judges of this Hon'ble Court in Rustom Cavasjee
Cooper V. Union of India6, leaves no manner of doubt that the premise
17
upon which the twin decisions of M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra and
Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. were predicated, stands altered. Ergo,
where the main pillars have been demolished, the edifice of these twin
judgments cannot be allowed to remain. Therefore, a Constitution Bench
of this Hon'ble Court in Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of India 18 has
observed that the wheel has turned full circle and that the minority
opinion in Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 10 has come to hold the field.
10. This Hon'ble Court in District Registrar and Collector V. Canara
Bank19 has thus observed a forward march of law:
"40. [...] The right to privacy has since been widely accepted as
implied in our Constitution, in other cases, namely, People's Union for
Civil Liberties V. Union of India0 , Mr 'X' V. Hospital 'Z 21, , People's
Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India2 and Sharda V. Dharmpal ."
"53. Once we have accepted in Gobind15 and in later cases that the
right to privacy deals with "persons and not places", the documents or
copies of documents of the customer which are in a bank, must
continue to remain confidential vis--vis the person, even if they are
no longer at the customer's house and have been voluntarily sent to a
bank."
11. Therefore, it is most respectfully submitted that a case-by-case
development of the right to privacy, which is a requirement necessitated
by this Hon'ble Court's decision in Gobind V. State of M.P. 24 has taken
place vide a series of decisions of this Hon'ble Court25, and has also been
26
recognised as such.
12. Inasmuch as this Hon'ble Court has relied upon the understanding
of Part III as rendered in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India7 and
Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India8, (i.e. fundamental rights are of the
widest amplitude encompassing a variety of rights), it stands well settled
that every person has the fundamental right to safeguard the privacy of
his own, his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child-bearing and
education among other aspects. 29
C. Identification of the "right to privacy" as a "fundamental right"
13. The fundamental right to privacy inheres in Article 21 with its
facets being placed across the length and breadth of Part III of the
Constitution.
14. Homo sapiens is first and foremost a social animal; yet, "the
concept of privacy embodies the moral fact that a person belongs to
himself and not to others nor to society as a whole". 30 The Constitution is
not, and cannot be, a totalitarian design depending for its success upon
the homogenisation or depersonalisation of humanity. It is for this reason
that this Hon'ble Court has reached into the Constitution's spirit and,
through a contextual and meaningful interpretation thereof, has
elaborated upon the idea of a "human" and its conception as a "being",
not as a mere formal contemplation but as an essential constitutional
requirement. 31
32
15. Privacy does not stand on the pedestal of secrecy.
Rather, it
stands on the pedestal of "dignity" and "personal liberty". While "liberty"
presumes an autonomy of self which includes freedom of thought, belief,
expression and intimate conduct amongst other things33, personal liberty
entails a positive constitutional promise of the existence of a realm for all
34
individuals, where it would not be permissible for the State to enter.
This realm of protection is essential to secure, protect and ensure a right
to live with human dignity; human life has its charm and there is no
reason why life should not be enjoyed with all permissible pleasures.
16. John Stuart Mill, in his essay on liberty, commented that the
people's "choice of pleasures, and their mode of expending their income,
after satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the State and to
individuals, are their own concern, and must rest with their own
,,36
judgment.
Without the identification of this sphere as being a person's
right to privacy, and without a concomitant identification of an injunction
on the State through Part III of the Constitution, the right to life itself
may be rendered otiose in many of its vibrant and necessary facets.
17. In this regard, guidance may also be sought from the evolution of
the "right to privacy" jurisprudence of the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR), which has examined multifarious facets of privacy in its
decisions. In S & Marper V. United Kingdom37 the ECtHR made an
attempt to summarise these facets of privacy emanating from Article 8 of
the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms and observed as follows : 37
"66. The Court recalls that the concept of "private life" is a broad
term not susceptible to exhaustive definition. It covers the physical
and psychological integrity of a person. It can therefore embrace
multiple aspects of the person's physical and social identity. Elements
such as, for example, gender identification, name and sexual
orientation and sexual life fall within the personal sphere protected by
Article 8. Beyond a person's name, his or her private and family life
may include other means of personal identification and of linking to a
family Information about the person's health is an important element
of private life. The Court furthermore considers that an individual's
ethnic identity must be regarded as another such element. Article 8
protects in addition a right to
personal development, and the right to establish and develop
relationships with other human beings and the outside world. The
concept of private life moreover includes elements relating to a person's
right to their image.
67. The mere storing of data relating to the private life of an
individual amounts to an interference within the meaning of Article 8.
The subsequent use of the stored information has no bearing on that
finding." (References removed; emphasis supplied)
18. Therefore, to ensure that the State recognises its constitutional
obligation to protect and safeguard this right, it has become imperative
to seek a judicial and a constitutional recognition of the fundamental
"right to privacy". Any measure adopted by the State for it to be a
constitutionally valid restriction : (i) must be in consonance with a legal
architecture premised upon the protection of one's fundamental "right to
privacy"; (ii) must not erode the efficacy of the fundamental "right to
privacy"; and (iii) must not lead to wielding of an unqualified exercise of
power by the State which may cause chilling of fundamental rights.
D. The role of the Judiciary
19. As our Constitution's "sentinel on the qui vive"38 this Hon'ble
Court must (i) curb arbitrary exercises of power; and (ii) prevent
permeation of unconstitutional surveillances and transgressions into one's
fundamental right to privacy. This is particularly when the seriousness of
the ramifications on privacy multiply in this digital age in comparison to
"papers" and "physical property". The State cannot be allowed to use
technology with an unfettered discretion such that it may alter the
relationship between a citizen and the Government in a way that is
32
inimical to a democratic society.
20. Modern cellphones39 have evolved from being mere "tools of
convenience" to "extensions of the users" themselves and therefore, may
40
hold and reveal the respective "privacies of life". However, the mere
fact that such personal and sensitive data/information can be physically
carried around would not disentitle a person of his privacy. Therefore,
when the State ignores this aspect to act in a manner which is
detrimental to the people's right to privacy, particularly in today's age of
digitization, it becomes incumbent upon this Hon'ble Court to perform its
esteemed duty and determine the constitutionality of such measure to
protect one's fundamental rights.
21. The authoritative identification of a fundamental right to privacy
would amount to explicitly subjecting a state action to the rigours of
Article 13(2) of the Constitution as a result of which, a State action would
have to be justified by the State on the anvil of a "reasonable restriction"
or a "procedure established by law", or otherwise. Identification of such a
right to privacy in the context of the present times has also found
mention in a decision of this Hon'ble Court in State of Maharashtra V.
Bharat Shanti Lal Shah41 wherein their Lordships observed as follows:
"60. The interception of conversation though constitutes an invasion
of an individual right to privacy but the said right can be curtailed in
accordance with procedure validly established by law. Thus, what the
court is required to see is that the procedure itself must be fair, just
and reasonable and non-arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive."
E. Necessity of identifying the fundamental right to privacy in a
"digital" age
22. The premise that a voluntary disclosure of information to third
parties would nullify the expectation of privacy of the person disclosing
such information is ill suited, particularly to the digital age, which is
characterised by people revealing a great deal of private information to
third parties while carrying out mundane tasks of life
32
"People disclose the phone numbers they dial or text to their
cellular providers; the URLs that they visit and the e-mail addresses
with which they correspond to the Internet service providers; and the
books, groceries, and medications they purchase to online retailers.
Though some may find such a trade-off of privacy convenient and
worthwhile, or have come to accept without complaint the warrantless
disclosure to the State of every website they had visited in the last
week, or month, or year, all voluntary disclosure of information cannot
disentitle the protection of one's right to privacy."
23. Further, before the advent of cellphones, a search of a person was
limited by physical realities and tended, as a general matter, to
constitute only a narrow intrusion on privacy of the body. However, with
the introduction of cellphones with immense storage capacity, even a
basic search of the person (who walks around with his cellphone) could
yield and expose sensitive personal information and data which was
otherwise protected in great measures. 40
24. Dehors a recognition of the fundamental right to privacy, the State
would be empowered to conduct a search of a person possessing a mobile
phone and access personal data/information stored thereon, upon
standards devised in a different time and for a different purpose. 42
Recognising the incongruence between applying "pre-cellphone" era tests
to a "post-
cellphone" era and the need to protect one's right to privacy, the
Supreme Court of the United States in Riley V. California40 40 held that while
examination of a wallet belonging to a person may be permissible without
a warrant, an examination of a person's cellphone without a warrant is
wholly impermissible. 40 In this context, the Court observed :
40
"First, a cellphone collects in one place many distinct types of
information-an address, a note, a prescription, a bank statement, a
video-that reveal much more in combination than any isolated record.
Second, a cellphone's capacity allows even just one type of information
to convey far more than previously possible. The sum of an individual's
private life can be reconstructed through a thousand photographs
labeled with dates, locations, and descriptions; the same cannot be
said of a photograph or two of loved ones tucked into a wallet. Third,
the data on a phone can date back to the purchase of the phone, or
even earlier. A person might carry in his pocket a slip of paper
reminding him to call Mr Jones; he would not carry a record of all his
communications with Mr Jones for the past several months, as would
routinely be kept on a phone."
"Finally, there is an element of pervasiveness that characterizes
cellphones but not physical records. Prior to the digital age, people did
not typically carry a cache of sensitive personal information with them
as they went about their day. Now it is the person who is not carrying
a cellphone, with all that it contains, who is the exception."
25. Digital society has not only emerged, but has gained critical
appeal in India. In this context, it would be relevant to mention certain
figures so as to provide a perspective of the ramifications of not
identifying or not protecting the fundamental right to privacy:
Comparison of connectivity and mobility between India and the United
States.
SI.
Particulars
India
USA
1.
Mobile Phones
118 Cr. (89%)
32 Cr. (103%)
2.
Internet Connections
35 Cr.
22 Cr.
3.
Cars
4 Cr.
25 Cr.
4.
Population
132 Cr.
31 Cr.
26. The qualitative distinctiveness of the present times in which
constitutional principles are to be evolved and applied has been captured
by the Supreme Court of the United States in Riley V. California in the
following words :
40
"An Internet search and browsing history, for example, can be
found on an Internet-enabled phone and could reveal an individual's
private interests or concerns-perhaps a search for certain symptoms
of disease [...] Data on a cellphone can also reveal where a person has
been. Historic location information is a standard feature on many
smart phones
and can reconstruct someone's specific movements down to the minute,
not only around town but also within a particular building."
27. As submitted supra, privacy is not predicated upon secrecy.
Inasmuch as privacy is not a discrete commodity, possessed absolutely
or not at all, those who disclose certain facts to a bank or a phone
company for a limited business purpose need not assume that this
information will be released to other persons for other purposes.
Therefore, what a person seeks to preserve as private, even in an area
accessible to the public, has to remain constitutionally protected.
32
28. In fact, contemporary approaches to the right to privacy allow for
placing informational privacy even in this digital age in a sacrosanct
bracket. Retention of an individual's information is violative of such
individual's privacy irrespective of its real effect on the individual. In
Digital Rights Ireland Ltd. V. Minister of Communications43, the Court of
Justice of the European Union held as follows:
"33. To establish the existence of an interference with the
fundamental right to privacy, it does not matter whether the
information on the private lives concerned is sensitive or whether the
persons concerned have been inconvenienced in any way."
29. In S & Marper V. United Kingdom44, the ECtHR held that even the
mere storing of data relating to one's private life is a violation of one's
right to privacy:
"67. The mere storing of data relating to the private life of an
individual amounts to an interference within the meaning of Article 8
(see Leander V. Sweden45). The subsequent use of the stored
information has no bearing on that finding (Amann V. Switzerland 46.
30. It is most respectfully submitted that the obligation of the State to
respect, not interfere and protect one's realm of personal liberty and
privacy is only heightened in the context of the digital age, inasmuch as
it has now become possible for even the State to use electronic means to
commit unconstitutional invasions on privacy.
F. Parliamentary recognition of the fundamental right to privacy
31. The postulated issue of recognition of the right to privacy as a
fundamental right is not merely to be looked at from the viewpoint of
judicial dicta but also from how Parliament has manifested its
understanding of the said right. On an analysis of the various legislations
which recognise and enforce the right to privacy as a fundamental right,
it would be clear that its place in the Constitution is firmly cemented.
32. An analysis of existing legislations, apart from leading to the
unfolding of a legislative understanding of the right to privacy, would also
be consonant with the judicial practice of looking at the extant statutory
architecture, which includes a macro exercise of comparatively examining
statutes to arrive at a judicial finding.47 It is most humbly submitted that
an analysis of the existing statutes would reveal that Parliament has
recognised the right to privacy as a fundamental right under the
Constitution.
33. In this context, it would be relevant to examine and juxtapose pre
-constitutional as well as post-constitutional statutes. When interpreting
pre-constitutional statutes, regard must be had to : (i) the historical
background leading to the legislation; (ii) the amendments effected
48
therein; and (iii) the various aspects covered by it.
34. Analysing the various Central legislations leads to the conclusion
that Parliament has, time and again, given recognition to the right to
privacy by either reiterating its principles in the statutory provisions or by
introducing fetters to the exercise of the right to privacy by attempting to
make laws which satisfy the requirement of a "reasonable restriction"
imposed by way of a "procedure established by law". Furthermore, even
in pre-constitutional legislations, the sacrosanct position of the right to
privacy had been legislatively recognised inasmuch as special procedures
had been established in such laws while introducing limitations on any
aspect of the right to privacy.
G. Table of statutes recognising and dealing with the right to
privacy
SI.
Statute
Section/Regulation
No.
1.
The Right to Information
Section 8(1)(j) : Unwarranted
Act, 2005
invasion of the privacy of the
individual. 49
2.
The Juvenile Justice (Care
Section 3(xi) : Principle of right to
and Protection of Children)
privacy and confidentiality. 50
Act, 2015
3.
Information Technology Act,
Section 66-E : Punishment for
2000
violation of privacy.
4.
Protection of Human Rights
Section 2(1)(d) "Human rights"
Act, 1993
means the rights relating to life,
liberty, equality and dignity of the
individual guaranteed by the
Constitution or embodied in the
International
Covenants
and
enforceable by courts in India.
51
5.
Census Act, 1948
Section 15 : Records not open to
inspection nor admissible.
6.
The Collection of Statistics
Sections 9-14 : Security of
Act, 2008
information; only to be used for
statistical purposes.
7.
The Protection of Children
Section
23
:
Lowering
his
from Sexual Offences Act,
reputation or infringing upon his
2012
privacy.
8.
Indian
Medical
Council
Reg. 7.14 : Shall not disclose the
(Professional
Conduct,
secrets of a patient.
52
Etiquette
and
Ethics)
Regulations, 2002
9.
Credit
Information
53
Section 20 : Privacy principles.
Companies
(Regulation)
Act, 2005
10.
Bankers' Books Evidence
Section 5 : Cannot be compelled
Act, 1891
to produce books in certain cases.
11.
The
Representation
of
Section
128 : Maintenance of
Peoples Act, 1951
54
secrecy of voting.
12.
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
Sections 122, 126, 129 : Protected
communications.
55
13.
Penal Code, 1860
Section 228-A : Disclosure of
identity of the victim of certain
offences. 56
14.
Code of Criminal Procedure,
Section 46 : Shall not touch the
1973
person of the woman and no arrest
after sunset and before sunrise.
57
15.
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
Section
5
:
Possession
and
interception. 58
Section 5(2) (pre-amendment) :
Certificate shall be conclusive
proof of public emergency.
Section 5(2) (post-amendment) :
Expedient so to do in the interests
of the sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign
States or public order or for
preventing incitement to the
commission of an offence.
16.
Indian Post Office Act, 1898
Section 26 : Power to intercept for
public good; occurrence of any
public emergency, or in the
interest of the public safety or
tranquillity.
35. This Hon'ble Court in Thalappalam Service Coop. Bank Ltd. V.
State of Kerala59, observed that the right to privacy is not only
recognised as a basic human right under Article 12 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, but, more importantly, that Parliament has
recognised the right to privacy as a sacrosanct facet of Article 21. The
aforesaid was observed with specific reference to Section 8(1)(j) of the
Right to Information Act, 2005, wherein this Hon'ble Court was called
upon to adjudicate the scope and ambit of an exception to a general right
to information. The same goes to inform the contemporanea expositio
that has been granted to the right to privacy under our constitutional
framework.
36. Additionally, this Hon'ble Court, in Directorate of Revenue V. Mohd.
Nisar Holia 57 , , in the context of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985, recognised a fundamental right to privacy. In this
context, it was observed thus:
"14. [...] the Act contemplated different measures to be taken in
respect of search to be conducted between sunrise and sunset,
between sunset and sunrise as also the private place and public place
is of some significance. An authority cannot be given an untrammeled
power to infringe the right of privacy of any person. Even if a statute
confers such power upon an authority to make search and seizure of a
person at all hours and at all places, the same may be held to be ultra
vires unless the restrictions imposed are reasonable ones. [...]
Although a statutory power to make a search and seizure by itself may
not offend the right of privacy but in a case of this nature, the least
that a court can do is to see that such a right is not unnecessarily
infringed. Right to privacy deals with persons and not places."
37. Therefore, even dehors the line of judicial precedents after M.P.
Sharma V. Satish Chandra7, and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 10 , it is
no
longer res integra that the said right to privacy is a fundamental right
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution which presupposes a
specific and special procedure established by law to be derogated from. it
is no longer res integra that the said right to privacy is a fundamental
right guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution which presupposes a
specific and special procedure established by law to be derogated from. It
is in this light that this Hon'ble Court has also interpreted the said right
to privacy as a "sacrosanct facet of Article 21"49, "49 , upon undertaking a
judicial examination of the pertinent statutes.
H. Domestic application of the transnational perspective on the
right to privacy
38. The right to privacy has been recognised in International
Covenants, particularly those which : (i) have been judicially recognised
and applied in the context of Part III of the Constitution; or (ii) have
found place in opinio juris i.e. India's State-practice under international
law, which has manifested in the form of parliamentary enactments and
executive incorporations. Reliance on such international covenants in the
context of interpreting the provisions of Part III of the Constitution,
would not only "foster respect for international law" in accordance with
Article 51(c), but also help in recognising the universally accepted rights
of all human beings.
39. This Hon'ble Court, in a series of its decisions, including decisions
considering the "right to privacy", has relied upon international
instruments to interpret fundamental rights:
(i) This Hon'ble Court in Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan60, , has held
that it is now an acceptable rule of judicial construction that regard
must
be had to international conventions and norms for domestic law when
there is no inconsistency between them and there is a purported void in
domestic law.
(ii) This Hon'ble Court in District Registrar and Collector V. Canara
Bank61 relied upon the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the European
Convention on Human Rights, to discuss the scope of the right to
privacy.
(iii) This Hon'ble Court in Thalappalam Service Coop. Bank Ltd. V.
State of Kerala62, , observed that the right to privacy : (i) is recognised
as a basic human right under Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights; and (ii) that Parliament has recognised the right to
privacy as a sacrosanct facet of Article 21.
(iv) This Hon'ble Court in Selvi V. State of Karnataka63 referred to
the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, to construe the scope of Article 20(3) and
Article 21 of the Constitution.
(v) This Hon'ble Court in Nilabati Behera V. State of Orissa64 relied
upon the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to assert
an enforceable right to compensation under Part III of the
Constitution.
(vi) This Hon'ble Court in PUCL V. Union of India6 relied upon the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to interpret Article
21 in a manner which would be in conformity with international law.
40. Some of the International Instruments which directly ensure the
"right to privacy", are as follows:
(i) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in Article 12, states
that, "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his
privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honor
and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law
against such interference or attacks."
(ii) The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
in
Article 17(1), states that, "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or
unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or
correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation",
and, in Article 17(2), "Everyone has the right to the protection of the
law against such interference or attacks."
(iii) The European Convention on Human Rights, in Article 8(1),
states that, "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
family life, his home and his correspondence."
41. Thus, the right to privacy is a natural corollary of basic human
rights inherent in every individual and recognised internationally.
I. It is the rights that are fundamental, not the limitations
42. At the outset, it is most respectfully submitted that, "however
helpful taxonomies might be, they usually leave essentially unspecified
the substance of what is being protected, telling us neither the character
of the choices or the information we are to classify as special, nor the
contexts of decision in which such classification is to be employed."6
This must also hold true in the context of the kinds of tests which may be
employed to restrict a fundamental right, with the additional and
mandatory requirement that any restriction on a fundamental right must
be narrowly tailored.
43. In every case involving the imposition of limitations and
restrictions on fundamental rights, it is the rights which are fundamental,
not its limitations. Therefore, it becomes the duty and responsibility of
this Hon'ble Court to guard and defend these rights zealously.
44. Such a duty entails that : (i) rights which were intended to be
fundamental are kept fundamental; and (ii) that neither Parliament nor
the executive exceed the bounds within which they are confined by the
{Start Page 164} Constitution when given the power to impose
fetters on freedoms guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution.
Additionally, in the specific case of the executive, the duty is to see
further that it does not travel beyond the powers conferred by
Parliament68 , given that Parliament itself has recognised a fundamental
right to privacy. 49
45. This duty is not limited to the rendition of fundamental rights
guaranteed at the inception. It also extends to those rights, which the
people of India "have learned through the years to cherish, to the very
fullest extent of the guarantee, and to ensure that they are not whittled
away or brought to nought either by parliamentary legislation or by
executive action". 69
46. An exercise of State power entails trust. Therefore, those who
wield it, must be accountable for it; "[a]II power is a trust and its
exercise by Governments must be subject to social audit and Judas
exposure. "70 This accountability stems in the requirement of strict
adherence to the constitutional ethos, particularly of the stringent tests
for restricting fundamental rights.
47. Additionally, just as a responsible municipal council constituted for
the precise purpose of preserving public health and providing better
finances cannot abdicate its principal duty by pleading financial inability,
the State cannot use personal information without providing for adequate
safeguards for the protection of personal information, and consequently,
the protection of the right to privacy.
48. Lastly, this Hon'ble Court must be cautious while considering
appeals to emotions, generally, in the context of constitutional
interpretation, and particularly, when placed as justifications for
curtailing and/or restricting a fundamental right. Emotional arguments
72
are completely irrelevant in the interpretation and application of law.
Additionally, an argument that "a particular interpretation would open a
floodgate of litigation" must also be rejected. 73
J. Conclusion
49. It is therefore discernible that an arbitrary curb on the exercise of
the right to privacy causes a concomitant chilling effect on the exercise of
other rights under Part III of the Constitution of India. In that light, the
minority opinion in Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.10, , is instructive to
determine the necessity and propriety of recognising a right which is
74
already inherent in our constitutional ethos :
"31 [...] In an uncivilized society where there are no inhibitions,
only physical restraints may detract from personal liberty, but as
civilization advances the psychological restraints are more effective
than physical ones. The scientific methods used to condition a man's
mind are in a real sense physical restraints, for they engender physical
fear channeling one's actions through anticipated and expected
grooves. So also creation of conditions which necessarily engender
inhibitions and fear complexes can be described as physical restraints.
Further, the right to personal liberty takes in not only a right to be free
from restrictions placed on his movements, but also free from
encroachments on his private life. It is true our Constitution does not
expressly declare the right to privacy as a fundamental right, but the
said right is an essential ingredient of personal liberty."
(emphasis supplied)
50. This is further buttressed by the observations in the decision of
the Supreme Court of the United States in United States V. Jones32
32
"Awareness that the Government may be watching chills
associational and expressive freedoms. And the Government's
unrestrained power to assemble data that reveal private aspects of
identity is susceptible to abuse."
VI. Attorney General for India, Mr K.K. Venugopal, for the
respondents
Preface
1. This matter has been placed before a Constitution Bench of 5
Judges of this Hon'ble Court pursuant to the reference, by 3 Judges of
this Hon'ble Court, in K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India. The three-
Judge Bench in its reference order stated:
"12. We are of the opinion that the cases on hand raise far-reaching
questions of importance involving interpretation of the Constitution.
What is at stake is the amplitude of the fundamental rights including
that precious and inalienable right under Article 21. If the observations
made in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh are to be read literally and
accepted
as the law of this country, the fundamental rights guaranteed under the
Constitution of India and more particularly right to liberty under Article
21 would be denuded of vigour and vitality. At the same time, we are
also of the opinion that the institutional integrity and judicial discipline
require that pronouncement made by larger Benches of this Court cannot
be ignored by the smaller Benches without appropriately explaining the
reasons for not following the pronouncements made by such larger
Benches. With due respect to all the learned Judges who rendered the
subsequent judgments - where right to privacy is asserted or referred to
their Lordships concern for the liberty of human beings, we are of the
humble opinion that there appears to be certain amount of apparent
unresolved contradiction in the law declared by this Court.
13. Therefore, in our opinion to give a quietus to the kind of
controversy raised in this batch of cases once for all, it is better that
the ratio decidendi of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh is scrutinized
and the jurisprudential correctness of the subsequent decisions of this
Court where the right to privacy is either asserted or referred be
examined and authoritatively decided by a Bench of appropriate
strength.
14. We, therefore, direct the Registry to place these matters before
the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders."
(emphasis supplied)
2. The "apparent unresolved contradiction in the law declared by this
Court" referred to in the aforementioned order, in the submission of the
Union of India, relates to a contradiction between M.P. Sharma V. Satish
Chandra ("M.P. Sharma") (8 Judges) and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 3
("Kharak Singh") (6 Judges) on the one hand, and Gobind V. State of
M.P.4 ("Gobind") (3 Judges), R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 5 ("Rajagopal")
(2 Judges), People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India 6 ("PUCL")
(2 Judges) on the other.
3. The Union of India further submits the following:
3.1. M.P. Sharma (8 Judges) and Kharak Singh3 (6 Judges) hold that
there is no fundamental right to privacy in the Constitution.
3.2. There appears to be inconsistency between M.P. Sharma (8
Judges) and Kharak Singh (6 Judges) taken together on the one hand,
and Gobind4 (3 Judges), Rajagopal5 (2 Judges), and PUCL6 (2 Judges)
taken together on the other;
3.3. Given that the earlier decisions in M.P. Sharma and Kharak
Singh3 are by larger Benches, those decisions would bind, and would be
treated as having finally declared position regarding the absence of a
fundamental right to privacy under our Constitution.
These propositions will now be elaborated in turn.
A.
M.P.
Sharma
and
Kharak
Singh
hold
that
there
is
no
fundamental right to privacy in the Constitution
4. In M.P. Sharma, the central issue relevant for the purposes of this
note, before an 8-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court was whether search
warrants and seizure of documents on such searches under Sections 94
and 96 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 for searching premises of
certain companies alleged to have been part of commission of criminal
offences ought to be quashed on the ground that such searches (and
documents seized consequent thereto) violate the fundamental right
against self-incrimination in Article 20(3) of the Constitution. Article 20
(3) reads,
"No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a
witness against himself."
It was held that a search warrant is under a communication from a
Magistrate to a police officer under law (in this case the Code of Criminal
Procedure) and, consequently, there is no testimonial act of the accused
involved in this process. Similarly, a seizure consequent to such search
warrant is also not a testimonial act. Per Jagannadhadas, J.:
"17.
It is, therefore, clear that there is no basis in the Indian law
for the assumption that a search or seizure of a thing or document is
in itself to be treated as compelled production of the same. Indeed a
little consideration will show that the two are essentially different
matters for the purpose relevant to the present discussion. A notice to
produce is addressed to the party concerned and his production in
compliance therewith constitutes a testimonial act by him within the
meaning of Article 20(3) as above explained. But a search warrant is
addressed to an officer of the Government, generally a police officer.
Neither the search nor the seizure are acts of the occupier of the
searched premises. They are acts of another to which he is obliged to
submit and are, therefore, not his testimonial acts in any sense. Even
in the American decisions there is a strong current of judicial opinion
in support of this distinction."
(emphasis supplied)
5. In the context of the right to privacy, it was held (per
Jagannadhadas, J.):
"17.
A power of search and seizure is in any system
of
jurisprudence an overriding power of the State for the protection of
social security and that power is necessarily regulated by law. When
the Constitution makers have thought fit not to subject such
regulation to constitutional limitations by recognition of a fundamental
right to privacy, analogous to the Fourth Amendment, we have no
justification to import it, into a totally different fundamental right, by
some process of strained construction. Nor is it legitimate to assume
that the
constitutional protection under Article 20(3) would be defeated by the
statutory provisions for searches."
(emphasis supplied)
6. As a result of this analysis, the Court held:
"18. We are, therefore, clearly of the opinion that the searches with
which we are concerned in the present cases cannot be challenged as
illegal on the ground of violation of any fundamental rights and that
these applications are liable to be dismissed."
7. It is thus clear that M.P. Sharma 2 holds (in para 17 extracted
above) that since the Constitution-makers have not thought it fit to
subject searches and seizures to any fundamental right to privacy in
Article 21 (like in the 4th Amendment to the Constitution of the United
States of America), there is no question of incorporating such a right into
Article 20(3). Thus it is testament for the following propositions:
a. Searches authorised by law do not violate Article 20(3);
b. No fundamental right to privacy exists in Article 21 and conse-
quently no such right can be brought into Article 20(3) by a strained
construction.
8. In Kharak Singh, the central issue relevant for the purposes of this
note, before a 6-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court was whether Chapter
XX of the Uttar Pradesh Police Regulations violated the fundamental
rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. The relevant
regulations (which were admitted by the U.P. Government as being non-
statutory in nature) permitted the police to engage in secret picketing,
domiciliary visits, periodical enquiries, reporting of movements and
collection of records of "history-sheeters" i.e. persons who are, or are
likely to become habitual criminals and therefore require surveillance.
Regulation 236, which according to the Court "for all practical purposes,
defines 'surveillance' " provided:
"236. Without prejudice to the right of Superintendents of Police to
put into practice any legal measures, such as shadowing in cities, by
which they find they can keep in touch with suspects in particular
localities or special circumstances, surveillance may for most practical
purposes be defined as consisting of one or more of the following
measures:
(a) Secret picketing of the house or approaches to the house of
suspects;
(b) domiciliary visits at night;
(c) through periodical inquiries by officers not below the rank of
Sub-Inspector into repute, habits, associations, income, expenses
and occupation;
(d) the reporting by constables and chaukidars of movements
and absence from home;
(e) the verification of movements and absences by means of
inquiry slips;
(f) the collection and record on a history-sheet of all information
bearing on conduct."
9. It was held by the majority that the regulation which deals with
secret picketing [clause (a) of Regulation 236] does not violate personal
liberty. The majority of the Court said (per Ayyangar, J.)
"10. We shall now consider each of these clauses of Regulation 236
in relation to the "freedoms" which it is said they violate:
(a) Secret picketing of the houses of suspects.-
It is obvious that the secrecy here referred to is secrecy from the
suspect; in other words its purpose is to ascertain the identity of
the person or persons who visit the house of the suspect, so that
the police might have a record of the nature of the activities in
which the suspect is engaged. This, of course, cannot in any
material or palpable form affect either the right on the part of the
suspect to "move freely" nor can it be held to deprive him of his
"personal liberty" within Article 21. It was submitted that if the
suspect does come to know that his house is being subjected to
picketing, that might affect his inclination to move about or that in
any event it would prejudice his "personal liberty". We consider that
there is no substance in this argument. In dealing with a
fundamental right such as the right to free movement or personal
liberty, that only can constitute an infringement which is both direct
as well as tangible and it could not be that under these freedoms
the Constitution-makers intended to protect or protected mere
personal sensitiveness."
(emphasis supplied)
10. This clearly envisages that intimacy in a household or exercise of
personal autonomy within a household free from surveillance was not
considered by the Court to be protected by Article 21. It is instructive to
note that such right to conceal information about oneself, particularly
intimate information inside one's own household, could be seen as a
component of the right to privacy.
11. However, with regard to the regulation pertaining to domiciliary
visits at night [Regulation 236(b)], the Court held (per Ayyangar, J.):
"10.
The question that has next to be considered is whether the
intrusion into the residence of a citizen and the knocking at his door
with the disturbance to his sleep and ordinary comfort which such
action must necessarily involve, constitute a violation of the freedom
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(d) or "a deprivation" of the "personal
liberty" guaranteed by Article 21.
13.
Frankfurter, J. observed in Wolf V. Colorado
"The security of one's privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the
police
is basic to a free society. It is therefore implicit in 'the
concept of ordered liberty' and as such enforceable against the States
through the Due Process Clause. The knock at the door, whether by
day or by night, as a prelude to a search, without authority of law but
solely on the authority of the police, did not need the commentary of
recent history to be condemned as inconsistent with the conception of
human rights enshrined in the history and the basic constitutional
documents of English-speaking peoples We have no hesitation
in
saying that were a State affirmatively to sanction such police incursion
into privacy it would run counter to the guarantee of the Fourteenth
Amendment."
14. Murphy, J. considered that such invasion was against "the very
essence of a scheme of ordered liberty.
15. It is true that in the decision of the U.S. Supreme Court from
which we have made these extracts, the Court had to consider also the
impact of a violation of the Fourth Amendment which reads:
"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures,
shall not be violated; and no warrants shall issue but upon probable
cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing
the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized."
and that our Constitution does not in terms confer any like constitutional
guarantee. Nevertheless, these extracts would show that an unauthorised
intrusion into a person's home and the disturbance caused to him
thereby, is as it were the violation of a common law right of a man an
ultimate essential of ordered liberty, if not of the very concept of
civilisation. An English Common Law maxim asserts that "every man's
house is his castle" and in Semayne case8 8 where this was applied, it was
stated that "the house of everyone is to him as his castle and fortress as
well as for his defence against injury and violence as for his repose". We
are not unmindful of the fact that Semayne case8 was concerned with the
law relating to executions in England, but the passage extracted has a
validity quite apart from the context of the particular decision. It
embodies an abiding principle which transcends mere protection of
property rights and expounds a concept of "personal liberty" which does
not rest on any element of feudalism or on any theory of freedom which
has ceased to be of value.
16. In our view clause (b) of Regulation 236 is plainly violative of
Article 21 and as there is no "Law" on which the same could be
justified it must be struck down as unconstitutional."
(emphasis supplied)
12. It is clear that the impugned regulation which allowed an
unauthorised intrusion into a person's home was found unconstitutional
since
it was antithetical to "ordered liberty, if not of the very concept of
civilisation". This was seen as a common law right which was enshrined
in Article 21. It is instructive to note however that such a right was not
seen as a facet of a right to privacy but a standalone protection that
flowed directly from the Court's conception of "ordered liberty" and the
sanctity of a person's home.
13. With regard to the regulations pertaining to shadowing of history-
sheeters for the purpose of recording their movements and activities and
obtaining of information relating to persons with whom they associate,
[Regulations 236(c), (d) and (e)] the majority of the Court held (per
Ayyangar, J.):
"17.
Having given the matter our best consideration we are
clearly of the opinion that the freedom guaranteed by Article 19(1)(d)
is not infringed by a watch being kept over the movements of the
suspect. Nor do we consider that Article 21 has any relevance in the
context as was sought to be suggested by learned Counsel for the
petitioner. As already pointed out, the right of privacy is not a
guaranteed right under our Constitution and therefore the attempt to
ascertain the movements of an individual which is merely a manner in
which privacy is invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right
guaranteed by Part III."
(emphasis supplied)
14. Thus it is clear that the Court provided limited protection to
unauthorised intrusions into a person's home as contrary to ordered
liberty under Article 21. It is critical to note that such a right was viewed
by the Court in contradistinction to the right of privacy, particularly
regarding movements of an individual or his need for intimacy and
safeguards against surveillance, which, according to the Court, were not
guaranteed.
15. The judgment by Subba Rao, J. held not only the regulation
pertaining to domiciliary visits, but also the other impugned regulations
pertaining to secret picketing, periodical enquiries, reporting of
movements and collection of records of history-sheeters as
unconstitutional since they impeded free movement protected by Article
19(1)(d) and personal liberty protected by Article 21. It held (per Subba
Rao, J.):
"27.
In other words, the State must satisfy that both the
fundamental rights are not infringed by showing that there is a law
and that it does amount to a reasonable restriction within the meaning
of Article 19(2) of the Constitution. But in this case no such defence is
available, as admittedly there is no such law. So the petitioner can
legitimately plead that his fundamental rights both under Article 19(1)
(d) and Article 21 are infringed by the State."
16. On a combined reading of the two judgments it is clear that they
hold that there is no fundamental right to privacy in the Constitution. It
is only unauthorised intrusions (without law) into one's home that is
protected under
Article 21 of the Constitution as a component of ordered liberty. Thus, in
view of the aforementioned judgments, no Article 32 petition lies in this
Hon'ble Court on the ground of violation of privacy.
17. It may be noted that there continues to be a common law right to
privacy, but the existence of such a common law right would not, in any
manner, dilute the position regarding the non-maintainability of an
Article 32 petition before this Hon'ble Court on the ground of the
(alleged) violation of privacy.
B. There appears to be a contradiction between M.P. Sharma2 and
Kharak Singh3 on the one hand and Gobind4, Rajagopal5, PUCL6 on
the other debut
18. It is respectfully submitted that there appears to be a
contradiction between M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh taken together
on the one hand, and Gobind4, Rajagopal5 and PUCL6 on the other.
In
Gobind4 the validity of Regulations 855 and 856 of the Madhya Pradesh
Police Regulations were challenged. These Regulations were in pari
materia with Regulation 236 of the U.P. Police Regulations in Kharak
Singh, except for the fact that these were made by the Government of
Madhya Pradesh under Section 46(2)(c) of the Police Act, 1961. Thus,
these Regulations had the force of law for the purpose of Article 21. The
contradiction between Gobind4 (and the subsequent cases) and M.P.
Sharma and Kharak Singh3 can be identified based on the conclusions
they reached with regard to the right to privacy. As mentioned above,
M.P. Sharma did not read the right to privacy in Article 20(3) of the
Constitution. Kharak Singh3 held that an unauthorised intrusion into
one's home is a violation of ordered liberty under Article 21. Privacy was
held to not be part of the same right.
19. The judgment in Gobind4 considered privacy as flowing from
notions of autonomy, dignity, liberty and intimacy. This is evident from
the following extracts from Gobind4 (per Mathew, J.):
"22. There can be no doubt that privacy-dignity claims deserve to
be examined with care and to be denied only when an important
countervailing interest is shown to be superior. If the Court does find
that a claimed right is entitled to protection as a fundamental privacy
right, a law infringing it must satisfy the compelling State interest
test. Then the question would be whether a State interest is of such
paramount importance as would justify an infringement of the right.
Obviously, if the enforcement of morality were held to be a compelling
as well as a permissible State interest, the characterization of a
claimed right as a fundamental privacy right would be of far less
significance. The question whether enforcement of morality is a State
interest sufficient to justify the infringement of a fundamental privacy
right need not be considered for the purpose of this case and therefore
we refuse to enter the controversial thicket whether enforcement of
morality is a function of State.
23. Individual autonomy, perhaps the central concern of any system
of limited Government, is protected in part under our Constitution by
explicit constitutional guarantees. In the application of the
Constitution our contemplation cannot only be of what has been but
what may be. Time works changes and brings into existence new
conditions. Subtler and far reaching means of invading privacy will
make it possible to be heard in the street what is whispered in the
closet. Yet, too broad a definition of privacy raises serious questions
about the propriety of judicial reliance on a right that is not explicit in
the Constitution. Of course, privacy primarily concerns the individual.
It therefore relates to and overlaps with the concept of liberty. The
most serious advocate of privacy must confess that there are serious
problems of defining the essence and scope of the right. Privacy
interest in autonomy must also be placed in the context of other rights
and values.
24. Any right to privacy must encompass and protect the personal
intimacies of the home, the family, marriage, motherhood, procreation
and child rearing. This catalogue approach to the question is obviously
not as instructive as it does not give analytical picture of the
distinctive characteristics of the right of privacy. Perhaps, the only
suggestion that can be offered as unifying principle underlying the
concept has been the assertion that a claimed right must be a
fundamental right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.
25. Rights and freedoms of citizens are set forth in the Constitution
in order to guarantee that the individual, his personality, and those
things stamped with his personality shall be free from official
interference except where a reasonable basis for intrusion exists.
"Liberty against Government" a phrase coined by Professor Corwin
expresses this idea forcefully. In this sense, many of the fundamental
rights of citizens can be described as contributing to the right to
privacy."
(emphasis supplied)
20. Gobind4 accepted a penumbral theory of interpretation that there
could be rights emanating from other rights and privacy could be one of
them. The Court said:
"30. Having reached this conclusion, we are satisfied that drastic
inroads directly into the privacy and indirectly into the fundamental
rights, of a citizen will be made if Regulations 855 and 856 were to be
read widely. To interpret the rule in harmony with the Constitution is
therefore necessary and canalisation of the powers vested in the police
by the two regulations earlier read becomes necessary, if they are to
be saved at all. Our founding fathers were thoroughly opposed to a
Police Raj even as our history of the struggle for freedom has borne
eloquent testimony to it. The relevant articles of the Constitution we
have adverted to earlier, behove us therefore to narrow down the
scope for play of the two regulations. We proceed to give direction and
restriction to the application of the said regulations with the caveat
that if any action were
taken beyond the boundaries so set, the citizen will be entitled to attack
such action as unconstitutional and void.
31. Depending on the character and antecedents of the person
subjected to surveillance as also the objects and the limitation under
which surveillance is made, it cannot be said surveillance by
domiciliary visits would always be unreasonable restriction upon the
right of privacy. Assuming that the fundamental rights explicitly
guaranteed to a citizen have penumbral zones and that the right to
privacy is itself a fundamental right, that fundamental right must be
subject to restriction on the basis of compelling public interest.
21. Ultimately, the Court in Gobind4 upheld the impugned Regulations
since they had the force of law with compelling State interest for the
purpose of Article 21 (unlike the impugned Regulation 236(b) in Kharak
Singh):
"31.
As Regulation 856 has the force of law, it cannot be said that
the fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 21 has been
violated by the provisions contained in it : for, what is guaranteed
under that article is that no person shall be deprived of his life or
personal liberty except by the procedure established by "law". We
think that the procedure is reasonable having regard to the provisions
of Regulations 853(c) and 857. Even if we hold that Article 19(1)(d)
guarantees to a citizen a right to a privacy in his movement as an
emanation from that Article and is itself a fundamental right, the
question will arise whether Regulation 856 is a law imposing
reasonable restriction in public interest on the freedom of movement
falling within Article 19(5); or, even if it be assumed that Article 19(5)
does not apply in terms, as the right to privacy of movement cannot
be absolute, a law imposing reasonable restriction upon it for
compelling interest of State must be upheld as valid."
22. Thus, there is an apparent contradiction between Gobind4 on the
one hand, and M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh on the other. While M.P
Sharma and Kharak Singh3 never recognised the right to privacy,
Gobind4 does recognise such a right under the Constitution. Further,
while Gobind , like Kharak Singh, considers unauthorised intrusions into
the home of an individual as a violation of Article 21, it does so after
reading in privacy as a fundamental right under Article 21, whereas
Kharak Singh clearly finds no such right to exist. As a result of this
finding, it also considers individual autonomy and personal intimacies to
be enjoyed free from observation as protected under the right to privacy,
directly contrary to Kharak Singh. Curiously though, Gobind4, despite
such recognition, upholds the impugned regulations in totality on the
ground that they had the force of law and were consequently not an
unauthorised intrusion. Thus, Gobind 4, a bench of 3 Hon'ble Judges reads
in a general right to privacy into Article 21, contrary to M.P. Sharma and
particularly Kharak Singh, both larger Benches.
23. It is humbly submitted that Gobind4's understanding of privacy
has been eventually followed in Rajagopal5 as well as PUCL6. In
Rajagopal5, the Supreme Court held (per Jeevan Reddy, J):
"26. We may now summarise the broad principles flowing from the
above discussion:
(1) The right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by Article 21. It is a "right to
be let alone". A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own,
his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child-bearing and
education among other matters. None can publish anything concerning
the above matters without his consent - whether truthful or otherwise
and whether laudatory or critical. If he does so, he would be violating
the right to privacy of the person concerned and would be liable in an
action for damages. Position may, however, be different, if a person
voluntarily thrusts himself into controversy or voluntarily invites or
raises a controversy."
The position of law laid down in Rajagopal5 is identical to Gobind 4, insofar
as it recognises an implicit right to privacy in Article 21.
24. Further, PUCL6 crystallised the position that the right to privacy
must be read under Article 21 of the Constitution. The Court in PUCL
observed
that
Gobind4 and Rajagopal have read the right to privacy
under Article 21. The Court held (per Kuldip Singh, J.):
"17. We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that right to
privacy is a part of the right to "life" and "personal liberty" enshrined
under Article 21 of the Constitution. Once the facts in a given case
constitute a right to privacy, Article 21 is attracted. The said right
cannot be curtailed "except according to procedure established by
law"."
25. As mentioned above, Kharak Singh* 3 and Gobind4 dealt with similar
fact situations. Kharak Singh3 recognised a penumbral right to "ordered
liberty" in Article 21, which was the right of a person against
unauthorised intrusion into their homes. However, Kharak Singh 3 did not
recognise the right to privacy per se under Article 21 in any form,
penumbral or otherwise. On the contrary, it expressly rejected such a
reading (para 17 of Kharak Singh. In Gobind4, contrary to Kharak
Singh, a kernel of a general right to privacy was recognised in Article 21,
which included rights to intimacy and secrecy, free from observation. This
line of reasoning which was followed in Rajagopal5 and PUCL6 is contrary
to the express recognition of there being no such right to privacy
delivered by larger Benches of this Court in M.P. Sharma and Kharak
Singh* 3
26. In light of the above, it is humbly submitted that there is
inconsistency between Gobind4 (and Rajagopal5 and PUCL6 on the one
hand, and Kharak Singh3 and M.P. Sharma on the other. M.P. Sharma
did not recognise a right to privacy in the Constitution and consequently
refused
to read it into Article 20(3). Kharak Singh3 recognised the right not to be
subject to unauthorised intrusion into one's home as part of ordered
liberty under Article 21 but in the same token, rejected a guaranteed
general right to privacy. Gobind4, on the other hand, explicated the
ordered liberty principle as containing a general right to privacy, followed
in subsequent judgments. In this respect, the three-Judge Bench
decision in Gobind4, and the subsequent decisions which adopt a similar
line, are inconsistent with M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh.
27. It is a fundamental principle with regard to Bench strength that
smaller Benches are expected to follow and apply decisions of larger
Benches. This was held by the Supreme Court in State of U.P. V. Ajay
Kumar Sharma9:
"13. Time and again this Court has emphatically restated the
essentials and principles of "precedent" and of stare decisis which are
a cardinal feature of the hierarchical character of all common law
judicial systems. The doctrine of precedent mandates that an
exposition of law must be followed and applied even by coordinate or
coequal Benches and certainly by all smaller Benches and subordinate
courts. That is to say that a smaller and a later Bench has no freedom
other than to apply the law laid down by the earlier and larger Bench;
that is the law which is said to hold the field. Apart from Article 141, it
is a policy of the courts to stand by precedent and not to disturb a
settled point. The purpose of precedents is to bestow predictability on
judicial decisions and it is beyond cavil that certainty in law is an
essential ingredient of rule of law. A departure may only be made
when a coordinate or coequal Bench finds the previous decision to be
of doubtful logic or efficacy and consequentially, its judicial conscience
is so perturbed and aroused that it finds it impossible to follow the
existing ratio. The Bench must then comply with the discipline of
requesting the Hon'ble Chief Justice to constitute a larger Bench."
(emphasis supplied)
28. The position of law regarding what a Bench can do when decisions
of two or more coordinate or larger Benches stand before it was decided
in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community V. State of Maharashtra 0. ,
(Lahoti, CJ):
"12. Having carefully considered the submissions made by the
learned Senior Counsel for the parties and having examined the law
laid down by the Constitution Benches in the abovesaid decisions, we
would like to sum up the legal position in the following terms:
(1) The law laid down by this Court in a decision delivered by a
Bench of larger strength is binding on any subsequent Bench of
lesser or coequal strength.
(2) A Bench of lesser quorum cannot disagree or dissent from the
view of the law taken by a Bench of larger quorum. In case of doubt
all that the Bench of lesser quorum can do is to invite the attention
of the Chief Justice and request for the matter being placed for
hearing before a Bench of larger quorum than the Bench whose
decision has come up for consideration. It will be open only for a
Bench of coequal strength to express an opinion doubting the
correctness of the view taken by the earlier Bench of coequal
strength, whereupon the matter may be placed for hearing before a
Bench consisting of a quorum larger than the one which pronounced
the decision laying down the law the correctness of which is
doubted.
(3) The above rules are subject to two exceptions : (i) the
abovesaid rules do not bind the discretion of the Chief Justice in
whom vests the power of framing the roster and who can direct any
particular matter to be placed for hearing before any particular
Bench of any strength; and (ii) in spite of the rules laid down
hereinabove, if the matter has already come up for hearing before a
Bench of larger quorum and that Bench itself feels that the view of
the law taken by a Bench of lesser quorum, which view is in doubt,
needs correction or reconsideration then by way of exception (and
not as a rule) and for reasons given by it, it may proceed to hear
the case and examine the correctness of the previous decision in
question dispensing with the need of a specific reference or the
order of the Chief Justice constituting the Bench and such listing.
Such was the situation in Raghubir Singh11 and Hansoli Devi .
29. Further, in P.A. Inamdar V. State of Maharashtra. a seven-Judge
Bench of the Supreme Court made an important observation when it was
faced with a decision of an eleven-Judge Bench (Lahoti, C.J.):
"20. Before we embark upon dealing with the issues posed before
us for resolution, we would like to make a few preliminary observations
as a preface to our judgment inasmuch as that would outline the scope
of the controversy with which we are actually dealing here. At the very
outset, we may state that our task is not to pronounce our own
independent opinion on the several issues which arose for
consideration in Pai Foundation14 Even if we are inclined to disagree
with any of the findings amounting to declaration of law by the
majority in Pai Foundation14 we cannot; that being a pronouncement
by an eleven-Judge Bench, we are bound by it. We cannot express
dissent or disagreement howsoever we may be inclined to do so on
any of the issues. The real task before us is to cull out the ratio
decidendi of Pai Foundation14 and to examine if the
explanation or clarification given in Islamic Academy15 runs counter to Pai
Foundation and if so, to what extent. If we find anything said or held in
Islamic Academy15 in conflict with Pai Foundation14 we shall say so as
being a departure from the law laid down by Pai Foundation14 and on the
14
principle of binding efficacy of precedents, overrule to that extent the
opinion of the Constitution Bench in Islamic Academy15.
30. It appears to be the stand of the petitioners that the subsequent
decisions by smaller Benches of this Hon'ble Court decide contentions not
raised or decided in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh, and should,
therefore, notwithstanding their inconsistency with M.P. Sharma and
Kharak Singh, be treated as having correctly read the fundamental right
of privacy into Article 21. This, it is submitted, is wholly untenable, in the
light of the decision of this Hon'ble Court in T. Govindaraja Mudaliar V.
State of T.N. 16 , wherein it was held:
"10. The argument of the appellants is that prior to the decision in
Rustom Cavasjee Cooper case7 it was not possible to challenge
Chapter IV-A of the Act as violation of Article 19(1)(f) owing to the
decision of this Court that Article 19(1)(f) could not be invoked when a
case fell within Article 31 and that was the reason why this Court in all
the previous decisions relating to the validity of Chapter IV-A
proceeded on an examination of the argument whether there was
infringement of Article 19(1)(g), and clause (f) of that article could not
possibly be invoked. We are unable to hold that there is much
substance in this argument. Bhanji Munji case18 and other decisions
which followed it were based mainly on an examination of the inter-
relationship between Article 19(1)(f) and Article 31(2). There is no
question of any acquisition or requisition in Chapter IV-A of the Act.
The relevant decision for the purpose of these cases was only the one
given in Kochuni case19, after which no doubt was left that the
authority of law seeking to deprive a person of his property otherwise
than by way of acquisition or requisition was open to challenge on the
ground that it constituted infringement of the fundamental rights
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(f). It was, therefore, open to those
effected by the provisions of Chapter IV-A to have agitated before this
Court the question which is being raised now based on the guarantee
embodied in Article 19(1)(f) which was never done. It is apparently
too late in the day now to pursue this line of argument. In this
connection we may refer to the observations of this Court in Mohd.
Ayub Khan V. Commr. of Police20 according to which even if certain
aspects of
a question were not brought to the notice of the court it would decline to
enter upon re-examination of the question since the decision had been
followed in other cases. In Somawanti V. State of Punjab21 a contention
was raised that in none of the decisions the argument advanced in that
case that a law may be protected from an attack under Article 31(2) but
it would be still open to challenge under Article 19(1)(f), had been
examined or considered. Therefore, the decision of the Court was invited
in the light of that argument This contention, however, was repelled by
the following observations at p. 794.
"The binding effect of a decision does not depend upon whether a
particular argument was considered therein or not, provided that
the point with reference to which an argument was subsequently
advanced was actually decided."
11. It is common ground in the present cases that the validity of
Chapter IV-A of the Act has been upheld on all previous occasions.
Merely because the aspect now presented based on the guarantee
contained in Article 19(1)(f) was not expressly considered or a
decision given thereon will not take away the binding effect of those
decisions on us."
(emphasis supplied)
31. This view was reaffirmed in Anil Kumar Neotia V. Union of India2
,
herein, the Court has held:
18. In that view of the matter this question is no longer open for
agitation by the petitioners. It is also no longer open to the petitioners
to contend that certain points had not been urged and the effect of the
judgment cannot be collaterally challenged. See in this connection the
16
observations of this Court in T. Govindaraja Mudaliar V. State of T.N.
,
where this Court at pp. 229 and 230 of the report observed as
(emphasis supplied)
32. A few facts with regard to the Aadhaar scheme, which is under
challenge in these cases, are also noteworthy. Around 115 crore residents
of India are now enrolled with Aadhaar with an adult coverage of over
99%. The uniqueness of Aadhaar helps in elimination of duplicates and
fakes from any beneficiary database, ensuring that the teeming millions
of poor people of this country are now receiving the subsidies and
benefits directly into their bank accounts, which they were hitherto
deprived of. This has also lead to immense savings through reduction of
leakages and wastages and therefore, it subserves vital public interest,
which ought not to be interfered with on account of the apprehensions
raised in these petitions. There is also tremendous convenience to the
old, infirm and the weaker sections of people who receive benefits like
pensions, etc. at their doorstep on account of Aadhaar based E-KYC.
33. It is also pertinent to note that it is incorrectly claimed by the
petitioners that as per the Notifications under Section 7 of the Aadhaar
Act, 2016, people will be denied benefits if they do not enroll for Aadhaar
by 30-6-2017 (now extended to 30-9-2017) and therefore people will
suffer hardships. It may be noted that while the notifications require
people to enroll for Aadhaar by 30-6-2017(nov extended to 30-9-2017),
it is provided in the notifications themselves that if people are not able to
enroll for Aadhaar before the time prescribed due to lack of enrolment
facilities in the nearby areas, then they can register their request for
Aadhaar enrolment before the appropriate authorities giving their contact
details, so that as and when enrolment facilities are set up in the area,
such persons can be enrolled for Aadhaar and for such people, benefits
will continue to be given even if they have not enrolled for Aadhaar
before 30-9-2017. Moreover, there is also no question of any exclusion of
any genuine beneficiaries, since Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act itself
requires either Aadhaar authentication or furnishing proof of possession
of Aadhaar number on the basis of which subsidies, benefits, etc can be
availed by the beneficiaries concerned. Therefore, the averment of the
Petitioner that there is large scale exclusion on account of authentication
failure, etc is misplaced and untenable in law.
Conclusion
34. For the foregoing reasons, it is submitted that in view of the
binding decisions by larger Benches of this Hon'ble Court in M.P. Sharma
and Kharak Singh, the present petitions under Article 32 of the
Constitution do not lie, and are liable to be dismissed by this Hon'ble
Court.
VII. Additional Solicitor General of India, Mr Tushar Mehta, for the
respondents
1. The right to privacy is, though an inherent right, is only a common
law right. Whenever and wherever the competent legislature has found it
necessary expedient or desirable to protect a person's privacy, it has
done so by enacting a statute and thus, making a statutory right of
privacy. Such common law right which can be protected based upon
specific subjects may not be declared as fundamental right on the
following grounds and also on the ground that there are no "judicially
discernable and manageable standards" to ascertain and define privacy.
Any view on the ground of privacy, if taken, by smaller Benches, are per
in curiam and, therefore, not a good law.
2. Privacy has always been recognised as a "right". It is a very
important and enforceable right but not a fundamental right:
2.1. That the ratio of Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 1 that "privacy" is
not a fundamental right has not been expressly or impliedly overruled by
subsequent judgments rendered by this Hon'ble Court. The subsequent
judgments which elevates the "right to privacy" as a fundamental right
are per incuriam.
2.2. That in view of the law which exists as on date there is no
fundamental right to privacy guaranteed under Part III of the
Constitution of India including under Article 21. If this Hon'ble Court
would "read" privacy in Part III, it will amount to amending the
Constitution though the omission to mention privacy in Part III is
conscious.
2.3. Neither the Constituent Assembly nor the competent legislature
exercising power of amendment of the Constitution have embodied right
of privacy under Part III of the Constitution and the omission clearly
appears to be conscious. Even by employing "external aid" for
interpreting i.e. Constitution Assembly Debates, the interpretation
canvassed by the petitioners, etc. that privacy is a fundamental right
cannot be sustained, inasmuch as, the framers of the Constitution
expressly did not deem it fit expedient or appropriate to incorporate a
right to privacy in Part III of the Constitution in their wisdom.
2.4. The courts have always refrained from creating a new right
adopting the process of interpretation since creating a "right" is not the
prerogative of the courts, but that of the competent legislature. Even in
other jurisdiction, the courts have refrained from "creating" a right by
way of judicial law-making.
2.5. Wherever, the legislature of other sovereign countries of the world
deemed it fit to confer "privacy" with constitutional status, they
incorporated the same either by way of amendment to the Constitution or
by way of adoption of the same through parliamentary process. In
absence thereof the right to privacy is, at best, a "common law right" and
the same can only be conferred/protected by way of a statute made by
the competent legislature.
3. UIDAI respectfully adopts the aforesaid submission made by the
Union of India. However, in addition to the submissions made by the
Union of India, UIDAI submits as under.
I. "Privacy" is inherently a vague and subjective concept-A vague
concept which is incapable of any precise definition/contours
cannot be conferred with a status of constitutional fundamental
right
4. It is respectfully submitted that the term "privacy" is inherently
vague and subjective notion having different meaning for different
individuals. Such a notion is incapable of being precisely defined and has
rambling application to various aspect of human life depending upon the
preconceived notions of each individual. It is submitted that such a
vague concept whose contours cannot be precisely defined cannot be
elevated to and/or conferred status of a constitutional fundamental right
as there would be no judicially discernable and manageable standards to
control and enforce the said right.
5. It is submitted that world over, all the legal as well as social
scholars and luminaries are ad idem that privacy, as a concept, is
elusively difficult to define. The definitional framework which may be
required to ascertain the extent and origins of privacy within the Indian
Constitutional law set-up may
further be difficult to ascertain. This concept of privacy has over the years
remained with little or almost no authoritative explanation.
6. In this context it would be relevant to refer to the view expresed by
some scholars who have tried to define privacy:
6.1. Mr Richard B. Parker in his article "A Definition of Privacy," has
stated as under:
" privacy is control over when and by whom the various parts of us
can be sensed by others. By "sensed," is meant simply seen, heard,
touched, smelled, or tasted. By "parts of us," is meant the part of our
bodies, our voices, and the products of our bodies. "Parts of us" also
includes objects very closely associated with us. By "closely
associated" is meant primarily what is spatially associated. The objects
which are "parts of us" are objects we usually keep with us or locked
up in a place accessible only to us."
(Richard B. Parker, "A Definition of Privacy," Rutgers Law Review 27
(1974) : 281)
6.2. Rachel L. Finn, David Wright and Michael Friedewald of Fraunhofer
Institute for Systems and Innovation Research, in their paper titled as
"Seven Types of Privacy" stated as under:
"Privacy" is a key lens though which many new technologies, and
most especially new surveillance technologies, are critiqued. 2 However,
"privacy" has proved notoriously difficult to define. Serge Gutwirth
says 'The notion of privacy remains out of the grasp of every academic
chasing it. Even when it is cornered by such additional modifiers as
"our" privacy, it still finds a way to remain elusive. ,3 Colin Bennett
notes that 'attempts to define the concept of 'privacy' have generally
not
met
with any success'. 4 Legal scholars James Whitman and Daniel
Solove have respectively described privacy as 'an unusually slippery
concept'5, and 'a concept in disarray. Nobody can articulate what it
means'6 Furthermore, Debbie Kaspar notes that 'scholars have a
famously difficult time pinning down the meaning of such a widely
used term [and] most introduce their work by citing this difficulty'.
Helen Nissenbaum has argued that privacy is best understood though
a notion of "contextual integrity", where it is not the sharing of
information that is a problem,
rather it is the sharing of information outside of socially agreed
contextual boundaries.
*
*
*
Although a widely accepted definition of privacy remains elusive,
there has been more consensus on a recognition that privacy
comprises multiple dimensions, and some privacy theorists have
attempted to create taxonomies of privacy problems, intrusions or
categories.
*
*
*
However, these scholars' focus on the ways in which privacy can be
infringed and the legal problem which must be solved is largely
reactive. They focus on specific harms which are already occurring and
which must be stopped, rather than over-arching protections that
should be instituted to prevent harms.
*
*
*
We also suggest that the fluidity of privacy as a concept may be an
important aspect of its utility, since technological developments may
introduce new types of privacy. As technologies develop and
proliferate, various types of privacy which had not previously been
considered or identified as under threat may become compromised.
*
*
*
we propose that fluidity and flexibility are necessary to enable
"privacy" to respond to technological changes. More precise
conceptualisations, taxonomies and boundaries surrounding privacy,
particularly in the legal field, may disrupt the use of privacy to protect
individuals and groups from intrusions that impact upon their
freedoms, fundamental rights and access to goods and services."
(emphasis supplied)
(Seven Types of Privacy-Rachel L. Finn David Wright Michael Friedewald,
Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research)
6.3. The academic Helen Nissenbaum, in the book Privacy in Context-
Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life', has enunciated key
concepts on the definitional exercise as:
"Almost as many who have taken up the subject of privacy in
relation to information technology have declared it deeply problematic,
referring not only to questions and disagreements about its value,
benefits, and harms but to its conceptual morass. Attempts to define it
have been notoriously controversial and have been accused of
vagueness and internal inconsistency-of being overly inclusive,
excessively narrow, or insufficiently distinct from other value concepts.
Believing conceptual murkiness to be a key obstacle to resolving
problems, many have embarked on the treacherous path of defining
privacy. As a prelude to addressing crucial substantive questions, they
have sought to establish whether privacy
is a claim, a right, an interest, a value, a preference, or merely a state of
existence. They have defended accounts of privacy as a descriptive
concept, a normative concept, a legal concept, or all three. They have
taken positions on whether privacy applies only to information, to actions
and decisions (the so called Constitutional rights to privacy), to special
seclusion, or to all three. They have declared privacy relevant to all
information, or only to a rarefied subset of personal, sensitive, or intimate
information, and they have disagreed over whether it is a right to control
and limit access or merely a measure of the degree of access others have
to us and to information about us. They have posited links between
privacy and anonymity, privacy and secrecy, privacy and confidentiality,
and privacy and solitude.
Believing that one must define or provide an account of privacy
before one can systematically address critical challenges can thwart
further progress
Maintaining all these meanings while delineating a concept to
support policy, moral judgment, and technical design seems a
hopeless ambition.
Those who recognise the perils of inclusiveness attempt to purify
the concept by trimming away some of the inconsistency and
ambiguity, declaring certain uses wrong or confused. This has meant
disputing the proper application of privacy so called Constitutional
case, or it has meant rejecting control over information as part of the
meaning of privacy in favour of degree of access or visa-versa."
(Helen Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context, Technology, Policy, and the
Integrity of Social Life, Stanford University Press)
6.4. Scholar Julie E. Cohen in an article in Harvard Law Review titled
"What Privacy Is For" has stated as under:
"Most privacy theorists have tended to think that the key to defining
privacy lies in locating privacy's essence in one or another overarching
principle (such as liberty, inaccessibility, or control) and then offering
finely parsed resolutions of the resulting conflicts between the
principles and ordinary, everyday practices and expectations.
Definitions of privacy grounded in core principles, however, inevitably
prove both over and under inclusive when measured against the types
of privacy expectations that real people have. For example, such
definitions can't explain the widespread belief that sharing personal
details with one's friends or one's airplane seatmate does not
automatically equal sharing them with one's employer. In the real
world, privacy expectations and behaviors are unruly and
heterogeneous, persistently defying efforts to reduce them to neat
conceptual schema.
The self has no autonomous, pre-cultural core, nor could it, because
we are born and remain situated within social and cultural contexts.
And privacy is not a fixed condition, nor could it be, because the
individual's relationship to social and cultural contexts is dynamic.
These realities do not weaken the case for privacy; they strengthen it.
Subjectivity is a function of the interplay between emergent
selfhood and social shaping; privacy, which inheres in the interstices
of social shaping, is what permits that interplay to occur. Privacy is not
a fixed condition that can be distilled to an essential core, but rather
"an interest in breathing room to engage in socially situated processes
of boundary management." It enables situated subjects to navigate
within preexisting cultural and social matrices, creating spaces for the
play and the work of self-making."
6.5. Scholar Adam Moore, in a Journal Of Social Philosophy, wrote an
article titled as "Defining Privacy" wherein it was argued that if privacy
exists in various fields, requiring varying degrees of protection, it would
be incongruent to define it within the Constitutional framework as one
overarching. In the said article following was argued by Adam Moore:
"Privacy has been defined in many ways over the last few hundred
years. Warren and Brandeis, following Judge Thomas Cooley, called it
8
"the
right to be let alone, "9 Pound and Freund have defined privacy in
10
terms of an extension personality or personhood. Legal scholar
William Prosser separated privacy cases into four distinct but related
torts. "Intrusion : Intruding (physically or otherwise) upon the solitude
of another in a highly offensive manner. Private facts : Publicizing
highly offensive private information about someone which is not of
legitimate concern to the public. False light : Publicizing a highly
offensive and false impression of another. Appropriation : Using
another's name or likeness for some advantage without the other's
consent. "11
Alan Westin and others have described privacy in terms of
information control. 12 Still others have insisted that privacy consists of
a
13
form of autonomy over personal matters.
William Parent argued that
"[p]rivacy is the condition of not having undocumented personal
knowledge about one possessed by others"14, while Julie Inness defined
privacy as "the state of possessing control over a realm of intimate
decisions, which include decisions about intimate intimate information,
and intimate actions." "15
More recently, Judith Wagner DeCew has proposed that the "realm
of the private to be whatever types of information and activities are
not, according to a reasonable person in normal circumstances, the
"16
legitimate concern of others.
"I have maintained that privacy should be defined as a right to
control access to places, locations, and personal information along with
use and control rights to these goods. Nevertheless, it is likely the
case that any definition of a right to privacy will not satisfy everyone.
It is equally true that how the right is justified will play an important
role in providing the dimensions of the definition at issue-thus, any
attempt to define privacy rights independent of a justifying theory will
likely be incomplete."
(Adam Moore, "Defining Privacy", Journal of Social Philosophy, Vol. 39 No.
3, Fall 2008, 411-428)
6.6. Thus it is respectfully submitted that while it may at the outset
seem inherently harmless and innocuous to lay down the parameters of
privacy, it may result in limiting the role of citizen or the role of State in
one way or the other if the privacy is to be held to be fundamental right.
As stated above, it is seen that for the better part of the century,
foremost legal scholars have not been able to define the contours of
privacy. It has been an almost unanimous view that any exercise to
include such a concept within the fundamental rights framework may do
violence to the delicate balance of State machinery and individual
citizenry. The criticism of the American approach, highly relied upon by
the petitioner is perfectly conceptualised in an essay on the seminal work
of Warren and Brandeis in the Harvard Law Review article in 1890.
6.7. Professor, Dorothy J. Glancy, in her article "The Invention of The
Right to Privacy", in Arizona Law Review, states that:
"Fewer than ninety years later it is surprising to find that this
relatively new chapter in our law appears to have fallen into such
disarray that one United States Supreme Court Justice has
characterized the right to privacy cases decided by his Court as
"defying categorical description".
All that Warren and Brandeis ever claimed to have invented was a
legal theory which brought into focus a common "right to privacy"
denominator already present in a wide variety of legal concepts and
precedents from many different areas of the common law. It is for that
reason that their article reads as if the authors had literally ransacked
every traditional area of the common law they could find-such as
contracts, property, trusts, copyright, protection of trade secrets, and
torts-in order to pluck out the already existing legal principle
underlying all of these various parts of the common law. This
underlying legal principle was the right to privacy."
(Dorothy J. Glancy, The Invention of The Right to Privacy, Arizona Law
Review, Volume 21 1979 Number 1)
7. Thus it is clear from the above that not only "privacy" as a concept
is incapable of being precisely defined but also its application on various
facets of human behaviour and activities are essentially individual
specific, therefore, incapable of any "judicially discernable and
manageable standard" according to which it can be enforced. As such in
absence of any precise guidance as to what conduct of human life is
covered under the concept of "privacy" it cannot be conferred with a
constitutional status of a "protected fundamental right".
II. The codified statutory law in India already confers protection
to individuals' "Right to Privacy".
8. It is respectfully submitted that as stated above, ascertaining the
contours of the proposed right to privacy within the constitutional set-up
could be a daunting task. Further, such right would have to stand the
test of fast changing time wherein new avenues, technological
advancements and fields are emerging rapidly. In this changing scenario
privacy can be best protected through statutory legislations which would
be dealing with subject specific legislations which can precisely define
the conduct and/or activity of humans requiring protection and also
provide for breach thereof in absence of which only, a constitutional
remedy under Article 226 can be resorted to. It is submitted that when a
statute is subject specific, it will not be difficult for the competent
legislature to either define "privacy" or provide for its protections in the
context of such a specific subject.
9. In this context, it is extremely crucial to note here that it is
completely incorrect to suggest that the mandate of Article 12 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 17 of the International
Covenant of Civil and Political Rights which provides for protection
against arbitrary or unlawful interference with individual's privacy, family,
home and correspondence, and which seeks to protect unlawful attacks
on his honour and reputation has not been embodied in Indian law as
submitted by some of the petitioners.
10. It is respectfully submitted that wherever, competent legislature
has deemed it fit, expedient, desirable or necessary to protect privacy in
any aspect of human life, the legislature has protected the same under a
specific statute. It is submitted that by enacting respective statutes
dealing with specific subjects as detailed hereinafter, not only the
legislature has protected individual's privacy in family, home,
correspondence, and unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation but
the legislature, in its wisdom, has also protected privacy in other facets of
human life.
11. The question of protecting "privacy" as a "right" can be broadly
classified as under:
PRIVACY
Physical privacy
Mental privacy
(Re body)
(Re mind)
Dissemination of
Personal choices
information of
personal naure
12. The following are the broad facets of privacy. The list is obviously
illustrative and not exhaustive:
(i) Physical privacy
(ii) Privacy in one's home
(iii) Privacy in communication
(iv) Privacy in financial affairs
(v) Privacy of health
(vi) Privacy of individual information
(vii) Online privacy
(viii) Privacy of thought
13. It is respectfully submitted that wherever legislature deemed it fit
and expedient, the above facets of "common law right of privacy" have
been statutorily recognised, codified, defined and protected under the
respective statutes, with a safeguard that the same cannot be abridged
in any manner other than as provided under those specific statutes.
14. The same is evident from the following illustrative chart, which
provides for laws which protect privacy of individuals in specific fields:
The Right to Information Section 8 (i) of the Act forbids disclosure of
Act, 2005
information which relates to personal
information the disclosure of which has not
relationship to any public activity, or
interest, or which would cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual
The test for disclosure of the said
information under the Act is that the
authority created under the has to be
satisfied that the larger public interest
justifies the disclosure of such information.
The
Easements
Act,
Section 18 of the Act provides for Customary
1882
easement and provides that by the custom
of a certain town no owner or occupier of a
house can open a new window therein so as
substantially to invade his neighbour's
privacy.
Penal Code, 1860
Penal Code, 1860 comprehensively covers
almost all the aspect of human privacy
including but not limiting to individual's
privacy, family privacy, home and
correspondence privacy, and protection
against unlawful attacks on individuals
honour and reputation.
Privacy of property
- 268. - Public nuisance
"A person is guilty of a public nuisance who
does any act or is guilty of an illegal
omission which causes any common injury,
danger or annoyance to the public or to the
people in general who dwell or occupy
property in the vicinity, or which
must necessarily cause injury, obstruction,
danger or annoyance to persons who may
have occasion to use any public right."
- Section 441-Criminal trespass
"Whoever enters into or upon property in the
possession of another with intent to commit
an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy
any person in possession of such property,
or having lawfully entered into or upon such
property, unlawfully remains there with
intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy
any such person, or with intent to commit
an offence, is said to commit "criminal
trespass".
- Section 42-House trespass
"Whoever commits criminal trespass by
entering into or remaining in any building,
tent or vessel used as a human dwelling. or
any building used as a place for worship, or
as a place for the custody of property, is
said to commit "House-trespass"."
- Section 443-Lurking house-trespass
"Whoever commits house-trespass having
taken precautions to conceal such house-
trespass from some person who has a right
to exclude or eject the trespasser from the
building, tent or vessel which is the subject
of the trespass, is said to commit "lurking
house-trespass".
- Section 444-Lurking house-trespass by
night
"Whoever commits lurking house-trespass
after sunset and before sunrise, is said to
commit "lurking house-trespass by night"."
- Section 445-House-breaking
"A person is said to commit "house-
breaking" who commits house-trespass if he
effects his entrance into the house or any
part of it in any of the six ways here in after
described; or if, being in the house or
any part of it for the purpose of committing
an offence, or, having committed an offence
therein, he quits the house or any part of it
in any of such six ways, that is to say:
First-If he enters or quits through a
passage by himself, or by any abettor of the
house-trespass, in order to the committing
of the house-trespass.
Secondly-I he enters or quits through any
passage not intended by any person, other
than himself or an abettor of the offence, for
human entrance; or through any passage to
which he has obtained access by scaling or
climbing over any wall or building.
Thirdly-If lie enters or quits through any
passage which he or any abettor of the
house-trespass has opened, in order to the
committing of the house-trespass by any
means by which that passage was not
intended by the occupier of the house to be
opened.
Fourthly - If he enters or quits by opening
any lock in order to the committing of the
house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of
the house after a house-trespass.
Fifthly-If he effects his entrance or
departure by using criminal force or
committing an assault or by threatening any
person with assault.
Sixthly-It he enters or quits by any
passage which he knows to have been
fastened against such entrance or departure,
and to have been unfastened by himself or
by an abettor of the house-trespass."
- Section 446-House-breaking by night
"Whoever commits house-breaking, after
sunset and before sunrise, is said to commit
"house-breaking by night"."
- Section 49-House-trespass in order
to commit offence punishable with death
"Whoever commits house-trespass in order
to the committing of any offence punishable
with death, shall be punishable with 152
[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine."
- Section 450-House-trespass in order to
commit
offence
punishable
with
imprisonment for life
"Whoever commits house-trespass in order
to the committing of any offence punishable
with [imprisonment for life], shall be
punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding, ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine."
- Section 451-House-trespass in order to
commit offence punishable with
imprisonment
"Whoever commits house-trespass in order
to the committing of any offence punishable
with imprisonment, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, and
shall also be liable to fine; and if the offence
intended to be committed is theft, the term
of the imprisonment may be extended to
seven years."
-
Section 452-House-trespass after
preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful
restraint
"Whoever commits house-trespass, having
made preparation for causing hurt to any
person or for assaulting any person, or for
wrongfully restraining any person, or for
putting any person in fear of hurt, or of
assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine."
- Section 458-Lurking house-trespass or
house-breaking by night after preparation
for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint
- Section 459-Grievous hurt caused whilst
committing lurking house trespass or house-
breaking
- Section 461 - Dishonestly breaking open
receptacle containing property
-
Section 462-Punishment for same
offence when committed by person
entrusted with custody
Evidence Act
- Section 122. Communications during
marriage.
"No person who is or has been married, shall
be compelled to disclose any communication
made to him during marriage by any person
to whom he is or has been married; nor
shall he be permitted to disclose any such
communication, unless the person who
made it, or his representative in interest,
consents, except in suits between married
persons, or proceedings in which one
married person is prosecuted for any crime
committed against the other.
- Section 124. Official communications
"No public officer shall be compelled to
disclose communications made to him in
official confidence, when he considers that
the public interests would suffer by the
disclosure.
-
Section
125.
Information
as
to
commission of offences
No Magistrate or Police officer shall be
compelled to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any
offence, and no Revenue officer shall be
compelled to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any
offence against the public revenue. 1 125.
Information as to commission of
offences. - No Magistrate or Police officer
shall be compelled to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any
offence, and no Revenue officer shall be
compelled to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any
offence against the public revenue."
Explanation. - "Revenue officer" in this
section means an officer employed in or
about the business of any branch of the
public revenue.]
- Section 126 Professional communications
No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil shall
at an time be permitted, unless with his
client's express consent, to disclose any
communication made to him in the course
and for the purpose of his employment as
such barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, by
or on behalf of his client, or to state the
contents or condition of any document with
which he has become acquainted in the
course and for the purpose of his
professional employment, or to disclose any
advice given by him to his client in the
course and for the purpose of such
employment : Provided that nothing in this
section shall protect from disclosure-
(1) Any such communication made in
furtherance of any [illegal] purpose; [illegal]
purpose;"
(2) Any fact observed by any barrister,
pleader, attorney or vakil, in the course of
his employment as such, showing that any
crime or fraud has been committed since the
commencement of his employment. It is
immaterial whether the attention of such
barrister, [pleader], attorney or vakil was or
was not directed to such fact by or on behalf
of his client. Explanation.-The obligation
stated in this section continues after the
employment has ceased.
Illustrations
(a) A, a client, says to B, an attorney-")
have committed forgery, and I wish you to
defend me" As the defence of a man known
to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this
communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an attorney-
wish to obtain possession of property by the
use of a forged deed on which I request you
to sue". This communication, being made in
furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not
protected from disclosure.
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement,
retains B, an attorney, to defend him. In the
course of the proceedings, B observes that
an entry has been made in A's account-
book, charging A with the sum said to have
been embezzled, which entry was not in the
book at the commencement of his
employment. This being a fact observed by
B in the course of his employment, showing
that a fraud has been committed since the
commencement of the proceedings, it is not
protected from disclosure.
- Section 127-Section 126 to apply to
interpreters, etc
The provisions of Section 126 shall apply to
interpreters, and the clerks or servants of
barristers, pleaders, attorneys, and vakils.
- Section 128-Privilege not waived by
volunteering evidence
If any party to a suit gives evidence therein
at his own instance or otherwise, he shall
not be deemed to have consented thereby to
such disclosure as is mentioned in Section
126; and if any party. to a suit or
proceeding calls any such barrister, 1
[pleader], attorney or vakil as a witness, he
shall be deemed to have consented to such
disclosure only if he questions such
barrister, attorney or vakil on matters
which, but for such question, he would not
be at liberty to disclose.-If any party to a
suit gives evidence therein at his own
instance or otherwise, he shall not be
deemed to have consented thereby to such
disclosure as is mentioned in Section 126;
and if any party to a suitor proceeding calls
any such barrister, 1 [pleader], attorney or
vakil as a witness, he shall be deemed to
have consented to such disclosure only if he
questions such barrister, attorney or vakil on
matters which, but for such question, he
would not be at liberty to disclose."
-Section 129. Confidential communications
with legal advisers
No one shall be compelled to disclose to the
Court any confidential communication which
has taken place between him and his legal
professional adviser, unless he offers himself
as a witness, in which case he may be
compelled to disclose any such
communications as may appear to the Court
necessary to be known in order to explain
any evidence which he has given; but no
others.
- Section 130-Production of title-deeds of
witness not a party
No witness who is not a party to a suit shall
be compelled to produce his title-deeds to
any property, or any document in virtue of
which he holds any property as pledgee or
mortgagee, or any document the production
of which might tend to criminate him,
unless he has agreed in writing to produce
them with the person seeking the
production of such deeds or some person
through whom he claims.
- Section 131-Production - of documents or
electronic records which another person.
having possession could refuse to produce
No one shall be compelled to produce
documents in his possession or electronic
records under his control, which any other
person would be entitled to refuse to
produce if they were in his possession, or
control, unless such last-mentioned person
consents to their production. 12 [131.
Production of documents or electronic
records which another person, having
possession, could refuse to produce.-No
one shall be compelled to produce
documents in his possession or electronic
records under his control, which any other
person would be entitled to refuse to
produce if they were in his possession, or
control, unless such last-mentioned person
consents to their production.]'
(emphasis supplied)
Indian Telegraph Act,
The Act contains several provisions which
1885
regulate and prohibit the unauthorised
interception or tampering with messages
sent over "telegraphs".
Section 5 of the Act empowers the
Government to take possession of licensed
telegraphs and to order interception of
messages in cases of 'public emergency' or
'in the interest of the public safety'.
Interception may only be carried out
pursuant to a written order by an officer
specifically empowered for this purpose by
the State/Central Government. The officer
must be satisfied that "it is necessary or
expedient so to do in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States or public order or for
preventing incitement to the commission of
an offence"
Section 24 makes it a criminal offence for a
person to enter a telegraph office "with the
intent of unlawfully learning the contents of
any message". Such a person may be
punished with imprisonment for a term of
up to a year.
Section 25 further imposes a criminal
penalty on anyone who damages or tampers
with any
telegraph with the intent to prevent the
transmission of messages or to acquaint
himself with the contents of any message or
to commit mischief. Punishment in this case
could extend to 3 years imprisonment or a
fine or both.
Section 26 makes it an offence for a
Telegraph Officer to alter, unlawfully disclose
or acquaint himself with the content of any
message. This is also punishable with up to
3 years imprisonment or a fine or both.
Section 30 criminalises the fraudulent
retention or willful detention of a message
which is intended for someone else.
Punishment
extends
to
2
years
imprisonment or fine or both.
License
Agreements
Although the statute itself governs the
granted
under
the
actions of telecom operators in a general
Telegraph Act
way, more detailed guidelines protecting
individual privacy regulating their behaviour
are contained in the terms of the licenses
issued to the telecoms which permit them to
conduct businesses. Frequently, these
licenses contain clauses requiring telecom
operators to safeguard the privacy of their
consumers. A few examples include:
Clause 21 of the National Long Distance
License comprehensively covers various
aspects of privacy including-
(a) Licensees to be responsible for the
protection
of
privacy
of
communication, and to ensure that
unauthorised interception of message
does not take place.
(b) Licensees to take all necessary steps
to safeguard the privacy and
confidentiality of any information about
a third party and their business to
whom they provide service and from
whom they have acguired such
information by virtue of those service
and shall use their best endeavours to
secure that:
(i) No person acting on behalf of the
licensees or the licensees
themselves divulge
or uses any such information except as may
be necessary in the course of providing such
service to the third party; and
(ii) No such person seeks such
information other than is necessary
for the purpose of providing service
to the third party.
(c) The above safeguard however does
not apply where
(i) The information relates to a specific
party and that party has consented
in writing to such information being
divulged or used, and such
information is divulged or used in
accordance with the terms of that
consent; or
(ii) The information is already open to
the public and otherwise known.
(d) The licensees shall take necessary
steps to ensure that they and any
person(s) acting on their behalf
observe confidentiality of customer
information.
2) Clause 39.2 of the Unified Access
Service Licence and Clause 42.2 of
the Cellular Mobile Telephone
Service licence enjoin the licensee
to take all necessary steps to
safeguard
the
privacy
and
confidentiality of any information
about a third party, and its business
to whom it provides the service. The
licensee is required to use its best
endeavours to secure that no person
acting on behalf of the licensee or
the licensee divulges or uses any
such information-except - as may be
necessary in the course of providing
such service to the third party.
3) The Internet Services Licence
Agreement (which authorises ISPs
to function in India) similarly
contains provisions touching on
privacy:
(a) Part VI of the Licence Agreement
gives the Government the right to
inspect/monitor the TSPs systems. The
TSP is responsible for making facilities
available for such interception.
(b) Clause 32 under Part VI contains
provisions mandating the confidentiality of
information. These provisions are identical to
those described in Clause 21 of the NLD
License agreement (see above).
(c) Clause 33.4 makes it the
responsibility of the TSP to trace
nuisance, obnoxious or malicious calls,
messages
or
communications
transported through its equipment.
(d) Clause 34.8 requires ISPs to maintain
a log of all users connected and the
service they are using (mail, telnet,
http, etc.). The ISPs must also log
every outward login or telnet through
their computers. These logs, as well as
copies of all the packets originating
from
the
customer
premises
equipment (CPE) of the ISP, must be
available in REAL TIME to Telecom
Authority. The clause forbids logins
where the identity of the logged-in
user is not known.
(e) Clauses 34.12 and 34.13 requires the
licensee to make available a list of all
subscribers to its services on a
password protected website for easy
access by Government authorities.
(f) Clause 34.16 requires the licensee to
activate services only after verifying
the bona fides of the subscribers and
collecting supporting documentation.
There is no regulation governing how
long this information is to be retained.
(g) Clause 34.22 makes it mandatory for
the Licensee to make available "details
of the subscribers using the service" to
the Government or its representatives
"at any prescribed instant".
(h) Clause 34.23 mandates that the
licensee maintain "all commercial
records with regard to the
communications exchanged on the
network" for a period of "at least one
year for scrutiny by the licensor for
security reasons and may be destroyed
thereafter
unless directed otherwise by the licensor".
(i) Clause 34.28(viii) forbids the licensee
from, transferring the following
information to any person/place
outside India:
(j) Any accounting information relating to
subscriber (except for international
roaming/billing) (Note : it does not
restrict a statutorily required disclosure
of financial nature); and
(k) User information (except pertaining to
foreign subscribers using Indian
operator's network while roaming).
(I) Clauses 34.28(ix) and (x) require the
TSP to provide traceable identity of
their subscribers and on request by the
Government must be able to provide
the geographical location of any
subscriber at any given time.
(m) Clause 34.28(xix) stipulates that "in
order to maintain the privacy of voice
and data, monitoring shall only be
upon authorisation by the Union Home
Secretary or Home Secretaries of the
States/Union Territories". (It is unclear
whether this is to operate as an
overriding provision governing all other
clauses as well)
Privacy and Confiden-
Vide its 2010 directions TRAI has sought to
tiality Direction by TRAI
implement the privacy and confidentiality
related clauses in the service providers'
licences. Accordingly by this direction, the
TRAI ordered all service providers to "put in
place an appropriate mechanisms, so as to
prevent the breach of confidentiality on
information belonging to the subscribers and
privacy of communication". All service
providers were required by this regulation to
submit a report to the TRAI giving details of
measures so adopted.
(emphasis supplied)
The
Bankers
Book
Acts confers statutory protections against
Evidence Act, 1891
inspection and dissemination of bankers
books of accounts.
Section 2A. Conditions in the printout.
A printout of entry or a copy of printout
referred to in sub-section (8) of Section 2
shall be accompanied by the following,
namely:
(a) a certificate to the effect that it is a
printout of such entry or a copy of such
printout by the principal accountant or
branch manager; and
(b) a certificate by a person in-charge of
computer system containing a brief
description of the computer system and the
particulars of (A) the safeguards adopted by
the system to ensure that data is entered or
other operation performed only by
authorised persons;
(B) the safeguards adopted to prevent and
detect unauthorised change of data;
(C) the safeguards available to retrieve data
that is lost due to systemic failure or any
other reasons;
(D) the manner in which data is transferred
from the system to removable media like
floppies, discs, tapes or other electro-
magnetic data storage devices;
(E) the mode of verification in order to
ensure that data has been accurately
transferred to such removable media;
(F) the mode of identification of such data
storage devices;
(G) the arrangements for the storage and
custody of such storage devices;
(H) the safeguards to prevent and detect
any tampering with the system; and
(I) any other factor which will vouch for the
integrity and accuracy of the system.
(c) a further certificate from the person in
charge of the computer system to the effect
that to the best of his knowledge and belief,
such computer system operated properly at
the material time, he was provided with all
the relevant data and the printout in
question represents correctly, or is
appropriately derived from, the relevant
data.
Section 5. Case in which officer of bank not
compellable to produce books
No officer of a bank shall in any legal
proceeding to which the bank is not a party
be compellable to produce any bankers book
the contents of which can be proved under
this Act, or to appear as a witness to prove
the matters, transactions and accounts
therein recorded, unless by order of the
Court or a Judge made for special cause.
Section 6. Inspection of books by order of
Court or Judge
(1) On the application of any party to a legal
proceeding the Court or a Judge may order
that such party be at liberty to inspect and
take copies of any entries in a bankers book
for any of the purposes of such proceeding,
or may order the bank to prepare and
produce, within a time to be specified in the
order, certified copies of all such entries
accompanied by a further certificate that no
other entries are to be found in the books of
the bank relevant to the matters in issue in
such proceeding, and such further certificate
shall be dated and subscribed in manner
hereinbefore directed in reference to
certified copies.
(2) An order under this or the preceding
section may be made either with or without
summoning the bank, and shall be served
on the bank three clear days (exclusive of
bank holidays) before the same is to be
obeyed, unless the Court or Judge shall
otherwise direct.
(3) The bank may at any time before the
time limited for obedience to any such order
as aforesaid either offer to produce their
books at the trial or give notice of their
intention to show cause against such order,
and thereupon the same/shall not be
enforced without further order.
Credit
Information
Chapter VI of the Act embodies information
Companies (Regulation)
privacy principles with respect to credit
Act, 2005
information
Section 2-Definitions.-
(e) "credit information company" means a
company formed and registered under the
Companies Act, 1956 and which has been
granted a certificate of registration under
sub-section (2) of Section 5;
(f) "credit institution" means a banking
company and includes-
(i) a corresponding new bank, the State
Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a co-
operative bank, the National Bank and
regional rural bank;
(ii) a non-banking financial company as
defined under clause (f) of Section 45-I of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
1. "specified user" means any credit
institution, credit information company
being a member under sub-section (3) of
Section 15, and includes such other person
or institution as may be specified by
regulations made, from time to time, by the
Reserve Bank for the purpose of obtaining
credit information from a credit information
company;
Section 19-Accuracy and security of credit
information.-A credit information company
or credit institution or specified user, as the
case may be, in possession or control of
credit information, shall take such steps
(including security safeguards) as may be
prescribed, to ensure that the data relating
to the credit information maintained by
them is accurate, complete, duly protected
against any loss or unauthorised access or
use or unauthorised disclosure thereof.
Section 20. Privacy principles.- -
Every credit information company, credit
institution and specified user, shall adopt
the following privacy principles in relation to
collection, processing, collating, recording,
preservation, secrecy, sharing and usage of
credit information, namely:
a. the principles -
i. which may be followed by every credit
institution for collection of information from
its borrowers and clients and by every credit
information company, for collection of
information from its member credit
institutions or credit information companies,
for processing, recording, protecting the
data relating to credit information furnished
by, or obtained from, their member credit
institutions or credit information companies,
as the case may be, and sharing of such
data with specified users;
ii. which may be adopted by every specified
user for processing, recording, preserving
and protecting the data relating to credit
information furnished, or received, as the
case may be, by it;
iii. which may be adopted by every credit
information company for allowing access to
records containing credit information of
borrowers and clients and alteration of such
records in case of need to do so;
b. the purpose for which the credit
information may be used, restriction on such
use and disclosure thereof;
C. the extent of obligation to check accuracy
of credit information before furnishing of
such information to credit information
companies or credit institutions or specified
users, as the case may be;
d. preservation of credit information
maintained by every credit information
company, credit institution, and specified
user as the case may be (including the
period for which such information may be
maintained, manner of deletion of such
information and maintenance of records of
credit information);
e. networking of credit information
companies, credit institutions and specified
users through electronic mode;
f. any other principles and procedures
relating to credit information which the
Reserve Bank may consider necessary and
appropriate and may be specified by
regulations.
Section 22. Unauthorised access to credit
information. -
1. No person shall have access to credit
information in the possession or control of a
credit information company or a credit
institution or a specified user unless the
access is authorised by this Act or any other
law for the time being in force or directed to
do so by any court or tribunal and any such
access to credit information without such
authorisation or direction shall be considered
as an unauthorised, access to credit
information.
2. Any person who obtains unauthorised
access to credit information as referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees in
respect of each offence and if he continues
to have such unauthorised access, with
further fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees for every day on which the
default continues and such unauthorised
credit information shall not be taken into
account for any purpose.
[The said Act also provides for penal
provision for violation of privacy]
Public
Financial
The Act imposes a bar on public financial
Institutions
(Obligation
institutions to disclose information relating
as
to
Fidelity
and
to affairs of its constituents
Secrecy) Act, 1983
Section 2. Definitions.-
(1) In this Act, "public financial institution"
means-
(a) the Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation of India Limited, a company
formed and registered under the Indian
Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913);
(b)
the
Industrial
Reconstruction
Corporation of India Limited, a company
formed and registered under the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
(c) any other institution, being a company
as defined in Section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or a company to
which the provisions of Section 619 of that
Act apply, which the Central Government
may, having regard to the nature of the
business carried on by such institution, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify to
be a public financial institution for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Every notification issued under clause
(c) of sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may
be, after it is issued, be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Section 3. Obligation as to fidelity and
secrecy.
1) A public financial institution shall not,
except as otherwise provided in sub-section
(2) or in any other law for the time being in
force, divulge any information relating to, or
to the affairs of, its constituents except in
circumstances in which it is, in accordance
with the law or practice and usage,
customary among bankers, necessary or
appropriate for the public financial
institution to divulge such information.
(2) A public financial institution may, for the
purpose of efficient discharge of its
functions, collect from, or furnish to,-
(a) the Central Government; or
(b) the State Bank of India constituted
under Section 3 of the State Bank of India
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), any subsidiary bank
within the meaning of the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of
1959). any corresponding new bank
constituted under Section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings)
Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or under Section 3 of
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of
1980), any other scheduled bank within the
meaning of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 (2 of 1934); or
(c) any other public financial institution,
such credit information or other information
as it may consider useful for the purpose, in
such manner and at such time as it may
think fit. Explanation. - For the purposes of
this sub-section, the expression "credit
information" shall have the same meaning
as in clause (c) of Section 45A of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934)
subject to the modification that the banking
company referred to therein shall mean a
bank referred to in clause (b) of this sub-
section or a public financial institution. 1
[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall
apply to the credit information disclosed
under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2005.]
Payment and Settlement
Section 15 of the Act grants confidentiality
Systems Act, 2007
to the document or information obtained by
the Reserve Bank from the system provider
which provides payment system for credit
card. debit card related transactions [eg
VISA]
Section 15. Information. etc., to be
confidential. - 1. Subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), any document or
information obtained by the Reserve Bank
under Sections 12 to 14 (both inclusive)
shall be kept confidential.
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank may
disclose any document or information
obtained by it under Sections 12 to 14 (both
inclusive) to any person to whom the
disclosure of such document or information
is considered necessary for protecting the
integrity, effectiveness or security of the
payment system, or in the interest of
banking or monetary policy or the operation
of the payment systems generally or in the
public interest.
Indian Income Tax Act,
Act provides for confidentiality of income
1961
and tax information of the Assessee;
Fair Practice Code for
Under these guidelines banks/NBFCs are
Credit Card Operations,
directed to ensure confidentiality of the
2010
customer's records and maintain fair
practices in debt collection. The said
guidelines also lays down that no bank or its
agents would resort to invasion of privacy
viz., persistently bothering the card
holders/their family members at odd hours,
either for offering of credit card or for the
purpose of recovery of the balance amount.
It also provides for violation of "do not call"
code etc.
The Right To Information
Section 8(d) of the said provides exemption
Act, 2005
from disclosure of information if the said
information contains commercial confidence,
trade secrets or intellectual property and
disclosure of which would harm the
competitive position of a third party. The
said information is disclosed only if
competent authority is satisfied that larger
public interest warrants the disclosure of
such information;
The Aadhaar (Targeted
Chapter VI Protection of Information
Delivery of Financial and
28. Security and confidentiality
of
Other Subsidies, Benefits
information.
and Services) Act, 2016
The Authority shall ensure the security of
identity information and authentication
records of individuals.
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the
Authority shall ensure confidentiality of
identity information and authentication
records of individuals.
The Authority shall take all necessary
measures to ensure that the information in
the possession or control of the Authority,
including information stored in the Central
Identities Data Repository, is secured and
protected against access, use or disclosure
not permitted under this Act or regulations
made thereunder, and against accidental or
intentional destruction, loss or damage.
Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and
(2), the Authority shall
adopt and implement appropriate technical
and organisational security measures;
ensure that the agencies, consultants,
advisors or other persons appointed or
engaged for performing any function of the
Authority under this Act, have in place
appropriate technical and organisational
security measures for the information; and
ensure that the agreements or
arrangements entered into with such
agencies, consultants, advisors or other
persons, impose obligations equivalent to
those imposed on the Authority under this
Act, and require such agencies, consultants,
advisors and other persons to act only on
instructions from the Authority.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, and
save as otherwise provided in this Act, the
Authority or any of its officers or other
employees or any agency that maintains the
Central Identities Data Repository shall not,
whether during his service or thereafter,
reveal any information stored in the Central
Identities Data Repository or authentication
record to anyone:
29. Restriction on sharing information.
No core biometric information, collected or
created under this Act, shall be-
shared with anyone for any reason
whatsoever; or
used for any purpose other than generation
of Aadhaar numbers and authentication
under this Act.
The identity information, other than core
biometric information, collected or created
under this Act may be shared only in
accordance with the provisions of this Act
and in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
No identity information available with a
requesting entity shall be- -
used for any purpose, other than that
specified to the individual at the time of
submitting any identity information for
authentication; or disclosed further, except
with the prior consent of the individual to
whom such information relates.
No Aadhaar number or core biometric
information collected or created under this
Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder
shall be published, displayed or posted
publicly, except for the purposes as may be
specified by regulations.
30. Biometric information deemed to be
sensitive personal information.
The biometric information collected and
stored in electronic form, in accordance with
this Act and regulations made thereunder,
shall be deemed to be "electronic record"
and "sensitive personal data or
information", and the provisions contained
in the Information Technology Act, 2000
and the rules made thereunder shall apply
to such information, in addition to, and to
the extent not in derogation of the
provisions of this Act.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this
section, the expressions-
"electronic form" shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in clause (r) of
sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000;
"electronic record" shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in clause (t) of
sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000;
"sensitive personal data or information"
shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause (iii) of the Explanation to
Section 43A of the Information Technology
Act, 2000.
31. Alteration of demographic information or
biometric information.
1. In case any demographic information of
an Aadhaar number holder is found
incorrect or changes subsequently, the
Aadhaar number holder shall request the
Authority to alter such demographic
information in his record in the Central
Identities Data Repository in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
2. In case any biometric information of
Aadhaar number holder is lost or changes
subsequently for any reason, the Aadhaar
number holder shall request the Authority
to make necessary alteration in his record in
the Central Identities Data Repository in
such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
3. On receipt of any request under sub-
section (I) or sub-section (2), the Authority
may, if it is satisfied, make such alteration
as may be required in the record relating to
such Aadhaar number holder and intimate
such alteration to the concerned Aadhaar
number holder.
4. No identity information in the Central
Identities Data Repository shall be altered
except in the manner provided in this Act or
regulations made in this behalf.
32. Access to own information and records
of requests for authentication.
The Authority shall maintain authentication
records in such manner and for such period
as may be specified by regulations.
Every Aadhaar number holder shall be
entitled to obtain his authentication record
in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
The Authority shall not, either by itself or
through any entity under its control, collect,
keep or maintain any information about the
purpose of authentication.
33. Disclosure of information in certain
cases.
1. Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (5) of Section 28 or sub-section
(2) of Section 29 shall apply in respect of
any disclosure of information, including
identity
information or authentication records, made
pursuant to an order of a court not inferior
to that of a District Judge:
Provided that no order by the court under
this sub-section shall be made without
giving an opportunity of hearing to the
Authority.
2. Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (5) of Section 28 and clause (b)
of sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) of Section 29 shall apply in
respect of any disclosure of information,
including identity information
or
authentication records, made in the interest
of national security in pursuance of a
direction of an officer not below the rank of
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
specially authorised in this behalf by an
order of the Central Government:
Provided that every direction issued under
this sub-section, shall be reviewed by an
Oversight Committee consisting of the
Cabinet Secretary and the Secretaries to the
Government of India in the Department of
Legal Affairs and the Department of
Electronics and Information Technology,
before it takes effect:
Provided further that any direction issued
under this sub-section shall be valid for a
period of three months from the date of its
issue, which may be extended for a further
period of three months after the review by
the Oversight Committee.
The Census Act, 1948
Protection from unauthorised disclosure of
information gathered by the officers of State
during the survey for census.
The
Collection
of
Protection from unauthorised disclosure of
Statistics Act, 2008
information furnished to the statistics officer
or to any person or agencies authorised
under the Act.
Provision for keeping the identity of the
informant confidential. [Chapter III -
Section 9-14]
Juvenile
Justice
(Care
and
Protection
of
Children)
Act, 2000
Under Section 3 of the Act the Central
Government, the State Governments, the
Board, and other agencies, as the case may
be, while implementing the provisions of
this Act are to be guided by principles of
Principle of right to privacy and
confidentiality.
Section 74 of the said Act prohibits
disclosure of identity of children in any
newspaper magazine, news-sheet or audio-
visual media or other forms of
communication which may lead to the
identification of a child in conflict with law
or a child in need of care and protection or a
child victim or witness of a crime.
As per Section 51 of the Act the report of
the probation officer or social worker on a
juvenile having been charged with the
offence is be kept confidential;
The Protection of Children
Provides for protecting children's rights of
from Sexual Offences
privacy and confidentiality who are victim of
Act, 2012
offences of sexual assault, sexual
harassment and pornography,
The
Information
Section 30 Certifying Authority to follow
Technology Act, 2000
certain procedures
Every Certifying Authority shall,-
(a) make use of hardware, software, and
procedures that the secure from intrusion
and misuse;
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability
in its services which are reasonably suited
to the performance of intended functions;
(c) adhere to security procedures to
ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the
digital signatures are assured; and
(d) observe such other standards as may
be specified by regulations.
Section 65 of the Act provides protection
against tampering with individual's
computer/source documents.
Section 66 Hacking with Computer
System.-
(1) Whoever with the intent of cause or
knowing that is likely to cause wrongful
loss or damage to the public or any person
destroys or deletes or alters any
information residing in a computer
resource or diminishes its value or utility
or affects it injuriously by any means,
commits hacking.
(2) Whoever commits hacking shall be
punished with imprisonment up to three
years, or with fine which may extend up
to two lakh rupees, or with both.
Section 66E of the Act provides for
punishment for violation of privacy.
Section 72 Breach of confidentiality and
privacy. -
Save as otherwise provided in this Act or
any other law for the time being in force,
if any person who, in pursuance of any of
the powers conferred under this Act, rules
or regulations made thereunder, has
secured access to any electronic record,
book,
register,
correspondence,
information, document or other material
without the consent of the person
concerned discloses such electronic
record, book, register, correspondence,
information, document or other material
to any other person shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both.
Information
Technology
India's most comprehensive data
(Reasonable
security
protection standards are found in the ITA
practices and procedures
and are known as the Information
and sensitive personal data
Technology (Reasonable security practices
or information) Rules, 2011
and procedures and sensitive personal
data or information) Rules, 2011.
The Rules seek to provide rights to the
individual with regards to their
information and obligate body corporate to
take steps towards protecting the privacy
of consumer's information. Among other
things, the Rules define "sensitive
personal information' and require that any
corporate body must publish an online
privacy' policy, provide individuals with
the right to access and correct their
information, obtain consent before
disclosing
sensitive personal information 'except in
the case' of law enforcement, provide
individuals the ability to withdraw
consent, establish a grievance officer,
require companies to ensure equivalent
levels of protection when transferring
information, and put in place reasonable
security practices.
15. Thus, from the aforesaid illustrative statutory provisions it is clear
that both pre-and post-independence, the legislature has been granting
protection to the various facets and aspects of this "common law right to
privacy" through statutes enacted by the competent legislatures. As
such, in view thereof there is no justification to confer it a separate
constitutional protection under Part III of the Constitution by way of the
process of judicial interpretation when it is impossible to lay down any
definitive contours of the term "privacy".
III In other jurisdictions also "privacy" is protected by statute
16. It is submitted that not only in India but in other jurisdictions also
there are instances where privacy is not conferred with a status of
constitutional right but the same has been protected under statutes
governing various fields of human activity. This fact necessarily depends
upon country specific parameters. The same is evident from the analysis
of laws of the following countries which have codified the law relating to
"individual privacy" which primarily defined as personal data and has
granted in statutory safeguards from any state or private action:
New Zealand
The Privacy Act, 1993 (Act) governs how agencies
collect, use, disclose, store, retain and give access to
personal information. The Act gives the Privacy
Commissioner the power to issue, codes of practice that
modify the operation of the Act in relation to specific
industries, agencies, activities or types of personal
information. Codes currently in place are:
Credit Reporting Privacy Code
Health Information Privacy Code
Justice Sector Unique Identifier Code
Superannuation Schemes Unique Identifier Code
Telecommunications Information Privacy Code
Civil Defence National Emergencies (Information
Sharing) Code.
Enforcement is through the Privacy Commissioner.
Australia
Data privacy/protection in Australia is currently made
up of a mix of Federal and State/Territory legislation.
The Federal Privacy Act, 1988 (Cth) (Privacy Act) and
its Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) apply to private
sector entities with an annual turnover of at least A$3
million and all Commonwealth Government and
Australian Capital Territory Government agencies. The
Privacy Act was last amended by the Privacy
Amendment (Enhancing Privacy Protection) Act, 2012,
which came into force on 12-3-2014. The amendments
significantly strengthened the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner to conduct investigations. (including own
motion investigations), ensure compliance with the
amended Privacy Act and, for the first time, introduced
civil penalties for a serious/egregious breach or for
repeated breaches of the APPs where remediation has
not been implemented.
Israel
The laws that govern the right to privacy in Israel are
the Basic Law : Human Dignity and Liberty, 5752 -
1992; the Protection of Privacy Law, 5741-1981 and the
regulations promulgated thereunder (the PPL) and the
guidelines of ILITA (as defined below). The Israeli Law,
Information and Technology Authority (ILITA),
established in September 2006, as determined by
Israel's Government Decision No. 4660, dated 19-1-
2006.
Japan
The Act on the Protection of Personal Information (APPI)
requires business operators who utilise for their
business in Japan a personal information database
which consists of more than 5000 individuals in total
identified by personal information on any day in the
past six months to protect personal information.
Amendments to the APPI, which were passed in 2015
and go into effect no later than September 2017[1]
(the Amendments), apply the APPI to all businesses in
Japan, regardless of whether the business operator
maintains a database of more than 5000 individuals.
Further, the Amendments clarify the definition of
personal information, add two new classes of
information, and introduce new requirements for "opt
out" choice for business operators to disclosure of
personal information to third parties. Finally, as of 1-1-
2016, the Amendments created a Privacy Protection
Commission (the Commission), a central agency which
will Act as a supervisory governmental organisation on
issues of privacy protection. The
Amendments created the Privacy
Protection Commission (the Commission),
which will Act as a supervisory
governmental organisation on issues of
privacy protection.
China
Currently, there is not a comprehensive
data protection law in the People's
Republic of China (PRC). Instead, rules
relating to personal data protection are
found across various laws and regulations.
Generally speaking, provisions found in
laws such as the General Principles of Civil
Law and the Tort Liability Law may be
used to interpret data protection rights as
a right of reputation or right of privacy.
However, such interpretation is not
explicit. A draft Personal Data Protection
Law has been under review by the PRC
Government for many years, but there is
still no indication as to if and when such
law will be passed.
Brazil
Currently, Brazil does not have a single
statute establishing data protection
framework. There are two bills of laws,
namely,
No.
330/2013
and
No.
5.276/2016, under analysis before
Congress that, when enacted, will
specifically and broadly regulate such,
subject-matter locally. According to the
developments of both future regulations,
Bill of Law No. 5.2726/16 (Bill of Law),
dated of 13-5-2016, is likely to be
enacted in the near future, since the
Presidency declared it with a status of
urgency under the terms of Section 64 of
Brazilian Federal Constitution, thus, Bill of
Law No. 330/13 should be disregarded. In
the absence of specific law, Federal Law
No. 12.965/2014 (Brazilian Internet Act),
and its recently enacted regulating Decree
No. 8.771/16 (Decree), dated of 11-5-
2016, has brought some provisions on
security and processing of personal data.
Saudi Arabia
Shari'a principles (that is, Islamic
principles derived from the Holy Quran
and the Sunnah, the latter being the
witnesses' sayings of the Prophet
Mohammed), which although not codified,
are the primary source of law in the KSA.
In addition to Shari'a principles, the law in
the KSA consists of secular regulations
passed by the government, which is
secondary if it conflicts with Shari'a
principles. At this time, there is no
specific data protection legislation in place
in the KSA (although we understand that
a new freedom of information and
protection of private data law is under
review by the
Shura
Council).
Shari'a
principles
generally protect the privacy and personal
data of individuals.
Qatar
On 3-11-2016 the Qatari Government
passed a data protection law, Law No. 13
of 2016 concerning Personal Data
Protection (Data Protection Law). The Data
Protection Law will come into effect within
six months of the date of issue, that is, 3-
5-2017 (unless this period is extended).
Qatar is the first GCC member state to
issue a generally applicable data
protection law. The Data Protection Law
envisages further regulations being issued
to assist its implementation. The Data
Protection Law will apply to personal data
when this data is processed electronically,
or obtained, collected or extracted in any
other way in preparation for the electronic
processing thereof, or that is processed by
combining electronic processing and
traditional processing.
Singapore
Singapore enacted the Personal Data
Protection Act, 2012 (26 of 2012) (Act) on
15-10-2012. The Act took effect in 3
phases:
(i) Provisions relating to the formation of
the Personal Data Protection Commission
(the 'Commission') took effect on 2-1-
2013.
(ii) Provisions relating to the National Do-
Not-Call Registry (DNC Registry) took
effect on 2-1-2014.
(iii) The main data protection provisions
took effect on 2-7-2014.
The Act has extraterritorial effect, and so
applies to organisations collecting
personal data from individuals in
Singapore whether or not the organisation
itself has a presence in Singapore. The
data protection obligations under the Act
do not apply to the public sector, to whom
separate rules apply.
Taiwan
The former Computer Processed Personal
Data Protection Law (CPPL) was renamed
as the Personal Data Protection Law
(PDPL) and amended on 26-5-2010. The
PDPL became effective on 1-10-2012,
except that the provisions relating to
sensitive personal data and the
notification obligation for personal data
indirectly collected before
the
effectiveness of the PDPL remained
ineffective. The Government later
proposed further amendment to these and
other provisions, which passed
legislative procedure and became effective
on 15-3-2016. In Taiwan, there is no
single national data protection authority.
The various ministries and city/County
Governments serve as the competent
authorities. There is no requirement in
Taiwan for the Data Controller to appoint a
Data Protection Officer. However, if the
Data Controller is a government agency, a
specific person should be appointed to be
in charge of the security maintenance
measures.
Malaysia
Malaysia's first comprehensive personal
data protection legislation, the Personal
Data Protection Act, 2010 (PDPA), was
passed by the Malaysian Parliament on 2-
6-2010 and came into force on 15-11-
2013. Pursuant to the PDPA, a Personal
Data
Protection
Commissioner
(Commissioner) has been appointed to
implement the PDPA's provisions.
Decisions of the Commissioner can be
appealed against through the Personal
Data Protection Appeal Tribunal.
Mexico
The Federal Law on the Protection of
Personal Data held by Private Parties (Ley
Federal
de
Proteccin
de
DatosPersonalesenPosesin
de
losParticulares) (the Law) was enacted on
5-7-2010 and entered into force on 6-7-
2010. The Executive Branch has also
issued:
(i) the Regulations to the Federal Law on
the Protection of Personal Data held by
Private Parties (Reglamento de la Ley
Federal de Proteccin de Datos
PersonaiesenPosesin de losParticulares)
on 21-12-2011 (the 'Regulations'), same
which entered into force on 22-12-2011.
(ii) the Privacy Notice Guidelines on 17-1-
2013 (the Guidelines) which entered into
force on 18-4-2013.
(iii) the Parameters for Self Regulation
regarding personal data on 29-5-2014
(the Parameters), which entered into force
on 30-5-2014.
Nigeria
Nigeria does not have a comprehensive
legislative framework on the protection of
personal data. However, there are a few
industry-specific and targeted laws and
regulations that provide some privacy-
related protections, which include:
(i) The Constitution of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, 1999 (As Amended)
(the Constitution) which provides for the
fundamental rights of its citizens and
upholds the right of privacy as sacrosanct.
Section 37 thereof provides for the
guarantee and protection of the privacy of
citizens, their homes, correspondence,
telephone conversations and telegraphic
communications.
(ii) The Freedom of Information Act, 2011
(FOI Act) which seeks to protect personal
privacy. Section 14 of the FOI Act
provides that a public institution is
obliged to deny an application for
information that contains personal
information unless the individual involved
consents to the disclosure, or where such
information is publicly available. Also,
Section 16 of the FOI. Act provides that a
public institution may deny an application
for disclosure of information that is
subject to various forms of professional
privilege conferred by law (such as lawyer
-client privilege, health workers-client
privilege, etc).
(iii) The Child Rights Act 26 of 2003 (the
Child Rights Act) regulates the protection
of children (persons under the age of 18
years). This Act limits access to
information relating to children in certain
circumstances.
(iv) The Consumer Code of Practice
Regulations, 2007 (the NCC Regulations)
issued by the regulator of the
telecommunications industry in Nigeria,
the Nigerian Communications Commission
(NCC). The NCC Regulations provide that
all licensees must take reasonable steps
to protect customer information against
improper or accidental disclosure, and
must ensure that such information is
securely stored and not kept longer than
necessary. It also provides that customer
information must not be transferred to
any party except to the extent agreed
with the Customer, as permitted or
required by the NCC or other applicable
laws or regulations.
(v) In 2011, the NCC issued the Nigerian
Communications
Commission
(Registration of Telephone Subscribers)
Regulations, 2011. Section 9 of the
Regulation provides that subscribers
information contained in the Central
Database shall be held in strict
confidentiality basis and no person or
entity shall be allowed access to any
subscriber's information that is on the
Central Database except as prescribed by
the Regulation. "Central Database" is
defined in the Regulation to mean
subscriber information database,
containing the biometric and other
registration
information of all subscribers. Section 21
of the Regulation provides penal sanctions
for violators.
(vi) The National Information Technology
Development Agency (NITDA) which is the
national authority responsible
for
planning, developing and promoting the
use of information technology in Nigeria,
and which issues the Guidelines on Data
Protection (NITDA Guidelines) pursuant to
the NITDA Act, 2007. The NITDA Guidelines
prescribe guidelines for organisations that
obtain and process personal data of
Nigeria residents and citizens within and
outside Nigeria for protecting such
personal data. The NITDA Guidelines apply
to federal, State and local Government
agencies and institutions as well as
private sector organisations that own, use
or deploy information systems within the
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Peru
Personal data protection is governed in
Peru by:
(i) the Personal Data Protection Law
29733 (PDPL) published on 3-7-2011
(ii) its regulations enacted by Supreme
Decree 003-2013-JUS and published on
22-3-2013 (the Regulations), and
(iii) the Security Policy on Information
Managed by Databanks of Personal Data
enacted by Directorial Resolution N 019-
2013-JUS/DGPDP on 11-10-2013.
Although several provisions of the PDPL
have been in force since 4-7-2011, most
of the provisions of the PDPL only came
into force on 8-5-2013 (30 business days
after the issuance of the Regulations).
South Korea
In the past, South Korea did not have a
comprehensive
law governing data privacy. However, a
law relating to
protection of personal information
(Personal
Information Protection Act, "PIPA") was
enacted and
became effective as of 30-9-2011.
Moreover, there is sector specific
legislation such as:
(i) the Act on Promotion of Information
and Communication Network Utilisation
and Information Protection (IT Network
Act) which regulates the collection and
use of personal information by IT Service
Providers, defined as telecommunications
business operators under Article 2.8 of the
Telecommunications
Business Act; and other persons who
provide information or intermediate the
provision of information for profit by
utilising services rendered by
a
telecommunications business operator
(ii) the Use and Protection of Credit
Information Act (UPCIA) which regulates
the use and disclosure of Personal Credit
Information, defined as credit information
which is necessary to determine the credit
rating, credit transaction capacity, etc. of
an individual person. The UPCIA primarily
applies to Credit Information
Providers/Users, defined under Article 2.7
of the UPCIA as a person (entity)
prescribed by Presidential Decree thereof
who provides any third party with credit
information obtained or produced in
relation to his/her own business for
purposes of commercial transactions, such
as financial transactions with customers,
or who has been continuously supplied
with credit information from any third
party to use such information for his/her
own business, and
(iii) the Act on Real Name Financial
Transactions and Guarantee of Secrecy
(ARNFTGS) which applies to information
obtained by financial or financial services
institutions.
Under PIPA, except as otherwise provided
for in any other Act, the protection of
personal information shall be governed by
the provisions of PIPA.
Trinidad and Tobago
In Trinidad and Tobago the Data
Protection Act, 2011 provides for the
protection of personal privacy and
information (DPA) processed and collected
by public bodies and private
organisations. The DPA was partially
proclaimed on 6-1-2012 by Legal Notice 2
of 2012 and only Part I and Sections 7 to
18, 22, 23, 25(1), 26 and 28 of Part II
have come into operation. No time table
has been set for the proclamation of the
remainder of the DPA and it is possible
that there may be changes to the
remainder of the legislation before it is
proclaimed.
Ukraine
The Law of Ukraine 2297 VI 'On Personal
Data Protection' as of 1-6-2010 (Data
Protection Law) is the main legislative Act
regulating relations in the sphere of
personal data protection in Ukraine. At 20-
12-2012 Data Protection Law has been
substantially amended by the Law of
Ukraine 'On introducing amendments to
the Law of Ukraine On personal data
protection' dated 20-11-
2012 No. 5491-VI. Additional significant
changes to Data Protection Law were
envisaged by the Law of Ukraine 'On
Amendments to Certain Laws of Ukraine
regarding Improvement of Personal Data
Protection System' dated 3-7-2013 No.
383-VII which came into force on 1-1-
2014. In addition to the Data Protection
Law, certain data protection issues are
regulated by subordinate legislation
specifically developed to implement the
Data Protection Law.
17. Thus, from the aforesaid analysis, it is clear that there are other
jurisdiction in the world where no constitutional protection is conferred to
"right of privacy" nonetheless the same has been conferred statutory
protection under respective statutes.
IV. Position under English Law post their joining European Union
18. So far as right to privacy in England is concerned, it is treated
merely as a common law right. In examining the nature of the English
cause of action for tort, it is necessary first of all to outline the distinctive
nature
of Article 8 ECHR rights. The Article 8 right to a private life is
a
qualified right. Para 2 provides that:
"1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
his home and his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and
is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security, public safety or the economic well being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."
19. By its very nature, therefore, Article 8 envisages a balancing of
competing rights, none of which is predominant, in determining whether
the interference with Article 8 is lawful and a necessary or proportionate
response. It has also been found to create negative and positive
obligations on the State, to abstain from arbitrary interference in private
or family life, but also to adopt measures designed to secure respect for
private life even in private disputes. 18 While the State has a margin of
appreciation in choosing the means by which to secure compliance with
Article 819, the nature of the State's obligation will depend on the
particular aspect of private life that is at
issue. 20 A wide margin of appreciation will exist in cases where the State
is required to strike a balance between competing private and public
interests or rights set out in the Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms1, although the court has indicated
that where the interference involves a most intimate aspect of private
life, the margin allowed to the State will be narrowed 22 This position
does signify, however, that there remains a lack of clarity as to the nature
and extent of the positive obligations imposed by Article 8.
23
20. This becomes clear from the following analysis of the decision
rendered by House of Lords in Wainwright V. Home Office24, , which makes
out following two points:
(a) That even the Apex Court in England has refused to do is to
formulate a general principle of "invasion of privacy" on constitutional
touchstone;
(b) The concept of privacy is so inherently vague that even
judicially trained minds can come to diametrically opposite conclusions
on the same set of facts;
21. In this context it would be relevant to first analyse the said
judgment from Point (b) above.
(a) In this case the court of first instance ie Leeds County Court
held that the searches were wrongful (and hence not protected by
authority of law) because of the battery and invasion of the
Wainwrights' "right to privacy", which he conceived to be a trespass to
the person. The court of first instance awarded Alan Wainwright
3,500 basic and 1,000 aggravated damages, and Mrs Wainwright
1,600 basic and 1,000 aggravated damages.
(b) The Court of Appeal did not agree with the above judgment.
(c) The plaintiffs appealed to the House of Lords. Lord Hoffmann
held that there was no tort for invasion of privacy, because (based on
experience in the United States) it was too uncertain. Moreover, a
claim under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
(ECHR), (right to privacy and family life), did not help because the
ECHR was merely a standard which applied to whatever was currently
present in the
common law. Common law protection was sufficient privacy protection for
the ECHR's purpose.
Thus from the above it is clear that on the same set of facts, even
judicially trained minds have also come to diametrically opposite
conclusions, while dealing with the case of personal privacy that it makes
it obvious that expressions "privacy is so vague that there is no
manageable standard by which a person can be said to have committed
breach or not to have committed a breach of the said vague concept.
22. Furthermore it is also clear that the Apex Court in England in the
said case of Wainwright (supra) refused to confer general principle
of
"invasion of privacy" a constitutional status. The same is clear from the
following extract of the case which is reproduced hereinbelow for ready
reference:
"15. My Lords, let us first consider the proposed tort of invasion of
privacy. Since the famous article by Warren and Brandeis ("The Right
to
Privacy"25 the question of whether such a tort exists, or should
exist, has been much debated in common law jurisdictions. Warren
and Brandeis suggested that one could generalise certain cases on
defamation, breach of copyright in unpublished letters, trade secrets
and breach of confidence as all based upon the protection of a
common value which they called privacy or, following Judge Cooley.
(Cooley on Torts, 2nd ed (1888), p 29) "the right to be let alone".
They said that identifying this common element should enable the
courts to declare the existence of a general principle which protected a
person's appearance, sayings, acts and personal relations from being
exposed in public.
16. Courts in the United States were receptive to this proposal and
a jurisprudence of privacy began to develop. It became apparent,
however, that the developments could not be contained within a single
principle; not, at any rate, one with greater explanatory power than
the proposition that it was based upon the protection of a value which
could be described as privacy. Dean Prosser, in his work on The Law of
Torts, 4th ed (1971), p. 804, said that:
"What has emerged is no very simple matter
it is not one tort,
but a complex of four. To date the law of privacy comprises four
distinct kinds of invasion of four different interests of the plaintiff,
which are tied together by the common name, but otherwise have
almost nothing in common except that each represents an
interference with the right of the plaintiff 'to be let alone'."
17. Dean Prosser's taxonomy divided the subject into (1) intrusion
upon the plaintiffs physical solitude or seclusion (including unlawful
searches, telephone tapping, long-distance photography and telephone
harassment) (2) public disclosure of private facts and (3) publicity
putting the plaintiff in a false light and (4) appropriation, for the
defendant's advantage, of the plaintiffs name or likeness. These, he said,
at p 814, had different elements and were subject to different defences.
18. The need in the United States to break down the concept of
"invasion of privacy" into a number of loosely-linked torts must cast
doubt upon the value of any high-level generalisation which can
perform a useful function in enabling one to deduce the rule to be
applied in a concrete case. English law has so far been unwilling,
perhaps unable, to formulate any such high-level principle. There are a
number of common law and statutory remedies of which it may be
said that one at least of the underlying values they protect is a right of
privacy. Sir Brian Neill's well known article "Privacy : a challenge for
the next century" in Protecting Privacy (ed B Markesinis, 1999)
contains a survey. Common law torts include trespass, nuisance,
defamation and malicious. falsehood; there is the equitable action for
breach of confidence and statutory remedies under the Protection from
Harassment Act, 1997 and the Data Protection Act, 1998. There are
also extra-legal remedies under Codes of Practice applicable to
broadcasters and newspapers. But there are gaps; cases in which the
courts have considered that an invasion of privacy deserves a remedy
which the existing law does not offer. Sometimes the perceived gap
can be filled by judicious development of an existing principle. The law
of breach of confidence has in recent years undergone such a process :
see in particular the judgment of Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers MR
in Campbell V. MGN Ltd. 26 On the other hand, an attempt to create a
tort of telephone harassment by a radical change in the basis of the
action for private nuisance in Khorasandjian V. Bush27 was held by, the
House of Lords in Hunter V. Canary Wharf Ltd. 28 to be a step too far.
The gap was filled by the 1997 Act.
19. What the courts have so far refused to do is to formulate a
general principle of "invasion of privacy" (J use the quotation marks to
signify doubt about what in such a context the expression would
mean) from which the conditions of liability in the particular case can
be deduced. The reasons were discussed by Sir Robert Megarry V-C in
Malone V. Metropolitan Police Commr. I shall be sparing in citation
but the whole of Sir Robert's treatment of the subject deserves careful
reading. The question was whether the plaintiff had a cause of action
for having his telephone tapped by the police without any trespass
upon his land. This was (as the European Court of Justice
subsequently held in
Malone V. United Kingdom an infringement by a public authority of his
right to privacy under article 8 of the Convention, but because there had
been no trespass, it gave rise to no identifiable cause of action in English
law. Sir Robert was invited to declare that invasion of privacy, at any rate
in respect of telephone conversations, was in itself a cause of action. He
said, at p 372:
"I am not unduly troubled by the absence of English authority :
there has to be a first time for everything, and if the principles of
English law, and not least analogies from the existing rules,
together with the requirements of justice and common sense,
pointed firmly to such a right existing, then I think the court should
not be deterred from recognising the right. On the other hand it is
no function of the courts to legislate in a new field. The extension of
the existing laws and principles is one thing, the creation of an
altogether new right is another."
22. Once again. Parliament provided a remedy, subject to a detailed
code of exceptions, in the Interception of Communications Act, 1985.
A similar problem arose in R. V. Khan (Sultan)superscript(3), in which the
defendant in criminal proceedings complained that the police had
invaded his privacy by using a listening device fixed to the outside of a
house. There was some discussion of whether the law should recognise
a right to privacy which had been prima facie infringed. but no
concluded view was expressed because all their Lordships thought that
any such right must be subject to exceptions, particularly in
connection with the detection of crime and that the accused's privacy
had been sufficiently taken into account by the judge when he
exercised his discretion under Section 78 of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act, 1984 to admit the evidence obtained by the device at
the criminal trial. The European Court of Human Rights subsequently
held (Khan V. United Kingdom3 that the invasion of privacy could not
be justified under Article 8 because, in the absence of any statutory
regulation, the actions of the police had not been "in accordance with
law". By that time, however Parliament had intervened in the Police
Act, 1997 to put the use of surveillance devices on a statutory basis.
26. All three, judgments are flat against a judicial power to declare
the existence of a high-level right to privacy and I do not think that
they suggest that the courts should do so. The members of the Court
of Appeal certainly thought that it would be desirable if there was
legislation to confer a right to protect the privacy of a person in the
position of Mr Kaue against the kind of intrusion which he suffered, but
they did not advocate any wider principle. And when the Calcutt
Committee reported in June 1990, they did indeed recommend that
"entering private property, without the consent of the lawful occupant,
with intent to obtain personal information with a view to its publication"
should be made a criminal offence : see the Report of the Committee on
Privacy and Related Matters (1990) (Cm 1102), para 6.33. The
Committee also recommended that certain other forms of intrusion, like
the use of surveillance devices on private property and long-distance
photography and sound recording, should be made offences.
27. But the Calcutt Committee did not recommend, even within
their terms of reference (which were confined to press intrusion) the
creation of a generalised tort of infringement of privacy : paragraph
12.5. This was not because they thought that the definitional problems
were insuperable. They said that if one confined the tort to
"publication of personal information to the world at large" (paragraph
12.12) it should be possible to produce an adequate definition and
they made some suggestions about how such a statutory tort might be
defined and what the defences should be. But they considered that the
problem could be tackled more effectively by a combination of the
more sharply-focused remedies which they recommended : paragraph
12.32. As for a "general wrong of infringement of privacy", they
accepted, at paragraph 12.12, that it would, even in statutory form,
give rise to "an unacceptable degree of uncertainty". There is nothing
in the opinions of the judges in Kaye V. Robertson33 which suggests
that the members of the court would have held any view, one way or
the other, about a general tort of privacy.
31. There seems to me a great difference between identifying
privacy as a value which underlies the existence of a rule of law (and
may point the direction in which the law should develop) and privacy
as a principle of law in itself. The English common law is familiar with
the notion of underlying values-principles only in the broadest sense-
which direct its development. A famous example is Derbyshire County
Council V. Times Newspapers Ltd. 34 , in which freedom of speech was
the underlying value which supported the decision to lay down the
specific rule that a local authority could not sue for libel. But no one
has suggested that freedom of speech is in itself a legal principle
which is capable of sufficient definition to enable one to deduce
specific rules to be applied in concrete cases. That is not the way the
common law works.
32. Nor is there anything in the jurisprudence of the European Court
of Human Rights which suggests that the adoption of some high level
principle of privacy is necessary to comply with Article 8 of the
Convention. The European Court is concerned only with whether English
law provides an adequate remedy in a specific case in which it considers
that there has been an invasion of privacy contrary to Article 8(1) and not
justifiable under Article 8(2). So in Earl Spencer V. United Kingdom35 it
was satisfied that the action for breach of confidence provided an
adequate remedy for the Spencers' complaint and looked no further into
the rest of the armoury of remedies available to the victims of other
invasions of privacy. Likewise, in Peck V. United Kingdom36 the court
expressed some impatience, at paragraph 103, at being given a tour
d'horizon of the remedies provided and to be provided by English law to
deal with every imaginable kind of invasion of privacy. It was concerned
with whether Mr Peck (who had been filmed in embarrassing
circumstances by a CCTV camera) had an adequate remedy when the
film was widely published by the media. It came to the conclusion that
he did not.
34. Furthermore, the coming into force of the Human Rights Act,
1998 weakens the argument for saying that a general tort of invasion
of privacy is needed to fill gaps in the existing remedies. Sections 6
and 7 of the Act are in themselves substantial gap fillers; if it is indeed
the case that a person's rights under Article 8 have been infringed by
a public, authority, he will have a statutory remedy. The creation of a
general tort will, as Buxton LJ pointed out in the Court of Appeal
Wainwright V. Home Office37 pre-empt the controversial question of
the extent, if any, to which the Convention requires the state to
provide remedies for invasions of privacy by persons who are not
public authorities.
35. For these reasons I would reject the invitation to declare
that since at the latest 1950 there has been a previously unknown
tort of invasion of privacy."
23. Thus from the aforesaid it is clear that this concept of "privacy" is
so vague that it cannot be, in the present form, be declared a
fundamental right as there are no judicially manageable standard to
constitutionally enforce the same. The said right of privacy is sufficiently
protected by appropriate statutes (as explained hereunder) depending
upon the subject-specific precise and definable need for protection of
privacy.
24. Further, following Wainwright V. Home Office24 , in Campbell V.
MGN Ltd.26 26 , the Court held:
11. In this country, unlike the United States of America there is no
over-arching, all-embracing cause of action for 'invasion of privacy' :
see Wainwright V. Home Office24 But protection of various aspects of
privacy is a fast developing area of the law, here and in some other
common law jurisdictions. The recent decision of the Court of Appeal of
New Zealand in Hosking V. Runting38 38 (25-3-2004) is an example of this.
In this country development of the law has been spurred by enactment of
the Human Rights Act, 1998.
12. The present case concerns one aspect of invasion of privacy :
wrongful disclosure of private information. The case involves the
familiar competition between freedom of expression and respect for an
individual's privacy. Both are vitally important rights. Neither has
precedence over the other. The importance of freedom of expression
has been stressed often and eloquently, the importance of privacy less
so. But it, too, lies at the heart of liberty in a modern state. A proper
degree of privacy is essential for the well-being and development of an
individual. And restraints imposed on government to pry into the lives
of the citizen go to the essence of a democratic state : see La Forest J.
in R. V. Dymont39.
13. The common law or, more precisely, courts of equity have long
afforded protection to the wrongful use of private information by
means of the cause of action which became known as breach of
confidence. A breach of confidence was restrained as a form of
unconscionable conduct, akin to a breach of trust. Today this
nomenclature is misleading. The breach of confidence label harks back
to the time when the cause of action was based on improper use of
information disclosed by one person to another in confidence. To
attract protection the information had to be of a confidential nature.
But the gist of the cause of action was that information of this
character had been disclosed by one person to another in
circumstances 'importing an obligation of confidence" even though no
contract of non-disclosure existed : see the classic exposition by
Megarry J. in Coco V. A.N. Clark (Engineers) Ltd. The confidence
referred to in the phrase 'breach of confidence" was the confidence
arising out of a confidential relationship.
14. This cause of action has now firmly shaken off the limiting
constraint of the need for an initial confidential relationship. In doing
so it has changed its nature. In this country this development was
recognised clearly in the judgment of Lord Goff of Chieveley in
Attorney General V. Guardian Newspapers Ltd. (No. 2)4 Now the law
imposes a 'duty of confidence" whenever a person receives information
he knows or ought to know is fairly and reasonably to be regarded as
confidential. Even this
formulation is awkward. The continuing use of the phrase 'duty of
confidence" and the description of the information as 'confidential' is not
altogether comfortable. Information about an individual's private life
would not, in ordinary usage, be called 'confidential'. The more natural
description today is that such information is private. The essence of the
tort is better encapsulated now as misuse of private information.
15. In the case of individuals this tort, however labelled, affords
respect for one aspect of an individual's privacy. That is the value
underlying this cause of action. An individual's privacy can be invaded
in ways not involving publication of information. Strip-searches are an
example. The extent to which the common law as developed thus far
in this country protects other forms of invasion of privacy is not a
matter arising in the present case. It does not arise because, although
pleaded more widely, Miss Campbell's common law claim was
throughout presented in court exclusively on the basis of breach of
confidence, that is, the wrongful publication by the 'Mirror' of private
information.
16. The European Convention on Human Rights, and the Strasbourg
jurisprudence, have undoubtedly had a significant influence in this
area of the common law for some years. The provisions of Article 8,
concerning respect for private and family life, and Article 10,
concerning freedom of expression, and the interaction of these two
articles, have prompted the courts of this country to identify more
clearly the different factors involved in cases where one or other of
these two interests is present. Where both are present the courts are
increasingly explicit in evaluating the competing considerations
involved. When identifying and evaluating these factors the courts,
including your Lordships' House. have tested the common law against
the values encapsulated in these two articles. The development of the
common law has been in harmony with these articles of the
Convention : see, for instance, Reynolds V. Times Newspapers Ltd.42
22. Different forms of words, usually to much the same effect, have
been suggested from time to time. The second Restatement of Torts in
the United States (1977), Article 652-D, p. 394, uses the formulation
of disclosure of matter which 'would be highly offensive to a
reasonable person'. In Australian Broadcasting Corpn. V. Lenah Game
Meats Pty Ltd. 43 , Gleeson CJ used words, widely quoted, having a
similar meaning. This particular formulation should be used with care,
for two reasons. First, the 'highly offensive' phrase is suggestive of a
stricter test of private information than a reasonable expectation of
privacy. Second. the 'highly offensive' formulation can all too easily
bring into account, when
deciding whether the disclosed information was private, considerations
which go more properly to issues of proportionality; for instance, the
degree of intrusion into private life, and the extent to which publication
was a matter of proper public concern. This could be a recipe for
confusion.
V. Recent trends under American Law
25. The American constitutional standard of privacy right is wholly
inapplicable to the fundamental rights jurisprudence in India. The US
Supreme Court has held that people cannot reasonably expect privacy in
information they willingly disclose to third parties and, thus, that
government intrusions on such information are not Fourth Amendment
searches, commonly known as the Third Party Doctrine. 44
26. In its 1979 decision in Smith V. Maryland the Supreme Court
ruled in favour of the Government, observing that "this Court consistently
has held that a person has no legitimate expectation of privacy in
information he voluntarily turns over to third parties". The Smith ruling
also made reference to another Fourth Amendment case decided three
years earlier, United States V. Miller45 that involved warrantless
Government access of a suspect's bank records. In Miller supra, the US
Supreme Court had also found in favour of the Government, holding that:
"The depositor takes the risk, in revealing his affairs to another, that
the information will be conveyed by that person to the Government.
This Court has held repeatedly that the Fourth Amendment does not
prohibit the obtaining of information revealed to a third party and
conveyed by him to Government authorities, even if the information is
revealed on the assumption that it will be used only for a limited
purpose and the confidence placed in the third party will not be
betrayed."
27. The Miller and Smith decisions (supra) manifests what has since
become known as the third-party doctrine. Under that doctrine, if you
voluntarily provide information to a third party, the Fourth Amendment
does not preclude the Government from accessing it without a warrant.
More succinctly, as the Court held in Smith44, you have "no legitimate
expectation of privacy" from warrantless government access to that
information.
28. In United States V. Jones46, the question involved was GPS
tracking performed directly by the Government, without a third party
intermediary. The Government's physical intrusion onto private property,
without a valid warrant, to attach a GPS tracker to a suspect's car was in
question. The US Supreme Court justices voted unanimously that this
was a "search" under the
Fourth Amendment, although they were split 5-4 as to the fundamental
reasons behind that conclusion. The majority held that by physically
installing the GPS device on the defendant's car, the police had
committed a trespass against Jones' "personal effects" - this trespass, in
an attempt to obtain information, constituted a search per se.
29. As per recent American trends, the American lower courts have
held that historical cell-site location information (CSLI) - a carrier's
records of the cell tower used to route a user's calls and messages
(typically the tower closest to the user)47 is such information willingly
disclosed to third parties. 48 Recently, in United States V. Graham49. The
Fourth Circuit upheld that rule, finding that two defendants could not
reasonably expect privacy in CSLI that police used to place them at the
crime scene.
30. To further understand the verdict in United States V. Graham49 it
is necessary to understand the factual background that led to the verdict:
(a) Aaron Graham and Eric Jordan were prosecuted for six armed
robberies in Baltimore that occurred over the course of several weeks
in early 2011;
(b) The fifth and sixth robberies took place on the same afternoon.
Based on eyewitness testimony, the police arrested Graham and
Jordan; they then acquired physical evidence connecting the
defendants to two of the earlier robberies.
(c) While investigating those robberies, an officer seized (under
warrant) two phones from Graham's car, linking them to the phone
numbers Graham and Jordan gave at arrest.
(d) The police sought court orders through the Stored
Communications Act (SCA), under which the Government may compel
disclosure of certain records under a standard lower than probable
cause.
(e) They demanded that Sprint/Nextel (the defendants' phone
carrier) provide the historical CSLI associated with the defendants'
phones for a total of 221 days over seven months, collecting over
28,000 CSLI data points for each defendant.
(f) Prosecutors used CSLI to place the defendants at most of the
crime scenes.
31. Subsequently, Graham and Jordan brought a motion to suppress
the CSLI as the fruit of an unconstitutional search. The District Court
concluded that the defendants could not legitimately expect privacy in
their historical CSLI records as they voluntarily conveyed that information
to Sprint/Nextel; the third-party doctrine thus applied. Accordingly, the
court rejected the
motion, and the defendants were then convicted following a jury trial.
They appealed, arguing that the Government, by obtaining the CSLI, had
violated their Fourth Amendment rights. A panel of the Fourth Circuit
agreed.
32. On appeal, the Fourth Circuit, sitting en banc (Full Bench),
reversed the panel's Fourth Amendment holding. Previously in minority,
but now in the majority, Motz, J. first wrote that the third-party doctrine
applies even to information conveyed for limited purposes. The Hon'ble
Court held:
"Defendants maintain that cell phone users do not convey CSLI to
phone providers, voluntarily or otherwise. We reject that contention.
With respect to the nature of CSLI, there can be little question that
cell phone users "convey" CSLI to their service providers. After all, if
they do not, then who does?
user therefore "conveys" the location of the cell towers his phone
connects with to his provider whenever he uses the provider's network.
There is similarly little question that cell phone users convey CSLI
to their service providers "voluntarily."
When an individual purchases a cell phone and chooses a service
provider, he expects the provider will, at a minimum, route outgoing
and incoming calls and text messages. As most cell phone users know
all too well, proximity to a cell tower is necessary to complete these
tasks. Anyone who has stepped outside to "get a signal," or has
warned a caller of a potential loss of service before entering an
elevator, understands, on some level, that location matters.
If it were otherwise, courts would frequently need to parse business
records for indicia of what an individual knew he conveyed to a third
party. For example, when a person hands his credit card to the cashier
at a grocery store, he may not pause to consider that he is also
"conveying" to his credit card company the date and time of his
purchase or the store's street address. But he would hardly be able to
use that as an excuse to claim an expectation of privacy if those pieces
of information appear in the credit card company's resulting records of
the transaction. Cf. United States V. Phibbs 50 (Defendant "did not have
both an actual and a justifiable privacy interest in his credit card
statements."),
In their efforts to avoid the third-party doctrine, Defendants
attempt to redefine it. They maintain that the third-party doctrine
does not apply to historical CSLI because a cell phone user does not
"actively choose[] to share" his location information. Defendants' Br. at
30. Such a rule is
nowhere to be found in either Miller45 or Smith44. Moreover, this
purported requirement cannot be squared with the myriad of federal
cases that permit the government to acquire third-party records, even
when individuals do not "actively choose to share" the information
contained in those records.
Thus, the redefinition of the third-party doctrine that Defendants
advocate not only conflicts with Supreme Court doctrine and all the
CSLI cases from our sister circuits, but is also at odds with other
established circuit precedent.
C.
In another attempt to avoid the third-party doctrine, Defendants
rely on a factual argument long rejected by the Supreme Court and a
series of cases involving the content of communications to support
their assertion that historical CSLI is protected by the Fourth
Amendment.
First, Defendants emphasize that cellphone use is so ubiquitous in
our society today that individuals must risk producing CSLI or "opt out
of modern society." Defendants' En Banc Br. at 11. Defendants
contend that such widespread use shields CSLI from the consequences
of the third-party doctrine and renders any conveyance of CSLI "not
voluntary," for [I]iving off the grid is not a prerequisite to enjoying
the protection of the Fourth Amendment." Id.
But the dissenting justices in Miller45 and Smith44 unsuccessfully
advanced nearly identical concerns.
The Supreme Court has thus twice rejected Defendants' theory.
Until the Court says otherwise, these holdings bind us.
Second, Defendants rely on cases that afford Fourth Amendment
protection to the content of communications to suggest that CSLI
warrants the same protection.
The Supreme Court has thus forged a clear distinction between the
contents of communications and the non-content information that
enables communications providers to transmit the content. CSLI,
which identifies the equipment used to route calls and texts,
undeniably belongs in the non-content category. As the Sixth Circuit
recently recognized, CSLI is non-content information because "cell-site
data - like mailing addresses, phone numbers, and IP addresses -
are information that facilitate personal communications, rather than
part of the content of those communications themselves."
Outrage at the amount of information the Government obtained,
rather than concern for any legal principle, seems to be at the heart of
Defendants' arguments.
Defendants' answer appears to rest on a misunderstandina of the
analysis embraced in the two concurring opinions in Jones. There, the
concurring justices recognized a line between "short-term monitoring
of a person's movements on public streets," which would not infringe a
reasonable expectation of privacy, and "longer term GPS monitoring,"
which would. Jones46 S Ct at 964 (Alito, J., concurring in the
judgment); see also id. at 955 (Sotomayor, J., concurring). But Jones
involved government surveillance of an individual, not an individual's
voluntary disclosure of information to a third party. And determining
when government surveillance infringes on an individual's reasonable
expectation of privacy requires a very different analysis.
In considering the legality of the government surveillance at issue
in
Jones46 Justice Alito looked to what a hypothetical law enforcement
officer, engaged in visual surveillance. could reasonably have learned
about the defendant. He concluded that four weeks of GPS monitoring
by the government constituted a Fourth Amendment "search" because
"society's expectation" had always been "that law enforcement agents
and others would not - and indeed, in the main, simply could not -
secretly monitor and catalogue" an individual's movements in public
for very long. Id. at 964 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment)
(emphasis added). In other words, direct surveillance by the
government using technological means may, at some point, be limited
by the government's capacity to accomplish such surveillance by
physical
means. 52 However, society has no analogous expectations
about the capacity of third parties to maintain business records.
Indeed, we expect that our banks, doctors, credit card companies, and
countless other third parties will record and keep information about
our relationships with them, and will do so for the entirety of those
relationships - be it several weeks or many years. Third parties can
even retain their records about us after our relationships with them
end; it is their prerogative, and many business-related reasons exist
for doing so. This is true even when, in the aggregate, these records
reveal sensitive information similar to what could be revealed by direct
surveillance. For this reason, Justice Alito's concern in Jones 46 is
simply
inapposite to the third-party doctrine and to the instant case. Here,
Defendants voluntarily disclosed all the CSLI at issue to Sprint/Nextel.
Intrinsic to the doctrine is an assumption that the quantity of
information an individual shares with a third party does not affect
whether that individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy.
Of course, in the face of rapidly advancing technology, courts must
"assure[] preservation of that degree of privacy against government
that existed when the Fourth Amendment was adopted." Kyllo53 53 The
Supreme Court has long concluded that the third-party doctrine does
this. Thus the Court has never held that routing information, like CSLI,
shared with third parties to allow them to deliver a message or provide
a service is protected under the Fourth Amendment. Perhaps this is
implicit acknowledgment that the privacy-erosion argument has a flip-
side : technological advances also do not give individuals a Fourth
Amendment right to conceal information that otherwise would not
have been private. 54
Moreover, application of the third-party doctrine does not render
privacy an unavoidable casualty of technological progress - Congress
remains free to require greater privacy protection if it believes that
desirable. The legislative branch is far better positioned to respond to
changes in technology than are the courts. See Jones46 (Alito, J.,
concurring in the judgment) ("A legislative body is well situated to
gauge changing public attitudes, to draw detailed lines, and to balance
privacy and public safety in a comprehensive way."); see also
Application (Fifth Circuit), In 55 (explaining that the proper
"recourse" for those seeking increased privacy is often "in the market
or the political process"). The very statute at issue here, the Stored
Communications Act (SCA), demonstrates that Congress can - and
does - make these judgments. The SCA requires the government to
meet a higher burden when acquiring "the contents of a wire or
electronic communication" from "a provider of electronic
communication service" than when obtaining "a record pertaining to
a subscriber or customer" from the provider. 18
U.S.C.  2703(a), (c) (emphasis added). It requires the executive to
obtain judicial approval, as the Government did here, before acquiring
even non-content information. Id.  2703(c), (d). And the SCA is part of
a broader statute, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986
(ECPA), which Congress enacted in the wake of Smith44 See Pub. L. No.
99-508, 100 Stat. 1848."
33. Wilkinson, J. concurred, writing that decisions regarding the
Fourth Amendment's privacy protections should be left to Congress. He
held as follows:
"Finally, Congress imparts the considerable power or democratic
legitimacy to a high stakes and highly controversial area. The
emergence of advanced communication technologies has set off a race
between criminal enterprises on the one hand and law enforcement
efforts on the other. Modern communication devices - even as they
abet the government's indigenous tendencies to intrude upon our
privacy - also assist criminal syndicates and terrorist cells in inflicting
large-scale damage upon civilian populations. Appellants' strict
standard of probable cause and a warrant even for non-content
information held by third parties thus risks an imbalance of the most
dangerous sort, for it allows criminals to utilize the latest in
technological development to commit crime and hamstrings the ability
of law enforcement to capitalize upon those same developments to
prevent crime. The fact that the appellants in this case were convicted
of Hobbs Act violations and brandishing offenses cannot obscure the
implications of their proposed standards for much more serious threats
down the road.
It is human nature, I recognize, to want it all. But a world of total
privacy and perfect security no longer exists, if indeed it ever did. We
face a future of hard tradeoffs and compromises. as life and privacy
come simultaneously under siege. How sad, near the very inception of
this journey, for appellants to adopt the most stringent of Fourth
Amendment standards, to discard the great values of democratic
compromise, and to displace altogether the legislative role."
However, Wynn, J. declined to apply the third-party doctrine dissenting
with the majority view. These cases show the feasibility of a contextual
approach to privacy expectations.
VI. Privacy rights under Singapore Constitution
34. Similarly, in a recent decision rendered by the Apex Court in
Singapore "privacy" has not been elevated to a constitutionally protected
fundamental right. This case considered the same issues which were
considered by this Hon'ble Court in Naz Foundation case56 The same is
clear from the following extract of the Singapore Apex Court decision
rendered in Lim Meng Suang V. Attorney General57, which reads as
under:
43. The arguments raised by Mr Ravi and by Ms Barker on Article 9
in the present appeals are different. Ms Barker argues that the right to
life and personal liberty under Article 9(1) should include a limited
right to privacy and personal autonomy allowing a person to enjoy and
express affection and love towards another human being. Mr Ravi, on
the other hand, contends that Section 377A is vague, arbitrary and
absurd.
44. In so far as Ms Barker's arguments are concerned, our view is
that the right to privacy and personal autonomy which she canvassed
should not be read into the phrase "life or personal liberty" in Article 9
(1) for three reasons.
48. In a related vein, foreign cases that have conferred an
expansive Constitutional right to life and liberty should be approached
with circumspection because they were decided in the context of their
unique social, political and legal circumstances. For example, the
Supreme Court of India has taken an expansive view of the right to life
to include an individual's right to health and medical care. This
approach must be understood in the context of India's social and
economic conditions (see Yong Vui Kong5 58 at [83]-[84]). A similarly
broad approach has been adopted in the US because of the due
process clauses in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the US
Constitution, which are materially different from our Article 9(1).
49. Indeed, it is significant that Ms Barker herself conceded that the
private law relating to privacy was a developing one. It is clear that
Lim and Chee (and likewise, Tan in CA 125/2013) cannot obtain by the
(constitutional) backdoor what they cannot obtain by the (private law)
front door. Indeed, that would be a wholly inappropriate utilisation of
the existing body of Constitutional law (which serves a quite different
function). More importantly, as we have already noted above (at [30]),
Lim and Chee base their Article 9(1) rights on a narrow conception of
the right to privacy, viz, that the right to life and personal liberty
under Article 9(1) should include a limited right to privacy and
personal autonomy allowing a person to enjoy and express affection
and love towards another human being. Once again, such a right
ought, in our view, to be developed by way of the private law on
privacy instead. Indeed, we also observe that the right claimed by Lim
and Chee, although of an apparently limited nature, is, in point of fact,
not only vague and general, but also contains within itself
(contradictorily) the seeds of an unlimited right. Put simply, such a
right could be interpreted
to encompass as well as legalise all manner of subjective expressions of
love and affection, which could (in turn) embody content that may be
wholly unacceptable from the perspective of broader societal policy. At
this juncture, we are, of course, back to "square one", so to speak, for
this brings us back (in substance at least) to the issue of whether or not
Section 377A ought to enforce broader societal morality."
VII. Protection of privacy laws by the countries Joining European
Union
35. Apart from above in the following countries which joined European
Union and have adopted EU Data Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC, have
the following framework of law for granting privacy to its citizen:
36. It deserves to be pointed out that in the context of EU directive for
Data protection, the term "Data" is not restricted to electronic/computer
data but the said term is used as an overarching term including privacy
of an individual in general. The term "personal data" is defined as under:
"personal data" shall mean any information relating to an identified
or identifiable natural persons (data subject) an identifiable person is
one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by
reference to an identification number or to one or more factors specific
to his physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social
identity:
Country
Legal position
Germany
The main legal source of data protection in Germany is
the
Federal
Data
Protection
Act
(Bundesdatenschutzgesetz in German) (BDSG) which
implements the European Union Data Protection
Directive No. 95/46/EC. Additionally, each German
State has a data protection law of its own. In principle,
the data protection acts of the individual states intend
to protect personal data from processing and use by
public authorities of the States whereas the BDSG
intends to protect personal data from processing and
use by federal public authorities and private bodies.
Enforcement is through the data protection authorities
of the German States. The competence of the
respective State authority depends on the place of
business of the Data Controller.
United
As a member of the European Union, the United.
Kingdom
Kingdom. implemented the EU Data Protection
Directive No. 95/46/EC in March 2000 through the Data
Protection Act, 1998 (Act). Enforcement is through the
Information Commissioner's Office (ICO). In common
with the rest of the European Union, the United
Kingdom will adopt the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) from May 2018. When the United
Kingdom leaves the European Union it will, in theory,
be free to adopt its own data protection laws. Whilst it
is widely expected that the
United Kingdom will remain close to the
standard set by the GDPR, it is currently
too early to predict with any degree of
certainty the extent to which future UK
data protection laws will diverge from
those of the European Union.
France
Law
No.
78
17
of
6-1-1978
on
"Information Technology. Data Files and
Civil Liberty" (`Law') is the principal law
regulating data protection in France. The
EU Data Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC
was implemented via Law No. 2004-801
of 6-8-2004 which amended the Law.
Enforcement of the Law is principally
through the "Commission Nationale de
l'Informatique et des Libertes" (CNIL).
The CNIL is responsible for ensuring that
information technology remains at the
service of citizens, and does not
jeopardise human identity or breach
human rights, privacy or individual or
public liberties.
Switzerland
The processing of personal data is mainly
regulated by the Federal Act on Data
Protection of 19-6-1992 (DPA) and its
ordinances, i.e. the Ordinance to the
Federal Act on Data Protection (DPO) and
the Ordinance on Data Protection
Certification (ODPC). In addition, the
processing of personal data is further
restricted by provisions in other laws,
mainly with regard to the public sector
and regulated markets. It should be noted
that a substantial revision of the DPA has
just been initiated, the implementation of
which is however, not to be expected
before 2018. The revision of the DPA aims
to strengthen data protection in general
and to align the Swiss DPA with the
requirements of the EU General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR), in order to
facilitate compliance with Swiss
companies with those aspects of the GDPR
that are applicable to controllers or
processors outside of the EU.
Italy
The Italian law applicable on privacy
issues is the Legislative Decree No. 196 of
30-6-2003 (Codice in materia di
protezionedeidatipersonali, the "Privacy
Code"). The Privacy Code implements
Directives No. 95/46/EC, 2002/58/EC and
2009/12/EC. As a general rule, processing
of personal (non-sensitive) data by private
entities or profit seeking public bodies is
only allowed if the data subject gives
his/her express consent (Section 23 of the
Privacy Code).
Spain
As a member of the European Union,
Spain formally implemented the EU Data
Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC in
November 1999 with the Special Data
Protection Act, 1999 (the Act, also known
as the "LOPD"
in Spain). Nevertheless, from 1992, Spain
already had a Data Protection Act
("LORTAD") that was fully consistent with
most of the contents of the EU Data
Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC. The
Act, simply represents an up-to-date
version of LORTAD, rather than being a
major change in the legal framework.
Enforcement is through the Spanish Data
Protection Commissioner's Office (AEPD).
Its last amendment took place in March
2011.
Iceland
The governing legislation on data
protection is Act 77 of 2000 on the
Protection and Processing of Personal Data
(Data Protection Act), which implemented
EU Data Protection Directive No.
95/46/EC. All electronic processing of
personal data, which falls under the Data
Protection Act, must be notified to the
Icelandic Data Protection Authority, by the
controller of the data, unless an
exemption applies.
Turkey
The Turkish Data Protection Law No. 6698
(DP Law), which is based on EU Directive
No. 95/46/EC, came into force on 7-4-
2016. In the DP Law, personal data was
described as "Any information relating to
an identified or identifiable natural
person". The new DP Law introduces two
bodies to watch over and regulate data
processing and transfer activities. These
are the Data Protection Board and the
Data Protection Authority. The Data
Protection Board is an independent
decision-making body.
Netherlands
The Netherlands implemented the EU Data
Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC on 1-9-
2001 with the Dutch Personal Data
Protection Act (Wbp). Enforcement is
through the Dutch Data Protection
Authority (AutoriteitPersoonsgegevens).
Unless an exemption applies, Data
Controllers who process personal data by
automatic means must notify the
AutoriteitPersoonsgegevens so that their
processing of personal data may be
registered and made public. Changes to
the processing of personal data will
require the notification to be amended.
Bulgaria
Bulgaria implemented the EU Data
Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC with the
Personal
Data
Protection
Act
(In
Bulgarian
:
),
promulgated in State
Gazette No. 1 of 4-1-2002, as amended
periodically (Act). The Act came into force
on I-1-2002. The Act was last amended by
the State Gazette, Issue No. 15 of 15-2-
2013. Currently, a new Bulgarian data
protection law is in process of discussion
and is being prepared by a group of
experts, including
experts from the Bulgarian Data Protection
Authority. The new law is expected to be
adopted by May 2018 and to create a new
framework in connection to Regulation
(EU) No. 2016/679. The Bulgarian data
protection authority (DPA) is the Personal
Data Protection Commission. Unless an
exemption applies, prior to initiating any
personal data processing data controllers
must apply for registration with the DPA.
The registration covers the Data Controller
and the personal data registers controlled
by it.
Finland
Finland is a member of the European
Union and has implemented the EU Data
Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC with the
Personal Data Act 523 of 1999 (Act)
(Henkilotietolaki) in June 1999. Other
important Finnish laws concerning data
privacy and protection are the Code for
Information Society and Communications
Services 917/2014 (Information Society
Code) (Tietoyhteiskuntakaari) of 1-1-
2015, which aims to inter alia ensure the
confidentiality
of
electronic
communication and the protection of
privacy, and the Act on the Protection of
Privacy
in
Working
Life
759/2004
(Working
Life
Act)
(Lakiyksityisyydensuojastatyoelmss),
which aims to promote the protection of
privacy and other rights safeguarding the
privacy in working life. Information
Society Code is an ambitious effort to
collect the relevant laws relating to
information society under a single statute.
The Information Society Code contains
mostly the same provisions as the
preceding laws, but it combines a large
quantity of different provisions under a
single law and covers a large area of
legislation. The Working Life Act includes
some specific provisions on privacy issues
relating to employment and work
environments such as right to monitor
employees' email communication.
Ireland
The core Irish data protection law is
comprised in the Data Protection Act,
1988 (1988 Act) as amended by the Data
Protection (Amendment) Act, 2003 (2003
Act) [together the Data Protection Acts
(DPA)]. The 2003 Act implemented the EU
Data Protection Directive No. 95/46/EC
(Data Protection Directive). In addition to
the DPA, the European Communities
(Electronic Communications Networks and
Services) (Privacy and Electronic
Communications) Regulations, 2011
(`ePrivacy Regulations') set out data
protection rules in relation to direct
marketing and electronic networks and
services, including location data and
cookies.
VIII. Analysis of laws pertaining to privacy in countries where
right to privacy has been established under their respective
Constitution
Country
Legal position
Russia
Fundamental provisions of data protection law in Russia
can be found in the Russian Constitution, international
treaties and specific laws. Russia is a member of the
Strasbourg Convention for the Protection of Individuals
with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(Convention) (ratified by Russia in 2006) and the
Russian Constitution establishes the right to privacy of
each individual (Articles 23 and 24). Most rules are
found in specific legislation, particularly the Data
Protection Act 152 FZ dated 27-7-2006 (DPA) and
various regulatory acts adopted to implement the DPA
as well as other laws, including the Information,
Information Technologies and Information Protection
Act 149 FZ dated 27-7-2006 establishing basic rules as
to the information in general and its protection. In
addition, the Russian Labour Code contains provisions
on the protection of employees' personal data (Part
XIV). Other laws may also contain data protection
provisions which implement the provisions of DPA in
relation to specific areas of State services or industries.
On 22-7-2014 notable amendments to the DPA were
adopted and came into force on 1-9-2015. The
amendments require all personal data operators to
store and process any personal data of Russian
individuals within databases located in Russia (subject
to few exceptions). The penalty for violation of this
requirement is ultimately the blocking of websites
involving unlawful handling of Russian personal data. A
Register of Infringers of Rights of Personal Data
Subjects shall be established by the Roscomnadzor and
from there and the Roscomnadzor may move to block
websites.
Chile
Personal Data Protection is addressed in several specific
laws, as well as scattered provisions in related or
complementary laws and other legal authority:
(i) Constitution of the Republic of Chile, Article 19 N,
4 : establishes the 'respect and protection of the public
and private life, and the honour of the person and its
family'. Any person who by arbitrary or illegal
Act or omission suffers a deprivation,
perturbation or threat to this right may
file a Constitutional Protection Action.
(ii) Law 19,628 "On the protection of
private life", commonly referred as
"Personal Data Protection Law" (PDPL) :
mainly defines and refers to the treatment
of personal information in public and
private databases. Last modified : 17-2-
2012.
(iii) Law 20,285, "On the Access to Public
Information" : sets forth the Public
Function Transparency Principle, the
individual right to access the information
of Public Administration bodies, and the
procedures and exceptions thereof.
(iv)
Law
20,575:
"Establishes
the
Destination Principle' on the Treatment of
personal data" : incorporates additional
rules when treating economic and debt-
related personal data.
(v) General Law on Banks, Article 154,
establishes the Banking Secrecy : holds
that, subject to certain specific
exemptions, all deposits are secret, and
related information can be given only to
the account's owner or designated
representative.
(vi) Law 19,223, "Criminal Conducts
related to Informatics" : establishes
sanctions for those who breach and
unlawfully access and/or use the
information available in electronic
databases.
Argentina
Section 43 of the Federal Constitution
grants citizens expeditious judicial action
to gain access to information about them
contained in public and private databases
and to demand its amendment, updating,
confidentiality, or suppression if it is
incorrect. Personal Data Protection Law
Number 25,326 (the PDPL), enacted in
October 2000, provides much broader
protection of personal data closely
following Spain's data protection law. On
30-6-2003, the European Commission
recognised that Argentina provides an
"adequate" level of protection of personal
data, in line with the Data Protection
Directive No. 95/46/EC.
Thailand
At present, Thailand does not have any
general statutory law governing data
protection or privacy.
However, the Constitution of the Kingdom
of Thailand does recognise the protection
of privacy rights. In addition, statutory
laws in some specific areas (such as
telecommunications, banking and financial
businesses (Specific Businesses) as well
as other non-business related laws, such
as certain provisions under Thai Penal
Code and the Child Protection Act B.E.
2543 (2003), do provide a certain level of
protection against any unauthorised
collection, processing, disclosure and
transfer of personal data. Recently, the
draft Personal Information Protection Act
(Draft), which has been reviewed by the
Council of State, was given to the
Committee for House of Representative
Coordination to review and analyse if
there are any practical issues on applying
the law and how the Data Protection
Committee should be formed. The Draft is
being reviewed by the Office of the Public
Sector Development Commission and will
be submitted to the Cabinet for approval
later. The current Draft provides
protection of personal data by restricting
the gathering, using, disclosing and
altering of any personal data without the
consent of the data owner. The Draft also
imposes both criminal penalties and civil
liability for any violation of the Draft and
calls for the establishment of a Protection
of Personal Data Commission to regulate
compliance with the Draft.
Colombia
Article 15 of the Colombian Constitution
sets forth fundamental rights to intimacy,
good name or reputation and data
protection. Law 1266/08 (Law 1266),
reviewed by the Colombian Constitutional
Court in Decision C 1011/08, regulates
the collection, use and transfer of personal
information
regarding
monetary
obligations related to credit, financial and
banking services. Law 1581 of 2012 (Law
1581), reviewed by the Colombian
Constitutional Court in Decision C-748/11,
contains comprehensive personal data
protection regulations. This law is
intended to implement the Constitutional
right to know, update and rectify
information gathered about them in
databases or files, enshrined in Article 20
of the Constitution, as well as other rights,
liberties and Constitutional guarantees
referred to in Article 15 of the
Constitution.
IX. Vague concept cannot be elevated to a fundamental right
status
37. It is submitted that before elevation of any concept/statutory right
to the status of a "protected and enforceable constitutional fundamental
right", it is essential to lay down its contours, so as to enable the State,
as well as individuals, to precisely measure as to what aspect/action the
said fundamental right seeks to protect. If the said right would not be
able to clearly spell out as to what action/aspect it seeks to protect,
protection of the same by the State would become impossible and
importantly there would be no "judicially discernible and manageable
standard" to protect and enforce the said right.
38. If right to privacy (statutorily protected under various statutes
with specificities) is conferred a status of constitutionally enforceable and
protected and undefined fundamental right, then it would have both
private law as well as public law implications. In such a scenario the
State will have to protect such undefined and subjective individual
specific right of each individual from other private individuals also. The
authorities which are "State" within the meaning of Article 12 including
private entities discharging "public functions" will be amenable to and
answerable for an alleged violation of a right which an individual - in his
own subjective manner - treats to be his right of "Privacy".
39. Protection of the said right of an individual from another individual
will become impossible, as, such another individual will not be able to
know with reasonable certainty as to what, in this regard, are the limits
of his lawful conduct which he must not transgress. Similar would be the
position of State inasmuch as in such a situation, State would also not
know to as what aspect of human conduct would be constitutionally
protected and what aspect can be legitimately regulated by the State. In
such an ambiguous state possibility of the State inadvertently violating
either privacy of such other individual or perceived subjective privacy of
such individuals cannot be ruled out.
40. If this ambiguous, vague and uncertain subjective concept of
"privacy" is conferred constitutional status of protected fundamental right
then the State will be mandated to enforce it. It is most important to
note that if the said right is declared to be a fundamental right, the State
may have to provide for penal consequences for breach thereof. Also for
breach thereof, the State will have to provide for penal provision.
41. In this context, it has been well settled by a series of judicial
decision rendered by this Hon'ble Court that a vague and uncertain law
cannot remain in the statute book. Reliance in this regard is placed on
the judgment of this Hon'ble Court rendered in A.K. Roy V. Union of
India5 wherein this Hon'ble Court held as under:
61. In making these submissions counsel seem to us to have
overstated their case by adopting an unrealistic attitude. It is the that
the vagueness and the consequent uncertainty of a law of preventive
detention bears upon the unreasonableness of that law as much as the
uncertainty of a punitive law like the Penal Code does. A person cannot
be deprived of his liberty by a law which is nebulous and uncertain in
its definition and application. But in considering the question whether
the expressions aforesaid which are used in Section 3 of the Act are of
that character, we must have regard to the consideration whether the
concepts embodied in those expressions are at all capable of a precise
definition. The fact that some definition or the other can be formulated
of an expression does not mean that the definition can necessarily give
certainty to that expression. The British Parliament has defined the
term 'terrorism' in Section 28 of the Act of 1973 to mean "the use of
violence for political ends", which, by definition includes "any use of
violence for the purpose of putting the public or any section of the
public in fear". The phrase 'political ends' is itself of an uncertain
character and comprehends within its scope a variety of nebulous
situations. Similarly, the definitions contained in Section 8(3) of the
Jammu & Kashmir Act of 1978 themselves depend upon the meaning
of concepts like "overawe the government". The formulation of
definitions cannot be a panacea to the evil of vagueness and
uncertainty. We do not, of course, suggest that the legislature should
not attempt to define or at least to indicate the contours of
expressions, by the use of which people are sought to be deprived of
their liberty. The impossibility of framing a definition with
mathematical precision cannot either justify the use of vague
expressions or the total failure to frame any definition at all which can
furnish, by its inclusiveness at least, a safe guideline for
understanding the meaning of the expressions used by the legislature.
But the point to note is that there are expressions which inherently
comprehend such an infinite variety of situations that definitions,
instead of lending to them a definite meaning, can only succeed either
in robbing them of their intended amplitude or in making it necessary
to frame further definitions of the terms defined. Acts prejudicial to
the 'defence of India', 'security of India', 'security of the State', and
'relations of India with foreign powers' are concepts of that nature
which are difficult to encase within the straitjacket of a definition. If it
is permissible to the legislature to enact laws of preventive detention,
a
certain amount of minimal latitude has to be conceded to it in order
to make those laws effective. That we consider to be a realistic
approach to the situation. An administrator acting bona fide, or a court
faced with the question as to whether certain acts fall within the
mischief of the aforesaid expressions used in Section 3, will be able to
find an acceptable answer either way. In other words, though an
expression may appear in cold print to be vague and uncertain, it may
not
be difficult to apply it to life's practical realities. This process undoubtedly
involves the possibility of error but then, there is hardly any area of
adjudicative process which does not involve that possibility.
62. The requirement that crimes must be defined with appropriate
definiteness is regarded as a fundamental concept in criminal law and
must now be regarded as a pervading theme of our Constitution since
the decision in Maneka Gandhi60. The underlying principle is that every
person is entitled to be informed as to what the State commands or
forbids and that the life and liberty of a person cannot be put in peril
on an ambiguity. However, even in the domain of criminal law, the
processes of which can result in the taking away of life itself, no more
than a reasonable degree of certainty has to be accepted as a fact.
Neither the criminal law nor the Constitution requires the application
of impossible standards and therefore, what is expected is that the
language of the law must contain an adequate warning of the conduct
which may fall within the proscribed area, when measured by common
understanding. In criminal law, the legislature frequently uses vague
expressions like bring into hatred or contempt', or 'maintenance of
harmony between different religious groups', or likely to cause
disharmony or hatred or ill will', or 'annoyance to the public' [see
Sections 124-A, 153-A(1)(b), 153-B(1)(c), and 268 of the Penal
Code]. These expressions, though they are difficult to define, do not
elude a just application to practical situations. The use of language
carries with it the inconvenience of the imperfections of language.
(emphasis supplied)
42. Similarly this Hon'ble Court in Shreya Singhal V. Union of India61
held as under:
"55. The US Supreme Court has repeatedly held in a series of
judgments that where no reasonable standards are laid down to define
guilt in a section which creates an offence, and where no clear
guidance is given to either law abiding citizens or to authorities and
courts, a section which creates an offence and which is vague must be
struck down as being arbitrary and unreasonable. Thus, in Musser V.
Utah62 a Utah statute which outlawed conspiracy to commit acts
injurious to public morals was struck down.
*
*
*
85. These two cases illustrate how judicially trained minds would
find a person guilty or not guilty depending upon the Judge's notion of
what is "grossly offensive" or "menacing". In Collins case, both the
Leicestershire Justices and two Judges of the Queen's Bench would
have acquitted Collins whereas the House of Lords convicted him.
Similarly, in the Chambers case, the Crown Court would have
convicted Chambers
whereas the Queen's Bench acquitted him. If judicially trained minds can
come to diametrically opposite conclusions on the same set of facts it is
obvious that expressions such as "grossly offensive" or "menacing" are so
vague that there is no manageable standard by which a person can be
said to have committed an offence or not to have committed an offence.
Quite obviously, a prospective offender of Section 66-A and the
authorities who are to enforce Section 66-A have absolutely no
manageable standard by which to book a person for an offence under
Section 66-A. This being the case, having regard also to the two English
precedents cited by the learned Additional Solicitor General, it is clear
that Section 66-A is unconstitutionally vague.
(emphasis supplied)
43. The concept of privacy is so inherently vague, uncertain, elastic
and subjective that in no circumstance it can convey an adequate
warning of the conduct which may fall within the proscribed area, when
measured by common understanding. Furthermore, it is also clear that
even judicially trained minds have also come to diametrically opposite
conclusions on the same set of facts, while dealing with the cases of
personal privacy that it makes it obvious that expressions "privacy is so
vague that there is no manageable standard by which a person can be
said to have committed an breach or not to have committed a breach of
the said concept."
X. Privacy is not a fundamental right but only a legitimate
claim/interest covered by the Constitutional ethos having sanction
of Common Law - Every such claim or interest of the
society/individual cannot be elevated to the status of fundamental
right
44. Conceptually, every human desire, if interpreted liberally can be
traced to the language used in Article 21 of the Indian Constitution.
However, not every human desire can be guaranteed and or protected
under the said article. The concept of privacy, both in private law field as
well in public law field is at the best a legitimate "claim" or an "interest"
having sanction of Common Law. It is respectfully submitted that any
such "claim" or "interest" which have sanction of common law and are
relatable to any of the guaranteed fundamental rights under our
Constitution cannot, by way of judicial interpretation, be elevated to the
status of an independent fundamental right enforceable directly by the
Constitutional Courts including this Hon'ble Court under Article 32 of the
Constitution.
45. That is so, because these common law "interest" or "claims" have
both positive, as well as, negative obligation and implication in private as
well as public law spheres. That is to say that these common law
"interest" or "claims", on occasion can have positive impact on State and
society which promotes constructive/positive development of State laws,
individuals and society. Whereas, at the same time it can have negative
impact/implication on State and society, which thus impairs constructive
and positive development of State laws, individuals and society.
46. It is respectfully submitted that wherever and whenever such
"claim" or "interests" have a negative obligation/implication on
constructive development of society/individual, it cannot be conferred
with the status of protected fundamental right, as it is deemed that
guaranteed fundamental rights only have positive obligations qua
individuals and State and have no negative impact/implication on
constructive development of society/individual.
47. In such circumstances, it becomes a policy decision to ascertain as
to which part of the activity has a positive obligation towards State and
fellow individuals and thus requires protection and which part of the
activity has a negative implication on betterment and constructive
development of the State and its citizens and thus requires to be
declared as outlawed.
48. Thus ascertainment and delineation of this positive obligation viz.
negative implication on State and its citizens, being essentially a policy
decision, should be best left to legislature to be protected and or
regulated through statutory framework. It is submitted that if such
common law claims and interests are conferred the status of an
overarching protected fundamental right, by way of judicial interpretation
then it would amount to this Hon'ble Court venturing into a policy-
making decision, which is impermissible in law. It is submitted that by
application of "doctrine of constitutional implication/limitation" this
Hon'ble Court has in past also refrained from declaring any new specie of
fundamental right which though was directly relatable to the existing
fundamental rights guaranteed under 'Part III of Indian Constitution.
Illustratively the said examples are as under:
48.1. Article 21 expressly provides for positive obligation of "right to
life" but the said the guaranteed "right to life" does not include within its
gamut "right to die" as it had a negative implication/impact on society
and State. It is stated that though this claim of "right to die" can be
easily read into or can be said to be inextricably relatable to right to life
protected under Article 21) since this "right to die" was considered to be
having a negative impact/implication on the society, this Hon'ble Court
(though the Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court is seized of the said
matter) has left it to the competent legislature to come up with the
suitable legislation either expressly accepting such claim and protecting
the same through statutory provisions or rejecting the said claim.
48.2. Similarly, the claim of "right to know" has been traced to Article
19(1)(a) of the Constitution, however, since this claim of "right to know"
also had a negative application/implication of not to know about the
personal information of fellow citizens, therefore, it was left by this
Hon'ble Court for competent legislature come up with a statutory
framework to statutorily regulate the said right to know. The said "right
to know" which can be traced to Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution is
therefore now regulated through provisions of the Right to Information
Act.
48.3. Likewise, right to education was read by this Hon'ble Court as a
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution in Unni
Krishnan, J.P. V. State of A.P. However, in the year 2002 when
63
legislature deemed it fit and proper, it was specifically declared by the
legislature as guaranteed fundamental right by way of a constitutional
amendment. Furthermore, the said right was conferred subject to
condition that the right to free and compulsory education would be
extended not to every individual but only to children of age between 6
years to 14 years in such manner as determined by the State through
appropriate law.
XI. Dangers of expanding the meaning of rights conferred under
Part III of our Constitution
49. It is submitted that there are inherent dangers in conferring an
expansive meaning to rights guaranteed under Part III of the
Constitution which can be illustratively brought out through following
examples.
50. It is submitted that right to life guaranteed under Article 21 also
includes "right to defend" one's own body. "Right to defend one's own
body" is also a very valuable and natural right. Further, this right has
been and established common law right. Thus in this context juxtaposed
with the scheme of our Indian constitution, can somebody be permitted
to argue that "right to defend" is an inextricably linked facet to right to
life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Indian Constitution and to secure
his life he has a "right to keep a firearm and/or maintain a militia" on the
pretext that the same is a natural right and also a common law right.
Thus on this pretext can any person seek creation of a new fundamental
right to keep arms and ammunition through judicial interpretation by
arguing that the same is a facet of right to life guaranteed under Article
21 and this right is already a recognised common law right and has been
specifically guaranteed under other jurisdiction of the worlds e.g. US
Constitution by way of Second amendment.
51. Similarly, forensic analysis of genetic material is an accepted
mode of criminal investigation. For example, fingerprints analysis of a
suspect, semen analysis to identify rape accused are effective procedures
which are employed by investigating 'agencies to bring a criminal to
book. It is submitted that giving expansive meaning to the rights
conferred under Part III, it is possible for a criminal to argue that their
biometric and genetic material is private to them and using the same in
criminal investigation against them would amount to violation of right
against self-incrimination.
52. Thus it is respectfully submitted that any "claim" or "interest"
which has a negative implication on the society and which though may
appear to be necessary concomitant for exercise of already declared
fundamental rights under Part III of our Constitution or are concepts
which appears to be relatable to fundamental rights already guaranteed
under Part III of our
Constitution, cannot be conferred with the status of an independent
fundamental right enforceable through Article 32 of the Constitution of
India.
53. It is submitted that in such scenario it should be best left with the
competent legislature to come up with suitable regulatory mechanism for
first delineating such legitimate claims or interest which are necessary for
constructive development of our constitutional ethos.
54. It is submitted that in this context the doctrine of constitutional
implication would squarely apply. Reliance in this regard is placed on
judgment of this Hon'ble Court rendered in Manoj Narula V. Union of
India wherein this Hon'ble Court held as under:
Doctrine of constitutional implications
75. The principle of Constitutional morality basically means to bow
down to the norms of the Constitution and not to act in a manner
which would become violative of the rule of law or reflectible of action
in an arbitrary manner. It actually works at the fulcrum and guides as
a laser beam in institution building. The traditions and conventions
have to grow to sustain the value of such amorality. The democratic
values survive and become successful where the people at large and
the persons in charge of the institution are strictly guided by the
Constitutional parameters without paving the path of deviancy and
reflecting in action the primary concern to maintain institutional
integrity and the requisite Constitutional restraints. Commitment to
the Constitution is a facet of Constitutional morality. In this context,
the following passage would be apt to be reproduced:
"If men were angels, no Government would be necessary. If
angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal controls on
government would be necessary. In framing a government which is
to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in
this : you must first enable the government to control the
governed : and in the next place oblige it to control itself. A
dependence on the people is, no doubt, the primary control on the
government,' but experience has taught mankind the necessity of
auxiliary precautions. [James Madison as Publius, Federalist 51]"
(emphasis supplied)
XII. The technological advancement should be used for "good
governance" and the privacy issues need to be taken care of by
statutes
55. The rapidly increasing technological advancement globally and
more particularly in electronic and communications field has opened
several new vistas. At the hands of handful of individuals, no attempt be
permitted which defeats positive and constructive efforts for "good
governance" in a developing country like India on an ostensible ground of
"privacy" which can be adequately taken care of by statutory provisions.
56. India is a country where substantial number of population either
lives below the poverty line or just above the poverty line. Even basic
necessities like food, drinking water, seeds, fertilizers, agricultural
equipments and banking has not reached them.
57. Though, this Hon'ble Court is not examining validity of Aadhaar,
the following facts need to be examined to satisfy the judicial conscience
of this Hon'ble Court that if privacy is declared to be a fundamental right
(which can always be secured by statutory provisions) all our attempts
will be made to stop "good governance" and majority of the deprived
population of the country would suffer.
58. Aadhaar card/number is the most widely held form of identity
document with the widest coverage amongst the residents/citizens of
India. This is evident from the following chart:
Identity Document
Coverage
Passport
6.9 Crores.
Pan Card
29 Crores (approx.)
EPIC Card
60 Crores (approx.)
Ration Card
15.17 Crores (approx.)
Driving Licence
17.37 Crores (approx.)
Aadhaar
115.15 Crores
59. The use of Aadhaar is one of the classic case of good governance
which can be demonstrated by one illustration. By using Aadhaar Card,
the total recorded savings of the Government of India from just one
scheme viz. the Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme (based upon Aadhaar)
has been Rs 49,560 crores in just two years i.e. 2014-2015 and 2015-
2016.
60. This not only serves public interest but the intended benefits,
subsidies and services offered by the Government as a welfare State
(which is its constitutional duty) reaches to correct beneficiaries weeding
out fake and duplicate beneficiaries saving thousand and crores of
rupees.
61. This Hon'ble Court in PUCL V. Union of India65 65 has approved the
recommendations of the High-Powered Committee headed by Justice D.P.
Wadhwa, which recommended linking of Aadhaar with PDS and has
encouraged State Governments to adopt the same.
62. This Hon'ble Court in State of Kerala V. Parent Teachers Assn.
SNVUP School has directed use of Aadhaar for checking bogus
admissions in schools with the following observations:
"18. We are, however, inclined to give a direction to the Education
Department, State of Kerala to forth with give effect to a circular dated
12-10-2011 to issue UID Card to all the school children and follow the
guidelines and directions contained in their circular. Needless to say, the
Government can always adopt, in future, better scientific methods to curb
such types of bogus admissions in various aided schools."
This Hon'ble Court, while monitoring the PILs relating to night
shelters for the homeless and right to food through the public distribution
system, has lauded and complimented the effort of State Governments
for, inter alia, carrying out biometric identification of the head of family of
each household to eliminate fictitious, bogus and ineligible BPL/AAY
household cards. This is evident from the following extracts in PUCL V.
Union of India67.
48. In the affidavit, it is mentioned that NGO, Samya had
conducted survey and identified 15,000 homeless beneficiaries of
which 14,850 which have been approved for giving "homeless cards".
These cards are being prepared zonewise and the list is displayed at
the office of the Assistant Commissioners/Circle Office for distribution
of the special homeless cards to the beneficiaries after obtaining their
biometric impressions. The NGO, Samya has also been informed to
facilitate delivery of these cards to the beneficiaries and enable them
to lift the specified food articles and kerosene oil allocated from the
linked fair price shop/kerosene oil depot. The details have been
mentioned in the AAY programme.
49. It is mentioned in the affidavit that under the Central Scheme
of Food and Supplies Department, Government of NCT of Delhi is
carrying out review of BPL/AAY household cards which were issued
before 15-1-2009. It is simultaneously carrying out biometric
identification of head of family of each household to eliminate
fictitious, bogus and ineligible cards and those who have left Delhi.
53. The Delhi Government has very minutely and carefully analysed
the problems of homeless people living in these shelters and is trying
to provide a comprehensive programme for the homeless. We must
compliment the Government of NCT of Delhi for this effort. We would
like the Government of NCT of Delhi to file a further affidavit indicating
what progress has been made on different fronts.
64. Similarly, this Hon'ble Court in PUCL (PDS matters) V. Union of
India
68
had held that computerisation is going to help the public
distribution system in the country in a big way and encouraged and
endorsed the digitisation of database including biometric identification of
the beneficiaries. In fact this Hon'ble Court had requested Mr Nandan
Nilekani, the then Chairman, UIDAI to suggest ways in which the
computerisation
process of PDS can be expedited. The following extracts from the
abovementioned order is relied upon:
2. There seems to be a general consensus that computerisation is
going to help the public distribution system in the country in a big
way. In the affidavit it is stated that the Department of Food and
Public Distribution has been pursuing the States to undertake special
drive to eliminate bogus/duplicate ration cards and as a result, 209.55
lakh ration cards have been eliminated since 2006 and the annual
saving of foodgrain subsidy has worked out to about Rs 8200 crores
per annum. It is further mentioned in the affidavit that end-to-end
computerisation of public distribution system comprises creation and
management of digitised beneficiary database including biometric
identification of the beneficiaries, supply chain management of TPDS
commodities till fair price shops.
3. It is further stated in the affidavit that in the State of Gujarat,
the process of computerisation is at an advanced stage where issue of
bar coded ration cards has led to a reduction of 16 lakh ration cards. It
is expected that once the biometric details are collected, this number
would increase further. For the present, a reduction of 16 lakh ration
cards would translate into an annual saving of over Rs 600 crores. This
is just to illustrate that computerisation would go in a big way to help
the targeted population of the public distribution system in the
country.
4. In the affidavit it is further mentioned that the Government of
India has set up a task force under the Chairmanship of Mr Nandan
Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI, to recommend, amongst others, an IT
strategy for the public distribution system. We request Mr Nandan
Nilekani to suggest us ways and means by which computerisation
process of the public distribution system can be expedited. Let a brief
report/affidavit be filed by Mr Nandan Nilekani within four weeks from
today.
65. This Hon'ble Court in PUCL V. Union of India5 69 has also endorsed
biometric identification of homeless persons so that the benefits like
supply of food and kerosene oil available to persons who are below
poverty line can be extended to the correct beneficiaries.
66. Recently, this Hon'ble Court in Lokniti Foundation V. Union of
India has approved Aadhaar based verification of existing and new
mobile phone number subscribers. This is a great leap towards
anonymous pre-paid sim cards which are being used either for terrorist
activities or for such other similar illegal activities.
67. The fact that food security is one of the most prime concern of the
Central Government which is under a mandate of National Food Security
Act, 2013 also statutorily incorporates Aadhaar, would show that not only
public interest is involved (as against a perceived and subjective privacy
interest of few individuals) but declaration of privacy as fundamental
right would open several other statutes to the vulnerability of challenge.
Section 12 of the National Food Security Act, 2013 reads as under:
"REFORMS IN TARGETED PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
12. (1) The Central and State Governments shall endeavour to
progressively undertake necessary reforms in the Targeted Public
Distribution System in consonance with the role envisaged for them in
this Act.
(2) The reforms shall, inter alia, include-
(a) doorstep delivery of foodgrains to the Targeted Public
Distribution System outlets;
(b) application of information and communication technology tools
including end-to-end computerisation in order to ensure transparent
recording of transactions at all levels, and to prevent diversion;
(c) leveraging "aadhaar" for unique identification, with biometric
information of entitled beneficiaries for proper targeting of benefits
under this Act;"
68. Therefore, it is humbly submitted that when Aadhaar has been
adopted by several statutes and authorities across the country both
pursuant to directions by this Hon'ble Court as well as legislative
amendments passed by Parliament of India, this Hon'ble Court may not
elevate a statutory right to the level of fundamental right which will open
doors for challenge to various public interest enactments.
69. The amended Section 139-AA of the Income Tax Act which intends
to expose all shell companies and curb the menace of black money,
money laundering and tax evasion is already held to be constitutional by
this Hon'ble Court on the challenge of Articles 14 and 19 of the
Constitution in Binoy Viswam V. Union of India71.
70. The object and purpose of the said amendment is also approved
by this Hon'ble Court in the aforesaid judgment. Such a salutary
provisions eradicating shell companies, black money and money
laundering would also come under the vulnerability of being declared
ultra vires. Right to privacy is declared to be a fundamental right. This is
more particularly so when otherwise the Income Tax Act provides for
sufficient statutory safeguards for protection of privacy.
71. When the technological advancement are taking place globally and
virtually on daily basis, the Government(s) as welfare State functioning
under
the
Constitution
may
come
up
with
several
regulations/programmes/schemes in the direction of good governance.
Just to give an illustration, it
may be pointed out that in large number of rural schools, it is found that
qualified teachers appointed never come for teaching. Their fake presence
is marked and a local unqualified person staying in the village teaches
the students. If, in future, the presence of the qualified teachers is linked
with either Aadhaar or such similar identification, it would be a great leap
in the direction of imparting education in rural areas.
72. There can be several such areas where the technology can be used
for larger public good and in furtherance of "good governance" while
protecting the individual privacy based upon each subject being dealt
with by way of a statute.
XIII. Reliance placed by the petitioners on the case law existing in
other jurisdictions to interpret the Indian Constitution merits
rejection
73. It is further submitted that reliance placed by the petitioners on
the case law existing in other jurisdictions to interpret the Indian
Constitution is liable to be rejected. It is respectfully submitted that in
view of the prevailing situation, it will not be in the interest of social
fabric of the country and also in the interest of justice that Indian
Constitution is interpreted in the light of constitutional law prevailing in
USA or any other foreign country, which has expressly provided in its
Constitution a right of privacy.
74. It is submitted that in absence of Parliament in its wisdom,
creating fundamental right of privacy the said right cannot be read into
the Constitution even by application of doctrine of "sub silentio" or
"constitutional silence". A fortiori creating a right of privacy by
interpreting the Indian Constitution in the light of the case law existing in
American or any other foreign jurisdiction, will amount to doing violence
with the conscious language of the Constitution.
75. It is submitted that that the thought process of Indian citizens,
their societal behaviour, their socio-economic problems, etc. are different
from the problems of citizens living in western countries. Their concept of
privacy is strikingly different from the privacy standards prevailing in
western countries. As such the standards of privacy existing in western
countries ought not be embodied in Indian Constitution as the Indian
Constitution shall have to be interpreted strictly in Indian context and
keeping the citizens of India in mind.
76. The aforesaid principle has been duly recognised in a catena of
judgements rendered by this Hon'ble Court, relevant portions of which
reads as under:
76.1. In Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel V. RBI72, this Hon'ble Court held
as under:
50. Mr Nambiar, however, joined issue on the use of the American
precedents on the ground that banking in America is by grace of
legislature, and is either a franchise or a privilege, which has no place in
our Constitution. He added that the carrying on of business is not one of
the provisions of the American Bill of Rights, nor a fundamental right, as
we understand it, though by judicial construction the individual right has
been brought within the Fourteenth Amendment. He, therefore,
contended that American cases and American laws should not be used.
In our opinion, no useful purpose will be served by trying to establish the
similarities or discrepancies between the American Constitution and
banking laws, on the one hand, and our Constitution and our banking
laws, on the other, and we do not wish to rest our decision on the
American and Japanese analogies.
75. The aid of American concepts, laws and precedents in the
interpretation of our laws is not always without its dangers and they
have therefore to be relied upon with some caution if not with
hesitation because of the difference in the nature of those laws and of
the institutions to which they apply. Mr Nambiyar relied upon these
different concepts and submitted that in USA the right to carry on
business is not a fundamental right but is a "franchise", though, it has
by legal interpretation, been brought within the fourteenth
amendment and the doctrine of "franchise" has no place in the Indian
Constitution : C.S.S. Motor Service V. State of Madras73 approved in
74
Saghir Ahmad V. State of U.P. Similarly the right to form a
corporation is in USA a "franchise" or a "privilege" which can be
withdrawn. To apply the analogy of Banks in USA to those in India or
the mode of exercise by and extent of the powers of a Controller of
Currency or some similar authority will more likely than not lead to
erroneous conclusions.
76.2. In M.C. Mehta V. Union of India 75 (Shriram - Oleum Gas), this
Hon'ble Court held as under:
29. We were, during the course of arguments, addressed at great
length by counsel on both sides on the American doctrine of State
action. The learned counsel elaborately traced the evolution of this
doctrine in its parent country. We are aware that in America since the
Fourteenth Amendment is available only against the State, the courts
in order to thwart racial discrimination by private parties, devised the
theory of State action under which it was held that wherever private
activity was aided, facilitated or supported by the State in a significant
measure, such activity took the colour of State action and was subject
to the Constitutional limitations of the Fourteenth Amendment. This
historical context in which the doctrine of State action evolved in the
United States
is irrelevant for our purpose especially since we have Article 15(2) in our
Constitution. But it is the principle behind the doctrine of State aid,
control and regulation so impregnating a private activity as to give it the
colour of State action that is of interest to us and that also to the limited
extent to which it can be Indianized and harmoniously blended with our
Constitutional Jurisprudence. That we in no way consider ourselves bound
by American exposition of Constitutional law is well demonstrated by the
fact that in Ramana Dayaram Shetty this Court preferred the minority
opinion of Douglas, J. in Jackson V. Metropolitan Edison Co. 77 as against
the majority opinion of Rehnquist, J. And again in Air India V. Nergesh
Meerza78 this Court whilst preferring the minority view in General Electric
Co. V. Martha V. Gilbert79 said that the provisions of the American
Constitution cannot always be applied to Indian conditions or to the
provisions of our Constitution and whilst some of the principles
adumbrated by the American decisions may provide a useful guide. close
adherence to those principles while applying them to the provisions of
our Constitution is not to be favoured, because the social conditions in
our country are different.
76.3. In Automobile (Rajasthan) Transport Ltd. V. State of
Rajasthan , this Hon'ble Court held as under:
80
8. So far we have set out the factual and legal background against
which the problem before us has to be solved. We must now say a few
words regarding the historical background. It is necessary to do this.
because extensive references have been made to Australian and
American decisions. Australian decisions with regard to the
interpretation of Section 92 of the Australian Constitution and
American decisions with regard to the Commerce clause of the
American Constitution. This Court pointed out in the Atiabari Tea Co.
81
case that it would not be always safe to rely upon the American or
Australian decisions in interpreting the provisions of our Constitution.
Valuable as those decisions might be in showing how the problem of
freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse was dealt with in other
federal constitutions, the provisions of our Constitution must be
interpreted against the historical background in which our Constitution
was made; the background of problems which the Constitution-makers
tried to solve according to the genius of the Indian people whom the
Constitution-makers represented in the Constituent Assembly. The
first thing to be
noticed in this connection is that the Constitution-makers were not
writing on a clean slate. They had the Government of India Act. 1935 and
they also had the administrative set-up which that Act envisaged. India
then consisted of various administrative units known as Provinces. each
with its own administrative set-up. There were differences of language,
religion etc. Some of the Provinces were economically more developed
than the others. Even inside the same. Province, there were under
developed, developed and highly developed areas from the point of view
of industries. communications etc. The problem of economic integration
with which the Constitution-makers were faced was a problem with many
facets.
76.4. In State of Bihar V. Union of India82 this Hon'ble Court held as
under:
13. Our attention was drawn to some provisions of the American
Constitution and of the Constitution Act of Australia and several
decisions bearing on the interpretation of provisions which are some
what similar to Article 131. But as the similarity is only limited, we do
not propose to examine either the provisions referred to or the
decisions to which our attention was drawn. In interpreting our
Constitution we must not be guided by decisions which do not bear
upon provisions identical with those in our Constitution.
76.5. In Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union of India83 , this Hon'ble Court
held as under:
188. At the outset it must be stated that the decisions of the United
States Supreme Court were not applied in the Indian context as it was
felt that the structure of the provisions under the two Constitutions
and the social conditions as well as other factors are widely different in
both the countries. Reference may be made to Bhikaji Narain Dhakras
V. State of M.P. 84 and A.S. Krishna V. State of Madras wherein this
Court specifically held that the due process clause in the Constitution
of the United States of America is not applicable to India. While
considering the scope and applicability of Article 19(1)(g) in
Kameshwar Prasad V. State of Bihar86 it was observed : (AIR p. 1169,
para 8)
"8. As regards these decisions of the American courts, it should
be borne in mind that though the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States reading 'Congress shall make no
law
abridging the freedom of speech , appears to confer no
power on the Congress to impose any restriction on the exercise of
the guaranteed right, still it has always been understood that the
freedom guaranteed is subject to the police power-the scope of which
however has not been defined with precision or uniformly."
189. In Kesavananda Bharati case87 also, while considering the
extent and scope of the power of amendment under Article 368 of the
Constitution of India, the Constitution of the United States of America
1108)
"1108. The American decisions which have been copiously cited
before us, were rendered in the context of the history of the
struggle against colonialism of the American people, sovereignty of
several States which came together to form a Confederation, the
strains and pressures which induced. them to frame a Constitution
for a Federal Government and the underlying concepts of law and
judicial approach over a period of nearly 200 years, cannot be used
to persuade this Court to apply their approach in determining the
cases arising under our Constitution."
190. It may also be noticed that there are structural differences in
the Constitution of India and the Constitution of the United States of
America. Reference may be made to the Fourteenth Amendment to the
US Constitution. Some of the relevant portions thereof are as follows:
"All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject
to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of
the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any
law which shall abridge the privileges and immunities of citizens of
the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life,
liberty or property without due process of law nor deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws."
Whereas in India, Articles 14 and 18 are differently structured and
contain express provisions for special provision for the advancement of
SEBCs, STs and SCs. Moreover, in our Constitution there is a specific
provision under the directive principles of State policy in Part IV of the
Constitution requiring the State to strive for justice social, economic and
political-and to minimise the inequalities of income and endeavour to
eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities (Article 38).
Earlier, there was a view that Articles 16(4) and 15(5) are exceptions to
Articles 16(1) and 15(1) respectively. This view was held in Southern
Railway V. Rangachari and M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore89
209. The aforesaid principles applied by the Supreme Court of the
United States of America cannot be applied directly to India as the
gamut
of affirmative action in India is fully supported by Constitutional
provisions and we have not applied the principles of "suspect legislation"
and we have been following the doctrine that every legislation passed by
Parliament is presumed to be constitutionally valid unless otherwise
proved. We have repeatedly held that the American decisions are not
strictly applicable to us and the very same principles of strict scrutiny
and suspect legislation were, sought to be applied and this Court rejected
the same in Saurabh Chaudri V. Union of India90 Speaking for the Bench,
"36. The strict scrutiny test or the intermediate scrutiny test
applicable in the United States of America as argued by Shri Salve
cannot be applied in this case. Such a test is not applied in Indian
courts. In any event, such a test may be applied in a case where a
legislation ex facie is found to be unreasonable. Such a test may
also be applied in a case where by reason of a statute the life and
liberty of a citizen is put in jeopardy. This Court since its inception
apart from a few cases where the legislation was found to be ex
facie wholly unreasonable proceeded on the doctrine that
constitutionality of a statute is to be presumed and the burden to
prove contra is on him who asserts the same."
76.6. In Pathumma V. State of Kerala 91 this Hon'ble Court held as
under:
23. We have deliberately not referred to the American cases
because the conditions in our country are quite different and this Court
need not rely on the American Constitution for the purpose of
examining the seven freedoms contained in Article 19 because the
social conditions and the habits of our people are different. In this
connection, in Jagmohan Singh V. State of U.P. 92 this Court observed
"So far as we are concerned in this country, we do not have, in
our Constitution any provision like the Eighth Amendment nor are
we at liberty to apply the test of reasonableness with the freedom
with which the Judges of the Supreme Court of America are
accustomed to apply 'the due process' clause."
XIV. Remedy for breach of common law right of privacy
77. It is respectfully submitted that the common law right of privacy
has been duly protected by various statutes, subject to reasonable
restrictions, as detailed above. In future, in case the Hon'ble
Constitutional Courts of the country, finds out that on specific fact
situation, privacy of individual is not adequately protected, then the
constitutional court can, on case-to-case basis, issue relevant guidelines
till the competent legislature steps in as done in
Destruction of Public & Private Properties V. State of A.P. 93 relevant
portion of which reads as under:
"17. The power of this Court also extends to laying down guidelines.
In Union of India V. Assn. for Democratic Reforms94 this Court
"19.
it is not possible for this Court to give any directions for
amending the Act or the statutory Rules. It is for Parliament to
amend the Act and the Rules. It is also established law that no
direction can be given, which would be contrary to the Act and the
Rules.
20. However, it is equally settled that in case when the Act or
Rules are silent on a particular subject and the authority
implementing the same has Constitutional or statutory power to
implement it, the Court can necessarily issue directions or orders on
the said subject to fill the vacuum or void till the suitable law is
enacted."
18. This Court has issued directions in a large number of cases to
meet urgent situations e.g.
(i) Lakshmi Kant Pandey V. Union of India95
(ii) Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan96
(iii) Vineet Narain V. Union of India97
(iv) State of W.B. V. Sampat Lal98
(v) K. Veeraswami V. Union of India99
(vi) Union Carbide Corpn. V. Union of India
(vii) Delhi Judicial Service Assn. V. State of Gujarat101
102
(viii) DDA V. Skipper Construction Co. (P) Ltd.
(ix) Dinesh Trivedi V. Union of India03 103 , Common Cause V. Union
of India 104
(x) Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union of
India 105,
78. It is respectfully submitted that while ascertaining the individual's
right of privacy against the State action or against an
individual/corporate action the Hon'ble courts would be guided by the
test of arbitrariness, test of "reasonable nexus to the purpose sought to
be achieved" and the "test of proportionality". It is submitted that the
test embodied under Section 8(j) RTI Act can also be applied for testing
as to whether in a given fact situation, an act/conduct or any other
aspect of human life is protected by privacy. As per the said test, a
person would have right of privacy if there is no overwhelming public
interest in disclosure of the said act/conduct or any other aspect of
human life and also the said act has no relationship with any public
activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of the
privacy of the individual. As against this if it is in the larger interest of
the nation or in overwhelming public interest not to keep specific kind of
information private, its disclosure can be permitted in accordance with
the law made by the competent legislature.
79. In nutshell, though each of the citizens of India has an inherent
right of privacy, its recognition, definition and protection can be done by
statutes and not as fundamental rights.
VIII. Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, Senior Advocate, for the respondents
1. This larger Bench of the Supreme Court of India has assembled to
decide the issue of existence of fundamental right of privacy in Article 21
or Part III as a whole and its contours (as far as possible) in the context
of an apparent conflict between previous judgments and the matrix of the
Aadhar Act. The Aadhar Act requires a limited identity data disclosure for
maintaining a database, only and solely, for identification purposes with
an express stipulation of non-transferability. Protection and safeguards
include punitive measures. In short, limited use for identification and non
-transferability with punitive safeguards is the hallmark of the Aadhar
Act. It does not seek to profile any person. The question therefore is "Is
there a right to privacy in public domain?", "What is the extent?",
"Whether data for mere identification would involve a privacy right?",
"What are the limitations of the State?".
Two Caveats
2. The majority view in Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala is that
the fundamental rights are not natural rights or inalienable rights.
(extracts are enclosed as Annexure-A) [Compilation RD Vol. III Tab R).
Even if one goes by the doctrine of basic structure they are certainly
important but they can be abridged though they cannot be destroyed or
emasculated. I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N. 2
3. Reference to "minimal governance" concept should be eschewed. It
should be sufficient and appropriate to say governance as per the
Constitution. That ensures respect for fundamental rights. Plea for
"horizontal protection" and "minimal governance" is somewhat
contradictory. Binoy Viswam V. Union of India  [Compilation RD Vol. III
Tab UVW)
"96. Having said so, when it comes to exercising the power of
judicial review of a legislation, the scope of such a power has to be
kept in mind and the power is to be exercised within the limited
sphere assigned to the judiciary to undertake the judicial review. This
has already been mentioned above. Therefore, unless the petitioner
demonstrates that the Parliament, in enacting the impugned provision,
has exceeded its power prescribed in the Constitution or this provision
violates any of the provision, the argument predicated on `limited
governance' will not succeed. One of the aforesaid ingredients needs to
be established by the petitioners in order to succeed."
I. Dynamics of privacy
4. Article 21 talks of life and personal liberty in conjunction. Our Court
has construed "Life" as not limited to body and limbs. In fact post-birth
the most important aspect of life is its protection, growth and
development until demise. Therefore the dynamics and dialectics, of
"Life" is important. And if "Privacy" is read into Article 21, as it should be
to an extent, then the same would be true of "Privacy".
5. Life and Privacy in "Tribal Society", "Feudal Society", "Industrial
Society", and "Techno-Industrial Society" would have different
dimensions. So also it would vary from a Colonial State to a modern
Democratic Welfare State. This is more so in the context of claims of
anonymity, autonomy and identity.
6. Primeval societies existed disconnectedly, isolatedly and in small
group existence. There was little need for building wide complex
relations. But, leaving the tracing of intermediary growth of societies, the
modern technological societies afford an opportunity to build wide
network of relations which are social, political and economical. Individuals
have to relate with the State too. Our growth and development depends
on such relations. Today's society is therefore founded on
interconnectivity and seeking of opportunities. And today's State also has
grown more complex with its welfare activities dimension, need for
taxation, and growing use of banks in commerce, as also growing crime
and terrorism.
7. In today's society if someone wants to be completely anonymous
and autonomous and does not want to disclose his identity at all then he
has to turn a recluse. In the modern society the normal proclivity of an
individual is to widen his network and enter into a variety of relations and
seek the
benefits and services both from private service providers and the
Government and public bodies. Therein lies his growth and development
sanctified by Article 21 of the Constitution. The necessary fallout of the
man setting out of his home for the aforesaid purpose is that he has to
disclose certain minimum information about his identity. Non-disclosure
of identity or complete anonymity in these circumstances is not possible.
To illustrate:
(i) If someone wishes to marry he/she would have to disclose who
they are and what they do. May be they would have to at least state
that they are not suffering from communicable or serious diseases.
(ii) If someone seeks an employment in the private/public or
government sector, he would, per necessity have to disclose his
identity and may be antecedents too. He may also have to agree to
biometric attendance.
(iii) Every professional working in an institution would have to
disclose his minimum identity data with photograph for his
recognition/identification, and also blood group which would enable
the institution to help save his life in the event he needs blood.
(iv) Every individual who wants to operate a smart phone or
internet and wishes to download/operate applications and engage in e-
commerce or e-banking, would have to disclose his minimum identity
in the form of name, date of birth, telephone number, email address
and the residential address.
(v) Every voter has to identify himself before casting his vote by
means of showing his voter identity card, which would have certain
details of identity of person including his photograph.
(vi) Similarly, a candidate seeking to contest has to disclose his
personal details such as income, assets and liabilities of himself and
that of his spouse, criminal antecedents, etc.
PUCL V. Union of India4 [Compilation RD Vol. III Tab XYZ)
8. The aforesaid are merely some instances to show that the building
of social, economic and political relations, engaging in commerce/e-
commerce and engaging with government/public institutions would
require minimum identity data for recognition and identification.
Disclosure of thumb impressions and photographs has also become
indispensable. In short, there can be no reasonable expectation of privacy
in the disclosure of such and other similar data for identification. In other
words, in the modern society the very growth and development of the
individual would not admit a privacy claim in disclosure of data for
identification.
9. The people with whom an individual relates, also have an identical
interest in right to life and personal liberty and Articles 14 & 19 which
give them the right to know or right to information. When an individual
deals with
an individual, or deals with a collectivity of individuals under an
institutional umbrella then Article 21 also would impose a requirement to
disclose identity information.
II. Constitutional existence of the fundamental right to privacy
10. Claim to privacy cannot be considered to be a fundamental right
under the Constitution of India in generality and abstraction. Every claim
to privacy in a non-penumbral zone of a specified fundamental right,
must in the first instance be established as a fundamental right under
Article 21 of the Constitution. The establishment would require
assessment of whether the subjective expectation of privacy of the
claimant is one which the court would objectively consider to reasonably
be legitimate. In this regard this Court will also consider the context and
the spatial domain (private or public) in which the claim of privacy is
seeking recognition as a fundamental right. This approach is being
followed in USA, UK and by the European Court of Human Rights.
11. A reference was made to the Preamble and Part III rights to show
that there is a right to privacy under the Constitution. But it is more
important to ascertain from the substantive text what is that right
outside the penumbra of the specified fundamental right [Articles 14, 19,
20(3), 25]. Where a claim of privacy is asserted to fall within the
penumbra of a specified fundamental right enshrined in Part III, like
Articles 14, 19, 20(3) and 25(1), the claim would merely be recognised
as the specified fundamental right, and the same would have no dehors
existence. Its infringement would be tested on the anvil of those
fundamental rights alone. Of course, if the claim falls in penumbra of
more than one fundamental right then the infringement would have to be
tested with respect to limitations regarding both fundamental rights, as
per R.C. Cooper5 doctrine. The fact that a privacy claim falls in the
penumbra of a specified fundamental right, does not necessarily imply
that there is generally a fundamental right to privacy under Article 21
and the same is inalienable.
12. It is instructing to refer to what is held in Maneka Gandhi V. Union
of India6 in the context of freedom of speech and expression of the
Constitution. This Court observed as below:
(pp. 306-307):
"29. It is not enough that a right claimed by the petitioner flows or
emanates from a named fundamental right or that its existence is
necessary in order to make the exercise of the named fundamental
right meaningful and effective. Every activity which facilitates the
exercise of a named fundamental right is not necessarily
comprehended in that fundamental right nor can it be regarded as
such merely because it may not be possible otherwise to effectively
exercise that fundamental right.
The contrary construction would lead to incongruous results and the
entire scheme of Article 19(1) which confers different rights and
sanctions different restrictions according to different standards depending
upon the nature of the right will be upset. What is necessary to be seen
is, and that is the test which must be applied, whether the right claimed
by the petitioner is an integral part of a named fundamental right or
partakes of the same basic nature and character as the named
fundamental right so that the exercise of such right is in reality and
substance nothing but an instance of the exercise of the named
fundamental right. If this be the correct test, as we apprehend it is, the
right to go abroad cannot in all circumstances be regarded as included in
freedom of speech and expression".
"33. We cannot, therefore, accept the theory that a peripheral or
concomitant right which facilitates the exercise of a named
fundamental right or gives it meaning and substance or makes its
exercise effective, is itself a guaranteed right included within the
named fundamental right".
III. Reasonably legitimate expectation of privacy
13. It follows that there cannot be a broad and general definition of
privacy and privacy interest must also be placed in the context of other
rights and values. A privacy right claimed in a context must be a
fundamental right implicit in the concept of life and personal liberty in
Article 21. In Gobind V. State of M.P.  , this Court relied on Griswold V.
Connecticut where the US Supreme Court observed as follows:
"22. There can be no doubt that privacy-dignity claims deserve to
be examined with care and to be denied only when an important
countervailing interest is shown to be superior. If the Court does find
that a claimed right is entitled to protection as a fundamental privacy
right, a law infringing it must satisfy the compelling State interest
test."
14. The US Supreme Court has consistently held that the court must
first find that a claimed right is entitled to protection as a fundamental
privacy right:
14.1. In United States V. Miller9 [Bank Documents] [Compilation RD
Vol. I Tab A) the Court observed:
"We must examine the nature of the particular documents sought to
be protected in order to determine whether there is a legitimate
expectation of privacy concerning their contents" (pp. 78-79)
14.2. In Smith V. Maryland10 10 [Pen Register], [Compilation RD Vol. I
Tab B) the Court observed "this inquiry as Mr Justice Harlan aptly noted
in
his
Katz1 concurrence, normally embraces two discrete questions. The
first is whether the individual, by his conduct, has "exhibited an actual
(subjective) expectation of privacy," whether, in the words of the Katz
majority, the individual has shown that "he seeks to preserve
(something) as private". The second question is whether the individual's
subjective expectation of privacy is "one that society is prepared to
recognize as `reasonable," "whether, in the words of the Katz1 majority,
the individual's expectation, viewed objectively, is "justifiable" under the
circumstances." (Pg 226-227).
14.3. In California V. Greenwood13 [garbage] [Compilation RD Vol. I
Tab C) it was observed "an expectation of privacy does not give rise to
IVth Amendment protection, however, unless society is prepared to
accept that expectation as objectively reasonable" (Pg 36)
14.4. In New York V. Class14 [car] [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab D) it was
observed:
"Nonetheless, the State's intrusion into a particular area, whether in
an automobile or elsewhere, cannot result in a Fourth. Amendment
violation unless the area is one in which there is a "constitutionally
protected reasonable Expectation of privacy".
15. The doctrine of reasonable expectation of privacy has also been
consistently applied in the UK (See R. (Wood) V. Commr. of Police of the
Metropolis15 [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab F); Kinloch V. HM Advocate16
[Compilation RD Vol. I Tab G).
16. These cases have been recently followed by the UK Supreme Court
in
JR38, In re 17 [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab H). The majority view
supported by Lord Toulson, Lord Hodge and Lord Clark in the context of
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms has observed as below:
"85. This passage highlights three matters : the width of the
concept of private life; the purpose of Article 8, i.e. what it seeks to
protect; and the need to examine the particular circumstances of the
case in order to decide whether, consonant with that purpose, the
applicant had a legitimate expectation of protection in relation to the
subject matter of his complaint. If so, it is then up to the defendant to
justify the interference with the defendant's privacy.
86. In an impressive analysis of the scope of Article 8, Laws LJ said
in R. (Wood) V. Commr. of Police of the Metropolis 15:
"20. The phrase 'physical and psychological integrity' of a person
(the Von Hannover case8. S. V. United Kingdom19 is with respect
helpful. So is the person's 'physical and social identity' : see S. V.
United Kingdom19 and other references there given. These
expressions reflect what seems to me to be the central value
protected by the right. I would describe it as the personal autonomy
of every individual
"21. The notion of the personal autonomy of every individual
marches with the presumption of liberty enjoyed in a free polity : a
presumption which consists in the principle that every interference
with the freedom of the individual stands in need of objective
justification. Applied to the myriad instances recognised in the
Article 8 jurisprudence, this presumption means that, subject to the
qualifications I shall shortly describe, an individual's personal
autonomy makes him-should make him-master of all those facts
about his own identity, such as his name, health, sexuality,
ethnicity, his own image, of which the cases speak; and also of the
'zone of interaction' (the Von Hannover case18 between himself and
others
"22. This cluster of values, summarised as the personal
autonomy of every individual and taking concrete form as a
presumption against interference with the individual's liberty, is a
defining characteristic of a free society. We therefore need to
preserve it even in little cases. At the same time it is important that
this core right protected by Article 8, however protean, should not
be read so widely that its claims become unreal and unreasonable.
For this purpose I think that there are three safeguards, or
qualifications. First, the alleged threat or assault to the individual's
autonomy must (if Article 8 is to be engaged) attain 'a certain level
of seriousness'. Secondly, the touchstone for Article 8.1's
engagement is whether the claimant enjoys on the facts a
'reasonable expectation of privacy' (in any of the senses of privacy
accepted in the cases). Absent such an expectation, there is no
relevant interference with personal autonomy. Thirdly, the breadth
of Article 8.1 may in many instances be greatly curtailed by the
scope of the justifications available to the state pursuant to Article
8.2. I shall say a little in turn about these three antidotes to the
overblown use of Article 8.'
87. I have set out this passage at length because I agree with it
and cannot improve on it. We are concerned in this case with the
second of Laws LJ's qualifications-the "touchstone" of whether the
claimant enjoyed on the facts a "reasonable expectation of privacy" or
"legitimate expectation of protection". (I take the expressions to be
synonymous.) In support of that part of his analysis Laws LJ cited
Hannover V. Germany18, at para 51 (set out above), Campbell V. MGN,
Ltd. 20 and Murray V. Express Newspapers plc. 21,
17. The case JR 38, In re17 involved publishing of photographic
images obtained from CCTV footage in journals and leaflets to be
distributed for the purpose of identifying the young persons participating
in riotous activity. Upholding the State action the Court observed:
"98. I therefore do not agree with Lord Kerr JSC's suggestion (para
56) that the test of reasonable expectation of privacy (or legitimate
expectation of protection), excludes from consideration such factors as
the age of the person involved, the presence or absence of consent to
publication, the context of the activity or the use to which the
published material is to be put. The reasonable or legitimate
expectation test is an objective test. It is to be applied broadly, taking
account of all the circumstances of the case (as Sir Anthony Clarke MR
said in Murray case21) and having regard to underlying value or values
to be protected. Thus, for example, the publication of a photograph of
a young person acting in a criminal manner for the purpose of enabling
the police to discover his identity may not fall within the scope of the
protection of personal autonomy which is the purpose of Article 8, but
the publication of the same photograph for another purpose might. Non
am I persuaded by Lord Kerr JSC's reading of Hannover 18 (in para 57
of his judgment) that the commission and the court treated
dissemination to the general public as a self-standing test."
IV. Public domain [information knowingly exposed to the public]
18. The US cases also make a distinction based upon the spatial
domain in which right to privacy is claimed, and this is notwithstanding
the
observation in Katz V. United States1 (telephone booth) [Compilation
RD Vol. I Tab E) that "the IVth Amendment protects, people and not
simply areas, against unreasonable searches and seizures "(Pg 583). In
fact, in Katz1 itself the Court significantly stated "what a person
knowingly exposes to the public even in his own home or office is not a
subject of IVth Amendment protection" (p. 582). In Katz, , the petitioner
was making calls from a telephone booth in public place and the officials
had placed a device outside the booth for overhearing. This was held
entitled to protection of privacy as the petitioner was speaking in privacy,
though in a public place. The subsequent cases which grappled with
information exposed to public are below:
18.1. In United States V. Miller9 [Bank records] [Compilation RD Vol. I
Tab A), a case of defrauding the Government of whiskey tax, Miller
sought to prevent his documents with the bank from being obtained by
the Treasury Department. The Court held that these documents were not
private papers and were business records of the bank. Rejecting the
contention that the documents were given by him for a limited purpose
(p. 78) the Court held that checks were not confidential communication
but negotiable instruments and had been voluntarily conveyed to the
banks and exposed in the ordinary course of business. In such cases, the
depositor takes the risk of conveyance of his information to the
Government. It was observed:
"(5) The depositor takes the risk, in revealing his affairs to another,
that the information will be conveyed by that person to the
Government. United States V. White22. This Court has held repeatedly
that the Fourth Amendment does not prohibit the obtaining of
information revealed to a third party and conveyed by him to
Government authorities, even if the information is revealed on the
assumption that it will be used only for a limited purpose and the
confidence placed in the third party will not be betrayed".
23
18.2. In Securities and Exchange Commission V. Jerry T. O'Brien Inc.
[Compilation RD Vol. II Tab L) the Court observed, it is established that,
when a person communicates information to a third party even on the
understanding that information is confidential, he cannot object if the
third party conveys that information or record thereof to law enforcement
authorities:
"5. Finally, respondents cannot invoke the Fourth Amendment in
support of the Court of Appeals' decision. It is established that, when
a person communicates information to a third party even on the
understanding that the communication is confidential, he cannot
object if the third party conveys that information or records thereof to
law enforcement authorities. United States V. Miller2, US at p. 443.
Relying on that principle, the Court has held that a customer of a bank
cannot challenge on Fourth Amendment grounds the admission into
evidence in a criminal prosecution of financial records obtained by the
Government from his bank pursuant to allegedly defective subpoenas,
despite the fact that he was given no notice of the subpoenas. Id, at p.
443 and n. 5. See also Donaldson V. United States24 (Internal Revenue
summons directed to third party does not trench upon any interests
protected by the Fourth Amendment). These rulings disable
respondents from arguing that notice of subpoenas issued to third
parties is necessary to allow a target to prevent an unconstitutional
search or seizure of his papers."
18.3. In Nixon V. Administrator of General Services25 [Compilation RD
Vol. I Tab IJ) the Court held that a person cannot assert any privacy
claim as to the documents and tape recordings that he has already
disclosed to the public:
"[23] The overwhelming bulk of the 42 million pages of documents
and the 880 tape recordings pertain, not to appellant's private
communications, but to the official conduct of his Presidency. Most of
the 42 million pages were prepared and seen by others and were
widely circulated within the Government. Appellant concedes that he
saw no more than 200,000 items, and we do not understand him to
suggest that his privacy claim extends to items he never saw. See
United States V. Miller9. Further, it is logical to assume that the tape
recordings made in the Presidential offices primarily relate to the
conduct and business of the Presidency. And, of course, appellant
cannot assert any privacy claim as to the documents and tape
recordings that he has already disclosed to the public. United States V.
Dionisio US at p. 14; Katz V. United States12 Therefore, appellant's
privacy claim embracing, for example, 'extremely private
communications between him and, among others, his wife, his
daughters, his physician, lawyer, and clergyman, and his close friends,
as well as personal diary dictablets and his wife's personal files,'
relates only to a very small fraction of the massive volume of official
materials with which they are presently commingled."
18.4. In United States V. Dioniso 26 [Compilation RD Vol. II Tab K) the
Court held that no person can have a reasonable expectation of privacy
over sound of his voice which is constantly exposed to the public : (pp.
79-80)
"[21, 22] "In Katz V. United States12, we said that the Fourth
Amendment provides no protection for what 'a person knowingly
exposes to the public, even in his own home or office The physical
characteristics of a person's voice, its tone and manner, as opposed to
the content of a specific conversation, are constantly exposed to the
public. Like a man's facial characteristics, or handwriting, his voice is
repeatedly produced for others to hear. No person can have a
reasonable expectation that others will not know the sound of his
voice, any more than he can reasonably expect that his face will be a
mystery to the world. As the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
stated:
"Except for the rare recluse who chooses to live his life in
complete solitude, in our daily lives we constantly speak and write,
and while the content of a communication is entitled to Fourth
Amendment
protection
the
underlying
identifying
characteristics-the constant factor throughout both public and
private communications-are open for all to see or hear. There is no
basis for constructing a wall of privacy against
the grand jury which does not exist in casual contacts with strangers.
Hence no intrusion into an individual's privacy results from compelled
execution of handwriting or voice exemplars; nothing is being exposed to
the grand jury that has not previously been exposed to the public at
large. United States V. Doe (Schwartz)7, F 2d at pp. 898-99.
The required disclosure of a person's voice is thus immeasurably
further removed from the Fourth Amendment protection than was the
intrusion into the body effected by the blood extraction in Schmerber.
"The interests in human dignity and privacy which the Fourth
Amendment protects forbid any such intrusions on the mere chance
that desired evidence might be obtained.' Schmerber V. California 8
US at pp. 769-70. Similarly, a seizure of voice exemplars does not
involve the 'severe, though brief, intrusion upon cherished personal
security," effected by the 'pat down' in Terry- - surely an annoying,
frightening, and perhaps humiliating experience. Terry V. Ohio9 , US
at pp. 24-25. Rather, this is like the fingerprinting in Davis, where,
though the initial dragnet detentions were constitutionally
impermissible, we noted that the fingerprinting itself 'involves none of
the probing into an individual's private life and thoughts that marks an
interrogation or search.' Davis V. Mississippi30, 394 US at p. 727; cf.
Thom V. New York Stock F Supp at p. 1009."
18.5. In Smith V. Maryland10 [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab B) a pen
register was installed in the telephone company's office to record the
numbers dialled from the telephone at the petitioner's home. This was
done on police's request. The claim of privacy was rejected as the Court
doubted that people in general entertained any actual expectations in the
numbers they dial. All telephone users realise that they must convey
phone numbers to the telephone company since it is through telephone
company's switching equipment that their calls are completed and based
on that monthly bills are prepared. The site of the call being home was
held to be immaterial. The Court observed "this Court consistently has
held that a person has no legitimate expectation of privacy in information
he voluntarily turns over to third parties" (pp. 229).
18.6. In California V. Greenwood13 [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab C)
garbage had been placed outside the house for collection and the same
was seized by the Narcotics Department on a suspicion of use of
prohibited substance. The Court held that the garbage had been placed
for conveying it to a third party and had been exposed to the public.
Therefore, there could be no claim of privacy under the IVth Amendment
(pp. 36-37).
18.7. In Florida V. Riley3. 32 [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab M), Riley was
growing marijuana in a greenhouse which was not enclosed on two sides.
The IO discovered the growing of marijuana from a helicopter. Similar
was the case in California V. Ciraolo3. The Court observed "what a person
knowingly exposes to public even in his own home or office is not a
subject of IVth Amendment protection" (pp. 841).
18.8. In Oliver V. United States34 [Compilation RD Vol. II Tab N)
marijuana was grown in open field. The court held that there could be no
legitimate expectation of privacy.
19. Dealing with adult theatres showing pornographic films, the US
Supreme Court in Paris Adult Theatre V. Slaton35 [Compilation RD Vol. II
Tab o) observed as below:
"(21). Our prior decisions recognizing a right to privacy guaranteed
by the Fourteenth Amendment included 'only personal rights that can
be deemed 'fundamental' or implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.'
Palko V. Connecticut36, US at p. 325. Roe V. Wade37, US at p. 152. This
privacy right encompasses and protects the personal intimacies of the
home, the family, marriage, motherhood, procreation, and child
rearing. Cf. Eisenstadt V. Baird38 405 US at pp. 453-54; id at pp.
460, 463-465 (White, J., concurring); Stanley V. Georgia 39, US at p.
568; Loving V. Virginia40, US at p. 12; Griswold V. Connecticut S, US at
p. 486; Prince V. Massachusetts41. Skinner V. Oklahoma ex rel.
Williamson42 US at p. 541; Pierce V. Society of Sisters43, US at p.
535; Meyer V. Nebraska44, US at p. 399. Nothing, however, in this
Court's decisions intimates that there is any 'fundamental' privacy
right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty' to watch obscene
movies in places of public accommodation".
"(22-25) the idea of "privacy" right and a place of public
accommodation are, in this context mutually exclusive.."
"
20. The same view was taken in United States V. Orito45 [Compilation
RD Vol. II Tab PQ) where obscene material was being transported by
means of a common carrier. It was observed:
"But viewing obscene films in a commercial theatre open to the
adult public, see Paris Adult Theatre35 IV Slaton, US at pp. 65-67, L Ed
2d pp. 461-62, or transporting such films in common carriers in
interstate commerce, has no claim to such special consideration. It is
hardly necessary to catalog the myriad activities that may be lawfully
conducted within the privacy and confines of the home, but may be
prohibited in public".
21. Even our Court has held in Rajagopal46, the case of Auto Shankar
that once an information is in public record then there is no privacy right
(para 29).
22. In Veronica School V. Acton47 [Compilation RD Vol. I Tab A) where
children wishing to take part in athletics were subjected to random
urinanalysis drug testing, the Court observed:
"The first factor to be considered is the nature of the privacy
interest upon which the search here at issue intrudes. The Fourth
Amendment does not protect all subjective expectations of privacy,
but only those that society recognizes as "legitimate." T.L.O. 48 , US at
p. 338. What expectations are legitimate varies, of course, with
context, id., at p. 337, depending, for example, upon whether the
individual asserting the privacy interest is at home, at work, in a car,
or in a public park. In addition, the legitimacy of certain privacy
expectations vis--vis the State may depend upon the individual's
legal relationship with the State".
The Court held that the student athletes have a reduced expectation of
privacy (p. 577).
23. In Whalen V. Roe 49 [Compilation RD Vol. II Tab S) the State of
New York was recording in a centralised computer file the names and
addresses of all persons who obtained certain drugs under doctor's
prescription. The Court held that "requiring such disclosure to
representatives of the States having responsibility of the health of the
community does not amount to an impermissible invasion of privacy. In
a concurring judgment, Stewart, J. observed that "there is no general
constitutional right to privacy and that whatever the ratio decidendi of
Griswold, it does not recognize a general interest in freedom from
disclosure of private information" (pp. 78-79). With this, the State action
was upheld.
V. Digital data
24. From the above judgments it is evident that there can be no claim
for privacy with regard to personal data and information which has
already been voluntarily transferred by a person on account of use of
modern technologies comprising the laptops, smartphones, etc. So far, as
photographs, thumb
impressions and iris scans are concerned they are already substantially in
the public domain and are available with the websites, service providers,
application owners, aggregators, etc. These information are being
transmitted on a daily basis to the above resources during the course of e
-commerce. Much of the data and information is transmitted
unconditionally. It is submitted that with respect to such data there could
be no claim of privacy.
25. Where the transference of personal data is not merely to a third
party for a limited purpose but to several parties on a regular basis the
principle of "contextual integrity" (or limited purpose) which a few
proponents of privacy in public domain are projecting ["Protecting Privacy
in an Information Age : The Problem of Privacy in Public" by Helen
Nissenbaum] would also not result in a valid claim of privacy.
VI. Identity data
26. Even otherwise, providing thumb impressions as identity
information has been in vogue and have been used in India since long in
execution of documents, particularly sale deeds and other similar transfer
documents. Of late, it is compulsory to append photographs and to put
thumb impressions while getting documents registered. Personal identity
data is also required to be disclosed along with photograph (biometrics)
in obtaining passport, driving licence, bank account, for checking-in
hotels and obtaining identity passes for entering into public institutions.
Consequently, there cannot be any claim of fundamental right to privacy
in disclosing personal data for identification. There cannot be any claim of
anonymity when citizens step out of their homes to enter into various
kinds of social, economic and political relations, to obtain benefits and
services, to enter into contracts or to discharge legal obligations such as
tax. In fact, even to claim fundamental right under Article 19 a person
would have to establish that he is a "citizen" and for this he will have to
disclose personal data for identification. Rule 12(2)(i)(a) of the Supreme
Court Rules, 2013 dealing with PIL provides that the petitioner shall
disclose his full name, complete postal address, email address, phone
number, proof regarding personal identification, occupation and annual
income, PAN number and national unique identity card number, if any.
27. A survey of the US Supreme Court judgments would show that the
Constitution of USA has been understood as protecting the right to
privacy of people in their "persons, houses, papers and effects" as early
as 1923, in Hester V. United States 50 [Compilation RD Vol. II Tab T),
Holmes, J. observed "the special protection accorded by the IVth
Amendment to the people in their persons, houses, papers and effects is
not extended to open field". Even Article 12 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights only talk about arbitrary and unlawful interference with
"his privacy, family, home
or correspondence." and about protection from "unlawful attacks on his
honor and reputation". These instruments therefore do not expand the
right to privacv in generality or abstract nor do thev extend the right to
privacy beyond the domain which is private/private-like and confidential.
They do not bring within their coverage that which has been voluntarily
and unconditionally exposed to the public domain not to that which
pertains to identity disclosure in the context of social, economic and
political relations.
VII. Human Rights Conventions
28. Article 8 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, 1950-European Convention also provides only
for respect for his private and family life, his home and his
correspondence. Similar is the position with regard to Schedule I of the
UK Human Rights Act, 1998. Clearly, these conventions do not extend in
the public domain especially when the information has been transmitted
to such domain willingly and unconditionally. In the context of Article 8
of the European Convention for the Protection of Fundamental Rights and
Human Freedoms, the UK Supreme Court in Kinloch V. HM Advocate
16
[Compilation RD Vol. I Tab G) held as below:
19. There is a zone of interaction with others, even in a public
context, which may fall within the scope of private life : PG V. United
Kingdom51 EHRR, para 56. But measures effected in a public place
outside the person's home or private premises will not, without more,
be regarded as interfering with his right to respect for his private life.
Occasions when a person knowingly or intentionally involves himself in
activities which may be recorded or reported in public, in
circumstances where he does not have a reasonable expectation of
privacy, will fall into that category : PG V. United Kingdom51, para 57.
A person who walks down a street has to expect that he will be visible
to any member of the public who happens also to be present. So too if
he crosses a pavement and gets into a motor car. He can also expect
to be the subject of monitoring on closed circuit television in public
areas where he may go, as it is a familiar feature in places that the
public frequent".
Having so observed, the Court held that the appellant was moving openly
in the public view and there was nothing in the case to suggest that he
could "reasonably have had any such expectation of privacy". He took the
risk of being seen and of his movements being noted down so there was
infringement of Article 8.
VIII. Duality of personal information
29. As regards personal information of any kind, as long as the
information is with the person himself and in his private domain there
would be two distinct rights simultaneously embedded. One is his right to
privacy which entitles him not to part with the information (barring
identity
information). The second is right to property in the said information. To
illustrate, a person can pen down all his information in the autobiography
which can then be transferred by sale to the public in the form of a book
or biopic. But once the person has transmitted his personal information
willingly in the public domain by exercising his right to speech and
expression then he would definitely lose the first right to privacy. The
only issue would be how far and how much right to property he would
retain in his own information after transmission but those issues would
be only issues of property and not privacy. The fears with regard to data
mining and data colonisation as being creative of monopolies, injurious to
competition and issues of ownership would all fall in the realm of
property rights.
30. It is also to be noted that when a person transmits personal
information to the public domain he is actually exercising his
fundamental right to speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a).
Therefore, it is for the person concerned to express himself clearly and
ensure that he puts conditions for retaining whatever privacy rights or he
should refrain from giving information. Largely, this would be in the
realm of contract and it would depend upon mutual bargains as to
whether the person would be in a position to put a condition. But where
such an information is transmitted willingly and unconditionally in the
public domain to third parties and on a regular basis, there would be no
right to privacy.
IX. Clash with other fundamental rights
31. Yet again, a claim of privacy can get wiped out and overridden in a
situation of clash with another person's fundamental right. It has been so
ruled in the following cases:
Court held that right to privacy does exist outside the confines of home
and it was not absolute. But this was in the context of a confidential
relationship with the hospital and the information was sensitive. The
exposure of which would have stigmatised. However, in the context of
marriage, SC held that the right to privacy of a person suffering from
AIDS would be overridden on account of the right to life of the person
with whom marriage was to be solemnised. Both rights were within
Article 21.
disclosure of assets and liabilities of the spouse by an election candidate.
It was held that the claim of right to privacy would be overridden by the
right to information of citizens.
32. When a minimal identity disclosure is legislatively required in the
context of delivery of benefits and services by the Government or a public
body then the seeker of benefit and service would not be entitled to any
fundamental right to privacy with regard to identity disclosure. More so if
the
benefit and service is a targeted one, that is to say that it is intended to a
defined class of persons. A welfare State is constitutionally obliged to
undertake such exercise. The provision of benefits and services would
actually enliven the fundamental right to life and personal liberty of the
poorer and the weaker section of the society. It is not enough to protect
Article 21 of the persons who have the means and the haves it is more
important to ensure that the benefits and service those who are truly
have-nots and deserving. This involves identification. In context of
reservations this court has held evolved the concept of creamy layer in
order that benefits of reservation may flow to those who are truly
backward. The State has been obliged to undertake identification of the
33. It is submitted that even assuming that there is some privacy
right even in the minimal identity disclosure for identification. The same
would be overridden by the fundamental right of those persons to whom
the targeted benefits are meant to flow.
X. Contours
34. The plea that the court should refrain from specifying the contours
of the fundamental right to privacy and it should be left to be developed
on a case-to-case basis ought not to be expected. It is absolutely
essential to delineate the right to privacy and the nature of limitations of
the State. The modern Indian State faced with complex problems arising
from illegal immigration, crime, terrorism, corruption, fraud, etc is also
constitutionally charged with securing a social order in which justice,
social, economic and political-informs all the institutions of national life,
and that the material resources of the community are so distributed as
best to subserve the common good (Articles 38 & 39). India is a Welfare
State. Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala55 (Per Khanna, J.):
"1475. Apart from what has been stated above about the effect of
preamble on the power of amendment, let us deal with the provisions
of the preamble itself. After referring to the solemn resolution of the
people of India to constitute India into a sovereign democratic
republic, the preamble makes mention of the different objectives
which were to be secured to all its citizens.
These objectives are:
JUSTICE, social, economic, and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among
them all;
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity of
the Nation.
It would be seen from the above that the first of the objectives
mentioned in the preamble is to secure to all citizens of India Justice,
social, economic and political. Article 38 in Part IV relating to the
Directive Principles of State Policy recites that the State shall strive to
promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as
effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic
and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
1476. Since the latter half of the eighteenth century when the idea
of political equality of individuals gathered force and led to the
formation of democratic Governments, there has been a great deal of
extension of the idea of equality from political to economic and social
fields. Wide disparaties in the standard of living of the upper strata
and the lower strata as also huge concentration of wealth in the midst
of abject poverty are an index of social mal-adjustment and if
continued for long, they give rise to mass discontent and a desire on
the part of those belonging to the lower strata to radically alter and, if
necessary, blow up the social order. As those belonging to the lower
strata constitute the bulk of the population, the disparities provide a
fertile soil for violent upheavals. The prevention of such upheaval is
not merely necessary for the peaceful evolution of society, it is also in
the interest of those who belong to the upper strata to ensure that the
potential causes for violent upheaval are eliminated. Various remedies
have been suggested in this connection and the stress has been laid
mainly upon having what is called a welfare state. The modern states
have consequently to take steps with a view to ameliorate the
conditions of the poor and to narrow the chasm which divides them
from the affluent sections of the population. For this purpose the State
has to deal with the problems of social security, economic planning
and industrial and agrarian welfare. Quite often in the implementation
of these policies, the State is faced with the problem of conflict
between the individual rights and interests on the one side and rights
and welfare of vast sections of the population on the other. The
approach which is now generally advocated for the resolving of the
above conflict is to look upon the rights of the individuals as
conditioned by social responsibility. Harold Laski while dealing with
this matter has observed in Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences:
"The struggle for freedom is largely transferred from the plane of
political to that of economic rights. Men become less interested in
the abstract fragment of political power an individual can secure
than in the use of massed pressure of the groups to which they
belong to secure an increasing share of the social product so long
as there is inequality, it is argued, there cannot be liberty. The
historic inevitability of this evolution was seen a century ago by de
Tocqueville. It is interesting to compare this insistence that the
democratization of political power mean equality and that its absence
would be regarded by the masses as oppression with the argument of
Lord Acton that liberty and equality are antitheses. To the latter liberty
was essentially an autocratic ideal; democracy destroyed individuality,
which was the very pith of liberty, by seeking identity of conditions. The
modern emphasis is rather towards the principle that material equality is
growing inescapable and that the affirmation of personality must be
effective upon an immaterial plane." (see Vol. IX, p. 445).
1477. I may also refer to another passage on p. 99 of Grammar of
Politics by Harold Laski:
"The state, therefore, which seeks to survive must continually
transform itself to the demands of men who have an equal claim
upon that common welfare which is its ideal purpose to promote.
We are concerned here, not with the defence of anarchy, but with
the conditions of its avoidance. Men must learn to subordinate their
self-interest to the common welfare. The privileges of some must
give way before the rights of all. Indeed, it may be urged that the
interest of the few is in fact the attainment of those rights, since in
no other environment is stability to be assured."
1478. A modern State has to usher in and deal with large schemes
having social and economic content. It has to undertake the
challenging task of what has been called social engineering, the
essential aim of which is the eradication of the poverty, uplift of the
downtrodden, the raising of the standards of the vast mass of people
and the narrowing of the gulf between the rich and the poor. As
occasions arise quite often when the individual rights clash with the
larger interests of the society, the State acquires the power to
subordinate the individual rights to the larger interests of society as a
step towards social justice. As observed by Roscoe Pound on p. 434 of
Volume I of Jurisprudence under the heading "Limitations on the Use
of Property":
"Today the law is imposing social limitations - limitations regarded
as involved in social life. It is endeavouring to delimit the individual
interest better with respect to social interests and to confine the legal
right or liberty or privilege to the bounds of the interest so delimited."
To quote the words of Friedmann in Legal Theory:
"But modern democracy looks upon the right to property as one
conditioned by social responsibility by the needs of society, by the
'balancing of interests' which looms so large in modern jurisprudence,
and not as pre-ordained and untouchable private right." (Fifth Edition,
p. 406).
1479. With a view to bring about economic regeneration, the State
devises various methods and puts into operation certain socio-
economic measures. Some of the methods devised and measures put
into operation may impinge upon the property rights of individuals.
The courts may sometimes be sceptical about the wisdom behind
those methods and measures, but that would be an altogether
extraneous consideration in determining the validity of those methods
and measures. We need not dilate further upon this aspect because we
are only concerned with the impact of the preamble. In this respect I
find that although it gives a prominent place to securing the objective
of social, economic and political justice to the citizens, there is nothing
in it which gives primacy to claims of individual right to property over
the claims of social, economic and political justice. There is, as a
matter of fact, no clause or indication in the preamble which stands in
the way of abridgement of right to property for securing social,
economic and political justice. Indeed, the dignity of the individual
upon which also the preamble has laid stress, can only be assured by
securing the objective of social, economic and political justice."
35. Therefore, when a claim of privacy seeks inclusion in Article 21 of
the Constitution of India the Court needs to apply the reasonable
expectation of privacy test. It should see:
(i) What is the context in which a privacy law is set up?
(ii) Does the claim relate to private or family life, or a confidential
relationship?
(iii) Is the claim serious one or is it trivial?
(iv) Is the disclosure likely to result in any serious or significant
injury and the nature and extent of disclosure?
(v) Is disclosure for identification purpose or relates to personal and
sensitive information of an identified person?
(vi) Does disclosure relate to information already disclosed publicly
to third parties or several parties willingly and unconditionally? Is the
disclosure in the course of e-commerce or social media?
36. Assuming that in a case that it is found that a claim for privacy is
protected by Article 21 of the Constitution the test should be the
following:
(i) The infringement should be by legislation.
(ii) The legislation should be in public interest.
(iii) The legislation should be reasonable and have nexus with the
public interest.
(iv) The State would be entitled to adopt that measure which would
most efficiently achieve the objective without being excessive.
(v) If apart from Article 21 the legislation infringes any other
specified Fundamental Right then it must stand the test in relation to
that specified Fundamental Right.
(vi) Presumption of validity would attach to the legislations.
37. It ought not to be accepted that the right to privacy flows
collectively from various fundamental rights, for then the legislation in
every case has to satisfy the test in relation to all the fundamental rights.
Our Constitution has specified fundamental rights in different articles and
the limitations on the State with respect to them have different contours.
Hence it is more appropriate to hold that if the claim of privacy is in the
penumbra, the specified fundamental right then it must satisfy the test
in relation to that specified fundamental right alone. Where a claim of
privacy is not within the penumbra of a specified fundamental right then
it should first establish itself as being embedded in Article 21 and the
test would be whether the expectation of privacy could be considered to
be reasonably legitimate, and further is not overridden by any competing
fundamental right.
XI. Due process and compelling State interest
38. The test of compelling State interest derived from the US cases
should not be adopted. In Gobind this Court referred to Griswold' 8 and
Roe V. Wade37 and adopted the compelling State interest test. Para 31 is
as below:
"31. Depending on the character and antecedents of the person
subjected to surveillance as also the objects and the limitation under
which surveillance is made, it cannot be said surveillance by
domiciliary visits would always be unreasonable restriction upon the
right of privacy. Assuming that the fundamental rights explicitly
guaranteed to a citizen have penumbral zones and that the right to
privacy is itself a fundamental right, that fundamental right must be
subject to restriction on the basis of compelling public interest. As
Regulation 856 has the force of law, it cannot be said that the
fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 21 has been violated
by the provisions contained in it : for, what is guaranteed under that
article is that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except by the procedure established by "law". We think that the
procedure is reasonable having regard to the provisions of Regulations
853(c) and 857. Even if we hold that Article 19(1)(d) guarantees to a
citizen a right to a privacy in his movement as an emanation from that
Article and is itself a fundamental right, the question will arise whether
Regulation 856 is a law imposing reasonable restriction in public
interest on the freedom of movement falling within Article 19(5); or,
even if it be assumed that Article 19(5) does not apply in terms, as
the right to privacy of movement cannot be absolute, a law imposing
reasonable restriction upon it for compelling interest of State must be
upheld as valid".
39. It is submitted that the "compelling State interest" test is an
evolution from the US Constitution, particularly the XIVth Amendment
which injuncts deprivation of "any person of life, liberty or property
without due process of law". Based on this due process requirement the
US Supreme Court has in the American historical context evolved the test
of strict scrutiny of
compelling State interest, and narrow tailoring or over breath or least
drastic means. Our Constitution of India does not incorporate the due
process provision. The same was specifically discarded by the Constituent
Assembly (enclosed as Annexure C). In Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of
India56 , Justice R.F. Nariman traced the history of Article 21, referred to
the Constituent Assembly Debates and Maneka Gandhi case6, and
concluded that "substantive due process" is now to be applied to the
fundamental right to life and liberty (paras 17-28). But it is notable that
this Court has said that in the context of Maneka Gandhi test of
"reasonable, just and fair". So ever after the judgment of Maneka Gandhi
the only requirement under Article 21 is that the law should be
reasonable, just and fair.
40. In Maneka Gandhi case6 the principle of reasonableness or non-
arbitrariness was drawn into Article 21 from Article 14:
"7.
The principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as
philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness
pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence and the procedure
contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of reasonableness in
order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must be "right and just
and fair" and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive; otherwise, it. would
be no procedure at all and the requirement of Article 21 would not be
satisfied."
41. In Bachan Singh V. State of Punjab57, a Constitution Bench
observed:
"136. Article 21 reads as under:
"No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law."
If this Article is expanded in accordance with the interpretative
principle indicated in Maneka Gandhi6 it will read as follows:
"No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to fair, just and reasonable procedure established by valid
law."
In the converse positive form, the expanded Article will read as below:
"A person may be deprived of his life or personal liberty in
accordance with fair, just and reasonable procedure established by
valid law.'
Thus expanded and read for interpretative purposes, Article 21
clearly brings out the implication, that the founding fathers recognised
the right of the State to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty
in accordance with fair, just and reasonable procedure established by
valid law."
42. In Sunil Batra V. Delhi Admn. 58 dealing with solitary confinement
after conviction and award of death sentence, Desai, J., speaking for the
majority observed in para 228 "the word "law" in the expression
"procedure established by law" in Article 21 has been interpreted to
mean in Maneka Gandhi case that the law must be right, just and fair
and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive." Krishna Iyer, J., in a concurring
judgment observed in para 52 "true, our Constitution has no due process
clause or the VIIIth Amendment; but in this branch of law after Cooper5
and Maneka Gandhi the consequence is the same".
43. The majority of the judges do not hold so. Subsequently, in Mithu
V.
State of Punjab59 Chandrachud, CJ speaking for a Constitution Bench
referred to both the views in Sunil Batra58 and finally observed as below:
"6. These decisions have expanded the scope of Article 21 in a
significant way and it is now too late in the day to contend that it is for
the legislature to prescribe the procedure and for the courts to follow
it; that it is for the legislature to provide the punishment and for the
courts to impose it. Two instances, undoubtedly extreme, may be
taken by way of illustration for the purpose of showing how the courts
are not bound, and are indeed not free, to apply a fanciful procedure
by a blind adherence to the letter of the law or to impose a savage
sentence. A law providing that an accused shall not be allowed to lead
evidence in self-defence will be hit by Articles 14 and 21. Similarly, if
a law were to provide that the offence of theft will be punishable with
the penalty of the cutting of hands, the law will be bad as violating
Article 21. A savage sentence is anathema to the civilized
jurisprudence of Article 21. These are, of course, extreme illustrations
and we need have no fear that our legislatures will ever pass such
laws. But these examples serve to illustrate that the last word on the
question of justice and fairness does not rest with the legislature. Just
as reasonableness of restrictions under clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19
is for the courts to determine, so is it for the courts to decide whether
the procedure prescribed by a law for depriving a person of his life or
liberty is fair, just and reasonable. The question which then arises
before us is whether the sentence of death, prescribed by Section 303
of the Penal Code for the offence of murder committed by a person
who is under a sentence of life imprisonment, is arbitrary and
oppressive so as to be violative of the fundamental right conferred by
Article 21."
This Constitution Bench does not endorse the equation of Article 21 with
due process clause as in the American Constitution.
44. In State of A.P. V. McDowell & Co. 60 this Court held that the
doctrine of substantive due process is inapplicable to our Constitution:
"43.
As against this, the United States of America has a Federal
Constitution where the power of the Congress and the State
Legislatures to make laws is limited in two ways, viz., the division of
legislative powers between the States and the Federal Government
and the fundamental rights (Bill of Rights) incorporated in the
Constitution. In India, the position is similar to the United States of
America. The power of Parliament or for that matter, the State
Legislatures is restricted in two ways. A law made by Parliament or the
legislature can be struck down by courts on two grounds and two
grounds alone, viz., (1) lack of legislative competence and (2)
violation of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the
Constitution or of any other constitutional provision. There is no third
ground. We do not wish to enter into a discussion of the concepts of
procedural unreasonableness and substantive unreasonableness -
concepts inspired by the decisions of United States Supreme Court.
Even in U.S.A., these concepts and in particular the concept of
substantive due process have proved to be of unending controversy,
the latest thinking tending towards a severe curtailment of this ground
(substantive due process). The main criticism against the ground of
substantive due process being that it seeks to set up the courts as
arbiters of the wisdom of the legislature in enacting the particular
piece of legislation. It is enough for us to say that by whatever name it
is characterised, the ground of invalidation must fall within the four
corners of the two grounds mentioned above. In other words, say, if an
enactment is challenged as violative of Article 14, it can be struck
down only if it is found that it is violative of the equality clause/equal
protection clause enshrined therein. Similarly, if an enactment is
challenged as violative of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by
clauses (a) to (g) of Article 19(1), it can be struck down only if it is
found not saved by any of the clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 and so
on. No enactment can be struck down by just saying that it is
arbitrary** - or unreasonable. Some or other constitutional infirmity
has to be found before invalidating an Act. An enactment cannot be
struck down on the ground that court thinks it unjustified. Parliament
and the legislatures, composed as they are of the representatives of
the people, are supposed to know and be aware of the needs of the
people and what is good and bad for them. The court cannot sit in
judgment over their wisdom
"
45. Similar view was expressed in A.K. Roy V. Union of India61:
35. The fact that England and America do not resort to preventive
detention in normal times was known to our Constituent Assembly and
yet it chose to provide for it, sanctioning its use for specified purposes.
The attitude of two other well-known democracies to preventive detention
as a means of regulating the lives and liberties of the people was
undoubtedly relevant to the framing of our Constitution. But the framers
having decided to adopt and legitimise it, we cannot declare it
unconstitutional by importing our notions of what is right and wrong. The
power to Judge the fairness and justness of procedure established by a
law for the purposes of Article 21 is one thing : that power can be spelt
out from the language of that article. Procedural safeguards are the
handmaids of equal justice and since, the power of the government is
colossal as compared with the power of an individual, the freedom of the
individual can be safe only if he has a guarantee that he will be treated
fairly. The power to decide upon the justness of the law itself is quite
another thing : that power springs from a 'due process' provision such as
is to be found in the 5th and 14th Amendments of the American
Constitution by which no person can be deprived of life, liberty or
property "without due process of law".
36. Insofar as our Constitution is concerned, an amendment was
moved by Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava to draft Article 15, which
corresponds to Article 21 of the Constitution, for substituting the
words "without due process of law" for the words "except according to
procedure established by law". Many members spoke on that
amendment on 6-12-1948, amongst whom were Shri K.M. Munshi,
who was in favour of the amendment, and Sir Alladi Krishnaswamy
Ayyar who, while explaining the view of the Drafting Committee, said
that he was "still open to conviction". The discussion of the
amendment was resumed by the Assembly on 13-12-1948 when Dr
Ambedkar, who too had an open mind on the vexed question of 'due
process', said:
"
I must confess that I am somewhat in a difficult position with
regard to Article 15 and the amendment moved by my friend Pandit
Bhargava for the deletion of the words 'procedure according to law'
and the substitution of the words 'due process'.
*
*
*
The question of 'due process' raises, in my judgment, the question
of the relationship between the legislature and the judiciary. In a
federal constitution, it is always open to the judiciary to decide
whether any particular law passed by the legislature is ultra vires or
intra vires in reference to the powers of legislation which are granted
by the Constitution to the particular legislature The 'due process'
clause, in my judgment, would give the judiciary the power to
question the law made by the legislature on another ground. That
ground would be whether that law is in keeping with certain
fundamental principles relating to the rights of the individual. In other
words, the judiciary would be endowed with the authority to question
the law not merely on
the ground whether it was in excess of the authority of the legislature,
but also on the ground whether the law was good law, apart from the
question of the powers of the legislature making the law The question
now raised by the introduction of the phrase 'due process' is whether the
judiciary should be given the additional power to question the laws made
by the State on the ground that they violate certain fundamental
principles.
There are dangers on both sides. For myself I cannot altogether
omit the possibility of a legislature packed by party men making laws
which may abrogate or violate what we regard as certain fundamental
principles affecting the life and liberty of an individual. At the same
time, I do not see how five or six gentlemen sitting in the Federal or
Supreme Court examining laws made by the legislature and by dint of
their own individual conscience or their bias or their prejudices be
trusted to determine which law is good and which law is bad. It is
rather a case where a man has to sail between Charybdis and Scylla
and I therefore would not say anything. I would leave it to the House
to decide in any way it likes. (See Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol.
VII, pp. 999-1001)
The amendment was then put to vote and was negatived. In view of
this background and in view of the fact that the Constitution, as
originally conceived and enacted, recognizes preventive detention as a
permissible means of abridging the liberties of the people, though
subject to the limitations imposed by Part III, we must reject the
contention that preventive detention is basically impermissible under
the Indian Constitution."
46. This view was also recently endorsed in Rajbala V. State of
Haryana 62
64. From the above extract from McDowell & Co. case60 it is clear
that the courts in this country do not undertake the task of declaring a
piece of legislation unconstitutional on the ground that the legislation
is "arbitrary" since such an exercise implies a value judgment and
courts do not examine the wisdom of legislative choices unless the
legislation is otherwise violative of some specific provision of the
Constitution. To undertake such an examination would amount to
virtually importing the doctrine of "substantive due process" employed
by the American Supreme Court at an earlier point of time while
examining the constitutionality of Indian legislation. As pointed out in
the above extract, even in United States the doctrine is currently of
doubtful legitimacy. This Court long back in A.S. Krishna V. State of
Madras63 declared that the doctrine of due process has no application
under the Indian Constitution. As pointed out by Frankfurter, J.,
arbitrariness became a mantra.
47. Judgments delivered by this Court prior to Maneka Gandhi6
rejecting the American due process are enclosed as Annexure B
[Compilation RD Vol. III Tab T].
48. Our Court has in the context of Article 19 explained the test of
reasonableness in State of Madras V. V.G. Row64 Bishambhar Dayal
Chandra Mohan V. State of U.P. 65 , Bennet Coleman & Co. V. Union of
India66. All that is to be seen, therefore, in the context of Article 21 is as
66
to whether (1) law is competently made, (2) it has proximate connection
with public interest, (3) restriction is not excessive.
49. In V.G. Row case64, Patanjali Sastri, C.J. observed as below:
"It is important in this context to bear in mind that the test of
reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each
individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or general
pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases.
The nature of the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying
purpose of the restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil
sought to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition,
the prevailing conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial
verdict. In evaluating such elusive factors and forming their own
conception of what is reasonable, in all the circumstances of a given
case, it is inevitable that the social philosophy and the scale of values
of the judges participating in the decision should play an important
part, and the limit of their interference with legislative judgment in
such cases can only be dictated by their sense of responsibility and
self restraint and the sobering reflection that the Constitution is meant
not only for people of their way of thinking but for all, and that the
majority of the elected representatives of the people have, in
authorizing the imposition of the restrictions, considered them to be
reasonable." (Pathumma V. State of Kerala67)
50. Our courts have repeatedly cautioned against mechanical
implantation of American jurisprudence into our Constitution:
(i) Bhikaji Narain Dhakras V. State of M.P. 68 , SCR at p. 599
(ii) A.S. Krishna V. State of Madras63, , SCR at p. 412
(iii) Kameshwar Prasad V. State of Bihar 69 , SCR at p. 378
(iv) Pathumma V. State of Kerala67, , para 23
(v) Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union of India 70 , paras 188, 190, 252 &
253
51. That as regards the procedure contemplated by Article 21, this
Court observed in Maneka Gandhi case 6 as follows (para 7):
Bhagwati, J.:
"The principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as
philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-
arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence and
the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of
reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must
be "right and just and fair" and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive;
otherwise, it would be no procedure at all and the requirement of
Article 21 would not be satisfied."
Chandrachud, J.:
"But the mere prescription of some kind of procedure cannot ever
meet the mandate of Article 21. The procedure prescribed by law
has to be fair, just and reasonable, not fanciful, oppressive or
arbitrary."
Krishna Iyer, J.:
"82. So I am convinced that to frustrate Article 21 by relying on
any formal adjectival statute, however, flimsy or fantastic its
provisions be, is to rob what the Constitution treasures."
"85. To sum up, "procedure" in Article 21 means fair, not formal
procedure. "Law" is reasonable law, not any enacted piece."
52. In view of Maneka Gandhi case6 the principle for testing the law
infringing the right to privacy would only be "is the law reasonable, just
and fair, and in the public interest". There is no justification for importing
compelling State interest and the other principles associated with it.
53. In Illinois State Board of Elections V. Socialist Workers Party71
[Compilation RD Vol. II Tab U), Blackmun, J. while concurring, expressed
his deep unease with the test of compelling State interest "least drastic
means". He observed (p. 244):
"Although I join the Court's opinion and its strict-scrutiny approach
for election cases, I add these comments to record purposefully, and
perhaps somewhat belatedly, my unrelieved discomfort with what
seems to be a continuing tendency in this Court to use as tests such
easy phrases as "compelling [state] interest" and "least drastic [or
restrictive] means." See, ante, at 184, 185, and 186. I have never
been able fully to appreciate just what a "compelling state interest" is.
If it means "convincingly controlling," or "incapable of being
overcome" upon any balancing
process, then, of course, the test merely announces an inevitable result,
and the test is no test at all. And, for me, "least drastic means" is a
slippery slope and also the signal of the result the Court has chosen to
reach. A judge would be unimaginative indeed if he could not come up
with something a little less "drastic" or a little less "restrictive" in almost
any situation, and thereby enable himself to vote to strike legislation
down. This is reminiscent of the Court's indulgence, a few decades ago,
in substantive due process in the economic area as a means of
nullification".
Some other Judges concurring with majority only adopted the "rational
connection with State interest" test.
54. In fact in Veronica School V. Acton4 47 [Compilation RD Vol. II Tab
R), the petitioner's contention for a less intrusive means was not
accepted and the Court observed:
"We have repeatedly refuse to declare that only the least intrusive
search practicable can be reasonable under the IVth Amendment".
55. In view of the aforesaid judgment the test of compelling State
interest adopted in Gobind V. State of M.P.-Superscript(2) needs to be discarded.
XII. Ordered Liberty
56. Liberty is not licence for anarchy, chaos and disorder. It assumes
for its existence an ordered environment. In Gobind our Court talked of
"Ordered Liberty".
57. To illustrate, issuance of passes or proximity cards for entry in
institutions to enable orderly functioning actually enhances exercise of
liberty.
Additional submissions
58. Three constitutional constructs are competing for acceptance:
A. Privacy as a general right is intrinsic or implicit part of Article 21.
Hence, all infringements must be backed by law which is reasonable,
just and fair [Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India6 and that brings in
substantive due process [Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of India 56 ].
B. There is no fundamental right to privacy under the Constitution
of India.
C. (i) Every privacy concern with its context must first objectively
establish itself as a reasonable legitimate expectation of society in the
eyes of the court so as to be considered as implicit in Article 21.
(ii) It should not be overridden by another person's right under
Article 21 or other fundamental right.
(iii) Once held as implicit in Article 21, the State must satisfy that
infringement is (i) by law, (ii) law is for a legitimate public purpose,
(iii) law is reasonable, just and fair. Due process does not apply.
"Personal liberty" expansively construed
59. In Satwant Singh Sawhney V. Passport Officer 22, Subba Rao, CJ,
referred to the exposition of personal liberty in Kharak Singh and held
that it includes within itself "all the varieties of rights which go to make
up the personal liberties of man" and observed that it "bears the same
comprehensive meaning as is given to the expression "liberty" under the
US Constitution". Of course in view of A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras
73
the liberties enshrined in Article 19 were stated to be excluded. In
Maneka Gandhi, Bhagwati, J. endorsed the aforesaid with a further
expansion that "it is not a valid argument to say that the expression
personal liberty in Article 21 must be so interpreted as to avoid
&
overlapping between that Article and Article 19". "Personal liberty" was
said to be an expression of widest amplitude, and the procedure
prescribed by law should be reasonable, just and fair (having regard to
the impact of Article 14) (Pr 5 @ p. 280). With this, right to go abroad
was held to be covered by Article 21, but not integral to Article 19(i)(a)
in all situations. Thus, as regards Article 21 it has to be seen whether
privacy in general as claimed by the petitioners, is an attribute of life and
personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21.
Privacy is a contextually limited and variable concept with an
inherent rading characterstic
60. Privacy exists in contrast to "public" or what is made public. As a
person moves out of his castle and the more he opens the gates of his
Castle and personhood, his privacy would fade and dissipate. As the
person relates to others, singularly or in groups, his privacy would get
diluted. So also when he relates with institutions of all kinds and also the
State. This is where the "context" assumes great significance when
adjudging whether a claim qualifies to be judicially recognised as a "Life
and Personal Liberty" claim under Article 21. It is largely, if not entirely, a
relative and variable concept, and hence amorphous. Therefore, it ought
not to be recognised as a general concept to be implicit in Article 21.
61. It is submitted that the court should adopt a cautious approach in
recognising a particular privacy claim as implicit in Article 21. The right
to privacy is a jurisprudential realm where globally the courts are still
groping amidst confusion to ascertain the extent of privacy concerns
which should be recognised as a constitutional right. Many a times, the
court has proceeded on an assumption that a claimed right is a
fundamental right under the Constitution. It is noted in Gobind V. State
of M.P.7 [Mr Shyam Divan's Compilation Pg 123] that the US SC
recognises that "a right of personal privacy, or a guarantee of certain
areas or zones of privacy does exist under the Constitution". (Pr 19). In
para 20 they observed that the framers of our
Constitution "must have deemed to have conferred upon an individual as
against the Government a sphere he should be let alone". Yet, in para 23
they observe against a broad definition of privacy as such a right was not
explicit in the Constitution. Thus, the court was against a general
recognition of a right to privacy. Further, the court in paras 22 and 24
has stressed, as the only suggestion that the "unifying principle
underlying the concept has been the assertion that a claimed right must
be a fundamental right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty'. They
recommend in para 28 that the right to privacv will have to undergo case
-by-case development. Yet again, in para 23, the court has emphasised
that "privacy interest in autonomy must also be placed in the context of
other rights and values." [also, in the context of right to life and personal
liberty of others, as 'X' V. Hospital 'Z Sup
62. It is safer to say that right to privacy as a part of personal liberty
under the Constitution may exist in matters of personal intimacies, home
and family life, correspondence, personal health. This is what Charles
Warren and Louis D. Brandeis intended in their article "The right to
privacy". According to them, the idea of privacy has been understood as
"the idea of private space in which man may become and remain
himself" (Pr. 90 of Gobind . All Human Right Conventions ratified by
India talk of respecting the private and family life, home and
correspondence. The expanse is in narrow confines. Beyond this, complex
issues arise in the domain of informational privacy.
Thus, despite the expansive approach sanctified by Maneka Gandhi
case 6 only a certain zone of privacy contextually determined can get
incorporated as implicit in Article 21. The concept of privacy being
relative and flexible and of an amorphous kind the same as a generalised
concept cannot be said to be integral to Article 21.
Right to choice
64. Article 21 includes the right to choose the way of life. Both "life"
and "personal liberty" are individually and conjunctively wide enough to
include the right of a person to make his choice with regard to his life and
his growth and development. He can choose the space in which he wishes
to operate and the manner in which he will operate. It is another matter
that the range and extent of choice would depend upon the alternatives
which are available considering the stage of development of the society.
There is therefore a distinction between the right to choose and the
extent of choice. The ability to make the choice would also depend upon
the ability of the person to choose and this will include the financial
abilities. Equally, the person can choose to act in private space or in
public space. He may choose to be "let alone" and be in privacy or he
may choose to step out in the open and public. The submission is that
the making of choice is distinct from privacy. The right to choose is
directly integral to and intrinsic right to life and personal
liberty in Article 21 [I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N. 74 ]. The petitioner's
contention that right to choice or decisional autonomy is contained in
right to privacy is clearly erroneous. Right to choice cannot be located in
privacy. It is another matter that one can make decisions or choice while
being by himself.
Principle of limited purpose
65. In the domain of informational privacy, question arises as to what
extent there would be a valid privacy claim implicating "life or personal
liberty" when a person chooses to disclose personal information to a third
party or several other parties with whom he relates to. It is submitted:
(i) Where the information is merely the basic identity information
there would be no claim of privacy rights whatsoever under Article 21.
Such information is part of identification information and is expected
to be commonly and generally disclosed in human relation in the
present day society.
(ii) Information which is more than basic identity information and
pertains to other aspects of personal identity and the disclosure had
been made by the person to another in a relationship of confidentiality,
a presumption of limited purpose disclosure preventing further
transference or utilisation, could be set to arise and implicate Article
21, provided that the further disclosure or transference is likely to
cause significant injury or stigma. (iii) Where the second kind of
information is transmitted to another in a relationship which is not
involving confidentiality then the further transference and utilisation of
the information, as such or in an aggregated and analysed form, would
not involve any implication of Article 21. Non-confidential relationship
does not, without more, involve any assumption that it has been given
for a limited purpose. This is specially so if the transference has been
made unconditionally.
(iv) Where personal information has been transmitted to the public
at
large or to a considerably large number of
persons/institutions/service providers, then also the claim of privacy
would fade out. The concept of privacy is not only relative and
contextual but it also has an inherent fading attribute. The more the
personal information goes into the public, the more will the
informational privacy get diluted and eventually will fade out.
66. In the aforesaid circumstances an arching principle of limited
purpose disclosure if at all, should be drawn only with respect to the arch
of sensitive personal information transmitted to another person in a
confidential relationship disclosure of which could have a real likelihood of
causing significant harm or injury. It should be an important condition
attached to the
principle that the information can be further transferred or utilised
provided such transference or utilisation is not likely to cause any
significant injury or stigma.
67. It is also important that no overarching principle be devised which
obstructs the growth of overall knowledge fund available with the society.
Data or even meta data needs to be aggregated analysed to produce
further knowledge for the benefit of the society. That enriches "life" and
"personal liberty" both.
68. We are in an informational, knowledge and technological era.
Technology with artificial intelligence is growing rapidly. It helps,
facilitates and empowers. We cannot stand with our backs towards the
growth of technology. The approach to growth of technology, information
and knowledge cannot be allowed to be ostrich-like or Luddite (fear
stricken). While we may be entitled to protect ourselves from significant
harm and or injury, there should be no obstruction to the use of
information collected.
69. Drawing of an overarching principle based on limited purpose
disclosure has serious problems:
(i) It creates an assumption of limited purpose even where the
information has been parted unconditionally and voluntarily.
(ii) It creates an assumption of limited purpose disclosure even
where a person has freely and deliberately traded off the personal
information for superior benefits.
(iii) It would actually infringe on the person's right to choice.
(iv) It is impossible to implement such a principle for two reasons.
(a) The tremendous growth of technology is likely to present a
scenario where the computer collects, aggregates and analyses then
transmits information simultaneously.
(b) The servers may well be located outside India, the
aggregation, analysis and utilisation may happen abroad. There is
no way to control it. Horizontal regulation is not possible.
(v) It also needs to be borne in mind that the overarching principle
is very likely to be exploited by criminals, corrupt and terrorist. As an
illustration a person having committed a crime may disclose the
information confidentially to his close circle of friends or a criminal
having got injured while committing a crime approaches a doctor or
hospital (which is in confidential domain) then the commission of
crime which has become known to a third party cannot be transferred
to the State. Identically, a minor rape victim may disclose the
information to a teacher would be entitled to transfer the information
not only to the family, crime agencies of the State. There can be such
instances of disclosure of crime in the context of money laundering
and hoarding of black money.
70. Therefore, nature of information and causation of harm or injury
are important aspects and no absolute overarching principles of limited
purpose should be devised.
71. Requirement of consent for further transfer and utilisation of
personal information, given knowingly and unconditionally, particularly in
a non-confidential commercial relationship extends "ownership" idea into
a parted information which post-parting assumes property dimensions.
This does not flow from privacy or choice.
72. Also notable is the fact that worth of parted information arises
upon aggregation and the aggregated information is not the same thing
as information of individual received.
Kyllo respects "Reasonable" expectation
73. The test of reasonable expectation of privacy has not been done
away with. It continues to be applied consistently in the US. Justice
Scalia speaking for the majority in Kyllo V. United States75 said that they
cannot refine the test laid down in Katz1 but when it comes to searches
in homes this test cannot take away what had been traditionally been
protected by IVth Amendment.
74. The reasonable expectation of privacy test has been followed
consistently even after Kyllo75. Justice Scalia has himself applied the
reasonable expectation test in his subsequent judgments both while
speaking for the majority or in dissent. Some of them are as follows:
(i) Samson V. California76
(ii) Safford Unified School District V. Redding
(iii) Ontario V. Quon 78
(iv) United States V. Jones79
80
(v) Maryland V. R.
(vi) City of Los Angeles V. Patel
(The majority judgment by Sotomayer, J. examined the question whether
the warrantless search of records of motels was reasonable and whether
it violated IVth Amendment. Justice Scalia in his dissenting judgment
held that industry such as motels/inns, etc are highly regulated
industries and those who enter such industries have a lesser expectation
of privacy.)
IX. Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Advocate, for the respondents
1. The issue
1.1. This Bench of nine Hon'ble Judges has been constituted to
ascertain the correctness of the judgments of this Hon'ble Court in M.P.
Sharma and Kharak Singh2 vis--vis their observations concerning the
fundamental right to privacy. The petitioners have, inter alia, argued that
neither of these judgments deal with the issue of privacy; that the
observations therein are obiter; that even if it were part of the ratio, that
was in the context of the Gopalan compartmentalisation, and in any case,
ought to be overruled. In light of these submissions and those made by
the respondents, there appear to be three alternatives available to this
Hon'ble Court:
1.1.1. To decide that M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh are correctly
decided and that there is no fundamental right to privacy.
1.1.2. To decide that M.P. Sharma1 and Kharak Singh* 2 are correctly
decided but as per an earlier legal regime that no longer prevails, and
that there is a fundamental right to privacy.
1.1.3. To decide that M.P. Sharma1 and Kharak Singh2 2 are correctly
decided regardless of the legal regime, and that only certain aspects of
the right to privacy can be protected as fundamental rights, while others
are protected as legal rights.
2. The questions
2.1. What is the scope of the right to privacy? How is it to be defined?
2.2. How much of this right to privacy can be elevated to the status of
a fundamental right? Are there aspects which are protected as a legal
right, without more?
2.3. How would such a fundamental right to privacy be controlled?
What tests would be made applicable under Article 21?
2.4. What are the consequences of a declaration of a right as a
fundamental right? What obligations follow on the State, and if at all, on
non-State actors? Can such a right be waived? Where aspects of these
rights are protected by law, what else would follow if they are raised to
the level of a fundamental right?
3. The propositions
3.1. M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh2 are correctly decided. The
findings concerning privacy being a fundamental right are part of the
ratio of these two judgments.
3.2. There has been no change in the constitutional context from
Gopalant 3 through Cooper4 4 & Maneka 5 till now.
3.3. Privacy is incapable of precise definition and ought not to elevated
in all aspects, dimensions and sub-species to the level of a fundamental
right.
3.3.1. The fundamental aspect : The words "life" and "personal
liberty" in Article 21 have already been widely interpreted to include
many facets of what the petitioners refer to as privacy.
3.3.2. The legal aspect : Those facets which are not protected by
Article 21 but have statutory and regulatory protection.
3.3.3. The unprotected residue : Those facets which have sociological
and philosophical underpinnings but are not presently subject
to
protection either by Article 21 or by statute.
3.4. Two aspects that need to be considered on recognising aspects of
the rights to privacy are:
3.4.1. They cannot be waived; and
3.4.2. The test to protect against their invasion is whether such State
action is just, fair and reasonable (and not to concern itself with the
interest of the State);
3.5. The international legal regime is no different from the Indian
experience, but caution ought to be exercised in importing approaches
out of context.
A brief backdrop on interpretation
As widely interpreted to include a
As distinct from 'Citizen'
basket of rights
ARTICLE 21: No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law
As now interpreted to mean due
process
Detailed submissions
3.1.1. M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra
3.1.1.1. In the context of search warrants, the Court first considers
the proposition placed before it in the following words:
"It is urged that both search and seizure of a document and a
compelled production thereof on notice or summons serve the same
purpose of being available as evidence in a prosecution against the
person concerned, and that any other view would defeat or weaken the
protection afforded by the guarantee of the fundamental right. This
line of argument is not altogether without force and has the apparent
support of the Supreme Court of the United States of America in Boyd
V. United States6."
3.1.1.2. In order to understand the context of Boyd6, the Court then
proceeded to extract the 4th and 5th Amendments to the Constitution
and then extracted the following phrase from the majority judgment:
"The compulsory production of a man's private papers is search and
seizure."
and again thus
"We have been unable to perceive that the seizure of a man's
private books and papers to be used in evidence against him is
substantially different from compelling him to be a witness against
himself."
3.1.1.3. The judgment then proceeds in noting that the majority held
that the order for production was vulnerable not only on the ground of
the 5th Amendment (self-incrimination) but also the 4th Amendment
(illegal search). It then rejects the applicability of Boyd to the Indian
context and concludes as follows:
"A power of search and seizure is in any system of jurisprudence an
overriding power of the State for the protection of social security and
that power is necessarily regulated by law. When the Constitution-
makers have thought fit not to subject such regulation to
constitutional limitations by recognition of a fundamental right to
privacy, analogous to the Fourth Amendment, we have no justification
to import it, into a totally different fundamental right, by some process
of strained construction."
3.1.1.4. The "totally different fundamental right" referred to here is
obviously Article 20(3) which was relied upon by the petitioner in the
case. That in itself makes no difference to the present case where the
petitioners contend that the right to privacy is located in Part III of the
Constitution. The verdict in M.P. Sharma1 directly negates such a
contention, having concluded that the fundamental right to privacy is not
recognised in our Constitution.
3.1.2. Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.
3.1.2.1. The majority judgment penned by Ayyangar, J proceeds to
deal with the challenge to Regulation 236 of the U.P. Police Regulations
which had 6 sub-clauses. The Court first records that the challenge raised
by the petitioner is also on violation of personal liberty as enshrined in
Article 21 and then proceeds to deal with each of the regulations
seriatim.
3.1.2.2. In the context of clause (b) which dealt with nocturnal
domiciliary visits, the Court adverted to the words of Field, J in Munn V.
Illinois speaking in the context of the due process clauses in the 5th and
14th Amendments to say:
"By the term `life' as here used something more is meant than mere
animal existence. The inhibition against its deprivation extends to all
these limits and faculties by which life is enjoyed. The provision
equally prohibits the mutilation of the body or amputation of an arm or
leg or the putting out of an eye or the destruction of any other organ
of the body through which the soul communicates with the outer world
By the term liberty, as used in the provision something more is
meant than mere freedom from physical restraint or the bounds of a
prison."
3.1.2.3. The Court then states that our own Article 21 must be given
the widest interpretation and concludes that "life" be given the same
interpretation as that given by Field, J. Then, in order to interpret
"personal liberty", the Court refers to Frankfurter, J in Wolf V.
where he said:
"The security of one's privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the
police
is basic to a free society. It is therefore implicit in 'the
concept of ordered liberty' and as such enforceable against the States
through the Due Process Clause. The knock at the door, whether by
day or by night, as a prelude to a search, without authority of law but
solely on the authority of the police, did not need the commentary of
recent history to be condemned as inconsistent with the conception of
human rights enshrined in the history and the basic constitutional
documents of English-speaking peoples We have no hesitation in
saying that were a State affirmatively to sanction such police incursion
into privacy it would run counter to the guarantee of the Fourteenth
Amendment."
3.1.2.4. It is therefore apparent that the question of privacy squarely
arose in the context of interpreting the "personal liberty" clause in the
light of American case law. The judgment then draws a contrast after
extracting the 4th Amendment to say that "our Constitution does not in
terms confer any like Constitutional guarantee".
3.1.2.5. This is precisely why, immediately thereafter, when the
validity of Clauses (c), (d) & (e) dealing with shadowing and reporting
the movements of suspects are concerned, the Court says:
"Nor do we consider that Article 21 has any relevance in the context
as was sought to be suggested by learned counsel for the petitioner.
As already pointed out, the right of privacy is not a guaranteed right
under our Constitution and therefore the attempt to ascertain the
movements of an individual which is merely a manner in which privacy
is invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed by
Part III.
3.1.2.6. The very basis for the majority sustaining Clauses (c), (d) &
(e) is that there is no right to privacy in our Constitution. This is the ratio
of the ruling, absent which there is no rationale to save the impugned
clauses.
3.1.3. Admittedly, several judgments of this Hon'ble Court have
attributed the genesis of the discussion on the right to privacy to these
two judgments. Hence, there ought not to be much doubt that indeed
they did deal with the issue. The only misdirection appears to be what
the ratio was attributed to be.
3.2. There has been no change in the constitutional context from Gopalan
till now
3.2.1. Mr Subramanium's written submissions commence with the
following paragraph:
"It is submitted that the decisions in M.P. Sharma V. Satish
Chandra and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.2 to the extent they
interpret fundamental rights on a distinctive basis (as recognized in
A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras3, are no longer good law. In view of
the fact that A.K. Gopalan case3 stands overruled in R.C. Cooper V.
Union of India4, it follows a fortiori that neither of the above decisions
are effective."
3.2.2. It has unfortunately been accepted without question that:
(a) A.K. Gopalan had decided that all fundamental rights are to be
decided on a distinctive basis; and
(b) R.C. Cooper4 laid down new law in overruling this proposition of
Gopalan
3.2.3. Shah, J. speaking for the majority of 10 Judges in R.C. Cooper4
said (and this has been reproduced in Para 9 of Mr Subramanium's
submissions)
"The majority of the Court (Kania, C.J., and Patanjali Sastri,
Mahajan, Mukherjea and Das, JJ.), held that Article 22 being a
complete code relating to preventive detention, the validity of an order
of detention must be determined strictly according to the terms and
"within the four corners of that Article".
As a consequence, the judgment went on to conclude that:
"In our judgment, the assumption in A.K. Gopalan case that
certain articles in the Constitution exclusively deal with specific
matters and in determining whether there is infringement of the
individual's guaranteed rights, the object and the form of the State
action alone need be considered, and effect of the laws on
fundamental rights of the individuals in general will be ignored cannot
be accepted as correct."
3.2.4. It is doubtless that on the latter proposition (object V. effect),
Gopalan was correctly overruled by Cooper4. However, on the former
(individual rights being complete codes), there appears to be a doubt
whether the premise of Shah, J.'s majority judgment is correct. A careful
perusal of the individual judgments in Gopalan would show that in fact
only one of the Judges (Mahajan, J.) had agreed with the Attorney
General's complete code argument.
3.2.5. The following are the relevant extracts from the judgments in
Gopalan
Kania, C.J. : The learned Attorney General contended that the
subject of preventive detention does not fall under Article 21 at all and
is covered wholly by Article 22. According to him, Article 22 is a
complete code. I am unable to accept that contention. [Para 26/P.115]
Fazl Ali. J. : To my mind, the scheme of the Chapter dealing with
the fundamental rights does not contemplate what is attributed to it,
namely, that each article is a code by itself and is independent of the
others. In my opinion, it cannot be said that Articles 19, 20, 21 and 22
do not to some extent overlap each other. The case of a person who is
convicted of an offence will come under Articles 20 and 21 and also
under Article 22 so far as his arrest and detention in custody before
trial are concerned. [Para 58]
Sastri, J. : The learned Attorney General contended that Article 21
did not apply to preventive detention at all, as Article 22 clauses (4) to
(7) formed a complete code of constitutional safeguards in respect of
preventive detention, and, provided only these provisions are
conformed to, the validity of any law relating to preventive detention
could not be challenged. I am unable to agree with this view. [Para
133/P. 207]
Das, J. : The learned Attorney General, on the other hand has at
one stage of his argument, urged that Article 21 has nothing to do
with preventive detention at all and that preventive detention is wholly
covered by Articles 22(4) to (7) which by themselves constitute a
complete code. I am unable to accede to this extreme point of view
also. [Para 291/P. 324]
3.2.6. It is thus evident that the majority in Gopalan did not say
what the majority in Cooper4 erroneously presumed they did i.e. that the
complete code theory was accepted and applied. In fact, on the very facts
of the case,
the detention of the petitioner was examined with reference to Article 22
and Article 21 with the latter taken to supplement the former. If the
above complete code proposition was correct, there would have been no
reason for Gopalan judgment to become the cause celebre in our
constitutional history for its rejection of the due process argument.
Note:-Advertence may also be made to the fact that the arguments
on Article 19 were countenanced but rejected, not because of the
complete code theory, but because reading Articles 19 and 21 as
overlapping would cause the entire penal law to become vulnerable,
leading to chaos.
3.2.7. Despite the error, Cooper4 has been repeatedly referred to as
having overruled Gopalan on the complete code theory, most notably in
Sambhu Nath Sarkar V. State of W.B. 9 and Khudiram Das V. State of
W.B. The same propositions were followed without question by the
10
majority in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India5 speaking through Bhagwati,
J:
"The decision in A.K. Gopalan case3 gave rise to the theory that the
freedoms under Articles 19, 21, 22 and 31 are exclusive - each article
enacting a code relating to the protection of distinct rights, but this
theory was overturned in R.C. Cooper case4" [Para 5]
However, it was Kailasam, J. in that very case who entered upon a
detailed analysis of the Gopalan and Cooper4 verdicts and stated as
follows:
"We are not concerned in this case as to whether the decision in
Bank Nationalisation case4 is in the nature of obiter dicta so far as it
held that Articles 19(1) and 31 (2) are interrelated. But it is necessary
to state that the decision proceeded on some erroneous assumptions.
At p. 571 of Bank Nationalisation case4 it was assumed: "The majority
of the Court (Kania, C.J. and Patanjali Sastri, Mahajan, Mukherjea and
Das, JJ.) held that Article 22 being a complete code relating to
preventive detention the validity of an order of detention must be
determined strictly according to the terms and within the four corners
of that article." This statement is not borne out from the text of the
judgments in Gopalan case. The Court has not considered the
reasoning in Gopalan case3 and overruled it." [Para 158]
3.2.8. It is submitted that in as many as 96 cases from 1950 to 1970,
challenges were tested against multiple fundamental rights, without any
cloistered approach as has been attributed to the Gopalan dictum. It
was, therefore, an error on the part of the Cooper4 majority to presume
that for the previous two decades the law had been to exercise judicial
review on individual fundamental rights without going further.
3.2.9. As a result of the above, the proposition put forward by the
petitioners that in view of Cooper4 overruling Gopalan, the judgments in
M.P. Sharma and Kharak2 are no longer good law does not hold.
3.2.10. The above submission is quite apart from the fact that the
judgments in M.P. Sharma and Kharak2 dealt with the content of "life
and personal liberty" in Article 21 and did not concern itself with the
"complete code" theory. In fact, this is even acknowledged by Bhagwati,
J. in Maneka Gandhi5 in the following words:
"The first question that arises for consideration on the language of
Article 21 is : what is the meaning and content of the words "personal
liberty" as used in this article? This question incidentally came up for
discussion in some of the judgments in A.K. Gopalan V. State of
Madras3 and the observations made by Patanjali Sastri, J., Mukherjea,
J., and S.R. Das, J., seemed to place a narrow interpretation on the
words "personal liberty" so as to confine the protection of Article 21 to
freedom of the person against unlawful detention. But there was no
definite pronouncement made on this point since the question before
the Court was not so much the interpretation of the words "personal
liberty" as the inter-relation between Articles 19 and 21. It was in
Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 2 that the question as to the proper scope
and meaning of the expression "personal liberty" came up pointedly
for consideration for the first time before this Court." [Para 5]
Without prejudice
3.3. Only certain aspects of the right to privacy can be elevated to
fundamental right status.
3.3.1. There does not appear to be any cavil with the fact that a right
to privacy exists. However, privacy being an omnibus term which the
petitioners have admitted they cannot define, great care must be taken
before subjecting the entire genus of privacy rights to a hallowed
protection.
3.3.2. Privacy, not strictly being a jural term, appears across many
disciplines concerning man-ethics, philosophy, psychology and
medicine. Notwithstanding the various forays made in the legal field into
understanding its full import, some assistance could be received from the
classification available in the medical field. The Winter 2016 Edition of
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, in its chapter entitled "Privacy and
Medicine" classifies privacy into 5 groups:
(i) Informational privacy (confidentiality, data, secrecy of diagnosis,
anonymity while testing, IVF)
(ii) Physical privacy (solitude for the sick and dying, bodily
modesty, non-consensual testing and imaging)
(iii) Associational privacy (regulating visitors, levels of access)
(iv) Proprietary privacy (blood, tissue samples, fluids)
(v) Decisional privacy (birth control, abortion, gender selection,
right to refuse care)
3.3.3. Each of the above groups would equally apply to any aspect of
human conduct, even outside the medical realm. In India, many of these
are
protected or regulated by law, with restrictions on their invasion,
conditions for their use and liabilities for transgressions. Several other
aspects have been specifically recognised as part of the phrases "life" and
"personal liberty" under Article 21 of the Constitution, thereby according
to them the status of a fundamental right:
3.3.3.1. The fundamental rights
Over the course of the last 67 years, Article 21 has been gradually
expanded to include a whole host of rights that are essential to
individuals. Particularly, the phrase "personal liberty" includes within it
the aspects of autonomy, self-determination and personhood. When the
right to health, shelter and education are among the dozens of rights that
have been read into this compendious term, very little remains, and
which probably ought not to be raised to that standard by way of the
indirect acceptance of the word "privacy". It would be best to leave the
specifics to a case-by-case determination.
In addition, it may be relevant to consider that in the decisions where
a right to privacy has been specifically considered by this Hon'ble Court,
the contexts are extremely limited and does not encompass the entire
width of privacy as is being presently canvassed.
3.3.3.2. The legal rights
As correctly submitted by the petitioners, there are several laws and
regulations in place which perceive the necessity to protect the privacy of
individuals. These provisions, including the Regulations made under the
Aadhaar Act, 2016 itself recognise the right to privacy and acknowledge
the fact that it requires protection. However, the legislature in its wisdom
has chosen certain specific categories of privacy rights and afforded them
statutory security, which includes procedural protections and penal
consequences in the event of breaches.
It is of note that even the 271st Report of the Law Commission
entitled "Human DNA Profiling" submitted as recently as 26-7-2017
acknowledges the existence of such a right very clearly. In its conclusions
while enclosing the DNA Based Technology (Use and Regulation) Bill,
2017, the Commission states:
"7.5 The Bill of 2017 provides provisions intended to protect the
right to privacy. The mechanism provided permits for processing of
DNA samples only for 13 CODIS loci which would not violate in any
way the privacy of a person and as a result will never go beyond
identification of a particular person. The strict adherence to 13 CODIS
loci will eliminate the apprehension of revealing genetic traits."
3.3.3.3. It is submitted that the residue of the privacy rights that do
not at the moment have protection as fundamental rights via judicial
dictum or as legal rights by legislation will have to be specifically
enunciated and brought forward in a fit case in order to secure the
protection of this Hon'ble Court under Article 21.
3.3.4. As a result, it is submitted that a careful analysis would be
required in specific cases to accord the protection of Article 21 to the
various species of privacy rights.
3.4. Once so declared, the fundamental right must withstand the
established constitutional norms
3.4.1. Waiver
3.4.1.1. It has been well-established since the celebrated decision in
Basheshar Nath V. CIT1 that fundamental rights cannot be waived. In
fact, the enunciation can be traced back to the following passage from
the majority judgment of Mahajan, C.J. in Behram Khurshid Pesikaka V.
State of Bombay12:
"Again, we are not able to subscribe to the view that in a criminal
prosecution it is open to an accused person to waive his constitutional
right and get convicted. A reference to Cooley's Constitutional
Limitations, Vol. I, p. 371, makes the proposition clear. Therein the
learned professor says that a party may consent to waive rights of
property, but the trial and punishment for public offences are not
within the province of individual consent or agreement. In our opinion,
the doctrine of waiver enunciated by some American Judges in
construing the American Constitution cannot be introduced in our
Constitution without a fuller discussion of the matter. No inference in
deciding the case should have been raised on the basis of such a
theory. The learned Attorney General when questioned about the
doctrine did not seem to be very enthusiastic about it. Without finally
expressing an opinion on this question we are not for the moment
convinced that this theory has any relevancy in construing the
fundamental rights conferred by Part III of our Constitution. We think
that the rights described as fundamental rights are a necessary
consequence of the declaration in the preamble that the people of
India have solemnly resolved to constitute India into a sovereign
democratic republic and to secure to all its citizens justice, social,
economic and political; liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship; equality of status and of opportunity. These fundamental
rights have not been put in the Constitution merely for individual
benefit, though ultimately they come into operation in considering
individual rights. They have been put there as a matter of public policy
and the doctrine of waiver can have no application to provisions of law
which have been enacted as a matter of constitutional policy.
Reference to some of the articles, inter alia, Articles 15(1), 20, 21
makes the proposition quite plain. A citizen cannot get discrimination
by telling the State "You can discriminate", or get convicted by
waiving the protection given under Articles 20 and 21."
3.4.1.2. While in Basheshar Nath 11 , Bhagwati and Subba Rao, JJ.
adopted the position that no fundamental right could be waived, Das and
Kapur, JJ. restricted that principle only to Article 14. However, in Olga
Bench applied the principle to Article 21 and the right to dwell on
pavements. This position has remained the law of the land till date
without any detraction.
3.4.1.3 This being the position, if this Hon'ble Court were to hold that
the right to privacy as a whole were a fundamental right, then it would
not be possible to waive any part of it. This would lead to the following
complications:
(i) All the statutory provisions that deal with aspects of privacy as
detailed in Appendix 5 would be vulnerable.
(ii) The State would be barred from contractually obtaining virtually
any information about a person, including identification, fingerprints,
residential address, photographs, employment details, etc., unless
they were all found to be not a part of the right to privacy.
(iii) The consequence would be that the judiciary would be testing
what aspects of privacy could be excluded from Article 21 rather than
what can be included in Article 21.
3.4.1.4. As a consequence, it is submitted that the best approach
would be to recognise that certain aspects of the right to privacy may be
a part of Article 21, but that they would be determined on a case by case
basis.
3.4.2. The Article 21 test
3.4.2.1. During the arguments before this Hon'ble Court, a question
has arisen regarding the test to be applied to a right that emanates from
one or more of the fundamental rights and is then located in Article 21.
3.4.2.2. The opinion of the majority in Maneka Gandhi 5 was that
the
procedure prescribed by law has to be "fair, just and reasonable, not
fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary". It was precisely this test that was
applied in Mithu V. State of Punjab14 to strike down Section 303 of the
Penal Code [Paras 6 &23 per Chandrachud, C.J. and Para 24 per Reddy, J)
3.4.2.3. It is submitted that merely because privacy is traceable to
Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution does not automatically qualify it to
be a fundamental right. This is in fact the view of the majority in
Maneka 5, speaking through Bhagwati, J. in the following words:
"29. It is not enough that a right claimed by the petitioner flows
or emanates from a named fundamental right or that its existence is
necessary in order to make the exercise of the named fundamental
right meaningful and effective. Every activity which facilitates the
exercise of a named fundamental right is not necessarily
comprehended in that fundamental right nor can it be regarded as
such merely because it may
not be possible otherwise to effectively exercise that fundamental right.
The contrary construction would lead to incongruous results and the
entire scheme of Article 19(1) which confers different rights and
sanctions different restrictions according to different standards depending
upon the nature of the right will be upset. What is necessary to be seen
is, and that is the test which must be applied, whether the right claimed
by the petitioner is an integral part of a named fundamental right or
partakes of the same basic nature and character as the named
fundamental right so that the exercise of such right is in reality and
substance nothing but an instance of the exercise of the named
fundamental right.
33. We cannot, therefore, accept the theory that a peripheral or
concomitant right which facilitates the exercise of a named
fundamental right or gives it meaning and substance or makes its
exercise effective, is itself a guaranteed right included within the
named fundamental right."
3.4.2.4. It is evident, therefore, that it is only the core (the umbra) of
the facilitating unnamed right which would be recognised as protected by
Article 21 and not what has been often referred to as the penumbral right
of privacy.
3.4.2.5. It is submitted that the concepts of "legitimate State
interest" and "compelling State interest" are concepts alien to the Indian
constitutional scheme and therefore find no mention within it. It would
be inappropriate to place an additional burden on the State by testing
whether the State's interest is at all involved-a question that is in fact
properly left to the legislature as the people's representative. For
example, if, based on military intelligence that enemy incursions are
possible at the border, the State enacts law mandating border residents
to compulsorily register themselves at the district headquarters, the
legitimacy of the State's action ought not to be examined by this Hon'ble
Court.
3.4.2.6. Thus, if and when any aspect of privacy is read into Article
21, the only test that would apply is the one enunciated in Maneka 5 and
followed till date.
3.5. The international legal regime is as limited as India (if not
more so) in the recognition of a fundamental right to privacy
3.5.1. It is clear that the American case law has evolved in a
completely different context, hailing from a bare bones constitutional text
with a context-specific interpretation emanating from its Supreme Court.
The decisions which have touched upon privacy over the last century fall
broadly into the few categories of surveillance, search & seizure, bodily
autonomy and sexual choice. It is difficult to conclude from these few
instances that a wide right to privacy exists in the United States.
15
3.5.2. The House of Lords in Wainwright V. Home Office was very
clear in enunciating that there existed no common law right to privacy
and no
remedy could be granted in tort. In fact, it was specifically stated that
the remedies would lie in other actions (battery, trespass, etc.) or via
statutory remedies provided in the Interception of Communications Act,
1985 and Police Act, 1997. This is not unlike the Indian context as has
been detailed above.
3.5.3. Care must be taken not to confuse the issue of the right to
privacy as a tort as against its existence as a fundamental right. Even the
celebrated Harvard article of Warren and Brandeis dealt exclusively with
the existence of the private right with no advertence to its public law
element.
3.5.4. It is submitted that the foreign experiences in the context of
the right to privacy pale in significance to the robust development of
constitutional law in India. It would be apposite to apply the dicta of the
Indian courts which reflect the Indian societal experience rather than to
import without a context.
X. Dr Arghya Sengupta, Advocate, for the respondents
1. These written submissions are presented for the kind perusal of this
Hon'ble Court.
2. The reference order dated 18-7-2017 1 from which the present
proceedings arise, states:
"During the course of the hearing today, it seems that it has
become essential for us to determine whether there is any
fundamental right of privacy under the Indian Constitution. The
determination of this question would essentially entail whether the
decision recorded by this Court in M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra, by
an eight-Judge Constitution Bench, and also, in Kharak Singh V. State
of U.P.3 by a six-Judge Constitution Bench, that there is no such
fundamental right, is the correct expression of the constitutional
position."
3. If the Court finds the two aforementioned cases correctly decided,
then no question of a fundamental right to privacy arises in the first
place. However, if the Court finds the two cases wrongly decided or is
able to distinguish them, the Court would have to lay down whether there
is a right to privacy in Part III of the Constitution; if so, what are its
contours and if not, then whether any aspects of privacy are already
protected by Part III.
4. Without prejudice to the arguments made earlier regarding the
correctness of M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra ("M.P. Sharma") (8
Judges)
and Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 3 ("Kharak Singh") (6 Judges), our
submission is as follows:
4.1. No general fundamental right to privacy ought to be read in to
Part III of the Constitution:
4.1.1. The United States Supreme Court, on whose judgments,
reliance has been placed by the petitioners, no longer uses the right to
privacy to test laws that might have been tested on this ground, were it a
well-established part of American constitutional law.
4.1.2. Reading in a right to privacy from certain privacy interests that
may inhere in Part III of the Constitution is conceptually unsound.
4.1.3. An analysis of existing case law decided on the ground of right
to privacy will demonstrate that they either relate to protections already
granted under Article 21 or Article 19 or should not be protected under
the Constitution at all.
4.2. Several concerns relating to privacy breaches raised by the
petitioners are the rightful subject-matter of a data protection law:
4.2.1. Data protection and privacy per se are overlapping but distinct
issues.
4.2.2. Only a comprehensive data protection legislation can effectively
address such concerns.
4.2.3. The Government of India is alive to the need for such a law.
4.1. No general fundamental right to privacy ought to be read in to
Part III of the Constitution
4.1.1. The United States Supreme Court, on whose judgments, reliance
has been placed by the petitioners, no longer uses the right to privacy to
test laws that might have been tested on this ground, were it a well-
established part of American constitutional law.
5. The petitioners have placed reliance on the decision of the United
States Supreme Court in Katz V. United States ("Katz") to contend that
the United States Constitution recognises a right to privacy. In Katz4 the
question before the Supreme Court was whether eavesdropping on a
conversation through a device placed outside a public phone booth was
an unreasonable search and seizure offending the Fourth Amendment.
The Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution provides,
"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall
not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized."
(emphasis supplied)
6. Till Katz4, it was held that such protection was only available for
personal property, akin to common law trespass (see Scalia, J.'s opinion
in United States V. Jones5, for precedents). In Katz4, it was held by Potter
Stewart, J. (at pp. 350-352):
"In the first place, the correct solution of Fourth Amendment
problems is not necessarily promoted by incantation of the phrase
`constitutionally protected area.' Secondly, the Fourth Amendment
cannot be translated into a general constitutional right to privacy. That
Amendment protects individual privacy against certain kinds of
governmental intrusion, but its protections go further, and often have
nothing to do with privacy at all. Other provisions of the Constitution
protect personal privacy from other forms of governmental invasion.
But the protection of a person's general right to privacy-his right to
be let alone by other people-is, like the protection of his property and
of his very life, left largely to the law of the individual States."
"
But this effort to decide whether or not a given "area", viewed
in the abstract, is "constitutionally protected" deflects attention
from the problem presented by this case. For the Fourth
Amendment protects people, not places. What a person knowingly
exposes to the public, even in his own home or office, is not a
subject of Fourth Amendment protection. See Lewis V. United
States6; United States V. Lee But what he seeks to preserve as
private, even in an area accessible to the public, may be
constitutionally protected. See Rios V. United States Jackson, ex
p.
The Government stresses the fact that the telephone booth from
which the petitioner made his calls was constructed partly of glass, so
that he was as visible after he entered it as he would have been if he
had remained outside. But what he sought to exclude when he entered
the booth was not the intruding eye-it was the uninvited ear. He did
not shed his right to do so simply because he made his calls from a
place where he might be seen..." "
(emphasis supplied).
7. Thus in Katz4, it was held that privacy protection in the Fourth
Amendment extended to public places, moving beyond common law
trespass, but did not entail a general right of privacy. It is instructive to
note that Katz4 was decided two years after Griswold V. Connecticut 0,
widely viewed as first incorporating the right to privacy into US
constitutional law. In Griswold10, the question before the Court was
whether a Connecticut
statute that forbade the use of contraceptives by married couples was
unconstitutional. It was struck down by the Court ostensibly for violating
the right to privacy. Douglas, J. speaking for the Court held (at pp. 485-
486),
"The present case, then, concerns a relationship lying within the
zone of privacy created by several fundamental constitutional
guarantees. And it concerns a law which, in forbidding the use of
contraceptives rather than regulating their manufacture or sale, seeks
to achieve its goals by means having a maximum destructive impact
upon that relationship. Such a law cannot stand in light of the familiar
principle, so often applied by this Court, that a "governmental purpose
to control or prevent activities constitutionally subject to state
regulation may not be achieved by means which sweep unnecessarily
broadly and thereby invade the area of protected freedoms." NAACP V.
Alabama1. Would we allow the police to search the sacred precincts of
marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The
very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy surrounding the
marriage relationship.
We deal with a right of privacy older than the Bill of Rights-older
than our political parties, older than our school system. Marriage is a
coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and
intimate to the degree of being sacred. It is an association that
promotes a way of life, not causes; a harmony in living, not political
faiths; a bilateral loyalty, not commercial or social projects. Yet it is an
association for as noble a purpose as any involved in our prior
decisions."
(emphasis supplied)
8. However Stewart, J., who provided the opinion for the Court two
years later in Katz4, dissented. He said (at p. 530),
"What provision of the Constitution, then, does make this state law
invalid? The Court says it is the right of privacy "created by several
fundamental constitutional guarantees." With all deference, I can find
no such general right of privacy in the Bill of Rights, in any other part
of the Constitution, or in any case ever before decided by this Court."
9. It is thus clear that Justice Stewart's dissenting view in Griswold10
decided in the context of the Fourteenth Amendment and the right to
privacy became the controlling view of the Court when it came to the
Fourth Amendment, viz. that this Amendment, or the Constitution
generally did not espouse any general right to privacy.
10. The law relating to a general right to privacy appeared to be
reinstated in the seminal decision of the Supreme Court in Roe V.
Wade Superscript 12. In Roe12, the question before the Court was whether a Texas
statute which criminalised abortion except for limited grounds relating to
the health of the
mother was constitutional. It was struck down with the majority holding
(at p. 154),
"We, therefore, conclude that the right of personal privacy includes
the abortion decision, but that this right is not unqualified and must
be considered against important state interests in regulation."
11. Interestingly, Stewart, J. wrote a concurring opinion in Roe V.
Wade12 which held that the Texas statute is unconstitutional because it
violated the due process clause since a decision fundamental to the
individual such as whether to bear or beget a child is central to her
liberty, much more than whether children should be allowed to learn a
foreign language or not (earlier held to be constitutionally protected). The
opinion strikes down the statute for violating liberty in the Fourteenth
Amendment and not any general right to privacy. He holds (at pp. 168-
170),
" "In a Constitution for a free people, there can be no doubt that the
meaning of 'liberty' must be broad indeed." Board of Regents V.
Roth13 The Constitution nowhere mentions a specific right of personal
choice in matters of marriage and family life, but the "liberty"
protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
covers more than those freedoms explicitly named in the Bill of Rights.
See Schware V. Board of Bar Examiners14. Pierce V. Society of
Sisters15 Meyer V. Nebraska 6. Shapiro V. Thompson17; United States
V. Guest18, Carrington V. Rash19. Aptheker V. Secy. of State ; Kent V.
Dulles21; Boilling V. Sharpe22; Truax V. Raich23.
Several decisions of this Court make clear that freedom of personal
choice in matters of marriage and family life is one of the liberties
protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Loving V. Virginia24; Griswold V. Connecticut 10; Pierce V. Society of
Sisters15. Meyer V. Nebraska6, See also Prince V. Massachusetts ,
Skinner V. Oklahoma6. As recently as last Term, in Eisenstadt V.
Baird27,
we recognised the right of the individual, married or single, to be free
from unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so fundamentally
affecting a person as the decision whether to bear or beget a child. That
right necessarily includes the right of a woman to decide whether or not
to terminate her pregnancy. Certainly the interests of a woman in giving
of her physical and emotional self during pregnancy and the interests
that will be affected throughout her life by the birth and raising of a child
are of a far greater degree of significance and personal intimacy than the
right to send a child to private school protected in Pierce V. Society of
Sisters15 or the right to teach a foreign language protected in Meyer V.
Nebraska 6. Abele V. Markle28 28
Clearly, therefore, the Court today is correct in holding that the
right asserted by Jane Roe is embraced within the personal liberty
protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment."
(emphasis supplied)
12. It is clear that Justice Stewart's view protects the interests of the
pregnant woman to bear or beget a child, not as an instance of a general
right to privacy not found in the constitutional text, but an instance of
liberty that is worthy of protection in the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution. It is apparent from the future development of case law in
the United States that this is the prevalent point of view. This will
become apparent from a discussion of three cases below.
13. In Whalen V. Roe29 the issue before the Supreme Court was
whether a New York Statute that required disclosure of certain personal
information relating to patients and doctors to whom a particular
scheduled drug, which had both a lawful and unlawful market, was
prescribed, in order to check abuse, was constitutional. Upholding Justice
Stewart's reasoning, it was held by the Court : (at pp. 598-600)
"Appellees contend that the statute invades a constitutionally
protected "zone of privacy." The cases sometimes characterized as
protecting "privacy" have in fact involved at least two different kinds of
interests. One is the individual interest in avoiding disclosure of
personal matters, and another is the interest in independence in
making certain kinds of important decisions. Appellees argue that both
of these interests are impaired by this statute. The mere existence in
readily available form of the information about patients' use of
Schedule II drugs creates a genuine concern that the information will
become publicly known and that it will adversely affect their
reputations. This concern makes some patients reluctant to use, and
some doctors reluctant to prescribe, such drugs even when their use is
medically indicated. It follows, they argue, that the making of
decisions about matters vital to the care of their health
is inevitably affected by the statute. Thus, the statute threatens to impair
both their interest in the nondisclosure of private information and also
their interest in making important decisions independently.
We are persuaded, however, that the New York program does not,
on its face, pose a sufficiently grievous threat to either interest to
establish a constitutional violation. "[emphasis supplied]
The Court speaking through Stevens, J. held : (at pp. 603-604)
"We hold that neither the immediate nor the threatened impact of
the patient-identification requirements in the New York State
Controlled Substances Act of 1972 on either the reputation or the
independence of patients for whom Schedule II drugs are medically
indicated is sufficient to constitute an invasion of any right or liberty
protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. 30"
14. In fact, Justice Stevens has consistently advocated the return to a
wider understanding of 'liberty' in the Fourteenth Amendment in place of
reading in new rights such as privacy (the words 'liberty', 'freedom' and
'autonomy' entail the same idea and are used interchangeably). In
Fitzgerald V. Porter Memorial Hospital  1, when he was a Judge in the US
Court of Appeals in the Seventh Circuit he held (in a case that asked for a
husband's right to be in the hospital room at the time of delivery of his
baby) (at pp. 719-720),
"5. Plaintiffs characterize the right they assert as an aspect of the
"right of marital privacy." The source of its constitutional protection is
either the so-called penumbra of various provisions of the Bill of Rights
or the word "liberty" in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment.
6. It is somewhat unfortunate that claims of this kind tend to be
classified as assertions of a right to privacy. For the group of cases
that lend support to plaintiffs' position do not rest on the same privacy
concept that Brandeis and Warren identified in their article in the 1890
Edition of the Harvard Law Review. These cases do not deal with the
individual's interest in protection from unwarranted public attention,
comment, or exploitation. They deal, rather, with the individual's right to
make certain unusually important decisions that will affect his own, or his
family's destiny. The Court has referred to such decisions as implicating
"basic values", as being "fundamental", and as being dignified by history
and tradition. The character of the Court's language in these cases brings
to mind the origins of the American heritage of freedom the abiding
interest in individual liberty that makes certain state intrusions on the
citizen's right to decide how he will live his own life intolerable. Guided
by history, our tradition of respect for the dignity of individual choice in
matters of conscience and the restraints implicit in the federal system,
federal judges have accepted the responsibility for recognition and
protection of these rights in appropriate cases. But can it fairly be said
that this is such a case?" (footnotes omitted)
(emphasis supplied)
Then at para 12 (at p. 721):
"12. We hold that the so-called right of marital privacy does not
include the right of either spouse to have the husband present in the
delivery room of a public hospital which, for medical reasons, has
adopted a rule requiring his exclusion."
Justice Stevens' jurisprudence and how he was the key Judge on the
Supreme Court in moving away from a right to privacy to "the long arm
of liberty" in the Fourteenth Amendment has been described in Jamal
Greene, The So-Called Right to Privacy' 43 UC Davis Law Review 715-
747, at pp. 731-747 (2010) [Professor Jamal Greene is Professor Law,
Columbia Law School. The title is taken from a memorandum from then
Justice Department Attorney John Roberts to the Attorney General on 11-
12-1981 where Roberts wrote of the 'so-called right to privacy'. Roberts
is the present Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States of
America.]
15. Stewart, J. in concurrence held : (at pp. 608-609)
"The first case referred to, Griswold V. Connecticut 10, held that a
State cannot constitutionally prohibit a married couple from using
contraceptives in the privacy of their home. Although the broad
language of the opinion includes a discussion of privacy, see id., at
484-485, the constitutional protection there discovered also related to
(1) marriage, see id., at 485-486; id., at 495 (Goldberg, J.,
concurring); id., at 500 (Harlan, J., concurring in judgment), citing
Poe V. Ullman32 (Harlan, J., dissenting); Griswold10, US at pp. 502-503
(WHITE, J., concurring in judgment); (2) privacy in the home, see id.,
at 484-485 (majority opinion); id., at 495 (Goldberg, J., concurring);
id., at 500 (Harlan, J., concurring in judgment), citing Poe V. Ullman3,
US at p. 522 (Harlan, J., dissenting); and (3) the right to use
contraceptives, see Griswold10, US at
p. 503 (WHTE, J., concurring in judgment); see also Roe V. Wade1 US
at pp. 169-170 (STEWART, J., concurring). Whatever the ratio decidendi
of Griswold10, it does not recognize a general interest in freedom from
disclosure of private information."
(emphasis supplied)
16. Thus it is clear that the Court followed an incremental approach to
understanding which facets of liberty in the Fourteenth Amendment
would be entitled to protection rather than recognising a general right to
privacy. Alternatively put, it was apparent to the Court that when a
privacy claim was made, the rationale underlying the same was the need
to protect liberty in various critical facets of human life.
17. It is our humble submission that in cases concerning the right to
privacy in the Fourteenth Amendment that followed, it was liberty and
not privacy that was the controlling interest. 33 Thus in Planned
Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania V. Casey, Governor of
Pennsylvania 39 the Supreme Court in its first significant abortion
judgment after Roe V. Wade12, held : (at pp. 846, 851)
"Constitutional protection of the woman's decision to terminate her
pregnancy derives from the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. It declares that no State shall "deprive any person of life,
liberty, or property, without due process of law." The controlling word
in the cases before us is "liberty." Although a literal reading of the
Clause might suggest that it governs only the procedures by which a
State may deprive persons of liberty, for at least 105 years, since
Mugler V. Kansas35, the Clause has been understood to contain a
substantive component as well, one "barring certain government
actions regardless of the fairness of the procedures used to implement
them." Daniels V. Williams36
Our law affords constitutional protection to personal decisions
relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships,
child rearing, and education. Carey V. Population Services
International superscript(3). Our cases recognize "the right of the individual,
married or single, to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion
into matters so fundamentally affecting a person as the decision
whether to bear or beget a child." Eisenstadt V. Baird27, US at p. 453
(emphasis in original). Our precedents "have respected the private
realm of family life which the state cannot enter." Prince V.
Massachusetts 5, US at p. 166
(1944). These matters, involving the most intimate and personal choices
a person may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity and
autonomy, are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth
Amendment. At the heart of liberty is the right to define one's own
concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of
human life. Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes of
personhood were they formed under compulsion of the State."
(emphasis supplied)
18. It is evident that Casey34 involved a creative reinterpretation of
Roe2 and the controlling interest was liberty and not privacy. In fact,
the word "privacy" occurs only twice in the opinion of the Court, once
while citing a precedent and another time not linked to protecting a
sphere of decision-making, as had been the case in Roe1 12
19. Finally, the falling into desuetude of the right to privacy was
confirmed in Lawrence V. Texas38 If there were a right to privacy in the
Constitution then surely it would have been the primary ground for
invalidating a statute that criminalised intimate conduct of same-sex
couples. However, the opinion makes it clear that liberty was the
controlling interest in this case too. Though the respect for private life
was mentioned, the ground for striking down this law was violation of
liberty. The lead opinion of Kennedy, J. begins with the words : (at p.
562)
"Liberty protects the person from unwarranted government
intrusions into a dwelling or other private places. In our tradition the
State is not omnipresent in the home. And there are other spheres of
our lives and existence, outside the home, where the State should not
be a dominant presence. Freedom extends beyond spatial bounds.
Liberty presumes an autonomy of self that includes freedom of
thought, belief, expression, and certain intimate conduct. The instant
case involves liberty of the person both in its spatial and in its more
transcendent dimensions."
20. Again, (at p. 567):
"It suffices for us to acknowledge that adults may choose to enter
upon this relationship in the confines of their homes and their own
private lives and still retain their dignity as free persons. When
sexuality finds overt expression in intimate conduct with another
person, the conduct can be but one element in a personal bond that is
more enduring. The liberty protected by the Constitution allows
homosexual persons the right to make this choice."
(emphasis supplied).
21. A catena of decisions in the United States have thus refused to
10
follow the understanding of a right to privacy upheld in Griswold
and
Roe12. Katz4, relied upon by the petitioners, was the first to recognise
that there was no such general right to privacy. Subsequent cases, such
as Whalen, Casey
and Lawrence which could have been decided on privacy grounds were
instead tested on liberty grounds. On this test, the laws in Whalen and
Casey passed muster, whereas the one in Lawrence did not. For a full list
of such cases and the argument as to why the right to privacy is "no
more", see the article by Professor Jamal Greene [Jamal Greene, 'The So-
Called Right to Privacy' 43 UC Davis Law Review 715-747 (2010)].
22. Further, this move away from privacy to liberty is not limited to
any particular ideological viewpoint prevalent in the United States
Supreme Court. In fact, the loosely described "liberal wing" of the Court,
certainly pro-choice in abortion matters, have also jettisoned privacy in
favour of liberty. This is clear from the dissenting opinion of Justice
Ginsburg in Gonzales V. Carhart39, which involved a challenge to the
prohibition of a particular technique of abortion (the partial birth abortion
ban) which had made no exception for the health of the mother. The
Court upheld the prohibition. Ginsburg, J., in dissent, wrote for herself
and Breyer, Souter and Stevens, JJ.:
"As Casey34 comprehended, at stake in cases challenging abortion
restrictions is a woman's control over her [own] destiny. Casey34, US
at p. 869 (plurality opinion). See also id., at 852 (majority opinion).
There was a time, not so long ago when women were regarded as the
center of home and family life, with attendant special responsibilities
that precluded full and independent legal status under the
Constitution. Id., at 896-897 (quoting Hoyt V. Florida40). Those views,
this Court made clear in Casey, are no longer consistent with our
understanding of the family, the individual, or the Constitution.
Casey34 34 US at p. 897. Women, it is now acknowledged, have the
talent, capacity, and right to participate equally in the economic and
social life of the Nation. Id., at 856. Their ability to realize their full
potential, the Court recognized, is intimately connected to their ability
to control their reproductive lives. Ibid. Thus, legal challenges to
undue restrictions on abortion procedures do not seek to vindicate
some generalized notion of privacy; rather, they center on a woman's
autonomy to determine her life's course, and thus to enjoy equal
citizenship stature. See, e.g., Siegel, Reasoning from the Body : A
Historical Perspective on Abortion Regulation and Questions of Equal
Protection, 44 Stan L Rev 261 (1992); Law, Re-thinking Sex and the
Constitution, 132 U Pa L Rev 955, 1002A1028 (1984)."
23. This move by Justice Ginsburg, away from a general notion of the
right to privacy, vindicates the approach followed by Justice Stewart
through his dissenting view in Griswold10 lead opinion in Katz and
concurring views in Roe 12 and Whalen29. It will be instructive for the
Court to note that Justice Stewart's views have been cited by the Indian
Supreme Court and
High Courts in at least twenty cases, including prominently in Maneka
Gandhi V. Union of India41 Indra Sawhney V. Union of India42 and Bachan
Singh V. State of Punjab43 A full list of these cases is annexed [See
Annexure 1].
24. On the evidence of the development of the right to privacy in
American constitutional law and its falling into disuse with decades of
experience, it is humbly submitted that no analogous general
fundamental right to privacy ought to be declared as part of the
Constitution of India by the Supreme Court in the present proceedings.
4.1.2. Reading in a right to privacy from certain privacy interests
that may inhere in Part III of the Constitution is conceptually
unsound.
25. It is evident from American constitutional law that there may be
certain zones of privacy which inhere in the First, Third, Fourth, Fifth,
Ninth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution. These zones of
privacy appear to be nothing but certain interests of immunity from
interference which are protected in order to protect the substantive rights
in question. As the petitioners have argued, this may also be the position
in Indian constitutional law. But the fallacy of translating these zones of
privacy into a self-standing and free-floating right has been clearly
pointed out by Robert Bork in his seminal work The Tempting of America.
Bork writes:
"It is important to understand Justice Douglas' argument both
because the method, though without merit, continually recurs in
constitutional adjudication and because the "right of privacy" has
become a loose canon in the law. Douglas began by pointing out that
"specific guarantees in the Bill of Rights have penumbras, formed by
emanations from those guarantees that help give them life and
substance." There is nothing exceptional about that thought, other
than the language of penumbras and emanations. Courts often give
protection to a constitutional freedom by creating a buffer zone, by
prohibiting a government from doing something not in itself forbidden
but likely to lead to an invasion of a right specified in the Constitution.
Douglas cited NAACP V. Alabama1, in which the Supreme Court held
that the State could not force the disclosure of the organisation's
membership lists since that would have a deterrent effect upon the
members' first amendment rights of political and legal action. That
may well have been part of the purpose of the statute. But for this
anticipated effect upon guaranteed freedoms, there would be no
constitutional objection to the required disclosure of membership. The
right not to disclose has no life of its own independent of the rights
specified in the first amendment.
Douglas named the buffer zone or "penumbra" of the first
amendment a protection of "privacy," although, in NAACP V.
Alabama1, of course, confidentiality of membership was required not
for the sake of individual privacy but to protect the public activities of
politics and litigation. Douglas then asserted that other amendments
create "zones of privacy." These were the First, Third (soldiers not to
be quartered in private homes), Fourth (ban on unreasonable searches
and seizures) and Fifth (freedom from self-incrimination). There was
no particularly good reason to use the word "privacy" for the freedom
cited, except for the fact that the opinion was building toward those
"sacred precincts of marital bedrooms." The phrase "areas of freedom"
would have been more accurate since the provisions cited both private
and public behaviour
The Court majority said there was now a right of privacy but did not
even intimate an answer to the question, "privacy to do what?" People
often take addictive drugs in private, some men physically abuse their
wives and children in private, executives conspire to fix prices in
private, Mafiosi confer with their button men in private. If these sound
bizarre one professor at a prominent law school has suggested that the
right of privacy may create a right to engage in prostitution. Moreover,
as we shall see, the Court has extended the right of privacy to
activities in no sense can be said to be done in private. The truth is
that "privacy" will turn out to protect those activities that enough
justices to form a majority think ought to be protected and not
activities with which they have little sympathy.
If one called the zones of the separate rights of the Bill of Rights
zones of "freedom" which would be more accurate, then, should one
care to follow Douglas's logic, the zones would add up to a general
right of freedom independent of any provision of the Constitution...
"
(emphasis supplied)
[Robert H. Bork, The Tempting of America, Free Press (1990), pp. 97-99]
26. In the same vein, Professor Louis Henkin writes (in the immediate
aftermath of Roe V.
"In our day the Justices have newly recognized the "right of
privacy." I think that denomination is misleading, if not mistaken. To
date, at least, the right has brought little new protection for what most
of us think of as "privacy"-freedom from official intrusion. What the
Supreme Court has given us, rather, is something essentially different
and farther-reaching, an additional zone of autonomy, of presumptive
immunity to governmental regulation. Appreciating what the Supreme
Court has wrought suggests the need for new inquiries into our sense
of public good, into the comparative weights of different goods in the
balances of constitutional jurisprudence, indeed into the very purposes
of our constitutional government."
[Louis Henkin, 'Privacy and Autonomy' 74 Columbia Law Review 1410-
1433, at pp. 1410-1411 (1974)]
27. Thus privacy at its core is nothing but a zone of freedom. This can
be stated differently-privacy at its most basic has been understood to be
the right to be let alone (Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis, 'Right to
Privacy' IV(5) Harvard Law Review 193-220 (1890)). Such a right
essentially places a correlative duty on everyone else to stay off. In
Hohfeldian terms, this is the exact conception of a liberty. Hohfeld writes,
"In other words, if X has a right against Y that he shall stay off the
former's land, the correlative (and equivalent) is that Y is under a duty
toward X to stay off the place. If, as seems desirable, we should seek a
synonym for the term "right" in this limited and proper meaning,
perhaps the word "claim" would prove the best.
In the example last put, whereas X has a right or claim that Y, the
other man, should stay off the land, he himself has the privilege of
entering on the land; or in equivalent words, X does not have a duty to
stay off. The privilege of entering is the negation of a duty to stay off."
[Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld, "Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as
applied in Judicial Reasoning" 23 Yale Law Journal 16-59, at p. 32
(1914)]
28. Please note that in Hohfeldian terms, the term "privilege" is the
same as "liberty". See, Hohfeld (at p. 36):
"On grounds already emphasized, it would seem that the line of
reasoning pursued by Lord Lindley in the great case of Quinn V.
Leathern44, is deserving of comment:
"The plaintiff had the ordinary rights of a British subject. He was
at liberty to earn his own living in his own way, provided he did not
violate some special law prohibiting him from so doing, and
provided he did not infringe the rights of other people. This liberty
involved liberty to deal with other persons who were willing to deal
with him. This liberty is a right recognised by law; its correlative is
the general duty of every one not to prevent the free exercise of this
liberty, except so far as his own liberty of action may justify him in
so doing. But a person's liberty or right to deal with others is
nugatory, unless they are at liberty to deal with him if they choose
to do so. Any interference with their liberty to deal with him affects
him."
A "liberty" considered as a legal relation (or "right" in the loose and
generic sense of that term) must mean, if it have any definite content
at all, precisely the same thing as privilege and certainly that is the
fair connotation of the term as used the first three times in the
passage quoted")
(emphasis supplied)
29. This is consistent with the philosophical understanding of privacy
as protecting liberty,
"Besides giving us control over the context in which we act, privacy
has a more defensive role in protecting our liberty. We may wish to do
or say things not forbidden by the restraints of morality, but which are
nevertheless unpopular or unconventional. If we thought that our
every word and deed were public, fear of disapproval or more tangible
retaliation might keep us from doing or saying things which we would
do or say if we could be sure of keeping them to ourselves or within a
circle of those who we know approve or tolerate our tastes."
[Charles Fried, 'Privacy' 77(3) Yale Law Journal 475-493, at p. 483
(January 1968)]
30. In this sense privacy achieves nothing more than serving as a
substitute for freedom/liberty since at its conceptual core it essentially is
a command to others to "stay off". It is thus a purely formal
conceptualisation that does not answer any substantive question
("privacy to do what?"). This is evident from the oral observation made
by Nariman, J. in this case, summarising the position of the petitioners
that privacy extends over the body and mind, with the mind aspect
having two facets-information and decisions. It is our humble
submission that this principle is overbroad and formal. In a formal sense,
privacy over body and mind means little but prescribing that others
should stay off matters relating to the body and mind since the individual
should have the liberty to do as she pleases in these matters. However
this cannot mean that the individual can slash her wrists (a facet of a
right over her body) or take drugs (an individual choice) or refuse to give
her relationship status when asked on her form (information). This is best
exemplified by a question posed by Chandrachud, J. in his oral
observations that it may not be a constitutional problem if a woman is
asked on a form about the number of children she has, but it will be a
problem if she is asked the number of abortions she has had. Privacy over
information should have made both these instances a violation-but
given that the former appears to be a violation and the latter does not, it
is clear that there is a substantive notion at play i.e. the nature of
personal liberties which deserve constitutional protection. This cannot be
explained simply by reference to "privacy". Instead it is a substantive
notion of a constitutionally protected liberty that provides the answer.
According to Joseph Raz, this determination of what counts as
constitutionally protected rights is done by courts with utmost caution in
constitutional review:
"We now have an outline of an account of the proper role of
constitutional review in most liberal democracies, in matters of
fundamental civil and political rights. Since these fundamental rights
inextricably combine issues of individual interest with questions of the
public interest, they can and should, like other issues of individual
rights, be dealt with by the courts. But at the same time they
inevitably involve
the courts in politics, since they cannot be settled except by deciding
questions concerning the public interest. Since, controversial though
these issues are, they are relatively free from conflict of interests and are
to be settled on the basis of the central tenets of the political tradition of
the country concerned, it is fitting that they should be removed from the
ordinary democratic process and be assigned to a separate political
process.
This means that the courts are political, but the political issues they
deal with in constitutional review of fundamental rights differ for the
most part in kind from the stuff that democratic politics is mostly
concerned with. This does not mean, of course, that the job of the
courts is to arrest the march of time and freeze the process of change
which affects a country's political culture, and its common good, just
as it affects everything else. All that is meant is that, in responding to
change and in encouraging change, the courts should be attuned to
the community's political traditions and to changes, which are
normally continuous and gradual, in its common good, and not to
short-term swings, however violent, in democratic politics."
[Joseph Raz 'Rights and Individual Well-being' in, Ethics in the Public
Domain : Essays in the Morality of Law and Politics (Clarendon Press
1995), at pp. 57-58]
31. It is for this reason that while conceptually privacy essentially
protects a liberty interest, several privacy interests have little to do with
constitutionally protected liberties (when the question "privacy to do
what?" is asked (for e.g., appropriation of someone's image). Further,
liberty is broader in content than privacy itself (for e.g. the freedom to
travel abroad has no discernible privacy component). Thus the discussion
above evidences a fundamental philosophical conception that privacy is
purely formal and does no conceptual work that liberty cannot do, and
does not do in the context of constitutionally protected personal liberty.
32. On the basis of the arguments above, even if the petitioners are
right that there might be zones of privacy in the Constitution, these are
first, not all-pervasive in the Constitution but limited to where liberties
exist (there is no necessary zone of privacy in Article 14, for example)
and second, they are conceptually zones of liberty. Insofar as they exist
in Article 19 (and other freedoms), their site of protection is a
constitutionally protected liberty per se and insofar as they exist in Article
21, their site of protection may be dignity (protection of medical records),
property (unauthorised intrusion into the home) or personal liberty per se
(freedom of association). Thus reading in a right to privacy from a zone of
privacy is conceptually unsound and does not protect anything that is not
already protected under Part III.
33. On the contrary, such an expansive and putatively free-floating
understanding of the right to privacy might be over-broad in its
conceptualisation. Privacy itself at its core does not, and it is our humble
submission, cannot answer the question, privacy to do what. As a result,
privacy may lead to insulating certain spaces from necessary
intervention. This has been the feminist critique of privacy which
deserves particular attention:
"But feminist consciousness has exploded the private. For women,
the measure of the intimacy has been the measure of the oppression.
To see the personal as political means to see the private as public. On
this level, women have no privacy to lose or to guarantee. We are not
inviolable.
Our sexuality, meaning gender identity, is not only violoble, it is
(hence we are) our violation. Privacy is everything women as women
have never been allowed to be or to have; at the same time the
private is everything women have been equated with and defined in
terms of men's ability to have. To confront the fact that we have no
privacy is to confront our private degradation as the public order. To
fail to recognize this place of the private in women's subordination by
seeking protection behind a right to that privacy is thus to be cut off
from collective verification and state support in the same act. The very
place (home, body), relations (sexual), activities (intercourse and
reproduction), and feelings (intimacy, selfhood) that feminism finds
central to women's subjection form the core of privacy doctrine. But
when women are segregated in private, one at a time, a law of privacy
will tend to protect the right of men "to be let alone" to oppress us one
at a time. A law of the private, in a state that mirrors such a society,
will translate the traditional values of the private sphere into individual
women's right to privacy, subordinating women's collective needs to
the imperatives of male supremacy. It will keep some men out of the
bedrooms of other men."
(emphasis supplied)
[Catharine MacKinnon, 'Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State
:
Toward Feminist Jurisprudence' 8(4) Signs 635-658, at p. 656 (Summer
1983)]
34. It is our humble submission that the instant case is the Griswold10
moment in Indian constitutional law. The experience of the United States
of America counsels us to be cautionary about creating a free-standing
right to privacy, a conceptually unsound and practically meaningless
interpretive exercise.
As Hyman Gross wrote of Griswold10
"The word "privacy" is put to torture until it confesses a
constitutional guaranty for everything it designates in household
parlance. The encroachment upon solitude and disturbance of repose
occasioned by the salesman at the front door is said to involve the
matter of privacy, as does the disruption of repose by a loudspeaker on
a bus, and loss of autonomy through application of a sterilization law.
In this way a verbal groundwork is provided for deciding that
something called
"privacy" is offended by a state law regulating marital intimacies, an area
of accustomed autonomy.
Though we may counsel the avoidance of ambiguity, we cannot
question that the Supreme Court may fashion whatever words it
chooses to comprehend what it has in mind to protect; and that
therefore the word "privacy" may be used to designate particular
things said to be protected by the Constitution-including freedom from
legislative regulation of marital intimacies. But what the Supreme
Court cannot do is make an eccentricity in common word usage do the
job of legal reasoning in constitutional interpretation. It cannot give
autonomy protection under constitutional rights of privacy simply
because the word "privacy" is sometimes loosely used to designate
autonomy. That is what has been attempted in Griswold 10 "
(emphasis supplied)
[Hyman Gross, The Concept of Privacy" 42 New York University Law
Review 34-54, at p. 43-44 (1967)]
35. In Indian constitutional law, the broad import of the term
"personal liberty" is well-established. The Supreme Court has held it to
include the right to travel abroad and consequently return to India
(Satwant Singh Sawhney V. Passport Officer45), to have interviews with
family and friends while imprisoned (Francis Coralie Mullin V. UT of
Delhi46), for women to make reproductive choices (Suchita Srivastava V.
Chandigarh Admn.47), for self-determination of gender (National Legal
Services Authority V. Union of India 48, amongst others. Thus when any
State action is challenged on this ground, it will be ascertained first,
whether it affects a liberty interest, secondly, whether the liberty in
question is within the sphere on constitutionally protected liberties and
thirdly, whether the interference with such interest is justified by a
countervailing legitimate State interest.
36. For the aforesaid reasons, a general fundamental right to privacy
should not be read into Part III of the Constitution.
4.1.3. An analysis of existing case law decided on the ground of
right to privacy will demonstrate that they either relate to aspects
of privacy already protected under Article 21 or Article 19 or
should not be protected under the Constitution at all.
37. The conceptual conclusion above will be made good by an
analytical exercise. Three Supreme Court cases that have made a
determination regarding the right to privacy will be taken and it will be
demonstrated that either the same could be decided on alternate
grounds, if the privacy interests are constitutional, or should not be
decided as a constitutional matter at all, if the privacy interests are not
worthy of constitutional protection.
38. In PUCL V. Union of India49, it was held that Section 5(2) of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 which allowed for wire-tapping of phones was
violative of privacy. Several procedural safeguards were read in to
prevent such a violation. The Court held (per Kuldip Singh, J.):
"18. The right to privacy-by itself-has not been identified under the
Constitution. As a concept it may be too broad and moralistic to define
it judicially. Whether right to privacy can be claimed or has been
infringed in a given case would depend on the facts of the said case.
But the right to hold a telephone conversation in the privacy of one's
home or office without interference can certainly be claimed as "right
to privacy". Conversations on the telephone are often of an intimate
and confidential character. Telephone-conversation is a part of modern
man's life. It is considered so important that more and more people
are carrying mobile telephone instruments in their pockets.
Telephone conversation is an important facet of a man's private life.
Right to privacy would certainly include telephone-conversation in the
privacy of one's home or office. Telephone-tapping would, thus, in fact
Article 21 of the Constitution of India unless it is permitted under the
procedure established by law."
39. On this basis, a series of procedural safeguards were read in to
ensure that telephone tapping is narrowly tailored to comply with Article
21. However it is clear that conversations on the telephone, irrespective
of their content, if tapped, would interfere with the liberty of individuals
to speak freely. Further, the opinion in PUCL appears to only protect
telephone conversation in the privacy of one's home or office, despite
recognising the prevalence of mobile phones. Personal liberty provides a
clearer ground for testing any phone tapping, not being tied to any
particular place, subject of course to any legitimate State interest in
doing so.
40. Again, in R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 50 the question before the
Court was whether a direction issued by the Tamil Nadu Police to the
editor and publisher of a Tamil weekly that was slated to publish the life-
story of a notorious criminal Auto Shankar was constitutional. While the
case ought to have been decided simply on whether the restriction was
reasonable as per Article 19(2), the Court formulated four questions:
"8. Whether a citizen of this country can prevent another person
from writing his life-story or biography? Does such unauthorised
writing infringe the citizen's right to privacy? Whether the freedom of
press guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) entitle the press to publish such
unauthorised account of a citizen's life and activities and if so to what
extent and in what circumstances? What are the remedies open to a
citizen of this country in case of infringement of his right to privacy and
further in case such writing amounts to defamation?"
This was owing to the fact that there was an allegation that unauthorised
publication of the life-story of the criminal would lead to the violation of
his privacy. Regarding the right to privacy, the Court held (per Jeevan
Reddy, J.):
"26 (1) The right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by Article 21. It is a "right to
be let alone". A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own,
his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child bearing and
education among other matters. None can publish anything concerning
the above matters without his consent-whether truthful or otherwise
and whether laudatory or critical. If he does so, he would be violating
the right to privacy of the person concerned and would be liable in an
action for damages. Position may, however, be different, if a person
voluntarily thrusts himself into controversy or voluntarily invites or
raises a controversy.
41. On this basis, the Court decided:
"29. Applying the above principles, it must be held that the
petitioners have a right to publish, what they allege to be the life-
story/autobiography of Auto Shankar insofar as it appears from the
public records, even without his consent or authorisation. But if they
go beyond that and publish his life-story, they may be invading his
right to privacy and will be liable for the consequences in accordance
with law. Similarly, the State or its officials cannot prevent or restrain
the said publication. The remedy of the affected public officials/public
figures, if any, is after the publication, as explained hereinabove."
42. It is humbly submitted that this case did not require any
discussion of the constitutional right to privacy. There was no claim by
the criminal himself (he was not a party to the case) that any aspect
critical to his personhood or liberty would be violated by the publication.
On the contrary, as the judgment makes clear, the publication would
appear to show corruption in the ranks of the Tamil Nadu Police. It cannot
be anybody's claim that there is a constitutional privacy interest in
protecting such activities from disclosure. This is simply a case of testing
the reasonableness of the restriction imposed by the State on publication.
Even in the hypothetical case that there was a privacy claim, the same
would be a horizontal claim made by the convict against the publisher
claiming that publication might affect his reputation. This could either be
a tortious claim or an action for defamation. Given the facts, no
constitutional question of privacy ought to have arisen in this case. This
represents a privacy interest that ought not to be entitled to
constitutional protection and is a cautionary sign against reading in a
general right to privacy in the Constitution.
43. Finally, in Mr 'X' V. Hospital the question before the Court
was whether the right to privacy of the patient was violated when his
blood test results showing he was HIV+ were disclosed by the hospital to
his future wife thereby leading to cancellation of marriage. It was held by
the Court (per Saghir Ahmad, J.):
"28. Disclosure of even true private facts has the tendency to
disturb a person's tranquillity. It may generate many complexes in
him and may even lead to psychological problems. He may, thereafter,
have a disturbed life all through. In the face of these potentialities,
and as already held by this Court in its various decisions referred to
above, the right of privacy is an essential component of the right to life
envisaged by Article 21. The right, however, is not absolute and may
be lawfully restricted for the prevention of crime, disorder or protection
of health or morals or protection of rights and freedom of others."
44. On this basis, the Court held that the patient's right to privacy
would be outweighed by the future wife's right to a healthy life. The
merits of such a decision aside, the framing of the issue as a privacy
issue, disguises theissue at its core-that the patient should have liberty
to decide with whom, when and how we would like to disclose his medical
record. This is a libertyinterest which is protected by ensuring the dignity
of the individual. It isclear from the judgment that disclosure of medical
records would certainlylead to disturbance and psychological difficulties.
Thus it would affect thepatient's sense of dignity, the basis of his
personhood. Thus a claim based on privacy, as significant as it may be in
this case, is a liberty interest which has individual dignity as the site of
its protection.
45. In the final analysis, the history and development of the law
relating to privacy shows an inductive movement from four distinct
tortious offences to one consolidated category, a facet of which was
deemed worthy of protection, not just in private law, but in constitutional
law. As Dean William Prosser wrote in his seminal article on the subject,
"What has emerged from the decisions is no simple matter. It is not
one tort, but a complex of four. The law of privacy comprises four
distinct kinds of invasion of four different interests of the plaintiff,
which are tied together by the common name, but otherwise have
almost nothing in common except that each represents an interference
with the right of the plaintiff, in the phrase coined by Judge Cooley,
"to be let alone." Without any attempt to exact definition, these four
torts may be described as follows:
1. Intrusion upon the plaintiff's seclusion or solitude, or into his
private affairs.
2. Public disclosure of embarrassing private facts about the
plaintiff.
3. Publicity which places the plaintiff in a false light in the public
eye.
4. Appropriation, for the defendant's advantage, of the plaintiff's
name or likeness."
[William L. Prosser, 'Privacy', 48(3) California Law Review 383-422, at p.
389 (1960)]
It is only a facet of category (1) that has been elevated to constitutional
status when it affects a constitutionally protected right, both in the
United States and in India. The remaining aspects of privacy continue to
be protected in common law or in statute (e.g. protection for privileged
communications in Sections 123-131 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872).
Reading in a general fundamental right to privacv has the potential to
erode these critical distinctions.
46. Reading in such a general fundamental right to privacy suffers
from two further difficulties. First, the Court would be creating a
redundancy, since as explained above, privacy is nothing but a liberty
interest of an individual. In other words, it is "personal liberty" which is
already protected by the Constitution. In a well-established line of
precedent, the Court has held while interpreting statutes that Parliament
should not be intended to have created redundancies while drafting
statutes (See, Grasim Industries Ltd. V. Collector of Customs52;
State
of
Maharashtra V. Marwanjee F. Desai53 Similarly the Court too should not
create a redundancy itself by using a synonym for what is essentially a
"personal liberty" interest. Creating such a new category would also fall
foul of the cardinal philosophical principle of Occam's razor that plurality
should not be resorted to in explanation except by necessity. This has
been explained by C. Delisle Burns in the leading philosophy journal,
Mind:
"It seems clear, as Mr Thorburn has shown (MIND, vol. xxiv., N.S.,
No. 94), that Ockham, even if he ever used the phrase "Entia non sunt
multi-plicanda," etc., certainly preferred "Pluralitas non est ponenda".
The usual form of the razor' seems very clumsy. I have never myself
found it in any work of Ockham's; but it is quite possible that he did
use it. In any case his preference for the form "Pluralitas non est
ponenda" is very reasonable, in view of his complaint against Scotus
that the 'doctor subtilis' created imaginary things which did not exist.
"Entia non sunt multiplicanda" seems to be a rule about "real things"
:
it seems to imply that one could "multiply" them. But, Ockham might
say, if you try as 'hard as you like," the mind cannot bring any object
into existence nor, by knowing it, make any difference to the object
known.
"Pluralitas non est ponenda" would mean "You must not suppose
that more things exist" than you have evidence for. And in the same
way "Frustra fit per plura quod potest fieri per pauciora" means that an
explanation is useless of what is already explained. This phrase, by the
way, may be found in the treatise "de Sacramento altaris" (p. 3)
besides the places referred to by Mr Thorburn."
(emphasis supplied)
[C. Delisle Burns, 'Occam's Razor' 24(96) Mind 592, at p. 592 (1915)]
47. On the basis of the aforesaid arguments, it is our submission that
privacy interests are purely formal interests that seek to protect liberty.
"Personal liberty" in Article 21 is capacious enough to protect such
interests. Other privacy interests (that may protect liberties, but not
those that in our political and legal culture ought to enjoy constitutional
protection) ought not to be read in to Article 21. This distinction is best
preserved by not reading in a general right to privacy in the
Constitution- conclusion that follows from comparative experience in
the United States of America, philosophical foundations of privacy and a
close study of precedents on this subject in Indian constitutional law.
Further, given that reading in a derivative right in this case will do no
conceptual work, the fundamental tenet that the law must not create a
redundancy should be upheld.
48. It is important to note however that contrary to the arguments
made by Mr C. Aryama Sundaram, learned counsel for the State of
Maharashtra, our submission in this regard is not a critique of the judicial
trend of reading in "unenumerated rights" into Part III of the
Constitution, as the petitioners have contended. It is our humble
submission that the major premise of this contention, that there are
unenumerated rights in the Constitution, itself is mistaken. Writing on
this subject, Ronald Dworkin said:
"So the distinction between enumerated and unenumerated rights
is widely understood to pose an important constitutional issue : the
question whether and when courts have authority to enforce rights not
actually enumerated in the Constitution as genuine constitutional
rights. I find the question unintelligible, however, as I said at the
outset, because the presumed distinction makes no sense. The
distinction between what is on some list and what is not is of course
genuine and often very important. An ordinance might declare, for
example, that it is forbidden to take guns, knives, or explosives in
hand luggage on an airplane. Suppose airport officials interpreted that
ordinance to exclude canisters of tear gas as well, on the ground that
the general structure of the ordinance, and the obvious intention
behind it, prohibits all weapons that might be taken aboard and used
in hijacks or terrorism. We would be right to say that gas was not on
the list of what was banned, and that it is a legitimate question
whether officials are entitled to add "unenumerated" weapons to the
list. But the distinction between officials excluding pistols, switch-
blades and hand-grenades on the one hand, and tear gas on the other,
depends upon a semantic assumption : that tear gas falls within what
philosophers call the reference of neither "guns" nor "knives" nor
"explosives." No comparable assumption can explain the supposed
distinction between enumerated and unenumerated constitutional rights.
The Bill of Rights, as I said, consists of broad and abstract principles of
political morality, which together encompass, in exceptionally abstract
form, all the dimensions of political morality that in our political culture
can ground an individual constitutional right. The key issue in applying
these abstract principles to particular political controversies is not one of
reference but of interpretation, which is very different."
(emphasis supplied).
[Ronald Dworkin, "Unenumerated Rights : Whether and how Roe should
be overruled" 59 University of Chicago Law Review 381-432, at p. 387
(1992)].
49. Thus when dealing with constitutional provisions such as Articles
14, 19 and 21 which deal with abstract principles, any interpretation is
subject to the charge of creating an unenumerated right. However it is
our humble submission that when such an interpretive exercise is
resorted to, it is critical that the interest that is now found protected
must conceptually be substantive in nature (which is not the case for
privacy as a concept) and constitutionally be within the contours of the
right it is derived from (which is not the case for the right of privacy,
derived from the right to personal liberty in Article 21). Neither of these
conditions is met in the case of right to privacy and thus it is
conceptually unsound to read it into Part III of the Constitution.
4.2. Several concerns relating to privacy breaches raised by the
petitioners will be effectively redressed by a data protection law
4.2.1. Data protection and privacy per se are overlapping but
distinct concerns
50. In the current digital era, several privacy concerns relate to
processing of data. The analysis of very large and complex sets of data is
done today through 'Big Data' analytics. Employment of such analytics
enables organizations and governments to gain remarkable insights in
areas such as health, food security, intelligent transport systems, energy
efficiency and urban planning [European Commission, "European Data
Protection Reform and Big Data : Factsheet", (2016) available
at: :<http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/files/data-protection-big.
lata_factsheet_web_en.pdf>].
51. For instance, companies such as Google have developed spell-
checking systems by applying 'Big Data' analytics to correlate mistyped
queries with their correct forms [Viktor Mayer-Schnberger & Kenneth
Cukier, Big Data : A Revolution that will transform how we live, work and
think (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt 2013) 112].
52. However, much of this data is personal data and has the
possibility of infringing privacy interests of individuals. As a result of this,
over 100 jurisdictions now have data protection laws and over 40 other
jurisdictions have pending bills and initiatives [David Banisar, "National
Comprehensive Data Protection/Privacy Laws and Bills 2016," available at
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/paper.cfm?abstract_id=1951416>]
53. Data protection laws govern the processing of "personal data",
which is understood as data relating to an individual who can be
identified through such information [See for instance, European Union
General Data Protection Regulation adopted by the European Parliament
in April 2016, Articles 2 and 4(1); UK Data Protection Act, 1998;
Canada's Personal Information Protection and Electronics Documents Act,
assented to on 13-4-2000; South Africa Protection of Personal
Information Act, 2013].
54. While often used synonymously with privacy, conceptually the two
are distinct [Herbert Burkert, 'Towards a New Generation of Data
Protection Legislation' in Gutwirth et al (ed.), Reinventing Data Protection
(Springer 2009), at p. 335]. It is not as an intervener contends, a subset
of privacy. This is best exemplified in Articles 7 and 8 of the EU Charter of
Fundamental Rights. They read:
Article 7
Respect for private and family life
Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and family
life, home and communications.
Article 8
Protection of personal data
1. Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data
concerning him or her.
2. Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on
the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other
legitimate basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to
data which has been collected concerning him or her, and the right to
have it rectified.
3. Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an
independent authority.
55. It is clear that data protection and privacy are two distinct
fundamental rights in the EU. This distinction was the product of
recognition over a period of time of the independent importance of data
protection. Explaining the distinction, Raphael Gellert and Serge Gutwirth
write:
"All in all, data protection and privacy overlap on a mode whereby
data protection is both broader and narrower than privacy. It is
narrower because it only deals with the processing personal data,
whereas the scope of privacy is wider. It is broader, however, because
it applies to the
processing of personal data, even if the latter does not infringe upon
privacy. Privacy also is broader and narrower : it might apply to a
processing of data which are not personal but nevertheless affects one's
privacy, while it will not apply upon a processing of personal data which
is not considered to infringe upon one's privacy. It can be said as well
that a processing of personal data can have consequences not only in
terms of privacy, but also in terms of other constitutional rights, and
most obviously, when the processing of data relating to individuals bears
risks in terms of discrimination."
[Raphael Gellert and Serge Gutwirth, 'The legal construction of privacy
and data protection' 29 Computer Law & Security Review 522-530, at p.
526 (2013)]
56. Data protection is narrower than privacy since it is limited to data
alone and does not extend to aspects of privacy that are not
informational. At the same time it is broader than privacy since it covers
all data relating to an identifiable individual and not just information
relatable to an individual's private life [Julianne Kokott & Christoph
Sobotta, 'The distinction between privacy and data protection in the
jurisprudence of the CJEU and the ECtHR' 3(4) International Data Privacy
Law 222-228, at p. 225 (2013)] The difference in scope is apparent from
international instruments relating to data protection and national data
protection laws-these contain provisions that are aimed at facilitating
data flows and not just protecting privacy. It is pertinent to note that the
OECD principles for processing of personal data, which have formed the
basis of several data protection laws, were primarily developed to ensure
uniformity in laws so as to facilitate trans-border data flows and "allow a
full exploitation of the potentialities of modern data processing
technologies insofar as this is desirable" [Explanatory Memorandum to
the OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Trans-border Flows
of Personal Data (1980)]. The OECD principles are:
"Collection Limitation Principle
There should be limits to the collection of personal data and any
such data should be obtained by lawful and fair means and, where
appropriate, with the Knowledge or consent of the data subject.
Data Quality Principle
Personal data should be relevant to the purposes for which they are
to be used, and, to the extent necessary for those purposes, should be
accurate, complete and kept up-to-date.
Purpose Specification Principle
The purposes for which personal data are collected should be
specified not later than at the time of data collection and the
subsequent use limited to the fulfilment of those purposes or such
others as are not
incompatible with those purposes and as are specified on each occasion
of change of purpose.
Use Limitation Principle
Personal data should not be disclosed, made available or otherwise
used for purposes other than those specified in accordance with (the
purpose specification principle) except:
(a) with the consent of the data subject; or
(b) by the authority of law.
Security Safeguards Principle
Personal data should be protected by reasonable security
safeguards against such risks as loss or unauthorised access,
destruction, use, modification or disclosure of data.
Openness Principle
There should be a general policy of openness about developments,
practices and policies with respect to personal data. Means should be
readily available of establishing the existence and nature of personal
data, and the main purposes of their use, as well as the identity and
usual residence of the data controller.
Individual Participation Principle
An individual should have the right:
(a) to obtain from a data controller, or otherwise, confirmation of
whether or not the data controller has data relating to him;
(b) to have communicated to him, data relating to him within a
reasonable time;
at a charge, if any, that is not excessive;
in a reasonable manner; and
in a form that is readily intelligible to him;
(c) to be given reasons if a request made under subparagraphs
(a) and (b) is denied, and to be able to challenge such denial; and
(d) to challenge data relating to him and, if the challenge is
successful to have the data erased, rectified, completed or
amended.
Accountability Principle
A data controller should be accountable for complying with
measures which give effect to the principles stated above.
57. It is apparent that some practices such as ensuring adequate data
quality and openness have little to do with privacy but are rather aimed
at ensuring accuracy such that the data can be effectively used. The aim
of data protection is to ensure fairness in processing of data and it is
sought to be achieved through the principles stated above. Thus, neither
is the correlation between data protection and privacy exact nor is the
former a subset of the
latter. Privacy interest protection is an important rationale of data
protection law, though it has other rationales; while privacy is not limited
to data protection related issues alone.
4.2.2. A comprehensive data protection legislation can address
privacy concerns relating to data
58. Arguing for an intervener, a counsel cited United States V. Jones5
to recommend that privacy protection in the Constitution ought to extend
to public information as well. He quoted Justice Sotomayor's concurring
view:
"More fundamentally, it may be necessary to reconsider the premise
that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy in
information voluntarily disclosed to third parties."
Irrespective of the merits of such a view, the reason why in the United
States such information that is already public is not protected is owing to
the absence of a comprehensive data protection legislation. The Privacy
Act, 1974 only governs personal data in federal government databases.
There is no law that governs collection, use and disclosure of data made
by individuals to private sector data processors. This is a deliberate
regulatory choice, as explained by a White House Report on the subject:
"Despite some important differences, the privacy frameworks in the
United States and those countries following the EU model are both
based on the FIPPs. The European approach, which is based on a view
that privacy is a fundamental human right, generally involves top-
down regulation and the imposition of across-the-board rules
restricting the use of data or requiring explicit consent for that use.
The United States, in contrast, employs a sectoral approach that
focuses on regulating specific risks of privacy harm in particular
contexts, such as health care and credit. This places fewer broad rules
on the use of data, allowing industry to be more innovative in its
products and services, while also sometimes leaving unregulated
potential uses of information that fall between sectors."
[John Podesta et al, Executive Office of the President, 'Big Data : Seizing
Opportunities, Preserving Values, May 2014]
59. Thus in fact, Justice Sotomayor's call for constitutional privacy
protection for publicly available data is a response to the absence of a
comprehensive data protection legislation in the United States of
America. This however is not a model that deserves emulation. As stated
above, a majority of countries regulate the collection, use, disclosure and
other processing of data through data protection legislation. This is
because it is recognised that rules relating to data protection promote
accountability and safeguard against harms from collection, use, sharing,
retention, etc. of personal data.
60. It is humbly submitted that the Constitution cannot provide
detailed provisions of this nature. The Supreme Court has recognised that
matters of detail cannot be provided in the Constitution itself, given it is
the basic law of the land, or statutes flowing from the Constitution. In
D.S. Garewal V. State of Punjab54 while speaking in the context of
regulation of recruitment and conditions of service by means of rules, the
Supreme Court held per Wanchoo, J. (as he then was):
"7
Regulation of recruitment and conditions of service requires
numerous and varied rules, which may have to be changed from time
to time as the exigencies of public service require. This could not be
unknown to the Constitution makers and it is not possible to hold that
the intention of the Constitution was that these numerous and varied
rules should be framed by Parliament itself and that any amendment
of these rules which may be required to meet the difficulties of day-to-
day administration should also be made by Parliament only with all the
attending delay which passing of legislation entails. We are, therefore,
of opinion that in the circumstances of Article 312 it could not have
been the intention of the Constitution that the numerous and varied
provisions that have to be made in order to regulate the recruitment
and the conditions of service of all-India services should all be enacted
as statute law and nothing should be delegated to the executive
authorities "
(emphasis supplied)
61. This has been recognised most clearly in the European Union.
Despite the Charter of Fundamental Rights containing privacy and data
protection rights, the EU has formulated detailed directives on data
protection. The law governing the field has been the EU Data Protection
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24
October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
However on 27-4-2016, the EU adopted a revised framework-Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27-4-
2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing
of personal data and on the free movement of such data. Commonly
known as the European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
its date of entry into force is 25-5-2018.
62. In its Preamble, the GDPR provides:
"(6) Rapid technological developments and globalisation have
brought new challenges for the protection of personal data. The scale
of the collection and sharing of personal data has increased
significantly. Technology allows both private companies and public
authorities to make use of personal data on an unprecedented scale in
order to pursue their
activities. Natural persons increasingly make personal information
available publicly and globally. Technology has transformed both the
economy and social life, and should further facilitate the free flow of
personal data within the Union and the transfer to third countries and
international organisations, while ensuring a high level of the protection
of personal data.
(7) Those developments require a strong and more coherent data
protection framework in the Union, backed by strong enforcement,
given the importance of creating the trust that will allow the digital
economy to develop across the internal market. Natural persons should
have control of their own personal data. Legal and practical certainty
for natural persons, economic operators and public authorities should
be enhanced."
It is a comprehensive regulation covering 99 provisions that deal
with scope of application, legitimate grounds for processing, substantive
obligations on data controllers and processors, rights of individuals to
access, rectification, erasure and objections and establishment of
appropriate enforcement machinery together with imposition of fines
which extend up to 20,000,000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up
to 4% of the total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding financial
year, whichever is higher [Article 83(5)]. It thus comprehensively covers
the fair information practices laid down by the OECO and builds on them
to ensure greater protection of data.
64. The EU GDPR is testament to the proposition that data protection
related concerns are best dealt with comprehensively by legislation
irrespective of whether a right exists in the Constitution in this regard or
not. This is because potential harms to individuals from collection and
use of data could happen in multiple ways and specific procedural and
substantive rules are necessary in order to protect against the same.
4.2.3. Parliament is alive to such data protection concerns
65. The issue of protection of data has been, and continues to be a
topic of consideration in Parliament. A key example of this may be found
in the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 ("the Aadhaar Act"). The Aadhaar Act
contains key data protection principles of informed consent, collection
limitation, purpose specification, use limitation, access and correction,
accountability and data security. The following provisions are relevant:
8. (1) The Authority shall perform authentication of the Aadhaar
number of an Aadhaar number holder submitted by any requesting
entity, in relation to his biometric information or demographic
information, subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees
and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) A requesting entity shall-
(a) unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain the consent of an
individual before collecting his identity information for the purposes of
authentication in such manner as may be specified by regulations; and
(b) ensure that the identity information of an individual is only used
for submission to the Central Identities Data Repository for
authentication.
(3) A requesting entity shall inform, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations, to the individual submitting his identity
information for authentication, the following details with respect to
authentication, namely:
(a) the nature of information that may be shared upon
authentication; (b) the uses to which the information received during
authentication may be put by the requesting entity; and (c)
alternatives to submission of identity information to the requesting
entity."
[Collection Limitation, Use Limitation]
28. (1) The Authority shall ensure the security of identity
information and authentication records of individuals.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall ensure
confidentiality of identity information and authentication records of
individuals.
(3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that
the information in the possession or control of the Authority, including
information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository, is secured
and protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under
this Act or regulations made thereunder, and against accidental or
intentional destruction, loss or damage.
(4) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the Authority
shall-(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and
organisational security measures;
(b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other
personsappointed or engaged for performing any function of the
Authority under this Act, have in place appropriate technical and
organisational security measures for the information; and
(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with
such agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons, impose
obligationsequivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this
Act, and requiresuch agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons
to act only oninstructions from the Authority.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, and save as otherwise provided in this Act, the
Authority or any of its officers or other employees or any agency that
maintains the Central Identities Data Repository shall not, whether
during his service or thereafter, reveal any information stored in the
Central Identities Data Repository or authentication record to anyone:
Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may request the Authority
to provide access to his identity information excluding his core
biometric information in such manner as may be specified by
regulations."
[Security Safeguards Principle]
"29. (1) No core biometric information, collected or created under
this Act, shall be-
(a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or
(b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar
numbers and authentication under this Act.
(2) The identity information, other than core biometric information,
collected or created under this Act may be shared only in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
(3) No identity information available with a requesting entity shall
be-
(a) used for any purpose, other than that specified to the
individual at the time of submitting any identity information for
authentication; or
(b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of the
individual to whom such information relates.
(4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric information collected or
created under this Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder shall be
published, displayed or posted publicly, except for the purposes as
may be specified by regulations.
[Use Limitation; Purpose Specification]
"31. (1) In case any demographic information of an Aadhaar
number holder is found incorrect or changes subsequently, the
Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to alter such
demographic information in his record in the Central Identities Data
Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) In case any biometric information of Aadhaar number holder is
lost or changes subsequently for any reason, the Aadhaar number
holder shall request the Authority to make necessary alteration in his
record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as
may be specified by regulations.
(3) On receipt of any request under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2), the Authority may, if it is satisfied, make such alteration as may
be required in the record relating to such Aadhaar number holder and
intimate such alteration to the concerned Aadhaar number holder.
(4) No identity information in the Central Identities Data Repository
shall be altered except in the manner provided in this Act or
regulations made in this behalf."
[Data Quality Principle; Individual Participation Principle]
"32. (1) The Authority shall maintain authentication records in such
manner and for such period as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Every Aadhaar number holder shall be entitled to obtain
hisauthentication record in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) The Authority shall not, either by itself or through any entity
under its control, collect, keep or maintain any information about the
purpose of authentication."
[Accountability Principle]
66. At the same time, both Parliament and the Union of India are alive
to the fact that concerns relating to data protection go beyond Aadhaar.
Thus a Private Member's Bill was introduced recently on 21-7-2017 on
the subject of data privacy and protection. Further, the Attorney-General
for India mentioned in open court on 18-4-2017 that the Union of India is
actively considering a comprehensive data protection legislation which
should be enacted soon [Karmanya Singh Sareen V. Union of India55].
Since then, the Government has taken several steps towards this end.
67. The aforementioned arguments are only in response to the
argument made by the petitioners and an intervener that significant data
protection concerns necessitate a reading in of a right to privacy in the
Constitution. Such an argument is flawed since data protection concerns
require a comprehensive legislation to be fully tackled. Thus no right
ought to be read into the Constitution on this basis. Without prejudice,
the horizontality of data protection issues means that the manner of
implementing and enforcing any constitutional dimensions of the right be
left to Parliament to decide by law as it is only a comprehensive statute
that can ensure necessary protection.
4.3. Conclusion
68. For the aforementioned reasons, it is humbly submitted that the
Hon'ble Supreme Court be pleased to not read in a general fundamental
right to privacy in the Constitution of India.
The Judgments* of the Court were delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J. (On behalf of Khehar, C.J., Agrawal, J.,
himself and Nazeer, J.; Chelameswar, J., Bobde, J., Nariman, J., Sapre, J.
and Kaul, J. concurring)- - This judgment has been divided into sections
to facilitate analysis. They are:
A.
The reference
B.
Decision in M.P. Sharma
C.
Decision in Kharak Singh2
D.
Gopalan doctrine : Fundamental rights as isolated
silos
E.
Cooper and Maneka 5 : Interrelationship between
rights
F.
Origins of privacy
G.
Natural and inalienable rights
H.
Evolution of the privacy doctrine in India
I.
The Indian Constitution
(i) Preamble
(ii) Jurisprudence on dignity
(iii) Fundamental Rights cases
(iv) No waiver of fundamental rights
(v) Privacy as intrinsic to freedom and liberty
(vi) Discordant Notes:
(i) ADM, Jabalpur6
(ii) Suresh Koushal-
J.
India's commitments under international law
K.
Comparative law on privacy
(i) the UK decisions
(ii) The US Supreme Court decisions
(iii) Constitutional right to privacy in South Africa
(iv) Constitutional right to privacy in Canada
(v) Privacy under the European Convention on
Human Rights and the European Charter
(vi) Decisions of the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights
L.
Criticisms of the privacy doctrine
(a) Thomson's Reductionism
(b) Posner's Economic critique
(c) Bork's critique
(d) Feminist critique
M.
Constituent Assembly and privacy : limits of
originalist interpretation
N.
Is the statutory protection to privacy reason to deny
a constitutional right?
O.
Not an elitist construct
P.
Not just a Common law right
Q.
Substantive due process
R.
Essential nature of privacy
S.
Informational privacy
T.
Conclusions
A. The reference
2. Nine Judges of this Court assembled to determine whether privacy
is a constitutionally protected value. The issue reaches out to the
foundation of a constitutional culture based on the protection of human
rights and enables this Court to revisit the basic principles on which our
Constitution has been founded and their consequences for a way of life it
seeks to protect. This case presents challenges for constitutional
interpretation. If privacy is to be construed as a protected constitutional
value, it would redefine in significant ways our concepts of liberty and the
entitlements that flow out of its protection.
3. Privacy, in its simplest sense, allows each human being to be left
alone in a core which is inviolable. Yet the autonomy of the individual is
conditioned by her relationships with the rest of society. Those
relationships may and do often pose questions to autonomy and free
choice. The overarching presence of State and non-State entities
regulates aspects of social existence which bear upon the freedom of the
individual. The preservation of constitutional liberty is, so to speak, work
in progress. Challenges have to be addressed to existing problems.
Equally, new challenges have to be dealt with in terms of a constitutional
understanding of where liberty places an individual in the context of a
social order. The emergence of new challenges is exemplified by this
case, where the debate on privacy is being analysed in the context of a
global information based society. In an age where information technology
governs virtually every aspect of our lives, the task before the Court is to
impart constitutional meaning to individual liberty in an interconnected
world. While we revisit the question whether our Constitution protects
privacy as an elemental principle, the Court has to be sensitive to the
needs of and the opportunities and dangers posed to liberty in a digital
world.
4. A Bench of three Judges of this Court, while considering the
constitutional challenge to the Aadhaar card scheme of the Union
Government noted in its order dated 11-8-2015 (infra footnote 11) that
the norms for and compilation of demographic biometric data by the
Government was questioned on the ground that it violates the right to
privacy. The Attorney General for India urged that the existence of a
fundamental right to privacy is in doubt in view of two decisions : the
first-M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra ("M.P. Sharma") was rendered by a
Bench of eight Judges and the second, in Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.
2
("Kharak Singh") was rendered by a Bench of six Judges. Each of these
decisions, in the submission of the Attorney General, contained
observations that the Indian Constitution does not specifically protect the
right to privacy. On the other hand, the submission of the petitioners was
that M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh2 were founded on principles
expounded in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras3 ("Gopalan"). Gopalan,
which construed each provision contained in the Chapter on Fundamental
Rights as embodying a distinct protection, was held not to be good law
by an eleven-Judge Bench in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India4
("Cooper"). Hence the petitioners submitted that the basis of the two
earlier decisions is not valid. Moreover, it was also urged that in the
seven-Judge Bench decision in Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India
("Maneka"), the minority judgment of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh2
was specifically approved of and the decision of the majority was
overruled.
5. While addressing these challenges, the Bench of three Judges of
this Court took note of several decisions of this Court in which the right to
privacy has been held to be a constitutionally protected fundamental
right. Those decisions include : Gobind V. State of M.P. 8 ("Gobind"), R.
Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 9 ("Rajagopal") and PUCL V. Union of India0
("PUCL"). These subsequent decisions which affirmed the existence of a
constitutionally protected right to privacy, were rendered by the Benches
of a strength smaller than those in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh.
Faced with this predicament and having due regard to the far-reaching
questions of importance involving interpretation of the Constitution, it
was felt that institutional integrity and judicial discipline would require a
reference to a larger Bench. Hence the Bench of three learned Judges
p. 741, paras 12-13)
"12. We are of the opinion that the cases on hand raise far-reaching
questions of importance involving interpretation of the Constitution.
What is at stake is the amplitude of the fundamental rights including
that precious and inalienable right under Article 21. If the observations
made in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh2 are to be read literally and
accepted as the law of this country, the fundamental rights guaranteed
under the Constitution of India and more particularly right to liberty
under Article 21 would be denuded of vigour and vitality. At the same
time, we are also of the opinion that the institutional integrity and
judicial discipline require that pronouncement made by larger Benches
of this Court cannot be ignored
by the smaller Benches without appropriately explaining the reasons for
not following the pronouncements made by such larger Benches. With
due respect to all the learned Judges who rendered the subsequent
judgments-where right to privacy is asserted or referred to their
Lordships concern for the liberty of human beings, we are of the humble
opinion that there appears to be certain amount of apparent unresolved
contradiction in the law declared by this Court.
13. Therefore, in our opinion to give a quietus to the kind of
controversy raised in this batch of cases once for all, it is better that
the ratio decidendi of M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh2 is scrutinised
and the jurisprudential correctness of the subsequent decisions of this
Court where the right to privacy is either asserted or referred be
examined and authoritatively decided by a Bench of appropriate
strength."
6. On 18-7-2017, a Constitution Bench presided over by the learned
Chief Justice considered it appropriate that the issue be resolved by a
Bench of nine Judges. The order12 of the Constitution Bench reads thus :
"1. During the course of the hearing today, it seems that it has
become essential for us to determine whether there is any
fundamental right to privacy under the Indian Constitution. The
determination of this question would essentially entail whether the
decision recorded by this Court in M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra by
an eight-Judge Constitution Bench, and also, in Kharak Singh V. State
of U.P. 2 by a six-Judge Constitution Bench, that there is no such
fundamental right, is the correct expression of the constitutional
position.
2. Before dealing with the matter any further, we are of the view
that the issue noticed hereinabove deserves to be placed before the
nine-Judge Constitution Bench. List these matters before the nine-
Judge Constitution Bench on 19-7-2017."
7. During the course of hearing, we have been ably assisted on behalf
of the petitioners by Mr Gopal Subramanium, Mr Kapil Sibal, Mr Arvind
Datar, Mr Shyam Divan, Mr Anand Grover, Ms Meenakshi Arora, Mr Sajan
Poovayya and Mr Jayant Bhushan, learned Senior Counsel. Mr J.S. Attri,
learned Senior Counsel supported them on behalf of the State of
Himachal Pradesh. On behalf of the Union of India, the Court has had the
benefit of the erudite submissions of Mr K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General
for India. He has been ably supported by Mr Tushar Mehta, Additional
Solicitor General, Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, Senior Counsel for the State of
Gujarat, Mr Aryama Sundaram for the State of Maharashtra, Mr Gopal
Sankaranarayanan and Dr Arghya Sengupta respectively. While some
State Governments have supported the stand of the Union Government,
others have supported the petitioners.
8. The correctness of the decisions in M.P. Sharma1 and Kharak
Singh, is to be evaluated during the course of the reference. Besides,
the jurisprudential correctness of subsequent decisions holding the right
to privacy to be a constitutionally protected right is to be determined.
The basic question whether privacy is a right protected under our
Constitution requires an understanding of what privacy means. For it is
when we understand what interests or entitlements privacy safeguards,
that we can determine whether the Constitution protects privacy. The
contents of privacy need to be analysed, not by providing an exhaustive
enunciation or catalogue of what it includes but by indicating its broad
contours. The Court has been addressed on various aspects of privacy
including:
(i) Whether there is a constitutionally protected right to privacy;
(ii) If there is a constitutionally protected right, whether this has
the character of an independent fundamental right or whether it arises
from within the existing guarantees of protected rights such as life and
personal liberty;
(iii) the doctrinal foundations of the claim to privacy;
(iv) the content of privacy; and
(v) the nature of the regulatory power of the State.
B. Decision in M.P. Sharma1
9. An investigation was ordered by the Union Government under the
Companies Act into the affairs of a company which was in liquidation on
the ground that it had made an organised attempt to embezzle its funds
and to conceal the true state of its affairs from the shareholders and on
the allegation that the company had indulged in fraudulent transactions
and falsified its records. Offences were registered and search warrants
were issued during the course of which, records were seized. The
challenge was that the searches violated the fundamental rights of the
petitioners under Article 19(1)(f) and Article 20(3) of the Constitution.
The former challenge was rejected. The question which this Court
addressed was whether there was a contravention of Article 20(3). Article
20(3) mandates that no person accused of an offence shall be compelled
to be a witness against himself. Reliance was placed on a judgment13 of
the US Supreme Court holding that obtaining incriminating evidence by
an illegal search and seizure violates the Fourth and Fifth Amendments of
the American Constitution. While tracing the history of the Indian
legislation, this Court observed that provisions for search were contained
in
successive enactments of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Jagannadhadas, J. speaking for the Bench, held that a search or seizure
does not infringe the constitutional right guaranteed by Article 20(3) of
the Constitution : (M.P. Sharma case1, AIR p. 306, para 18 : SCR p.
1096)
"18.
there is no basis in the Indian law for the assumption that a
search or seizure of a thing or document is in itself to be treated as
compelled production of the same. Indeed a little consideration will
show that the two are essentially different matters for the purpose
relevant to the present discussion. A notice to produce is addressed to
the party concerned and his production in compliance therewith
constitutes a testimonial act by him within the meaning of Article 20
(3) as above explained. But a search warrant is addressed to an officer
of the Government, generally a police officer. Neither the search nor
the seizure are acts of the occupier of the searched premises. They are
acts of another to which he is obliged to submit and are, therefore, not
his testimonial acts in any sense."
Having held that the guarantee against self-incrimination is not offended
by a search and seizure, the Court observed that : (AIR pp. 306-07, para
18 : SCR pp. 1096-97)
"18. A power of search and seizure is in any system of
jurisprudence an overriding power of the State for the protection of
social security and that power is necessarily regulated by law. When
the Constitution makers have thought fit not to subject such
regulation to constitutional limitations by recognition of a fundamental
right to privacy, analogous to the Fourth Amendment, we have no
justification to import it, into a totally different fundamental right, by
some process of strained construction. Nor is it legitimate to assume
that the constitutional protection under Article 20(3) would be
defeated by the statutory provisions for searches."
(emphasis supplied)
10. These observations-to be more precise in one sentence-
indicating that the Constitution makers did not subject the regulation by
law of the power of search and seizure to a fundamental right to privacy,
similar to the Fourth Amendment of the US Constitution, have been
pressed in aid to question the existence of a protected right to privacy
under our Constitution.
C. Decision in Kharak Singh
11. After being challaned in a case of dacoity in 1941, Kharak Singh
was released for want of evidence. But the police compiled a "history
sheet" against him. "History sheets" were defined in Regulation 228 of
Chapter XX of the U.P. Police Regulations as "the personal records of
criminals under surveillance". Kharak Singh, who was subjected to
regular surveillance, including midnight knocks, moved this Court for a
declaration that his fundamental rights were infringed. Among the
measures of surveillance contemplated by Regulation 236 were the
following : (AIR p. 1299, para 7)
"(a) Secret picketing of the house or approaches to the houses of
suspects;
(b) domiciliary visits at night;
(c) thorough periodical inquiries by officers not below the rank of
sub-inspector into repute, habits, associations, income, expenses and
occupation;
(d) the reporting by constables and chaukidars of movements and
absences from home;
(e) the verification of movements and absences by means of inquiry
slips;
(f) the collection and record on a history-sheet of all information
bearing on conduct."
This Court held that the freedom to move freely throughout the territory
of India, guaranteed by Article 19(1)(d) was not infringed by a midnight
knock on the door of the petitioner since "his locomotion is not impeded
or prejudiced in any manner".
12. When the decision in Kharak Singh was handed down, the
principles governing the interrelationship between the rights protected by
Article 19 and the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 were
governed by the judgment in Gopalan. Gopalan considered each of the
articles in the Chapter on Fundamental rights as embodying distinct (as
opposed to overlapping) freedoms. Hence in Kharak Singh, the Court
observed : (AIR p. 1301, para 15 : SCR p. 345)
"15.
In view of the very limited nature of the question before us it
is unnecessary to pause to consider either the precise relationship
between the "liberties" in Articles 19(1)(a) and (d) on the one hand
and that in Article 21 on the other, or the content and significance of
the words "procedure established by law" in the latter Article, both of
which were the subject of elaborate consideration by this Court in A.K.
Gopalan V. State of Madras."
13. The decision in Kharak Singh 2 held that clause (b) of Regulation
236 which provided for domiciliary visits at night was violative of Article
21. The Court observed : (AIR p. 1302, para 17 : SCR pp. 347-48)
"17.
Is then the word "personal liberty" to be construed as
excluding from its purview an invasion on the part of the police of the
sanctity of a man's home and an intrusion into his personal security
and his right to sleep which is the normal comfort and a dire necessity
for human existence even as an animal? It might not be inappropriate
to refer here to the words of the Preamble to the Constitution that it is
designed to "assure the dignity of the individual" and therefore of
those cherished human values as the means of ensuring his full
development and evolution. We are referring to these objectives of the
Framers merely to draw attention to the concepts underlying the
Constitution which would point to such vital words as "personal
liberty" having to be construed in a reasonable manner and to be
&
attributed that sense which would promote and achieve those
objectives
and by no means to stretch the meaning of the phrase to square with any
pre-conceived notions or doctrinaire constitutional theories."
14. In taking this view, Rajagopala Ayyangar, J. speaking for a
majority of five Judges, relied upon the judgment of Frankfurter, J.
speaking for the US Supreme Court in Wolf V. Colorado4, which held :
(Kharak Singh case, AIR p. 1302, para 17 : SCR p. 348)
"17.
'6. The security of one's privacy against arbitrary intrusion
by the police
is basic to a free society.
7.
We have no hesitation in saying that were a State affirmatively
to sanction such police incursion into privacy it would run counter to
OnLine US SC paras 6-7)"
(emphasis supplied)
While the Court observed that the Indian Constitution does not contain a
guarantee similar to the Fourth Amendment of the US Constitution, it
proceeded to hold that : (Kharak Singh case, AIR pp. 1302-03, para
18 : SCR p. 349)
"18.
Nevertheless, these extracts would show that any
unauthorised intrusion into a person's home and the disturbance
caused to him thereby, is as it were the violation of a common law
right of a man-an ultimate essential of ordered liberty, if not of the
very concept of civilisation. An English Common Law maxim asserts
that "every man's house is his castle" and in Semayne case15 15 where
this was applied, it was stated that "the house of everyone is to him as
his castle and fortress as well as for his defence against injury and
violence as for his repose". We are not unmindful of the fact that
Semayne case15 was concerned with the law relating to executions in
England, but the passage extracted has a validity quite apart from the
context of the particular decision. It embodies an abiding principle
which transcends mere protection of property rights and expounds a
concept of "personal liberty" which does not rest on any element of
feudalism or on any theory of freedom which has ceased to be of
value."
(emphasis supplied)
15. Kharak Singh2 regards the sanctity of the home and the protection
against unauthorised intrusion an integral element of "ordered liberty".
This is comprised in "personal liberty" guaranteed by Article 21. The
decision invalidated domiciliary visits at night authorised by Regulation
236(b), finding them to be an unauthorised intrusion into the home of a
person and a violation of the fundamental right to personal liberty.
However, while considering the validity of clauses (c), (d) and (e) which
provided for periodical enquiries, reporting by law-enforcement personnel
and verification of movements, this Court held as follows : (AIR p. 1303,
para 20 : SCR p. 351)
"20.
the freedom guaranteed by Article 19(1)(d) is not infringed
by a watch being kept over the movements of the suspect. Nor do we
consider that Article 21 has any relevance in the context as was
sought to be suggested by learned counsel for the petitioner. As
already pointed out, the right to privacy is not a guaranteed right
under our Constitution and therefore the attempt to ascertain the
movements of an individual which is merely a manner in which privacy
is invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed by
Part III."
(emphasis supplied)
In the context of clauses (c), (d) and (e), the above extract indicates the
view of the majority that the right to privacy is not guaranteed under the
Constitution.
16. Subba Rao, J. dissented. Subba Rao, J. held that the rights
conferred by Part III have overlapping areas. Where a law is challenged
as infringing the right to freedom of movement under Article 19(1)(d)
and the liberty of the individual under Article 21, it must satisfy the tests
laid down in Article 19(2) as well as the requirements of Article 21.
Subba Rao, J. held that : (Kharak Singh case AIR p. 1305, para 30 :
SCR pp. 356-57)
"30.
No doubt the expression "personal liberty" is a
comprehensive one and the right to move freely is an attribute of
personal liberty. It is said that the freedom to move freely is carved
out of personal liberty and, therefore, the expression "personal liberty"
in Article 21 excludes that attribute. In our view, this is not a correct
approach. Both are independent fundamental rights, though there is
overlapping. There is no question of one being carved out of another.
The fundamental right of life and personal liberty have many attributes
and some of them are found in Article 19. If a person's fundamental
right under Article 21 is infringed, the State can rely upon a law to
sustain the action; but that cannot be a complete answer unless the
said law satisfies the test laid down in Article 19(2) so far as the
attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned. In other words, the
State must satisfy that both the fundamental rights are not infringed
by showing that there is a law and that it does amount to a reasonable
restriction within the meaning of Article 19(2) of the Constitution. But
in this case no such defence is available, as admittedly there is no
such law. So the petitioner can legitimately plead that his fundamental
rights both under Article 19(1)(d) and Article 21 are infringed by the
State."
17. Subba Rao, J. held that Article 21 embodies the right of the
individual to be free from restrictions or encroachments. In this view,
though the Constitution does not expressly declare the right to privacy as
a fundamental right, such a right is essential to personal liberty. The
dissenting opinion places the matter of principle as follows : (Kharak
Singh case, AIR pp. 1305-06, para 31 : SCR pp. 358-59)
"31.
In an uncivilised society where there are no inhibitions, only
physical restraints may detract from personal liberty, but as civilisation
advances the psychological restraints are more effective than physical
ones. The scientific methods used to condition a man's mind are in a real
sense physical restraints, for they engender physical fear channelling
one's actions through anticipated and expected grooves. So also the
creation of conditions which necessarily engender inhibitions and fear
complexes can be described as physical restraints. Further, the right to
personal liberty takes in not only a right to be free from restrictions
placed on his movements, but also free from encroachments on his
private life. It is true our Constitution does not expressly declare a right
to privacy as a fundamental right, but the said right is an essential
ingredient of personal liberty. Every democratic country sanctifies
domestic life; it is expected to give him rest, physical happiness, peace
of mind and security. In the last resort, a person's house, where he lives
with his family, is his "castle"; it is his rampart against encroachment on
his personal liberty. The pregnant words of that famous Judge,
Frankfurter, J., in Wolf V. Colorado4 pointing out the importance of the
security of one's privacy against arbitrary intrusion by the police, could
have no less application to an Indian home as to an American one. If
physical restraints on a person's movements affect his personal liberty,
physical encroachments on his private life would affect it in a larger
degree. Indeed, nothing is more deleterious to a man's physical
happiness and health than a calculated interference with his privacy. We
would, therefore, define the right of personal liberty in Article 21 as a
right of an individual to be free from restrictions or encroachments on his
person, whether those restrictions or encroachments are directly imposed
or indirectly brought about by calculated measures. If so understood, all
the acts of surveillance under Regulation 236 infringe the fundamental
right of the petitioner under Article 21 of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
18. Significantly, both Rajagopala Ayyangar, J. for the majority and
Subba Rao, J. in his dissent rely upon the observations of Frankfurter, J.
in Wolf V. Colorado4 which specifically advert to privacy. The majority,
while relying upon them to invalidate domiciliary visits at night, regards
the sanctity of the home as part of ordered liberty. In the context of other
provisions of the regulation, the majority declines to recognise a right to
privacy as a constitutional protection. Subba Rao, J. recognised a
constitutionally protected right to privacy, considering it as an ingredient
of personal liberty.
D. Gopalan doctrine : Fundamental rights as isolated silos
19. When eight Judges of this Court rendered the decision in M.P.
Sharma in 1954 and later, six Judges decided the controversy in Kharak
Singh2 in 1962, the ascendant and, even well-established, doctrine
governing the fundamental rights contained in Part III was founded on
Gopalan3 principle. In Gopalan, Kania, C.J. speaking for a majority of
five of the Bench of six Judges, construed the relationship between
Articles 19 and 21 to be one of mutual exclusion. In
this line of enquiry, what was comprehended by Article 19 was excluded
from Article 21. The seven freedoms of Article 19 were not subsumed in
the fabric of life or personal liberty in Article 21. The consequence was
that a law which curtailed one of the freedoms guaranteed by Article 19
would be required to answer the tests of reasonableness prescribed by
clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 and those alone. In Gopalan perspective,
free speech and expression was guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) and was
hence excluded from personal liberty under Article 21. Article 21 was but
a residue. Kania, C.J. held : (AIR pp. 36-37, para 11)
"11. Reading Article 19 in that way it appears to me that the
concept of the right to move freely throughout the territory of India is
an entirely different concept from the right to "personal liberty"
contemplated by Article 21. "Personal liberty" covers many more rights
in one sense and has a restricted meaning in another sense. For
instance, while the right to move or reside may be covered by the
expression, "personal liberty" the right to freedom of speech
[mentioned in Article 19(1)(a)] or the right to acquire, hold or dispose
of property [mentioned in 19(1)(f)] cannot be considered a part of the
personal liberty of a citizen. They form part of the liberty of a citizen
but the limitation imposed by the word "personal" leads me to believe
that those rights are not covered by the expression personal liberty. So
read there is no conflict between Articles 19 and 21. The contents and
subject-matters of Articles 19 and 21 are thus not the same and they
proceed to deal with the rights covered by their respective words from
totally different angles. As already mentioned in respect of each of the
rights specified in sub-clauses of Article 19(1) specific limitations in
respect of each is provided, while the expression "personal liberty" in
Article 21 is generally controlled by the general expression "procedure
established by law"."
"Procedure established by law" under Article 21 was, in this view, not
capable of being expanded to include the "due process of law". Fazl Ali, J.
dissented. The dissent adopted the view that the fundamental rights are
not isolated and separate but protect a common thread of liberty and
freedom : (Gopalan case AIR pp. 52-53, para 58)
"58. To my mind, the scheme of the Chapter dealing with the
fundamental rights does not contemplate what is attributed to it,
namely, that each article is a code by itself and is independent of the
others. In my opinion, it cannot be said that Articles 19, 20, 21 and 22
do not to some extent overlap each other. The case of a person who is
convicted of an offence will come under Articles 20 and 21 and also
under Article 22 so far as his arrest and detention in custody before
trial are concerned. Preventive detention, which is dealt with in Article
22, also amounts to deprivation of personal liberty which is referred to
in Article 21, and is a violation of the right of freedom of movement
dealt with in Article 19(1)(d).
It seems
clear that the addition of the word "personal" before "liberty" in Article 21
cannot change the meaning of the words used in Article 19, nor can it put
a matter which is inseparably bound up with personal liberty beyond its
place."
20. In Satwant Singh Sawhney V. D. Ramarathnam ("Satwant Singh
Sawhney"), Hidayatullah, J. speaking for himself and R.S. Bachawat, J. in
the dissenting view noticed the clear lines of distinction between the
dissent of Subba Rao, J. and the view of the majority in Kharak Singh2.
The observations of Hidayatullah, J. indicate that if the right of
locomotion is embodied by Article 21 of which one aspect is covered by
Article 19(1)(d), that would in fact advance the minority view in Kharak
Singh2 : (Satwant Singh case6, AIR pp. 1851-52, para 61 : SCR p. 554)
"61. Subba Rao J. (as he then was) read personal liberty as the
antithesis of physical restraint or coercion and found that Articles 19
(1) and 21 overlapped and Article 19(1)(d) was not carved out of
personal liberty in Article 21. According to him, personal liberty could
be curtailed by law, but that law must satisfy the test in Article 19(2)
insofar as the specific rights in Article 19(1) are concerned. In other
words, the State must satisfy that both the fundamental rights are not
infringed by showing that there is a law and that it does not amount to
an unreasonable restriction within the meaning of Article 19(2) of the
Constitution. As in that case there was no law, fundamental rights,
both under Article 19(1)(d) and Article 21 were held to be infringed.
The learned Chief Justice has read into the decision of the Court a
meaning which it does not intend to convey. He excludes from Article
21 the right to free motion and locomotion within the territories of
India and puts the right to travel abroad in Article 21. He wants to see
a law and if his earlier reasoning were to prevail, the law should stand
the test of Article 19(2). But since clause (2) deals with matters in
Article 19(1) already held excluded, it is obvious that it will not apply.
The law which is made can only be tested on the ground of articles
other than Article 19 such as Articles 14, 20 and 22 which alone bears
upon this matter. In other words, the majority decision of the Court in
this case has rejected Ayyangar, J.'s view and accepted the view of the
minority in Kharak Singh case, This view obviously clashes with the
reading of Article 21 in Kharak Singh case, because there the right of
motion and locomotion was held to be excluded from Article 21. In
other words, the present decision advances the minority view in
Kharak Singh case above the majority view stated in that case."
E.
Cooper and Maneka5 : Interrelationship between rights
The surest way t to legal research!
21. The theory that the fundamental rights are watertight
compartments was discarded in the judgment of eleven Judges of this
Court in Cooper4. Gopalan3 had adopted the view that a law of preventive
detention would be tested for its validity only with reference to Article 22,
which was a complete code relating to the subject. Legislations on
preventive detention did not, in this view, have to meet the touchstone of
Article 19(1)(d). The dissenting view of Fazl Ali, J. in Gopalan was
noticed by J.C. Shah, J. speaking for this Court, in Cooper4 The
consequence of the Gopalan doctrine was that the protection afforded by
a guarantee of personal freedom would be decided by the object of the
State action in relation to the right of the individual and not upon its
effect upon the guarantee. Disagreeing with this view, the Court in
"52.
it is necessary to bear in mind the enunciation of the
guarantee of fundamental rights which has taken different forms. In
some cases it is an express declaration of a guaranteed right : Articles
29(1), 30(1), 26, 25 and 32; in others to ensure protection of
individual rights they take specific forms of restrictions on State
action-legislative or executive-Articles 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22(1), 27
and 28; in some others, it takes the form of a positive declaration and
simultaneously enunciates the restriction thereon : Articles 19(1) and
19(2) to (6); in some cases, it arises as an implication from the
delimitation of the authority of the State, e.g. Articles 31(1) and 31
(2); in still others, it takes the form of a general prohibition against
the State as well as others : Articles 17, 23 and 24. The enunciation of
rights either express or by implication does not follow a uniform
pattern. But one thread runs through them : they seek to protect the
rights of the individual or groups of individuals against infringement of
those rights within specific limits. Part III of the Constitution weaves a
pattern of guarantees on the texture of basic human rights. The
guarantees delimit the protection of those rights in their allotted
fields : they do not attempt to enunciate distinct rights."
(emphasis supplied)
22. The abrogation of Gopalan doctrine in Cooper4 was revisited in a
seven-Judge Bench decision in P.N. Bhagwati, J. who delivered
the leading opinion of three Judges held that the judgment in Cooper4
affirms the dissenting opinion of Subba Rao, J. (in Kharak Singh as
expressing the valid constitutional position. Hence in Maneka5, the Court
"5.
It was in Kharak Singh V. State of U.P.2 that the question as
to the proper scope and meaning of the expression "personal liberty"
came up
pointedly for consideration for the first time before this Court. The
majority of the Judges took the view : (AIR p. 1302, para 17)
`17.
that "personal liberty" is used in the article as a
compendious term to include within itself all the varieties of rights
which go to make up the "personal liberties" of man other than
those dealt with in the several clauses of Article 19(1). In other
words, while Article 19(1) deals with particular species or attributes
of that freedom, "personal liberty" in Article 21 takes in and
comprises the residue.'
The minority Judges, however, disagreed with this view taken by the majority and
explained their position in the following words : (AIR p. 1305, para 30)
'30.
No doubt the expression "personal liberty" is a
comprehensive one and the right to move freely is an attribute of
personal liberty. It is said that the freedom to move freely is carved
out of personal liberty and, therefore, the expression "personal liberty"
in Article 21 excludes that attribute. In our view, this is not a correct
approach. Both are independent fundamental rights, though there is
overlapping. There is no question of one being carved out of another.
The fundamental right of life and personal liberty has many attributes
and some of them are found in Article 19. If a person's fundamental
right under Article 21 is infringed, the State can rely upon a law to
sustain the action, but that cannot be a complete answer unless the
said law satisfies the test laid down in Article 19(2) so far as the
attributes covered by Article 19(1) are concerned."
There can be no doubt that in view of the decision of this Court in Rustom
Cavasjee Cooper V. Union of India4 the minority view must be regarded as correct
and the majority view must be held to have been overruled."
(emphasis supplied)
23. Following the decision in Maneka5, the established constitutional
doctrine is that the expression "personal liberty" in Article 21 covers a
variety of rights, some of which "have been raised to the status of
distinct fundamental rights" and given additional protection under Article
19. Consequently, in Satwant Singh Sawhney16, the right to travel
abroad was held to be subsumed within Article 21 as a consequence of
which any deprivation of that right could be only by a "procedure
established by law". Prior to the enactment of the Passports Act, 1967,
there was no law regulating the right to travel abroad as a result of which
the order of the Passport Officer refusing a passport was held to
be
invalid. The decision in Maneka carried the constitutional principle of the
overlapping nature of fundamental rights to its logical conclusion.
Reasonableness which is the foundation of the guarantee against
arbitrary State action under Article 14 infuses Article 21. A law which
provides for a
deprivation of life or personal liberty under Article 21 must lay down not
just any procedure but a procedure which is fair, just and reasonable.
24. The decisions in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh 2 adopted a
doctrinal position on the relationship between Articles 19 and 21, based
on the view of the majority in Gopalan. This view stands abrogated
particularly by the judgment in Cooper4 and the subsequent statement of
doctrine in Maneka5. The decision in Maneka 5, in fact, expressly
recognised that it is the dissenting judgment of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak
Singh2 which represents the exposition of the correct constitutional
principle. The jurisprudential foundation which held the field sixty-three
years ago in M.P. Sharma and fifty-five years ago in Kharak Singh2 has
given way to what is now a settled position in constitutional law. Firstly,
the fundamental rights emanate from basic notions of liberty and dignity
and the enumeration of some facets of liberty as distinctly protected
rights under Article 19 does not denude Article 21 of its expansive ambit.
Secondly, the validity of a law which infringes the fundamental rights has
to be tested not with reference to the object of State action but on the
basis of its effect on the guarantees of freedom. Thirdly, the requirement
of Article 14 that State action must not be arbitrary and must fulfil the
requirement of reasonableness, imparts meaning to the constitutional
guarantees in Part III.
25. The doctrinal invalidation of the basic premise underlying the
decisions in M.P. Sharma and Kharak Singh still leaves the issue of
whether privacy is a right protected by Part III of the Constitution open
for consideration. There are observations in both decisions that the
Constitution does not contain a specific protection of the right to privacy.
Presently, the matter can be looked at from the perspective of what
actually was the controversy in the two cases.
26. M.P. Sharma was a case where a law prescribing a search to
obtain documents for investigating into offences was challenged as being
contrary to the guarantee against self-incrimination in Article 20(3). The
Court repelled the argument that a search for documents compelled a
person accused of an offence to be witness against himself. Unlike a
notice to produce documents, which is addressed to a person and whose
compliance would constitute a testimonial act, a search warrant and a
seizure which follows are not testimonial acts of a person to whom the
warrant is addressed, within the meaning of Article 20(3). The Court
having held this, the controversy in M.P. Sharma would rest at that. The
observations in M.P. Sharma to the effect that the Constitution makers
had not thought it fit to subject the regulatory power of search and
seizure to constitutional limitations by recognising a fundamental right to
privacy (like the US Fourth Amendment), and that there was no
justification to import it into a "totally different fundamental right" are at
the highest, stray observations.
27. The decision in M.P. Sharma held that in the absence of a
provision like the Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution, a right to
privacy cannot be read into the Indian Constitution. The decision in M.P.
Sharma1 did not decide whether a constitutional right to privacy is
protected by other provisions contained in the fundamental rights
including among them, the right to life and personal liberty under Article
21. Hence the decision cannot be construed to specifically exclude the
protection of privacy under the framework of protected guarantees
including those in Articles 19 or 21. The absence of an express
constitutional guarantee of privacy still begs the question whether
privacy is an element of liberty and, as an integral part of human dignity,
is comprehended within the protection of life as well.
28. The decision in Kharak Singh2 is noteworthy because while
invalidating Regulation 236(b) of the Police Regulations which provided
for nightly domiciliary visits, the majority construed this to be an
unauthorised intrusion into a person's home and a violation of ordered
liberty. While arriving at this conclusion, the majority placed reliance on
the privacy doctrine enunciated by Frankfurter, J. speaking for the US
Supreme Court in Wolf V. Colorado4 (the extract from Wolf14 cited in the
majority judgment specifically adverts to "privacy" twice). Having relied
on this doctrine to invalidate domiciliary visits, the majority in Kharak
Singh2 proceeded to repel the challenge to other clauses of Regulation
236 on the ground that the right to privacy is not guaranteed under the
Constitution and hence Article 21 had no application. This part of the
judgment in Kharak Singh2 is inconsistent with the earlier part of the
decision. The decision of the majority in Kharak Singh suffers from an
internal inconsistency.
F. Origins of privacy
29. An evaluation of the origins of privacy is essential in order to
understand whether (as the Union of India postulates), the concept is so
amorphous as to defy description. The submission of the Government is
that the Court cannot recognise a juristic concept which is so vague and
uncertain that it fails to withstand constitutional scrutiny. This makes it
necessary to analyse the origins of privacy and to trace its evolution.
30. The Greek philosopher Aristotle spoke of a division between the
public sphere of political affairs (which he termed the polis) and the
personal sphere of human life (termed oikos). This dichotomy may
provide an early recognition of "a confidential zone on behalf of the
citizen"7. Aristotle's distinction between the public and private realms
can be regarded as providing a basis for restricting governmental
authority to activities falling within the public realm. On the
other hand, activities in the private realm are more appropriately
reserved for "private reflection, familial relations and self-
determination "18
31. At a certain level, the evolution of the doctrine of privacy has
followed the public-private distinction. William Blackstone in his
Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765) spoke about this
distinction while dividing wrongs into private wrongs and public wrongs.
Private wrongs are an infringement merely of particular rights concerning
individuals and are in the nature of civil injuries. Public wrongs constitute
a breach of general and public rights affecting the whole community and
according to him, are called crimes and misdemeanours.
32. John Stuart Mill in his essay, On Liberty (1859) gave expression to
the need to preserve a zone within which the liberty of the citizen would
be free from the authority of the State. According to Mill:
"The only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable
to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely
concerns himself, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself,
over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.
While speaking of a "struggle between liberty and authority"20, , Mill
posited that the tyranny of the majority could be reined by the
recognition of civil rights such as the individual right to privacy, free
speech, assembly and expression.
33. Austin in his Lectures on Jurisprudence (1869) spoke of the
distinction between the public and the private realms : jus publicum and
jus privatum. The distinction between the public and private realms has
its limitations. If the reason for protecting privacy is the dignity of the
individual, the rationale for its existence does not cease merely because
the individual has to interact with others in the public arena. The extent
to which an individual expects privacy in a public street may be different
from that which she expects in the sanctity of the home. Yet if dignity is
the underlying feature, the basis of recognising the right to privacy is not
denuded in public spaces. The extent of permissible State regulation
may, however, differ based on the legitimate concerns of governmental
authority.
34. James Madison, who was the architect of the American
Constitution, contemplated the protection of the faculties of the citizen as
an incident of the inalienable property rights of human beings. In his
words:
"In the former sense, a man's land, or merchandize, or money is
called his property. In the latter sense, a man has property in his
opinions and the free communication of them
He has an equal property interest in the free use of his faculties and
free choice of the objects on which to employ them. In a word, as a
man is said to have a right to his property, he may be equally said to
have a property in his rights. Where an excess of power prevails,
property of no sort is duly
respected. No man is safe in his opinions, his person, his faculties or his
possessions
Conscience is the most sacred of all property; other property
depending in part on positive law, the exercise of that, being a natural
and inalienable right. To guard a man's house as his castle, to pay
public and enforce private debts with the most exact faith, can give no
title to invade a man's conscience which is more sacred than his
castle, or to withhold from it that debt of protection, for which the
public faith is pledged, by the very nature and original conditions of
the social pact. ,21
Madison traced the recognition of an inviolable zone to an inalienable
right to property. Property is construed in the broadest sense to include
tangibles and intangibles and ultimately to control over one's conscience
itself.
35. In an article published on 15-12-1890 in the Harvard Law Review,
Samuel D. Warren and Louis Brandeis adverted to the evolution of the
law to incorporate within it, the right to life as "a recognition of man's
spiritual nature, of his feelings and his intellect"2. As legal rights were
broadened, the right to life had "come to mean the right to enjoy life-
the right to be let alone". Recognising that "only a part of the pain,
pleasure and profit of life lay in physical things" and that "thoughts,
emotions, and sensations demanded legal recognition", Warren and
Brandeis revealed with a sense of perspicacity the impact of technology
on the right to be let alone:
"Recent inventions and business methods call attention to the next
step which must be taken for the protection of the person, and for
securing to the individual what Judge Cooley calls the right "to be let
alone". Instantaneous photographs and newspaper enterprise have
invaded the sacred precincts of private and domestic life; and
numerous mechanical devices threaten to make good the prediction
that "what is whispered in the closet shall be proclaimed from the
house-tops". For years there has been a feeling that the law must
afford some remedy for the unauthorized circulation of portraits of
private persons
The intensity and complexity of life, attendant upon advancing
civilisation, have rendered necessary some retreat from the world, and
man, under the refining influence of culture, has become more
sensitive to publicity, so that solitude and privacy have become more
essential to the individual; but modern enterprise and invention have,
through invasions upon his privacy, subjected him to mental pain and
distress, far greater than could be inflicted by mere bodily injury."23
In their seminal article, Warren and Brandeis observed that:
"The principle which protects personal writings and all other
personal productions, not against theft and physical appropriation, but
against publication in any form, is in reality not the principle of private
property, but that of an inviolate personality."24
(emphasis supplied)
The right "to be let alone" thus represented a manifestation of "an
inviolate personality", a core of freedom and liberty from which the
human being had to be free from intrusion. The technology which
provided a justification for the need to preserve the privacy of the
individual was the development of photography. The right to be let alone
was not so much an incident of property as a reflection of the inviolable
nature of the human personality.
36. The ringing observations of Warren and Brandeis on the impact of
technology have continued relevance today in a globalised world
dominated by the internet and information technology. As societies have
evolved, so have the connotations and ambit of privacy.
37. Though many contemporary accounts attribute the modern
conception of the "right to privacy" to the Warren and Brandeis article,
historical material indicates that it was Thomas Cooley who adopted the
phrase "the right to be let alone", in his Treatise on the Law of Torts25
Discussing personal immunity, Cooley stated:
"the right of one's person may be said to be a right of complete
immunity; the right to be alone". 26
38. Roscoe Pound described the Warren and Brandeis article as having
done "nothing less than add a chapter to our law"27. However, another
writer on the subject states that:
"This right to privacy was not new. Warren and Brandeis did not
even coin the phrase, "right to privacy", nor its common soubriquet,
"the right to be let alone"."28
The right to be let alone is a part of the right to enjoy life. The right to
enjoy life is, in its turn, a part of the fundamental right to life of the
individual.
39. The right to privacy was developed by Warren and Brandeis in the
backdrop of the dense urbanisation which occurred particularly in the
East Coast of the United States. Between 1790 and 1890, the US
population had risen from four million to sixty-three million. The
population of urban areas
had grown over a hundred-fold since the end of the Civil War. In 1890,
over eight million people had immigrated to the US. Technological
progress and rapid innovations had led to the private realm being placed
under stress:
" technological progress during the post-Civil War decades had
brought to Boston and the rest of the United States "countless. little-
noticed revolutions" in the form of a variety of inventions which made
the personal lives and personalities of individuals increasingly
accessible to large numbers of others, irrespective of acquaintance,
social or economic class, or the customary constraints of propriety. Bell
invented the telephone in Boston; the first commercial telephone
exchange opened there in 1877, while Warren and Brandeis were
students at the Harvard Law School. By 1890 there were also
telegraphs, fairly inexpensive portable cameras, sound recording
devices, and better and cheaper methods of making window glass.
Warren and Brandeis recognised that these advances in technology,
coupled with intensified newspaper enterprise, increased the
vulnerability of individuals to having their actions, words, images, and
personalities communicated without their consent beyond the
protected circle of family and chosen friends."29
Coupled with this was the trend towards "newspaperisation"20, , the
increasing presence of the print media in American society. Six months
before the publication of the Warren and Brandeis' article, E.L. Godkin, a
newspaper man had published an article on the same subject in
Scribner's magazine in July 1890. Godkin, however, suggested no
realistic remedy for protecting privacy against intrusion, save and except
"by the cudgel or the horsewhip"31. It was Warren and Brandeis who
advocated the use of the Common law to vindicate the right to privacy.
32
40. Criminal libel actions were resorted to in the US during a part of
the nineteenth century but by 1890, they had virtually ceased to be "a
viable protection for individual privacy"33. The Sedition Act of 1789
expired in 1801. Before truth came to be accepted as a defence in
defamation actions, criminal libel prosecutions flourished in the State
courts. 34 Similarly, truth was not regarded as a valid defence to a civil
libel action in much of the nineteenth century. By the time Warren and
Brandeis wrote their article in 1890, publication of the truth was perhaps
no longer actionable under the law of defamation. It was this breach or
lacuna that they sought to fill up by speaking of the right to privacy
which would protect the control of the individual over her personality.
35
The right to privacy evolved as a "leitmotif" representing "the long
tradition of American individualism". 36
41. Conscious as we are of the limitations with which comparative
frameworks37 of law and history should be evaluated, the above account
is of significance. It reflects the basic need of every individual to live with
dignity. Urbanisation and economic development lead to a replacement of
traditional social structures. Urban ghettos replace the tranquillity of self-
sufficient rural livelihoods. The need to protect the privacy of the being is
no less when development and technological change continuously
threaten to place the person into public gaze and portend to submerge
the individual into a seamless web of interconnected lives.
G. Natural and inalienable rights
42. Privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to exercise
control over his or her personality. It finds an origin in the notion that
there are certain rights which are natural to or inherent in a human
being. Natural rights are inalienable because they are inseparable from
the human personality. The human element in life is impossible to
conceive without the existence of natural rights. In 1690, John Locke had
in his Second Treatise of Government observed that the lives, liberties
and estates of individuals are as a matter of fundamental natural law, a
private preserve. The idea of a private preserve was to create barriers
from outside interference. In 1765, William Blackstone in his
Commentaries on the Laws of England spoke of a "natural liberty". There
were, in his view, absolute rights which were vested in the individual by
the immutable laws of nature. These absolute rights were divided into
rights of personal security, personal liberty and property. The right of
personal security involved a legal and uninterrupted enjoyment of life,
limbs, body, health and reputation by an individual.
43. The notion that certain rights are inalienable was embodied in the
American Declaration of Independence (1776) in the following terms:
"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."
(emphasis supplied)
The term "inalienable rights" was incorporated in the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789) adopted by the French National
Assembly in the following terms:
"For its drafters, to ignore, to forget or to depreciate the rights of
man are the sole causes of public misfortune and government
corruption. These rights are natural rights, inalienable and sacred, the
National Assembly recognizes and proclaims them-it does not grant,
concede or establish them-and their conservation is the reason for all
political communities; within these rights figures resistance to
oppression."
(emphasis supplied)
44. In 1921, Roscoe Pound, in his work titled The Spirit of the
Common Law, explained the meaning of natural rights:
"Natural rights mean simply interests which we think ought to be
secured; demands which human beings may make which we think
ought to be satisfied. It is perfectly true that neither law nor State
creates them. But it is fatal to all sound thinking to treat them as legal
conceptions. For legal rights, the devices which law employs to secure
such of these interests as it is expedient to recognize, are the work of
the law and in that sense the work of the State."38
Two decades later in 1942, Pound in The Revival of Natural Law
propounded that:
"Classical natural law in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
had three postulates. One was natural rights, qualities of the ideal or
perfect man in a state of perfection by virtue of which he ought to
have certain things or be able to do certain things. These were a
guarantee of stability because the natural rights were taken to be
immutable and inalienable. (2) The social compact, a postulated
contract basis of civil society. Here was a guide to change. (3) An ideal
law of which positive laws were only declaratory; an ideal body of
perfect precepts governing human relations and ordering human
conduct, guaranteeing the natural rights and expressing the social
compact. 1139
(emphasis supplied)
45. In 1955, Edwin W. Patterson in A Pragmatist Looks at Natural Law
and Natural Rights observed that rights which individuals while making a
social compact to create a government, reserve to themselves, are
natural rights because they originate in a condition of nature and survive
the social compact. In his words:
"The basic rights of the citizen in our political society are regarded
as continuing from a prepolitical condition or as arising in society
independently of positive constitutions, statutes, and judicial
decisions, which merely seek to "secure" or "safeguard" rights already
reserved. These rights are not granted by a benevolent despot to his
grateful subjects. The "natural rights" theory thus provided a
convenient ideology for the preservation of such important rights as
freedom of speech, freedom of religion and procedural due process of
law. As a pragmatist, I should
prefer to explain them as individual and social interests which arise or
exist normally in our culture and are tuned into legal rights by being
legally protected."
46. Natural rights are not bestowed by the State. They inhere in
human beings because they are human. They exist equally in the
individual irrespective of class or strata, gender or orientation.
47. Distinguishing an inalienable right to an object from the object
itself emphasises the notion of inalienability. All human beings retain
their inalienable rights (whatever their situation, whatever their acts,
whatever their guilt or innocence). The concept of natural inalienable
rights secures autonomy to human beings. But the autonomy is not
absolute, for the simple reason that, the concept of inalienable rights
postulates that there are some rights which no human being may
alienate. While natural rights protect the right of the individual to choose
and preserve liberty, yet the autonomy of the individual is not absolute or
total. As a theoretical construct, it would otherwise be strictly possible to
hire another person to kill oneself or to sell oneself into slavery or
servitude. Though these acts are autonomous, they would be in violation
of inalienable rights. This is for the reason that:
"
These acts, however autonomous, would be in violation of
inalienable rights, as the theories would have it. They would be
morally invalid, and ineffective actually to alienate inalienable rights.
Although self-regarding, they pretend to an autonomy that does not
exist. Inalienable rights are precisely directed against such false
autonomy.
Natural inalienable rights, like other natural rights, have long rested
upon what has been called the law of nature of natural law. Perhaps all
of the theories discussed above could be called law of nature or natural
law theories. The American tradition, even as early as 1641, ten years
before Thomas Hobbes published Leviathan, included claims of natural
rights, and these claims appealed to the law of nature, often in terms.
Without a moral order of the law of nature sort, natural inalienable
rights are difficult to pose. It is from natural law, and from it alone,
that man obtains those rights we refer to as inalienable and inviolable
Human rights can have no foundation other than natural law.'
48. The idea that individuals can have rights against the State that are
prior to rights created by explicit legislation has been developed as part
of a liberal theory of law propounded by Ronald Dworkin. In his seminal
work titled Taking Rights Seriously42 (1977), he states that:
"Individual rights are political trumps held by individuals.
Individuals have rights when, for some reason, a collective goal is not
a
sufficient justification for denying them what they wish, as
individuals, to have or to do, or not a sufficient justification for
imposing some loss or injury upon them."43
(emphasis supplied)
Dworkin asserts the existence of a right against the Government as
essential to protecting the dignity of the individual:
"It makes sense to say that a man has a fundamental right against
the Government, in the strong sense, like free speech, if that right is
necessary to protect his dignity, or his standing as equally entitled to
concern and respect, or some other personal value of like
consequence.
(emphasis supplied)
49. Dealing with the question whether the Government may abridge
the rights of others to act when their acts might simply increase the risk,
by however slight or speculative a margin, that some person's right to life
or property will be violated, Dworkin says:
"But no society that purports to recognize a variety of rights, on the
ground that a man's dignity or equality may be invaded in a variety of
ways, can accept such a principle45
If rights make sense, then the degrees of their importance cannot
be so different that some count not at all when others are
mentioned 46
If the Government does not take rights seriously, then it does not
take law seriously either47 "
Dworkin states that Judges should decide how widely an individual's
rights extend. He states:
"Indeed, the suggestion that rights can be demonstrated by a
process of history rather than by an appeal to principle shows either
a confusion or no real concern about what rights are
This has been a complex argument, and I want to summarize it.
Our constitutional system rests on a particular moral theory, namely,
that men have moral rights against the State. The different clauses of
the Bill of Rights, like the due process and equal protection clauses,
must be understood as appealing to moral concepts rather than laying
down particular concepts; therefore, a court that undertakes the
burden of applying these clauses fully as law must be an activist court,
in the sense that it must be prepared to frame and answer questions
of political morality
"48
50. A later section of this judgment deals with how natural and
inalienable rights have been developed in Indian precedent.
H. Evolution of the privacy doctrine in India
51. Among the early decisions of this Court following Kharak Singh2
was R.M. Malkani V. State of Maharashtra49. In that case, this Court held
that Section 25 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 was not violated
"20.
Where a person talking on the telephone allows another
person to record it or to hear it, it cannot be said that the other person
who is allowed to do so is damaging, removing, tampering, touching
machinery battery line or post for intercepting or acquainting himself
with the contents of any message. There was no element of coercion or
compulsion in attaching the tape recorder to the telephone."50
This Court followed the same line of reasoning as it had in Kharak Singh2
while rejecting a privacy-based challenge under Article 21. Significantly,
"31.
Article 21 was invoked by submitting that the privacy of the
appellant's conversation was invaded. Article 21 contemplates
procedure established by law with regard to deprivation of life or
personal liberty. The telephone conversation of an innocent citizen will
be protected by Courts against wrongful or high-handed interference
by tapping the conversation. The protection is not for the guilty citizen
against the efforts of the police to vindicate the law and prevent
corruption of public servants. It must not be understood that the Court
will tolerate safeguards for the protection of the citizen to be imperilled
by permitting the police to proceed by unlawful or irregular
methods."5
In other words, it was the targeted and specific nature of the interception
which weighed with the Court, the telephone tapping being directed at a
guilty person. Hence the Court ruled that the telephone conversation of
an innocent citizen will be protected against wrongful interference by
wiretapping.
52. In Gobind, a Bench of three Judges of this Court considered a
challenge to the validity of Regulations 855 and 856 of State Police
Regulations under which a history sheet was opened against the
petitioner who had been placed under surveillance. The Bench of three
Judges adverted to the decision in Kharak Singh and to the validation
of
the Police Regulations (other than domiciliary visits at night). By the time
the decision was handed down in Gobind the law in the US had evolved
and this Court took note of the decision
in Griswold V. Connecticut52 ("Griswold") in which a conviction under a
statute on a charge of giving information and advice to married persons
on contraceptive methods was held to be invalid. This Court adverted to
the dictum that specific guarantees of the Bill of Rights have penumbras
which create zones of privacy. The Court also relied upon the US Supreme
Court decision in Roe V. Wade53 in which the Court upheld the right of a
married woman to terminate her pregnancy as a part of the right of
personal privacy. The following observations of Mathew, J. who delivered
the judgment of the Court do indicate a constitutional recognition of the
"20. There can be no doubt that the makers of our Constitution
wanted to ensure conditions favourable to the pursuit of happiness.
They certainly realised as Brandeis, J. said in his dissent in Olmstead
V. United States54, the significance of man's spiritual nature, of his
feelings and of his intellect and that only a part of the pain, pleasure,
satisfaction of life can be found in material things and therefore, they
must be deemed to have conferred upon the individual as against the
government a sphere where he should be let alone."
These observations follow upon a reference to the Warren and Brandeis
article; the two decisions of the US Supreme Court noted earlier; the
writings of Locke and Kant; and to dignity, liberty and autonomy.
53. Yet a close reading of the decision in Gobind 8 would indicate that
the Court eventually did not enter a specific finding on the existence of a
right to privacy under the Constitution. The Court indicated that if the
Court does find that a particular right should be protected as
a
fundamental privacy right, it could be overridden only subject to a
"22. There can be no doubt that privacy-dignity claims deserve to
be examined with care and to be denied only when an important
countervailing interest is shown to be superior. If the Court does find
that a claimed right is entitled to protection as a fundamental privacy
right, a law infringing it must satisfy the compelling State interest
test. Then the question would be whether a State interest is of such
paramount importance as would justify an infringement of the right."
(emphasis supplied)
While emphasising individual autonomy and the dangers of individual
privacy being eroded by new developments that "will make it possible to
be heard in the street what is whispered in the closet", the Court had
obvious concerns about adopting a broad definition of privacy since the
right to privacy "is not
explicit in the Constitution". Observing that the concept of privacy
para 23)
"23. Individual autonomy, perhaps the central concern of any
system of limited government, is protected in part under our
Constitution by explicit constitutional guarantees. In the application of
the Constitution our contemplation cannot only be of what has been
but what may be. Time works changes and brings into existence new
conditions. Subtler and far-reaching means of invading privacy will
make it possible to be heard in the street what is whispered in the
closet. Yet, too broad a definition of privacy raises serious questions
about the propriety of judicial reliance on a right that is not explicit in
the Constitution. Of course, privacy primarily concerns the individual.
It therefore relates to and overlaps with the concept of liberty. The
most serious advocate of privacy must confess that there are serious
problems of defining the essence and scope of the right. Privacy
interest in autonomy must also be placed in the context of other rights
and values."
(emphasis supplied)
54. Mathew, J. in Gobind proceeded to explain what any right to
privacy must encompass and protect and found it to be implicit in the
"24.
Any right to privacy must encompass and protect the
personal intimacies of the home, the family, marriage, motherhood,
procreation and child-bearing. This catalogue approach to the question
is obviously not as instructive as it does not give an analytical picture
of the distinctive characteristics of the right to privacy. Perhaps, the
only suggestion that can be offered as unifying principle underlying
the concept has been the assertion that a claimed right must be a
fundamental right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty."
In adverting to ordered liberty, the judgment is similar to the statement
in the judgment of Rajagopala Ayyangar, J. in Kharak Singh 2 which found
the intrusion of the home by nightly domiciliary visits a violation of
ordered liberty.
55. The Court in Gobind proceeded to hold that in any event, the
right to privacy will need a case-to-case elaboration. The following
observations were carefully crafted to hold that even on the "assumption"
that there is an independent right to privacy emanating from personal
liberty, the right to movement and free speech, the right is not absolute :
"28. The right to privacy in any event will necessarily have to go
through a process of case-by-case development. Therefore, even
assuming that the right to personal liberty, the right to move freely
throughout the territory of India and the freedom of speech create an
independent right to privacy as an emanation from them which one
can
characterise as a fundamental right, we do not think that the right is
absolute."
(emphasis supplied)
Again a similar "assumption" was made by the Court in the following
"31.
Assuming that the fundamental rights explicitly guaranteed
to a citizen have penumbral zones and that the right to privacy is itself
a fundamental right, that fundamental right must be subject to
restriction on the basis of compelling public interest. As Regulation
856 has the force of law, it cannot be said that the fundamental right
of the petitioner under Article 21 has been violated by the provisions
contained in it : for, what is guaranteed under that article is that no
person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except by the
procedure established by "law". We think that the procedure is
reasonable having regard to the provisions of Regulations 853(c) and
857."
(emphasis supplied)
The Court declined to interfere with the Regulations.
56. The judgment in Gobind does not contain a clear statement of
principle by the Court of the existence of an independent right to privacy
or of such a right being an emanation from explicit constitutional
guarantees. The Bench, which consisted of three Judges, may have been
constrained by the dictum in the latter part of Kharak Singh2. Whatever
be the reason, it is evident that in several places Mathew, J. proceeded
on the "assumption" that if the right to privacy is protected under the
Constitution, it is a part of ordered liberty and is not absolute but subject
to restrictions tailor-made to fulfil a compelling State interest. This
analysis of the decision in Gobind assumes significance because
subsequent decisions of smaller Benches have proceeded on the basis
that Gobind does indeed recognise a right to privacy. What the contours
of such a right are, emerges from a reading of those decisions. This is the
next aspect to which we now turn.
57. Malak Singh V. State of P&H5 55 ("Malak Singh") dealt with the
provisions of Section 23 of the Punjab Police Rules under which a
surveillance register was to be maintained among other persons, of all
convicts of a particular description and persons who were reasonably
believed to be habitual offenders whether or not, they were convicted.
The validity of the Rules was not questioned in view of the decisions in
Kharak Singh2 and Gobind The Rules provided for modalities of
surveillance. O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. speaking for a Bench of two Judges
of this Court recognised the need for surveillance on habitual and
para 6)
"6, Prevention of crime is one of the prime purposes of the
constitution of a police force. The Preamble to the Police Act, 1861
says:
'Whereas it is expedient to reorganise the police and to make it a
more efficient instrument for the prevention and detection of crime-.'
Section 23 of the Police Act prescribes it as the duty of police officers 'to collect and
communicate intelligence affecting the public peace; to prevent the commission of
offences and public nuisances'. In connection with these duties it will be necessary
to keep discreet surveillance over reputed bad characters, habitual offenders and
other potential offenders. Organised crime cannot be successfully fought without
close watch of suspects. But, surveillance may be intrusive and it may so seriously
encroach on the privacy of a citizen as to infringe his fundamental right to personal
liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution and the freedom of movement
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(d). That cannot be permitted. This is recognised by the
Punjab Police Rules themselves. Rule 23.7, which prescribes the mode of
surveillance, permits the close watch over the movements of the person under
surveillance but without any illegal interference. Permissible surveillance is only to
the extent of a close watch over the movements of the person under surveillance and
no more. So long as surveillance is for the purpose of preventing crime and is
confined to the limits prescribed by Rule 23.7 we do not think a person whose name
is included in the surveillance register can have a genuine cause for complaint. We
may notice here that interference in accordance with law and for the prevention of
disorder and crime is an exception recognised even by European Convention of
Human Rights to the right to respect for a person's private and family life. Article 8 of
the Convention reads as follows:
'(1) Everyone's right to respect for his private and family life, his
home and his correspondence shall be recognised.
(2) There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right, except such as is in accordance with law and is
necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security,
public safety, for the prevention of disorder and crime or for the
protection of health or morals.' "
(emphasis supplied)
58. The Court in Malak Singh55 55 did not consider it unlawful for the
police to conduct surveillance so long as it was for the purpose of
preventing crime and was confined to the limits prescribed by Rule 23.7
which, while authorising a close watch on the movement of a person
under surveillance, contained a condition that this should be without any
illegal interference. The object being to prevent crime, the Court held
that the person who is subject to surveillance is not entitled to access the
register nor was a pre-decisional hearing compliant with natural justice
warranted. Confidentiality, this Court held, was required in the interest of
the public, including keeping in confidence the sources of information.
"9. But all this does not mean that the police have a licence to enter
the names of whoever they like (dislike?) in the surveillance register;
nor can the surveillance be such as to squeeze the fundamental
freedoms guaranteed to all citizens or to obstruct the free exercise and
enjoyment of those freedoms; nor can the surveillance so intrude as to
offend the dignity of the individual. Surveillance of persons who do not
fall within the categories mentioned in Rule 23.4 or for reasons
unconnected with the prevention of crime, or excessive surveillance
falling beyond the limits prescribed by the rules, will entitle a citizen
to the court's protection which the court will not hesitate to give. The
very Rules which prescribe the conditions for making entries in the
surveillance register and the mode of surveillance appear to recognise
the caution and care with which the police officers are required to
proceed. The note following Rule 23.4 is instructive. It enjoins a duty
upon the police officer to construe the rule strictly and confine the
entries in the surveillance register to the class of persons mentioned in
the rule. Similarly Rule 23.7 demands that there should be no illegal
interference in the guise of surveillance. Surveillance, therefore, has to
be unobtrusive and within bounds."
The observations in Malak Singh 55 on the issue of privacy indicate that an
encroachment on privacy infringes personal liberty under Article 21 and
the right to the freedom of movement under Article 19(1)(d). Without
specifically holding that privacy is a protected constitutional value under
Article 19 or Article 21, the judgment of this Court indicates that serious
encroachments on privacy impinge upon personal liberty and the freedom
of movement. The Court linked such an encroachment with the dignity of
the individual which would be offended by surveillance bereft of
procedural protections and carried out in a manner that would obstruct
the free exercise of freedoms guaranteed by the fundamental rights.
59. State of Maharashtra V. Madhukar Narayan Mardikar56 is another
decision by a two-Judge Bench which dealt with a case of a Police
Inspector who was alleged to have attempted to have non-consensual
intercourse with a woman by entering the hutment where she lived.
Following an enquiry, he was dismissed from service but the punishment
was modified, in appeal, to removal so as to enable him to apply for
pensionary benefits. The High Court quashed the punishment both on the
ground of a violation of the principles of natural justice, and by
questioning the character of the victim. Holding that this approach of the
High Court was misconceived, A.M. Ahmadi, J. (as the learned Chief
Justice then was) held that though the victim had admitted "the dark
"8. The High Court observes that since Banubi is an unchaste
woman it would be extremely unsafe to allow the fortune and career of
a government official to be put in jeopardy upon the uncorroborated
version of such a woman who makes no secret of her illicit intimacy
with another person.
She was honest enough to admit the dark side of her life. Even a woman
of easy virtue is entitled to privacy and no one can invade her privacy as
and when he likes. So also it is not open to any and every person to
violate her person as and when he wishes. She is entitled to protect her
person if there is an attempt to violate it against her wish. She is equally
entitled to the protection of law. Therefore, merely because she is a
woman of easy virtue, her evidence cannot be thrown overboard. At the
most the officer called upon to evaluate her evidence would be required
to administer caution unto himself before accepting her evidence."
(emphasis supplied)
As the above extract indicates, the issue before this Court was essentially
based on the appreciation of the evidence of the victim by the High
Court. However, the observations of this Court make a strong statement
of the bodily integrity of a woman, as an incident of her privacy.
60. The decision in LIC V. Manubhai D. Shah57, incorrectly attributed
to the decision in Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. V. Union
of India58 the principle that the right to free expression under Article 19
(1)(a) includes the privacy of communications. The judgment of this
Court in Indian Express 58 cited a UN Report but did no more.
61. The decision which has assumed some significance is
In that case, in a proceeding under Article 32 of the Constitution, a writ
was sought for restraining the State and Prison Authorities from
interfering with the publication of an autobiography of a condemned
prisoner in a magazine. The Prison Authorities, in a communication to the
publisher, denied the claim that the autobiography had been authored by
the prisoner while he was confined to jail and opined that a publication in
the name of a convict was against Prison Rules. The prisoner in question
had been found guilty of six murders and was sentenced to death.
Among the questions which were posed by this Court for decision was
whether a citizen could prevent another from writing about the life story
of the former and whether an unauthorised publication infringes the
citizen's right to privacy. Jeevan Reddy, J. speaking for a Bench of two
Judges recognised that the right to privacy has two aspects : the first
affording an action in tort for damages resulting from an unlawful
invasion of privacy, while the second is a constitutional right. The
judgment traces the constitutional protection of privacy to the decisions
in Kharak Singh and Gobind This appears from the following
"9.
The first decision of this Court dealing with this aspect is
Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 2 A more elaborate appraisal of this right
took place in a later decision in Gobind V. State of M.P. 8 wherein
Mathew, J. speaking
for himself, Krishna Iyer and Goswami, JJ. traced the origins of this right
and also pointed out how the said right has been dealt with by the United
States Supreme Court in two of its well-known decisions in Griswold V.
Connecticut52 and Roe V. Wade53." "
The decision in Rajagopal9 considers the decisions in Kharak Singh2 and
"13.
Kharak Singh2 was a case where the petitioner was put
under surveillance as defined in Regulation 236 of the U.P. Police
Regulations.
Though right to privacy was referred to, the decision
turned on the meaning and content of "personal liberty" and "life" in
Article 21. Gobind was also a case of surveillance under M.P. Police
Regulations. Kharak Singh2 was followed even while at the same time
elaborating the right to privacy
"
62. The Court in Rajagopal  held that neither the State nor can its
officials impose prior restrictions on the publication of an autobiography
of a convict. In the course of its summary of the decision, the Court
"(1) The right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by Article 21. It is a "right to
be let alone". A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own,
his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child-bearing and
education among other matters. None can publish anything concerning
the above matters without his consent-whether truthful or otherwise
and whether laudatory or critical. If he does so, he would be violating
the right to privacy of the person concerned and would be liable in an
action for damages. Position may, however, be different, if a person
voluntarily thrusts himself into controversy or voluntarily invites or
raises a controversy.
(2) The rule aforesaid is subject to the exception, that any
publication concerning the aforesaid aspects becomes unobjectionable
if such publication is based upon public records including court
records. This is for the reason that once a matter becomes a matter of
public record, the right to privacy no longer subsists and it becomes a
legitimate subject for comment by press and media among others. We
are, however, of the opinion that in the interests of decency [Article 19
(2)] an exception must be carved out to this rule, viz., a female who is
the victim of a sexual assault, kidnap, abduction or a like offence
should not further be subjected to the indignity of her name and the
incident being publicised in press/media.
(3) There is yet another exception to the rule in (1) above -
indeed, this is not an exception but an independent rule. In the case
of public officials, it is obvious, right to privacy, or for that matter, the
remedy of action for
damages is simply not available with respect to their acts and conduct
relevant to the discharge of their official duties. This is so even where the
publication is based upon facts and statements which are not true, unless
the official establishes that the publication was made (by the defendant)
with reckless disregard for truth. In such a case, it would be enough for
the defendant (member of the press or media) to prove that he acted
after a reasonable verification of the facts; it is not necessary for him to
prove that what he has written is true. Of course, where the publication is
proved to be false and actuated by malice or personal animosity, the
defendant would have no defence and would be liable for damages. It is
equally obvious that in matters not relevant to the discharge of his
duties, the public official enjoys the same protection as any other citizen,
as explained in (1) and (2) above. It needs no reiteration that judiciary,
which is protected by the power to punish for contempt of court and
Parliament and legislatures protected as their privileges are by Articles
105 and 104 respectively of the Constitution of India, represent
exceptions to this rule."
(emphasis in original)
The judgment of Jeevan Reddy, J. regards privacy as implicit in
the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21. In coming to the
conclusion, the judgment in Rajagopal 9 notes that while Kharak Singh2
had referred to the right to privacy, the decision turned on the content of
life and personal liberty in Article 21. The decision recognises privacy as a
protected constitutional right, while tracing it to Article 21.
64. In an interesting research article on "State's Surveillance and the
Right to Privacy", a contemporary scholar has questioned the theoretical
foundation of the decision in Rajagopal 9 on the ground that the case
essentially dealt with cases in the US concerning privacy against
governmental intrusion which was irrelevant in the factual situation
before this Court. 59 In the view of the author, Rajagopal 9 involved a
publication of an article by a private publisher in a magazine, authored by
a private individual, albeit a convict. Hence the decision has been
criticised on the ground that Rajagopal  was about an action between
private parties and, therefore, ought to have dealt with privacy in the
context of Tort law. 59 While it is true that in Rajagopal9 it was a private
publisher who was seeking to publish an article about a death row
convict, it is equally true that the Court dealt with a prior restraint on
publication imposed by the State and its prison officials. That is, in fact,
how Article 32 was invoked by the publisher.
65. The intersection between privacy and medical jurisprudence has
been dealt with in a series of judgments of this Court, among them being
'X' V. Hospital 'Z60 In that case, the appellant was a doctor in the health
service of a State. He was accompanying a patient for surgery from
Nagaland to Chennai and was tested when he was to donate blood. The
blood sample was found to be
HIV+. The appellant claiming to have been socially ostracised by the
disclosure of his HIV+ status by the hospital, filed a claim for damages
before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC)
alleging that the hospital had unauthorisedly disclosed his HIV status
resulting in his marriage being called off and in social opprobrium. Saghir
Ahmad, J. speaking for a Bench of two Judges of this Court, adverted to
the duty of the doctor to maintain secrecy in relation to the patient but
held that there is an exception to the rule of confidentiality where public
interest will override that duty. The judgment of this Court dwelt on the
right to privacy under Article 21 and other provisions of the Constitution
305, para 21)
"21. Right to privacy has been culled out of the provisions of Article
21 and other provisions of the Constitution relating to the
Fundamental Rights read with the directive principles of State Policy.
It was in this context that it was held by this Court in Kharak Singh V.
State of U.P. that police surveillance of a person by domiciliary visits
would be violative of Article 21 of the Constitution. This decision was
considered by Mathew, J. in his classic judgment in Gobind V. State of
M.P. 8 in which the origin of "right to privacy" was traced and a number
of American decisions, including Munn V. Illinois61, Wolf V. Colorado 14
and various articles were considered "
66. The Court in 'X' V. Hospital read the decision in Malak Singh
as reiterating the view taken earlier, on privacy in Kharak Singh2 and
Gobind-. The Court proceeded to rely on the decision in Rajagopal . The
Court held that the right to privacy is not absolute and is subject to
action lawfully taken to prevent crime or disorder or to protect the health,
morals and the rights and freedoms of others. Public disclosure of even
true facts, the Court held, may amount to invasion of the right to privacy
or the right to be let alone when a doctor breaches confidentiality. The
"28. Disclosure of even true private facts has the tendency to
disturb a person's tranquillity. It may generate many complexes in
him and may even lead to psychological problems. He may, thereafter,
have a disturbed life all through. In the face of these potentialities,
and as already held by this Court in its various decisions referred to
above, the right to privacy is an essential component of the right to
life envisaged by Article 21. The right, however, is not absolute and
may be lawfully restricted for the prevention
of crime, disorder or protection of health or morals or protection of rights
and freedom of others."
However, the disclosure that the appellant was HIV+ was held not to be
violative of the right to privacy of the appellant on the ground that the
woman to whom he was to be married "was saved in time by such
disclosure and from the risk of being infected". The denial of a claim for
compensation by NCDRC was upheld.
67. The decision in 'X' V. Hospital 'Z60 fails to adequately appreciate
that the latter part of the decision in Kharak Singh 2 declined to accept
privacy as a constitutional right, while the earlier part invalidated
domiciliary visits in the context of an invasion of "ordered liberty".
Similarly, several observations in Gobind proceed on an assumption
:
if
there is a right to privacy, it would comprehend certain matters and
would be subject to a regulation to protect compelling State interests.
68. In a decision of a Bench of two Judges of this Court in PUCL 10 , the
Court dealt with telephone tapping. The petitioner challenged the
constitutional validity of Section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
and urged in the alternative for adopting procedural safeguards to curb
arbitrary acts of telephone tapping. Section 5(2) authorises the
pp. 305-06, para 3)
"5. (2) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the
interest of the public safety, the Central Government or a State
Government or any officer specially unauthorised in this behalf by the
Central Government or a State Government may, if satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the
commission of an offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by
order, direct that any message or class of messages to or from any
person or class of persons, or relating to any particular subject,
brought for transmission by or transmitted or received by any
telegraph, shall not be transmitted, or shall be intercepted or
detained, or shall be disclosed to the Government making the order or
an officer thereof mentioned in the order:
Provided that press messages intended to be published in India of
correspondents accredited to the Central Government or a State
Government shall not be intercepted or detained, unless their
transmission has been prohibited under this sub-section."
69. The submission on the invalidity of the statutory provision
authorising telephone tapping was based on the right to privacy being a
fundamental right under Articles 19(1) and 21 of the Constitution. Kuldip
Singh, J. adverted to the observations contained in the majority
judgment in Kharak Singh 2 which led to the invalidation of the provision
for domiciliary visits at night
under Regulation 236(b). PUCL cited the minority view of Subba Rao, J.
as having gone even further by invalidating Regulation 236, in its
entirety. The judgment, therefore, construes both the majority and
minority judgments as having affirmed the right to privacy as a part of
"14. Article 21 of the Constitution has, therefore, been interpreted
by all the seven learned Judges in Kharak Singh case2 (majority and
the minority opinions) to include that "right to privacy" as a part of the
right to "protection of life and personal liberty" guaranteed under the
said Article."
Gobind was construed to have upheld the validity of the State Police
Regulations providing surveillance on the ground that the "procedure
established by law" under Article 21 had not been violated. After
completing its summation of precedents, Kuldip Singh, J. held as
"17. We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that right to
privacy is a part of the right to "life" and "personal liberty" enshrined
under Article 21 of the Constitution. Once the facts in a given case
constitute a right to privacy, Article 21 is attracted. The said right
cannot be curtailed "except according to procedure established by
law"."
Telephone conversations were construed to be an important ingredient of
privacy and the tapping of such conversations was held to infringe Article
para 18)
"18. The right to privacy - by itself - has not been identified under
the Constitution. As a concept it may be too broad and moralistic to
define it judicially. Whether right to privacy can be claimed or has
been infringed in a given case would depend on the facts of the said
case. But the right to hold a telephone conversation in the privacy of
one's home or office without interference can certainly be claimed as
"right to privacy". Conversations on the telephone are often of an
intimate and confidential character. Telephone conversation is a part of
modern man's life. It is considered so important that more and more
people are carrying mobile telephone instruments in their pockets.
Telephone conversation is an important facet of a man's private life.
Right to privacy would certainly include telephone conversation in the
privacy of one's home or office. Telephone tapping would, thus, infract
Article 21 of the Constitution of India unless it is permitted under the
procedure established by law."
The Court also held that telephone tapping infringes the guarantee of free
speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) unless authorised by Article
19(2). The judgment relied on the protection of privacy under Article 17
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (and a similar
guarantee under Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights)
which, in its view, must be an interpretative tool for construing the
provisions of the Constitution. Article 21, in the view of the Court, has to
be interpreted in conformity with international law. In the absence of
rules providing for the precautions to be adopted for preventing improper
interception and/or disclosure of messages, the fundamental rights under
Articles 19(1)(a) and 21 could not be safeguarded. But the Court was not
inclined to require prior judicial scrutiny before intercepting telephone
conversations. The Court ruled that it would be necessary to lay down
procedural safeguards for the protection of the right to privacy of a
person until Parliament intervened by framing rules under Section 7 of
the Telegraph Act. The Court accordingly framed guidelines to be adopted
in all cases envisaging telephone tapping.
70. The judgment in PUCL10 construes the earlier decisions in Kharak
Singh2 (especially the majority view on the invalidity of domiciliary
visits), Gobind and Rajagopal  in holding that the right to privacy is
embodied as a constitutionally protected right under Article 21. The Court
was conscious of the fact that the right to privacy has "by itself" not been
identified under the Constitution. The expression "by itself" may indicate
one of two meanings. The first is that the Constitution does not recognise
a standalone right to privacy. The second recognises that there is no
express delineation of such a right. Evidently, the Court left the evolution
of the contours of the right to a case-by-case determination. Telephone
conversations from the home or office were construed to be an integral
element of the privacy of an individual. In PUCL10 the Court consciously
established the linkages between various articles conferring guarantees of
fundamental rights when it noted that wiretapping infringes privacy and
in consequence the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 and
the freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a). The need to
read the fundamental constitutional guarantees with a purpose
illuminated by India's commitment to the international regime of human
rights' protection also weighed in the decision. Section 5(2) of the
Telegraph Act was to be regulated by rules framed by the Government to
render the modalities of telephone tapping fair, just and reasonable
under Article 21. The importance which the Court ascribes to privacy is
evident from the fact that it did not await the eventual formulation of
rules by Parliament and prescribed that in the meantime, certain
procedural safeguards which it envisaged should be put into place.
71. While dealing with a case involving the rape of an eight year old
child, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Karnataka V.
"15. Sexual violence apart from being dehumanising is an
unlawful intrusion of the right to privacy and sanctity It offends
her dignity."
Similar observations were made in Sudhansu Sekhar Sahoo V. State of
Orissa 63
72. In Sharda V. Dharmpal64, the appellant and the respondent were
spouses. The respondent sued for divorce and filed an application for
conducting a medical examination of the appellant which was opposed.
The trial court allowed the application. The High Court dismissed the
challenge in a civil revision which led the appellant to move this Court.
The appellant argued before this Court that compelling her to undergo a
medical examination violated her personal liberty under Article 21 and
that in the absence of an empowering provision, the Matrimonial Court
had no jurisdiction to compel a party to undergo a medical examination.
S.B. Sinha, J. speaking for the Bench of three Judges, dealt with the first
aspect of the matter (whether a Matrimonial Court has jurisdiction to
52-53)
"52. Even otherwise the court may issue an appropriate direction so
as to satisfy itself as to whether apart from treatment he requires
adequate protection inter alia by way of legal aid so that he may not
be subject to an unjust order because of his incapacity. Keeping in
view of the fact that in a case of mental illness the court has adequate
power to examine the party or get him examined by a qualified doctor,
we are of the opinion that in an appropriate case the court may take
recourse to such a procedure even at the instance of the party to the
lis.
53. Furthermore, the court must be held to have the requisite
power even under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure to issue
such direction either suo motu or otherwise which, according to him,
would lead to the truth."
73. The second question considered by the Court in Sharda64 was
whether a compulsive subjecting of a person to a medical examination
violates Article 21. After noticing the observations in M.P. Sharma and
Kharak Singh2 where it was held that the Constitution has not
guaranteed the right to privacy, the Court held that in subsequent
decisions, such a right has been read into Article 21 on an expansive
interpretation of personal liberty. In the course of its judgment, the Court
adverted to the decisions in Rajagopal , PUCL10, Gobind and 'X' V.
Hospital 'Z 60 on the basis of which it stated that it had "outlined the law
relating to privacy in India". In the view of this Court, in matrimonial
cases where a decree of divorce is sought on medical grounds, a medical
examination
is the only way in which an allegation could be proved. In such a
"76.
If the respondent avoids such medical examination on the
ground that it violates his/her right to privacy or for that matter right
to personal liberty as enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India, then it may in most of such cases become impossible to arrive
at a conclusion. It may render the very grounds on which divorce is
permissible nugatory. Therefore, when there is no right to privacy
specifically conferred by Article 21 of the Constitution of India and
with the extensive interpretation of the phrase "personal liberty" this
right has been read into Article 21, it cannot be treated as an absolute
right."
The right to privacy was held not to be breached.
74. In District Registrar and Collector V. Canara Bank
65
("Canara
Bank"), a Bench of two Judges of this Court considered the provisions of
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (as amended by a special law in Andhra
Pradesh). Section 73, which was invalidated by the High Court,
empowered the Collector to inspect registers, books and records, papers,
documents and proceedings in the custody of any public officer 'to secure
any duty or to prove or would lead to the discovery of a fraud or
"73. Every public officer having in his custody any registers, books,
records, papers, documents or proceedings, the inspection whereof
may tend to secure any duty, or to prove or lead to the discovery of
any fraud or omission in relation to any duty, shall at all reasonable
times permit any person authorised in writing by the Collector to
inspect for such purpose the registers, books, papers, documents and
proceedings, and to take such notes and extracts as he may deem
necessary, without fee or charge."
After adverting to the evolution of the doctrine of privacy in the US from
a right associated with property 13 to a right associated with the
individual54, Lahoti, C.J. referred to the penumbras created by the Bill of
Rights resulting in a zone of privacy52 leading up eventually to a
"reasonable expectation of privacy"66, Lahoti, C.J. considered the decision
in M.P. Sharma to be "of limited help" to the discussion on privacy.
However, it was Kharak Singh2 which invalidated nightly domiciliary visits
that provided guidance on the issue. The evaluation
of Kharak Singh2 was in the following terms : (District Registrar case65, ,
"36.
In
Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 2 the U.P. Regulations
regarding domiciliary visits were in question and the majority referred
to Munn V. Illinois61 and held that though our Constitution did not
refer to the right to privacy expressly, still it can be traced from the
right to "life" in Article 21. According to the majority, Clause 236 of
the relevant Regulations in U.P., was bad in law; it offended Article 21
inasmuch as there was-no law* permitting interference by such visits.
The majority did not go into the question whether these visits violated
the "right to privacy". But, Subba Rao, J. while concurring that the
fundamental right to privacy was part of the right to liberty in Article
21, part of the right to freedom of speech and expression in Article 19
(1)(a), and also of the right to movement in Article 19(1)(d), held that
the Regulations permitting surveillance violated the fundamental right
to privacy. In the discussion the learned Judge referred to Wolf V.
Colorado4. In effect, all the seven learned Judges held that the "right
to privacy" was part of the right to "life" in Article 21."
(emphasis supplied)
The decision in Gobind is construed to have implied the right to privacy
"39. We have referred in detail to the reasons given by Mathew, J.
in Gobind to show that, the right to privacy has been implied in
Articles 19(1)(a) and (d) and Article 21; that, the right is not absolute
and that any State intrusion can be a reasonable restriction only if it
has-reasonable basis or reasonable materials- to support it."
(emphasis supplied)
75. The Court in Canara Bank65 dealt with the application of Section
73 of the Indian Stamp Act (as amended), to documents of a customer in
"53. Once we have accepted in Gobind and in later cases that the
right to privacy deals with "persons and not places", the documents or
copies of documents of the customer which are in a bank, must
continue to remain confidential vis--vis the person, even if they are
no longer at the customer's house and have been voluntarily sent to a
bank. If that be the correct view of the law, we cannot accept the line
of
Miller67 in which the Court proceeded on the basis that the right to
privacy is referable to the right of "property" theory. Once that is so,
then unless there is some probable
or reasonable cause or reasonable basis or material before the Collector
for reaching an opinion that the documents in the possession of the bank
tend to secure any duty or to prove or to lead to the discovery of any
fraud or omission in relation to any duty, the search or taking notes or
extracts therefore, cannot be valid. The above safeguards must
necessarily be read into the provision relating to search and inspection
and seizure so as to save it from any unconstitutionality."
Hence, the Court repudiated the notion that a person who places
documents with a bank would, as a result, forsake an expectation of
confidentiality. In the view of the Court, even if the documents cease to
be at a place other than in the custody and control of the customer,
privacy attaches to persons and not places and hence the protection of
privacy is not diluted. Moreover, in the view of the Court, there has to be
a reasonable basis or material for the Collector to form an opinion that
the documents in the possession of the bank would secure the purpose of
investigating into an act of fraud or an omission in relation to duty. The
safeguards which the Court introduced were regarded as being implicit in
the need to make a search of this nature reasonable.
76. The second part of the ruling of the Court in Canara Bank65 is
equally important for it finds fault with a statutory provision which allows
an excessive delegation of the power conferred upon the Collector to
inspect documents. The provision, the Court rules, would allow the
customers' privacy to be breached by non-governmental persons. Hence
the statute, insofar as it allowed the Collector to authorise any person to
p. 524, para 54)
"54. Secondly, the impugned provision in Section 73 enabling the
Collector to authorise "any person" whatsoever to inspect, to take
notes or extracts from the papers in the public office suffers from the
vice of excessive delegation as there are no guidelines in the Act and
more importantly, the section allows the facts relating to the
customer's privacy to reach non-governmental persons and would, on
that basis, be an unreasonable encroachment into the customer's
rights. This part of Section 73 permitting delegation to "any person"
suffers from the above serious defects and for that reason is, in our
view, unenforceable. The State must clearly define the officers by
designation or state that the power can be delegated to officers not
below a particular rank in the official hierarchy, as may be designated
by the State."
77. The significance of the judgment in Canara Bank lies first in its
reaffirmation of the right to privacy as emanating from the liberties
guaranteed by Article 19 and from the protection of life and personal
liberty under Article 21. Secondly, the Court finds the foundation for the
reaffirmation of this right not only in the judgments in Kharak Singh2 and
Gobind and the
cases which followed, but also in terms of India's international
commitments under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)
and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Thirdly,
the right to privacy is construed as a right which attaches to the person.
The significance of this is that the right to privacy is not lost as a result of
confidential documents or information being parted with by the customer
to the custody of the bank. Fourthly, the Court emphasised the need to
read procedural safeguards to ensure that the power of search and
seizure of the nature contemplated by Section 73 is not exercised
arbitrarily. Fifthly, access to bank records to the Collector does not permit
a delegation of those powers by the Collector to a private individual.
Hence even when the power to inspect and search is validly exercisable
by an organ of the State, necessary safeguards would be required to
ensure that the information does not travel to unauthorised private
hands. Sixthly, information provided by an individual to a third party (in
that case a bank) carries with it a reasonable expectation that it will be
utilised only for the purpose for which it is provided. Parting with
information (to the bank) does not deprive the individual of the privacy
interest. The reasonable expectation is allied to the purpose for which
information is provided. Seventhly, while legitimate aims of the State,
such as the protection of the revenue may intervene to permit a
disclosure to the State, the State must take care to ensure that the
information is not accessed by a private entity. The decision in Canara
Bank65 has thus important consequences for recognising informational
privacy.
78. After the decision in Canara Bank65 the provisions for search and
seizure under Section 132(5) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 were
construed strictly by this Court in P.R. Metrani V. CIT 68 on the ground
that they constitute a "serious intrusion into the privacy of a citizen".
Similarly, the search and seizure provisions of Sections 42 and 43 of the
NDPS Act69 were construed by this Court in Directorate of Revenue V.
Mohd. Nisar Holia 70. Adverting to Canara Bank65, among other decisions,
the Court held that the right to privacy is crucial and imposes a
requirement of a written recording of reasons before a search and seizure
could be carried out.
79. Section 30 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 prohibited the
employment of "any man under the age of 25 years" or "any woman" in
any part of the premises in which liquor or an intoxicating drug is
consumed by the public. The provision was also challenged in Anuj Garg
V. Hotel Assn. of India 1 on the ground that it violates the right to
privacy. While holding that the provision is ultra vires, the two-Judge
"35. Privacy rights prescribe autonomy to choose profession
whereas-security concerns texture methodology of delivery of this
assurance. But it is a reasonable proposition that the measures to
safeguard such a guarantee of autonomy should not be so strong that
the essence of the guarantee is lost. State protection must not
translate into censorship.
*
*
*
43. Instead of prohibiting women employment in the bars
altogether the State should focus on factoring in ways through which
unequal consequences of sex differences can be eliminated. It is the
State's duty to ensure circumstances of safety which inspire
confidence in women to discharge the duty freely in accordance to the
requirements of the profession they choose to follow. Any other-policy
inference** (such as the one embodied under Section 30) from societal
conditions would be oppressive on the women and against
the-privacy rights**.
*
*
*
51. The court's task is to determine whether the measures furthered
by the State in form of legislative mandate, to augment the legitimate
aim of protecting the interests of women are proportionate to the other
bulk of well-settled gender norms such as autonomy, equality of
opportunity, right to privacy et al."
(emphasis supplied)
80. In Hinsa Virodhak Sangh V. Mirzapur Moti Kuresh Jamat
("Hinsa
Virodhak Sangh"), this Court dealt with the closure of municipal
slaughterhouses in the city of Ahmedabad for a period of nine days each
year during the Jain observance of Paryushan, pursuant to the resolution
of the Municipal Corporation. The High Court had set aside the
para 27)
"27. Had the impugned resolutions ordered closure of municipal
slaughterhouses for a considerable period of time we may have held
the impugned resolutions to be invalid being an excessive restriction
on the rights of the butchers of Ahmedabad who practise their
profession of meat selling. After all, butchers are practising a trade
and it is their fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution which is guaranteed to all citizens of India. Moreover, it is
not a matter of the proprietor of the butchery shop alone. There may
be also several workmen therein who may become unemployed if the
slaughterhouses are closed for a considerable period of time, because
one of the conditions of the licence given to the shop-owners is to
supply meat regularly in the city of Ahmedabad and this supply comes
from the municipal slaughterhouses of Ahmedabad. Also, a large
number of people are non-vegetarian and they cannot be compelled to
become vegetarian for a long period. What one eats is one's personal
affair and it is a part of his right to privacy which is included in Article
21 of our
Constitution as held by several decisions of this Court. In R. Rajagopal V.
right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty guaranteed by
Article 21. It is a "right to be let alone"."
(emphasis supplied)
However, since the closure of slaughterhouses was for a period of nine
days, the Court came to the conclusion that it did not encroach upon the
freedom guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g). The restriction was held not to
be excessive.
81. The decision in the State of Maharashtra V. Bharat Shanti Lal
Shah deals with the constitutional validity of Sections 13 to 16 of the
73
Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) which inter alia
contains provisions for intercepting telephone and wireless
28, para 61)
"61. The object of MCOCA is to prevent the organised crime and a
perusal of the provisions of the Act under challenge would indicate
that the said law authorises the interception of wire, electronic or oral
communication only if it is intended to prevent the commission of an
organised crime or if it is intended to collect the evidence to the
commission of such an organised crime. The procedures authorising
such interception are also provided therein with enough procedural
safeguards, some of which are indicated and discussed hereinbefore."
The safeguards that the Court adverts to in the above extract include
Section 14, which requires details of the organised crime that is being
committed or is about to be committed, before surveillance could be
authorised. The requirements also mandate describing the nature and
location of the facilities from which the communication is to be
intercepted, the nature of the communication and the identity of the
person, if it is known. A statement is also necessary on whether other
modes of enquiry or intelligence gathering were tried or had failed or why
they reasonably appear to be unlikely to succeed if tried or whether these
would be too dangerous or would likely result in the identification of
those connected with the operation. The duration of the surveillance is
restricted in time and the provision requires "minimal interception"1.
82. During the course of the last decade, this Court has had occasion
to deal with the autonomy of a woman and, as an integral part, her
control over the body. Suchita Srivastava V. Chandigarh Admn. 75
("Suchita Srivastava") arose in the context of the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act (MTP) Act, 1971. A woman who was alleged to have been
raped while residing in a welfare institution run by the Government was
pregnant. The District Administration moved the High Court to seek
termination of the pregnancy. The High Court
directed
, that the pregnancy be terminated though medical experts
had opined that the victim had expressed her willingness to bear the
child. The High Court had issued this direction without the consent of the
woman which was mandated under the statute where the woman is a
major and does not suffer from a mental illness. The woman in this case
was found to suffer from a case of mild to moderate mental retardation.
Speaking for a Bench of three Judges, Balakrishnan, C.J. held that the
reproductive choice of the woman should be respected having regard to
p. 15, para 22)
"22. There is no doubt that a woman's right to make reproductive
choices is also a dimension of "personal liberty" as understood under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It is important to recognise that
reproductive choices can be exercised to procreate as well as to
abstain from procreating. The crucial consideration is that a woman's
right to privacy, dignity and bodily integrity should be respected. This
means that there should be no restriction whatsoever on the exercise
of reproductive choices such as a woman's right to refuse participation
in sexual activity or alternatively the insistence on use of contraceptive
methods. Furthermore, women are also free to choose birth control
methods such as undergoing sterilisation procedures. Taken to their
logical conclusion, reproductive rights include a woman's entitlement
to carry a pregnancy to its full term, to give birth and to subsequently
raise children. However, in the case of pregnant women there is also a
"compelling State interest" in protecting the life of the prospective
child. Therefore, the termination of a pregnancy is only permitted
when the conditions specified in the applicable statute have been
fulfilled. Hence, the provisions of the MTP Act, 1971 can also be viewed
as reasonable restrictions that have been placed on the exercise of
reproductive choices."
(emphasis supplied)
The Court noted that the statute requires the consent of a guardian
where the woman has not attained majority or is mentally ill. In the view
of the Court, there is a distinction between mental illness and mental
retardation and hence the State which was in charge of the welfare
institution was bound to respect the personal autonomy of the woman.
83. The decision in Suchita Srivastava 75 dwells on the statutory right
of a woman under the MTP Act to decide whether or not to consent to a
termination of pregnancy and to have that right respected where she
does not consent to termination. The statutory recognition of the right is
relatable to the constitutional right to make reproductive choices which
has been held to be an ingredient of personal liberty under Article 21.
The Court deduced the existence of such a right from a woman's right to
privacy, dignity and bodily integrity.
84. In Bhavesh Jayanti Lakhani V. State of Maharashtra  this Court
dealt with a challenge to the validity of an arrest warrant issued by a the
US court and a red corner notice issued by INTERPOL on the ground that
the petitioner had, in violation of an interim custody order, returned to
India with the child. The Court did not accept the submission that CBI,
by coordinating with INTERPOL had breached the petitioner's right to
privacy. However, during the course of the discussion, this Court held as
"102.
Right to privacy is not enumerated as a fundamental right
either in terms of Article 21 of the Constitution of India or otherwise.
It, however, by reason of an elaborate interpretation by this Court in
Kharak Singh V. State of U.P. 2 was held to be an essential ingredient of
"personal liberty".
103. This Court, however, in Gobind V. State of M.P. 8 upon taking
an elaborate view of the matter in regard to right to privacy vis--vis
the Madhya Pradesh Police Regulations dealing with surveillance,
opined that the said Regulations did not violate the "procedure
established by law". However, a limited fundamental right to privacy
as emanating from Articles 19(1)(a), (d) and 21 was upheld, but the
same was held to be not absolute wherefor reasonable restrictions
could be placed in terms of clause (5) of Article 19."
85. In Selvi V. State of Karnataka 99 ("Selvi"), a Bench of three Judges
of this Court dealt with a challenge to the validity of three investigative
techniques : narco-analysis, polygraph test (lie-detector test) and brain
electrical activation profile (BEAP) on the ground that they implicate the
fundamental rights under Articles 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution. The
Court held that the results obtained through an involuntary
administration of these tests are within the scope of a testimonial,
attracting the protective shield of Article 20(3) of the Constitution.
Balakrishnan, C.J. adverted to the earlier decisions rendered in the
context of privacy and noted that thus far, judicial understanding had
stressed mostly on the protection of the body and physical actions
induced by the State. The Court emphasised that while the right against
self-incrimination is a component of personal liberty under Article 21,
privacy under the Constitution has a meeting point with Article 20(3) as
"225.
The theory of interrelationship of rights mandates that the
right against self-incrimination should also be read as a component of
"personal liberty" under Article 21. Hence, our understanding of the
"right to privacy" should account for its intersection with Article 20(3).
Furthermore, the "rule against involuntary confessions" as embodied in
Sections 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the Evidence Act, 1872 seeks to serve
both
the objectives of reliability as well as voluntariness of testimony given in
a custodial setting. A conjunctive reading of Articles 20(3) and 21 of the
Constitution along with the principles of evidence law leads us to a clear
answer. We must recognise the importance of personal autonomy in
aspects such as the choice between remaining silent and speaking. An
individual's decision to make a statement is the product of a private
choice and there should be no scope for any other individual to interfere
with such autonomy, especially in circumstances where the person faces
exposure to criminal charges or penalties.
226. Therefore, it is our considered opinion that subjecting a person
to the impugned techniques in an involuntary manner violates the
prescribed boundaries of privacy. Forcible interference with a person's
mental processes is not provided for under any statute and it most
certainly comes into conflict with the "right against self-
incrimination".'
In
tracing the right to privacy under Article 20(3), as well as Article 21,
the decision marks a definite shift away from the M.P. Sharma rationale.
The right not to be compelled to speak or to incriminate oneself when
accused of an offence is an embodiment of the right to privacy. Selvi79
indicates how the right to privacy can straddle the ambit of several
constitutional rights - in that case, Articles 20(3) and 21.
86. In Bhabani Prasad Jena V. Orissa State Commission for Women
the Court was considering the question whether the High Court was
justified in issuing a direction for a DNA test of a child and the appellant
who, according to the mother of the child, was the father. It was held
"21. In a matter where paternity of a child is in issue before the
court, the use of DNA test is an extremely delicate and sensitive
aspect. One view is that when modern science gives the means of
ascertaining the paternity of a child, there should not be any hesitation
to use those means whenever the occasion requires. The other view is
that the court must be reluctant in the use of such scientific advances
and tools which result in invasion of right to privacy of an individual
and may not only be prejudicial to the rights of the parties but may
have devastating effect on the child. Sometimes the result of such
scientific test may bastardise an innocent child even though his
mother and her spouse were living together during the time of
conception."
87. In Amar Singh V. Union of India81 a Bench of two Judges of this
Court dealt with a petition under Article 32 alleging that the fundamental
right to privacy of the petitioner was being breached by intercepting his
conversations on telephone services provided by a service provider. The
"39. Considering the materials on record, this Court is of the opinion
that it is no doubt true that the service provider has to act on an
urgent basis and has to act in public interest. But in a given case, like
the present one, where the impugned communication dated 9-11-
2005 is full of gross mistakes, the service provider while immediately
acting upon the same, should simultaneously verify the authenticity of
the same from the author of the document. This Court is of the opinion
that the service provider has to act as a responsible agency and cannot
act on any communication. Sanctity and regularity in official
communication in such matters must be maintained especially when
the service provider is taking the serious step of intercepting the
telephone conversation of a person and by doing so is invading the
privacy right of the person concerned and which is a fundamental right
protected under the Constitution, as has been held by this Court."
(emphasis supplied)
88. In Ram Jethmalani V. Union of India82 ("Ram Jethmalani"),
a
Bench of two Judges was dealing with a public interest litigation
concerned with unaccounted monies and seeking the appointment of a
Special Investigating Team to follow and investigate a money trail. This
Court held that the revelation of the details of the bank accounts of
individuals without the establishment of a prima facie ground of
wrongdoing would be a violation of the right to privacy. This Court
"83. Right to privacy is an integral part of right to life. This is a
cherished constitutional value, and it is important that human beings
be allowed domains of freedom that are free of public scrutiny unless
they act in an unlawful manner. We understand and appreciate the
fact that the situation with respect to unaccounted for monies is
extremely grave. Nevertheless, as constitutional adjudicators we
always have to be mindful of preserving the sanctity of constitutional
values, and hasty steps that derogate from fundamental rights,
whether urged by Governments or private citizens, howsoever well-
meaning they may be, have to be necessarily very carefully
scrutinised. The solution for the problem of abrogation of one zone of
constitutional values cannot be the creation of another zone of
abrogation of constitutional values.
84. The rights of citizens, to effectively seek the protection of
fundamental rights, under clause (1) of Article 32 have to be balanced
against the rights of citizens and persons under Article 21. The latter
cannot be sacrificed on the anvil of fervid desire to find instantaneous
solutions to systemic problems such as unaccounted for monies, for it
would lead to dangerous circumstances, in which vigilante
investigations, inquisitions and rabble rousing, by masses of other
citizens could become the order of the day. The right of citizens to
petition this Court for upholding of fundamental rights is granted in
order that citizens, inter alia, are ever vigilant about the functioning of
the State in order to protect the constitutional project. That right
cannot be extended to being inquisitors of
fellow citizens. An inquisitorial order, where citizens' fundamental right to
privacy is breached by fellow citizens is destructive of social order. The
notion of fundamental rights, such as a right to privacy as part of right to
life, is not merely that the State is enjoined from derogating from them.
It also includes the responsibility of the State to uphold them against the
actions of others in the society, even in the context of exercise of
fundamental rights by those others."
(emphasis supplied)
The Court held that while the State could access details of the bank
accounts of citizens as an incident of its power to investigate and
prosecute crime, this would not enable a private citizen to compel a
citizen to reveal bank accounts to the public at large.
89. In Hindustan Times V. High Court of Allahabad 83 the two-Judge
Bench dealt with a contempt petition in respect of publication of an
incorrect report in a newspaper which tarnished the image of the Chief
Justice of a High Court. The Court made the following observations :
"6. The unbridled power of the media can become dangerous if
checks and balances are not inherent in it. The role of the media is to
provide to the readers and the public in general with information and
views tested and found as true and correct. This power must be
carefully regulated and must reconcile with a person's fundamental
right to privacy."
(emphasis supplied)
90. In Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re84, B.S. Chauhan, J. in a
"312. Right to privacy has been held to be a fundamental right of
the citizen being an integral part of Article 21 of the Constitution of
India by this Court. Illegitimate intrusion into privacy of a person is
not permissible as right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and
liberty guaranteed under our Constitution. Such a right has been
extended even to woman of easy virtues as she has been held to be
entitled to her right to privacy. However, right to privacy may not be
absolute and in exceptional circumstances particularly surveillance in
consonance with the statutory provisions may not violate such a right."
In the view of the Court, privacy and dignity of human life have "always
been considered a fundamental human right of every human being" like
other constitutional values such as free speech. We must also take notice
of the construction placed by the judgment on the decision in Kharak
Singh2 as having "held that the right to privacy is a part of life under
Article 21 of the Constitution" and which was reiterated in PUCL
10
91. The judgment of a Bench of two Judges of this Court in Bihar
Public Service Commission V. Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi 85 dealt with
the provisions of Section 8(1)(g) of the Right to Information Act, 2005. A
person claiming to be a public-spirited citizen sought information under
the statute from the Bihar Public Service Commission on a range of
matters relating to interviews conducted by it on two days. The
Commission disclosed the information save and except for the names of
the interview board. The High Court directed86 disclosure. Section 8(1)(g)
provides an exemption from disclosure of information of the following
"21.
'information, the disclosure of which would endanger the life
or physical safety of any person or identify the source of information or
assistance given in confidence for law enforcement and security
purposes.
23)
"23.
Certain matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are
required to be dealt with great confidentiality. The information may
come to knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by others
who give that information in confidence and with complete faith,
integrity and fidelity. Secrecy of such information shall be maintained,
thus. bringing it within the ambit of fiduciarv capacitv. Similarlv. there
may be cases where the disclosure has no relationship to any public
activity or interest or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of
privacy of the individual. All these protections have to be given their
due implementation as they spring from statutory exemptions. It is
not a decision simpliciter between private interest and public interest.
It is a matter where a constitutional protection is available to a person
with regard to the right to privacy. Thus, the public interest has to be
construed while keeping in mind the balance factor between right to
privacy and right to information with the purpose sought to be
achieved and the purpose that would be served in the larger public
interest, particularly when both these rights emerge from the
constitutional values under the Constitution of India."
(emphasis supplied)
Significantly, though the Court was construing the text of a statutory
exemption contained in Section 8, it dwelt on the privacy issues involved
in the disclosure of information furnished in confidence by adverting to
the constitutional right to privacy.
92. The decision in Lillu V. State of Haryana 87 emphasised the right of
rape survivors to privacy, physical and mental integrity and dignity. The
"13. In view of International Covenant on Economic, Social, and
Cultural Rights, 1966; United Nations Declaration of Basic Principles of
Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, 1985, the rape
survivors are entitled to legal recourse that does not re-traumatise
them or violate their physical or mental integrity and dignity. They are
also entitled to medical procedures conducted in a manner that
respects their right to consent. Medical procedures should not be
carried out in a manner that constitutes cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment and health should be of paramount consideration while
dealing with gender-based violence. The State is under an obligation
to make such services available to survivors of sexual violence. Proper
measures should be taken to ensure their safety and there should be
no arbitrary or unlawful interference with their privacy."
(emphasis supplied)
93. In Thalappalam Service Coop. Bank Ltd. V. State of Kerala
,
another Bench of two Judges considered the correctness of a decision of
the Kerala High Court which upheld a circular issued by the Registrar of
Cooperative Societies. By the circular all cooperative institutions under
his administrative control were declared to be public authorities within
the meaning of Section 2(h) of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
Section 8(j) contains an exemption from the disclosure of personal
information which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or
which would cause "unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual"
unless the authority is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies its
disclosure. This Court observed that the right to privacy has been
recognised as a part of Article 21 of the Constitution and the statutory
provisions contained in Section 8(j) of the RTI Act have been enacted by
the legislature in recognition of the constitutional protection of privacy.
"57. The right to privacy is also not expressly guaranteed under the
Constitution of India. However, the Privacy Bill, 2011 to provide for the
right to privacy to citizens of India and to regulate the collection,
maintenance and dissemination of their personal information and for
penalisation for violation of such rights and matters connected
therewith, is pending. In several judgments including Kharak Singh V.
State of U.P. R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N. 9 PUCL V. Union of India
and State of Maharashtra V. Bharat Shanti Lal Shah 73 this Court has
recognised the right to privacy as a fundamental right emanating from
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
*
*
*
64. Recognising the fact that the right to privacy is a sacrosanct
facet of Article 21 of the Constitution, the legislation has put a lot of
safeguards to protect the rights under Section 8(j), as already
indicated."
This Court held that on facts the cooperative societies were not public
authorities and the decision under challenge was quashed.
94. In Manoj Narula V. Union of India89 a Constitution Bench of this
Court was hearing a petition filed in the public interest complaining of the
increasing criminalisation of politics. Dealing with the provisions of Article
75(1) of the Constitution, Dipak Misra, J. while explaining the doctrine of
"constitutional implications", considered whether the Court could read a
disqualification into the provisions made by the Constitution in addition
to those which have been provided by the legislature. In that context, the
"69. In this regard, inclusion of many a facet within the ambit of
Article 21 is well established. In R. Rajagopal V. State of T.N.9 right to
privacy has been inferred from Article 21. Similarly, in Joginder Kumar
V. State of U.P. , inherent rights under Articles 21 and 22 have been
stated. Likewise, while dealing with freedom of speech and expression
and freedom of press, the Court, in Romesh Thappar V. State of
Madras91 91 has observed that freedom of speech and expression
includes freedom of propagation of ideas.
70. There is no speck of doubt that the Court has applied the
doctrine of implication to expand the constitutional concepts, but the
context in which the horizon has been expanded has to be borne in
mind.
At this juncture, it is seemly to state that the principle of
implication is fundamentally founded on rational inference of an idea
from the words used in the text.
Any proposition that is arrived at
taking this route of interpretation must find some resting pillar or
strength on the basis of certain words in the text or the scheme of the
text. In the absence of that, it may not be permissible for a court to
deduce any proposition as that would defeat the legitimacy of
reasoning. A proposition can be established by reading a number of
articles cohesively, for that will be in the domain of substantive
legitimacy."
(emphasis supplied)
95. In National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India 92 ("NALSA"),
a Bench of two Judges, while dealing with the rights of transgenders,
adverted to international conventions acceded to by India including UDHR
and ICCPR. Provisions in these conventions which confer a protection
against arbitrary and unlawful interference with a person's privacy, family
and home would, it was held, be read in a manner which harmonises the
fundamental rights
contained in Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 with India's international
"72. Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal
identity, gender expression and presentation and, therefore, it will
have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of
India. A transgender's personality could be expressed by the
transgender's behaviour and presentation. State cannot prohibit,
restrict or interfere with a transgender's expression of such
personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often the State
and its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest
the innate character and identity of such persons. We, therefore, hold
that values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy and personal integrity
are fundamental rights guaranteed to members of the transgender
community under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India and the
State is bound to protect and recognise those rights."
paras 73 & 75)
"73.
Article 21 is the heart and soul of the Indian Constitution,
which speaks of the rights to life and personal liberty. Right to life is
one of the basic fundamental rights and not even the State has the
authority to violate or take away that right. Article 21 takes all those
aspects of life which go to make a person's life meaningful. Article 21
protects the dignity of human life, one's personal autonomy, one's
right to privacy, etc. Right to dignity has been recognised to be an
essential part of the right to life and accrues to all persons on account
618-19, paras 7 and 8), this Court held that the right to dignity forms
an essential part of our constitutional culture which seeks to ensure
the full development and evolution of persons and includes
"expressing oneself in diverse forms, freely moving about and mixing
and comingling with fellow human beings.
*
*
*
75. Article 21, as already indicated, guarantees the protection of
"personal autonomy" of an individual. In Anuj Garg V. Hotel Assn. of
autonomy includes both the negative right of not to be subject to
interference by others and the positive right of individuals to make
decisions about their life, to express themselves and to choose which
activities to take part in. Self-determination of gender is an integral
part of personal autonomy and self-expression and falls within the
realm of personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India."
Dr A.K. Sikri, J. wrote a lucid concurring judgment.
96. NALSA92 indicates the rationale for grounding of a right to privacy
in the protection of gender identity within Article 15. The intersection of
Article 15 with Article 21 locates a constitutional right to privacy as an
expression of individual autonomy, dignity and identity. NALSA9
indicates
that the right to privacy does not necessarily have to fall within the ambit
of any one provision in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights. Intersecting
rights recognise the right to privacy. Though primarily, it is in the
guarantee of life and personal liberty under Article 21 that a
constitutional right to privacy dwells, it is enriched by the values
incorporated in other rights which are enumerated in Part III of the
Constitution.
97. In ABC V. State (NCT of Delhi)94 the Court dealt with the question
whether it is imperative for an unwed mother to specifically notify the
putative father of the child of her petition for appointment as guardian of
her child. It was stated by the mother of the child that she does not want
the future of her child to be marred by any controversy regarding his
paternity, which would indubitably result should the father refuse to
acknowledge the child as his own. It was her contention that her own
fundamental right to privacy will be violated if she is compelled to
disclose the name and particulars of the father of her child. Looking into
"28.
if a single parent/unwed mother applies for the issuance of a
birth certificate for a child born from her womb, the authorities
concerned may only require her to furnish an affidavit to this effect,
and must thereupon issue the birth certificate, unless there is a court
direction to the contrary."
(emphasis supplied)
98. While considering the constitutional validity of the Constitution
(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 which enunciated an institutional
process for the appointment of Judges, the concurring judgment of
Madan B. Lokur, J. in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union
of India95 dealt with privacy issues involved if disclosures were made
about a candidate under consideration for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court or High Court. Dealing with the right to know of the
general public on the one hand and the right to privacy on the other
hand, Lokur, J. noted that the latter is an "implicit fundamental right that
"953. The balance between transparency and confidentiality is very
delicate and if some sensitive information about a particular person is
made public, it can have a far-reaching impact on his/her reputation
and dignity. The 99th Constitution Amendment Act and the NJAC Act
have not taken note of the privacy concerns of an individual. This is
important because it was submitted by the learned Attorney General
that the proceedings
of NJAC will be completely transparent and any one can have access to
information that is available with NJAC. This is a rather sweeping
generalisation which obviously does not take into account the privacy of a
person who has been recommended for appointment, particularly as a
Judge of the High Court or in the first instance as a Judge of the Supreme
Court. The right to know is not a fundamental right but at best it is an
implicit fundamental right and it is hedged in with the implicit
fundamental right to privacy that all people enjoy. The balance between
the two implied fundamental rights is difficult to maintain, but the 99th
Constitution Amendment Act and the NJAC Act do not even attempt to
consider, let alone achieve that balance."
(emphasis supplied)
99. A comprehensive analysis of precedent has been necessary
because it indicates the manner in which the debate on the existence of a
constitutional right to privacy has progressed. The content of the
constitutional right to privacy and its limitations have proceeded on a
case-to-case basis, each precedent seeking to build upon and follow the
previous formulations. The doctrinal foundation essentially rests upon the
trilogy of M.P. Sharma - Kharak Singh2 - Gobind upon which
subsequent decisions including those in Rajagopal  , PUCL10, Canara
10
Bank65 Selvi79 and NALSA92 have contributed. Reconsideration of the
doctrinal basis cannot be complete without evaluating what the trilogy of
cases has decided.
100. M.P. Sharma dealt with a challenge to a search on the ground
that the statutory provision which authorised it, violated the guarantee
against self-incrimination in Article 20(3). In the absence of a specific
provision like the Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution in the Indian
Constitution, the Court answered the challenge by its ruling that an
individual who is subject to a search during the course of which material
is seized does not make a voluntary testimonial statement of the nature
that would attract Article 20(3). The Court distinguished a compulsory
search from a voluntary statement of disclosure in pursuance of a notice
issued by an authority to produce documents. It was the former category
that was held to be involved in a compulsive search, which the Court held
would not attract the guarantee against self-incrimination. The judgment,
however, proceeded further to hold that in the absence of the right to
privacy having been enumerated in the Constitution, a provision like the
Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution could not be read into our
own. The observation in regard to the absence of the right to privacy in
our Constitution was strictly speaking, not necessary for the decision of
the Court in M.P. Sharma
and the observation itself is no more than a passing observation.
Moreover, the decision does not adjudicate upon whether privacy could
be a constitutionally protected right under any other provision such as
Article 21 or under Article 19.
101. Kharak Singh 2 does not contain a reference to M.P. Sharma. The
decision of the majority in Kharak Singh2 is essentially divided into two
parts; the first dealing with the validity of a regulation for nocturnal
domiciliary visits (which was struck down) and the second dealing with
the rest of the regulation (which was upheld). The decision on the first
part, which dealt with Regulation 236(b) conveys an inescapable
impression that the regulation invaded the sanctity of the home and was
a
violation of ordered liberty. Though the reasoning of the Court does not
use the expression "privacy", it alludes to the decision of the US Supreme
Court in Wolf V. Colorado4, which deals with privacy. Besides, the portion
extracted in the judgment has a reference to privacy specifically at two
places. While holding domiciliary visits at night to be invalid, the Court
drew sustenance from the right to life under Article 21 which means
something more than a mere animal existence. The right under Article 21
includes the enjoyment of those faculties which render the right
meaningful. Hence, the first part of the decision in Kharak Singh2
represents an amalgam of life, personal liberty and privacy. It protects
interests which are grounded in privacy under the rubric of liberty. The
difficulty in construing the decision arises because in the second part of
its decision, the majority upheld the rest of the regulation and observed
(while doing so) that there is an absence of a protected right to privacy
under the Constitution. These observations in the second part are at
variance with those dealing with the first. The view about the absence of
a right to privacy is an isolated observation which cannot coexist with the
essential determination rendered on the first aspect of the regulation.
Subsequent Benches of this Court in the last five decades and more, have
attempted to make coherent doctrine out of the uneasy coexistence
between the first and the second parts of the decision in Kharak Singh2.
Several of them rely on the protection of interests grounded in privacy in
the first part, under the conceptual foundation of ordered liberty.
102. Gobind proceeded on the basis of an assumption and explains
what according to the Court would be the content of the right to privacy if
it is held to be a constitutional right. Gobind underlines that the right
would be intrinsic to ordered liberty and would cover intimate matters
such as family, marriage and procreation. Gobind while recognising that
the right would not be absolute and would be subject to the regulatory
power of the State, conditioned the latter on the existence of a
compelling State interest. The decision also brings in the requirement of
a narrow tailoring of the regulation
to meet the needs of a compelling interest. The Bench which decided
Gobind adverted to the decision in Kharak Singh (though not M.P.
Sharma). Be that as it may, Gobind has proceeded on the basis of an
assumption that the right to privacy is a constitutionally protected right
in India. Subsequent decisions of this Court have treated the formulation
of a right to privacy as one that emerges out of Kharak Singh or Gobind
(or both). Evidently, it is the first part of the decision in Kharak Singh2
which is construed as having recognised a constitutional entitlement to
privacy without reconciling the second part which contains a specific
observation on the absence of a protected constitutional right to privacy
in the Constitution. Succeeding Benches of smaller strength were not
obviously in a position to determine the correctness of the M.P. Sharma1
and Kharak Singh2 formulations. They had to weave a jurisprudence of
privacy as new challenges emerged from a variety of sources :
wiretapping, narco-analysis, gender-based identity, medical information,
informational autonomy and other manifestations of privacy. As far as the
decisions following upon Gobind are concerned, it does emerge that the
assumptions which find specific mention in several parts of the decision
were perhaps not adequately placed in perspective. Gobind has been
construed by subsequent Benches as affirming the right to privacy.
103. The right to privacy has been traced in the decisions which have
been rendered over more than four decades to the guarantee of life and
personal liberty in Article 21 and the freedoms set out in Article 19. In
addition, India's commitment to a world order founded on respect for
human rights has been noticed along with the specific articles of the
UDHR and the ICCPR which embody the right to privacy. 96 In the view of
this Court, international law has to be construed as a part of domestic law
in the absence of legislation to the contrary and, perhaps more
significantly, the meaning of constitutional guarantees must be
illuminated by the content of international conventions to which India is a
party. Consequently, as new cases brought new issues and problems
before the Court, the content of the right to privacy has found elaboration
in these diverse contexts. These would include telephone tapping
(PUCL10), prior restraints on publication of material on a death row
convict (Rajagopal-), inspection and search of confidential documents
involving the banker-customer relationship (Canara Bank65), disclosure of
HIV status ('X' V. food preferences and animal slaughter
(Hinsa Virodhak medical termination of pregnancy (Suchita
Srivastava 75) scientific tests in criminal investigation (Selvi 9),
disclosure of bank accounts held overseas (Ram Jethmalani82) and the
right of transgenders (NALSA92). Early cases dealt with Police Regulations
authorising intrusions on liberty, such as surveillance. As Indian society
has evolved, the assertion of the right to privacy has been considered by
this Court in varying contexts replicating the choices and autonomy of
the individual citizen.
104. The deficiency, however, is in regard to a doctrinal formulation of
the basis on which it can be determined as to whether the right to
privacy is constitutionally protected. M.P. Sharma need not have
answered the question; Kharak Singh2 dealt with it in a somewhat
inconsistent formulation while Gobind rested on assumption. M.P.
Sharma being a decision of eight Judges, this Bench has been called
upon to decide on the objection of the Union of India to the existence of
such a right in the first place.
I. The Indian Constitution
Preamble
105. The Preamble to the Constitution postulates that the People of
India have resolved to constitute India into a Republic which (among
other things) is Sovereign and Democratic and to secure to all its
citizens:
"JUSTICE social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them
all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity of the
Nation;"
106. In Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan97, Mudholkar, J. alluded
to
the fact that the Preamble to our Constitution is "not of the common run"
as is the Preamble in a legislative enactment but was marked both by a
"stamp of deep deliberation" and precision. This was suggestive, in the
words of the Court, of the special significance attached to the Preamble
by the Framers of the Constitution.
107. In Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala98 ("Kesavananda
Bharati"), Sikri, C.J. noticed that the Preamble is a part of the
Constitution. The Preamble emphasises the need to secure to all citizens
justice, liberty, equality and fraternity. Together they constitute the
founding faith or the
blueprint of values embodied with a sense of permanence in the
constitutional document. The Preamble speaks of securing liberty of
thought, expression, belief, faith and worship. Fraternity is to be
promoted to assure the dignity of the individual. The individual lies at the
core of constitutional focus and the ideals of justice, liberty, equality and
fraternity animate the vision of securing a dignified existence to the
individual. The Preamble envisions a social ordering in which fundamental
constitutional values are regarded as indispensable to the pursuit of
happiness. Such fundamental values have also found reflection in the
foundational document of totalitarian regimes in other parts of the world.
What distinguishes India is the adoption of a democratic way of life,
founded on the Rule of Law. Democracy accepts differences of perception,
acknowledges divergences in ways of life, and respects dissent.
Jurisprudence on dignity
108. Over the last four decades, our constitutional jurisprudence has
recognised the inseparable relationship between protection of life and
liberty with dignity. Dignity as a constitutional value finds expression in
the Preamble. The constitutional vision seeks the realisation of justice
(social, economic and political); liberty (of thought, expression, belief,
faith and worship); equality (as a guarantee against arbitrary treatment
of individuals) and fraternity (which assures a life of dignity to every
individual). These constitutional precepts exist in unity to facilitate a
humane and compassionate society. The individual is the focal point of
the Constitution because it is in the realisation of individual rights that
the collective well-being of the community is determined. Human dignity
is
an integral part of the Constitution. Reflections of dignity are found in
the guarantee against arbitrariness (Article 14), the lamps of freedom
(Article 19) and in the right to life and personal liberty (Article 21).
109. In Prem Shankar Shukla V. Delhi Admn.9 , which arose from the
handcuffing of the prisoners, Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for a three-Judge
"1.
the guarantee of human dignity, which forms part of our
constitutional culture, and the positive provisions of Articles 14, 19
and 21 spring into action when we realise that to manacle man is more
than to mortify him; it is to dehumanise him and, therefore, to violate
his very personhood, too often using the mask of "dangerousness" and
security.
*
*
*
21. The Preamble sets the humane tone and temper of the
Founding Document and highlights justice, equality and the dignity of
the individual."
110. A Bench of two Judges in Francis Coralie Mullin V. UT of Delhi93
("Francis Coralie") while construing the entitlement of a detenue under
the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities
(COFEPOSA) Act, 1974 to have an interview with a lawyer and the
"6.
The fundamental right to life which is the most precious
human right and which forms the ark of all other rights must therefore
be interpreted in a broad and expansive spirit so as to invest it with
significance and vitality which may endure for years to come and
enhance the dignity of the individual and the worth of the human
person.
7.
the right to life enshrined in Article 21 cannot be restricted to
mere animal existence. It means something much more than just
physical survival.
8.
We think that the right to life includes the right to live with
human dignity and all that goes along with it, namely, the bare
necessaries of life such as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter and
facilities for reading, writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms,
freely moving about and mixing and commingling with fellow human
beings.
Every act which offends against or impairs human dignity
would constitute deprivation pro tanto of this right to live and it would
have to be in accordance with reasonable, fair and just procedure
established by law which stands the test of other fundamental rights."
111. In Bandhua Mukti Morcha V. Union of India00 a Bench of three
Judges of this Court while dealing with individuals who were living in
"10.
This right to live with human dignity enshrined in Article 21
derives its life breath from the directive principles of State policy and
particularly clauses (e) and (f) of Article 39 and Articles 41 and 42 and
at the least, therefore, it must include protection of the health and
strength of the workers, men and women, and of the tender age of
children against abuse, opportunities and facilities for children to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity,
educational facilities, just and humane conditions of work and
maternity relief. These are the minimum requirements which must
exist in order to enable a person to live with human dignity, and no
State - neither the Central Government nor any State Government -
has the right to take any action which will deprive a person of the
enjoyment of these basic essentials."
112. Dealing with an allegation that activists of an organisation were
arrested and paraded throughout the town by the police and were beaten
up in police custody, this Court in Khedat Mazdoor Chetna Sangath V.
State of M.P.
"10.
It is, therefore, absolutely essential in the interest of justice,
human dignity and democracy that this Court must intervene; order
an
investigation, determine the correct facts and take strongest possible
action against the respondents who are responsible for these atrocities.
*
*
*
31. If dignity or honour vanishes what remains of life!"
102
113. Human dignity was construed in M. Nagaraj V. Union of India
by a Constitution Bench of this Court to be intrinsic to and inseparable
from human existence. Dignity, the Court held, is not something which is
pp. 243 & 247-48, paras 26 & 42)
"26.
The rights, liberties and freedoms of the individual are not
only to be protected against the State, they should be facilitated by it.
It is the duty of the State not only to protect the human dignity but
to facilitate it by taking positive steps in that direction. No exact
definition of human dignity exists. It refers to the intrinsic value of
every human being, which is to be respected. It cannot be taken away.
It cannot give (sic be given). It simply is. Every human being has
dignity by virtue of his existence.
*
*
*
42. India is constituted into a sovereign, democratic republic to
secure to all its citizens, fraternity assuring the dignity of the
individual and the unity of the nation. The sovereign, democratic
republic exists to promote fraternity and the dignity of the individual
citizen and to secure to the citizens certain rights. This is because the
objectives of the State can be realised only in and through the
individuals. Therefore, rights conferred on citizens and non-citizens are
not merely individual or personal rights. They have a large social and
political content, because the objectives of the Constitution cannot be
otherwise realised."
(emphasis supplied)
114. In Maharashtra University of Health Sciences V. Satchikitsa
Prasarak Mandal103 , this Court held that the dignity of the individual is a
p. 376, para 244)
"244.
we must recognise that a forcible intrusion into a person's
mental processes is also an affront to human dignity and liberty, often
with grave and long-lasting consequences."
115. In Mehmood Nayyar Azam V. State of Chhattisgarh104, this Court
noted that when dignity is lost, life goes into oblivion. The same
emphasis on dignity finds expression in the decision in NALSA92.
116. The same principle was more recently reiterated in Shabnam V.
"14. This right to human dignity has many elements. First and
foremost, human dignity is the dignity of each human being "as a
human being". Another element, which needs to be highlighted, in the
context of the present case, is that human dignity is infringed if a
person's life, physical or mental welfare is harmed. It is in this sense
torture, humiliation, forced labour, etc. all infringe on human dignity.
It is in this context many rights of the accused derive from his dignity
as a human being."
(emphasis in original)
117. The recent decision in Jeeja Ghosh V. Union of India06 construed
the constitutional protection afforded to human dignity. The Court
"37.
human dignity is a constitutional value and a constitutional
goal. What are the dimensions of constitutional value of human
dignity? It is beautifully illustrated by Aharon Barak10 107 (former Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of Israel) in the following manner:
'The constitutional value of human dignity has a central normative
role. Human dignity as a constitutional value is the factor that unites
the human rights into one whole. It ensures the normative unity of
human rights. This normative unity is expressed in the three ways
:
first, the value of human dignity serves as a normative basis for
constitutional rights set out in the constitution; second, it serves as an
interpretative principle for determining the scope of constitutional
rights, including the right to human dignity; third, the value of human
dignity has an important role in determining the proportionality of a
statute limiting a constitutional right.''
118. Life is precious in itself. But life is worth living because of the
freedoms which enable each individual to live life as it should be lived.
The best decisions on how life should be lived are entrusted to the
individual. They are continuously shaped by the social milieu in which
individuals exist. The duty of the State is to safeguard the ability to take
decisions - the autonomy of the individual - and not to dictate those
decisions. "Life" within the meaning of Article 21 is not confined to the
integrity of the physical body. The right comprehends one's being in its
fullest sense. That which facilitates the fulfilment of life is as much within
the protection of the guarantee of life.
119. To live is to live with dignity. The draftsmen of the Constitution
defined their vision of the society in which constitutional values would be
attained by emphasising, among other freedoms, liberty and dignity. So
fundamental is dignity that it permeates the core of the rights
guaranteed to
the individual by Part III. Dignity is the core which unites the
fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve for
each individual the dignity of existence. Privacy with its attendant values
assures dignity to the individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed
with dignity can liberty be of true substance. Privacy ensures the
fulfilment of dignity and is a core value which the protection of life and
liberty is intended to achieve.
Fundamental Rights cases
120. In Golak Nath V. State of Punjab108, , there was a challenge to the
Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 and to the Mysore Land
Reforms Act (as amended) upon their inclusion in the Ninth Schedule to
the Constitution. Subba Rao, C.J. dwelt on the rule of law and its purpose
in ensuring that every authority constituted by the Constitution is subject
to it and functions within its parameters. One of the purposes of
constraining governmental power was to shield the fundamental
freedoms against legislative majorities. This thought is reflected in the
following extract from the judgment of Subba Rao, C.J. : (AIR p. 1655,
para 15 SCR p. 788)
"15.
But, having regard to the past history of our country, it could
not implicitly believe the representatives of the people, for
uncontrolled and unrestricted power might lead to an authoritarian
State. It, therefore, preserves the natural rights against the State
encroachment and constitutes the higher judiciary of the State as the
sentinel of the said rights and the balancing wheel between the rights,
subject to social control. In short, the fundamental rights, subject to
social control, have been incorporated in the rule of law."
(emphasis supplied)
The learned Judge emphasised the position of the fundamental rights
thus : (AIR p. 1656, para 16 : SCR p. 789)
"16.
They are the rights of the people preserved by our
Constitution. "Fundamental Rights" are the modern name for what
have been traditionally known as "natural rights". As one author
puts:"they are moral rights which every human being everywhere at
all times ought to have simply because of the fact that in
contradistinction with other beings, he is rational and moral". They are
the primordial rights necessary for the development of human
personality. They are the rights which enable a man to chalk out of his
own life in the manner he likes best."
(emphasis supplied)
The fundamental rights, in other words, are primordial rights which have
traditionally been regarded as natural rights. In that character these
rights are inseparable from human existence. They have been preserved
by the Constitution, this being a recognition of their existence even prior
to the constitutional document.
121. In Kesavananda Bharati 98 , a Bench of 13 Judges considered the
nature of the amending power conferred by Article 368 and whether the
exercise of the
amending power was subject to limitations in its curtailment of the
fundamental freedoms. Sikri, C.J. held that the fundamental rights are
inalienable. In his view, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had to
be utilised to interpret the Constitution having regard to the mandate of
Article 51. India, having acceded to the Universal Declaration, Sikri, C.J.
held that the treatment of rights as inalienable must guide the
interpretation of the Court. The Chief Justice relied upon a line of
precedent holding these rights to be natural and inalienable and
"300. Various decisions of this Court describe fundamental rights as
'natural rights' or 'human rights'. Some of these decisions are
extracted below:
(i) 108. There can be no doubt that the people of India have, in
exercise of their sovereign will as expressed in the Preamble,
adopted the democratic ideal which assures to the citizen the
dignity of the individual and other cherished human values as a
means to the full evolution and expression of his personality, and in
delegating to the legislature, the executive and the judiciary their
respective powers in the Constitution, reserved to themselves
certain fundamental rights, so-called, I apprehend because they
have been retained by the people and made paramount to the
delegated powers, as in the American Model. (Per Patanjali Sastri,
J., in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras, AIR p. 72, para 108 : SCR
pp. 198-99.)
(ii) '6.
That article (Article 19) enumerates certain freedoms
under the caption "right to freedom" and deals with those great and
basic rights which are recognised and guaranteed as the natural
rights inherent in the status of a citizen of a free country." (Per
Patanjali Sastri, C.J., in State of W.B. V. Subodh Gopal Bose109 AIR
p. 95, para 6 : SCR p. 596.)
'6.
I have no doubt that the Framers of our Constitution drew
the same distinction and classed the natural right or capacity of a
citizen "to acquire, hold and dispose of property" with other natural
rights and freedoms inherent in the status of a free citizen and
embodied them in Article 19(1) (Subodh case109 AIR p. 95, para
6 : SCR p. 597)
'8.
For all these reasons, I am of opinion that under the
Scheme of the Constitution, all those broad and basic freedoms
inherent in the status of a citizen as a free man are embodied and
protected from invasion by the State under clause (1) of Article 19.
(Subodh case109 AIR p. 96, para 8 : SCR p. 600)
(iii) `107. The people, however, regard certain rights as
paramount, because they embrace liberty of action to the individual
in matters of private life, social intercourse and share in the
Government of the country and other spheres. The people who
vested the three limbs
of Government with their power and authority, at the same time kept
back these rights of citizens and also sometimes of non-citizens, and
made them inviolable except under certain conditions. The rights thus
kept back are placed in Part III of the Constitution, which is headed
"Fundamental Rights", and the conditions under which these rights can
be abridged are also indicated in that Part.' (Per Hidayatullah, J. in Ujjam
Bai V. State of U.P. 110 , AIR p. 1662, para 107 : SCR pp. 926-27)
301. The High Court Allahabad has described them as follows:
(iv)'220.
man has certain natural or inalienable rights and that it
is the function of the State, in order that human liberty might be
preserved and human personality developed, to give recognition and
free play to those rights.
221. Suffice it to say that they represent a trend in the democratic
220 & 221)"
(emphasis in original and supplied)
This was the doctrinal basis for holding that the fundamental rights could
not be "amended out of existence".
122. Elaborating all those features of the Constitution which formed a
part of the basic structure, Sikri, C.J. held that : (Kesavananda Bharati
"292. The learned Attorney General said that every provision of the
Constitution is essential; otherwise it would not have been put in the
Constitution. This is true. But this does not place every provision of the
Constitution in the same position. The true position is that every
provision of the Constitution can be amended provided in the result
the basic foundation and structure of the Constitution remains the
same. The basic structure may be said to consist of the following
features:
(1) Supremacy of the Constitution;
(2) Republican and democratic form of Government;
(3) Secular character of the Constitution;
(4) Separation of powers between the legislature, the executive
and the judiciarv:
(5) Federal character of the Constitution."
123. Shelat and Grover, JJ. held that "[t]he dignity of the individual
secured by the various freedoms and basic rights in Part III and the
mandate to build a welfare State contained in Part IV" (Kesavananda
structure. Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. emphasised that the primary object
before the Constituent Assembly were : (i) to constitute India into a
sovereign, democratic republic and (ii) to secure
its citizens the rights mentioned in it. Hence, the learned Judges found it
impossible to accept that the Constitution makers would have made a
provision in the Constitution itself for the destruction of the very ideals
which they had embodied in the fundamental rights. Hence, Parliament
had no power to abrogate the fundamental features of the Constitution
including among them "the essential features of the individual freedoms
para 666)
"666. On a careful consideration of the various aspects of the case,
we are convinced that Parliament has no power to abrogate or
emasculate the basic elements or fundamental features of the
Constitution such as the sovereignty of India, the democratic character
of our polity, the unity of the country, the essential features of the
individual freedoms secured to the citizens. Nor has Parliament the
power to revoke the mandate to build a welfare State and egalitarian
society. These limitations are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
Despite these limitations, however, there can be no question that the
amending power is a wide power and it reaches every article and every
part of the Constitution. That power can be used to reshape the
Constitution to fulfil the obligation imposed on the State. It can also
be used to reshape the Constitution within the limits mentioned
earlier, to make it an effective instrument for social good. We are
unable to agree with the contention that in order to build a welfare
State, it is necessary to destroy some of the human freedoms. That, at
any rate is not the perspective of our Constitution. Our Constitution
envisages that the State should without delay make available to all the
citizens of this country the real benefits of those freedoms in a
democratic way. Human freedoms are lost gradually and imperceptibly
and their destruction is generally followed by authoritarian rule. That is
what history has taught us. Struggle between liberty and power is
eternal. Vigilance is the price that we like every other democratic
society have to pay to safeguard the democratic values enshrined in
our Constitution. Even the best of Governments are not averse to have
more and more power to carry out their plans and programmes which
they may sincerely believe to be in public interest. But a freedom once
lost is hardly ever regained except by revolution. Every encroachment
on freedom sets a pattern for further encroachments. Our
constitutional plan is to eradicate poverty without destruction of
individual freedoms."
(emphasis supplied)
"1212. (2)
Parliament cannot under Article 368 expand its power
of amendment so as to confer on itself the power to repeal, abrogate
the Constitution or damage, emasculate or destroy any of the
fundamental rights or essential elements of the basic structure of the
Constitution or of destroying the identity of the Constitution.
"
Khanna, J. in the course of the summation of his conclusions held, as
"1537. (vii) The power of amendment under Article 368 does not
include the power to abrogate the Constitution nor does it include the
power to alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution.
Subject to the retention of the basic structure or framework of the
Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary and includes within
itself the power to amend the various articles of the Constitution,
including those relating to fundamental rights as well as those which
may be said to relate to essential features. No part of a fundamental
right can claim immunity from amendatory process by being described
as the essence, or core of that right. The power of amendment would
also include within itself the power to add, alter or repeal the various
articles."
Significantly, even though Mathew, J. was in the minority, the learned
Judge in the course of his decision observed the importance of human
"1676. The social nature of man, the generic traits of his physical
and mental constitution, his sentiments of justice and the morals
within, his instinct for individual and collective preservations, his
desire for happiness, his sense of human dignity, his consciousness of
man's station and purpose in life, all these are not products of fancy
but objective factors in the realm of existence."
124. In Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj Narain112 Khanna, J. clarified that
his view in Kesavananda Bharati98 is that Parliament in the exercise of its
power to amend the Constitution cannot destroy or abrogate the basic
structure of the Constitution. No distinction was made in regard to the
scope of the amending power relating to the provisions of the
fundamental rights and in respect of matters other than the fundamental
"251.
The limitation inherent in the word "amendment" according
to which it is not permissible by amendment of the Constitution to
change the basic structure of the Constitution was to operate equally
on articles pertaining to fundamental rights as on other articles not
pertaining to those rights."
Khanna, J. noted that the right to property was held by him not to be a
part of the basic structure. Khanna, J. observed that it would have been
unnecessary for him to hold so, if none of the fundamental rights were to
be a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
125. Chandrachud, C.J., in the course of his judgment for the
Constitution Bench in Minerva Mills Ltd. V. Union of India13 traced the
history of the evolution of inalienable rights, founded in inviolable
liberties, during the course of the Freedom Movement and observed that
both Parts III and IV of the Constitution had emerged as inseparably
intertwined, without a distinction
between the negative and positive obligations of the State. The
Constitution, in this view, is founded on "the bedrock of the balance
between Parts III and IV" and to give absolute primacy to one over the
other would be to disturb the harmony of the Constitution. In the view of
"57.
The edifice of our Constitution is built upon the concepts
crystallised in the Preamble. We resolved to constitute ourselves into a
Socialist State which carried with it the obligation to secure to our
people justice - social, economic and political. We, therefore, put Part
IV into our Constitution containing directive principles of State policy
which specify the socialistic goal to be achieved. We promised to our
people a democratic polity which carries with it the obligation of
securing to the people liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship; equality of status and of opportunity and the assurance that
the dignity of the individual will at all costs be preserved. We,
therefore, put Part III in our Constitution conferring those rights on
the people."
Articles 14 and 19, the Court held, confer rights essential for the proper
functioning of a democracy and are universally so regarded by the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Withdrawing the protection of
Articles 14 and 19 was plainly impermissible and the immunity granted
by the 42nd Amendment to the Constitution to a law against the
challenge that it violates Articles 14 or 19 (if the law is for giving effect to
the directive principles) amounted to a violation of the basic structure.
No waiver of fundamental rights
126. In Behram Khurshid Pesikaka V. State of Bombay114 , Mahajan,
C.J. speaking for the Constitution Bench, noted the link between the
constitutional vision contained in the Preamble and the position of the
fundamental rights as a means to facilitate its fulfilment. Though Part III
embodies fundamental rights, this was construed to be part of the wider
notion of securing the vision of justice of the Founding Fathers and, as a
matter of doctrine, the rights guaranteed were held not to be capable of
being waived. Mahajan, C.J., observed : (AIR p. 146, para 52 : SCR pp.
653-54)
"52.
We think that the rights described as fundamental rights are
a
necessary consequence of the declaration in the Preamble that the
people of India have solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
sovereign democratic republic and to secure to all its citizens justice,
social, economic and political; liberty of thought, expression, belief,
faith and worship; equality of status and of opportunity.
These fundamental rights have not been put in the Constitution
merely for individual benefit, though ultimately they come into
operation in considering individual rights. They have been put there as
a matter of public
policy and the doctrine of waiver can have no application to provisions of
law which have been enacted as a matter of constitutional policy."
Privacy as intrinsic to freedom and liberty
127. The submission that recognising the right to privacy is an
exercise which would require a constitutional amendment and cannot be
a matter of judicial interpretation is not an acceptable doctrinal position.
The argument assumes that the right to privacy is independent of the
liberties guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. There lies the error.
The right to privacy is an element of human dignity. The sanctity of
privacy lies in its functional relationship with dignity. Privacy ensures that
a human being can lead a life of dignity by securing the inner recesses of
the human personality from unwanted intrusion. Privacy recognises the
autonomy of the individual and the right of every person to make
essential choices which affect the course of life. In doing so privacy
recognises that living a life of dignity is essential for a human being to
fulfil the liberties and freedoms which are the cornerstone of the
Constitution. To recognise the value of privacy as a constitutional
entitlement and interest is not to fashion a new fundamental right by a
process of amendment through judicial fiat. Neither are the Judges nor is
the process of judicial review entrusted with the constitutional
responsibility to amend the Constitution. But judicial review certainly has
the task before it of determining the nature and extent of the freedoms
available to each person under the fabric of those constitutional
guarantees which are protected. Courts have traditionally discharged that
function and in the context of Article 21 itself, as we have already noted,
a panoply of protections governing different facets of a dignified
existence has been held to fall within the protection of Article 21.
115
128. In Olga Tellis V. Bombay Municipal Corpn. , Chandrachud, C.J.,
while explaining the ambit of Article 21 found a rationale for protecting
the right to livelihood as an incident of the right to life. For, as the Court
held, deprivation of livelihood would result in the abrogation of the right
"32.
The sweep of the right to life conferred by Article 21 is wide
and far-reaching. It does not mean merely that life cannot be
extinguished or taken away as, for example, by the imposition and
execution of the death sentence, except according to procedure
established by law. That is but one aspect of the right to life. An
equally important facet of that right is the right to livelihood because,
no person can live without the means of living, that is, the means of
livelihood. If the right to livelihood is not treated as a part of the
constitutional right to life, the easiest way of depriving a person of his
right to life would be to deprive him of his means of livelihood to the
point of abrogation. Such deprivation would not only denude the life of
its effective content and meaningfulness but it would make life
impossible to live. And yet, such deprivation would not have to be in
accordance with the procedure established by law, if the right to
livelihood is not regarded as a
part of the right to life. That, which alone makes it possible to live, leave
aside what makes life liveable, must be deemed to be an integral
component of the right to life. Deprive a person of his right to livelihood
and you shall have deprived him of his life."
129. In Unni Krishnan, J.P. V. State of A.P. 116 , Jeevan Reddy,
J.
speaking for this Court, held that though the right to education (as the
Constitution then stood) was not "stated expressly as a fundamental
right" in Part III, that would not militate against its being protected
under the rubric of life under Article 21. These decisions have been
ultimately guided by the object of a Constitutional Court which must be
to expand the boundaries of fundamental human freedoms rather than to
attenuate their content through a constricted judicial interpretation. In
"5.
The attempt of the court should be to expand the reach and
ambit of the fundamental rights rather than attenuate their meaning
and content by process of judicial construction. "personal liberty" in
Article 21 is of the widest amplitude.. "
130. Now, would this Court in interpreting the Constitution freeze the
content of constitutional guarantees and provisions to what the Founding
Fathers perceived? The Constitution was drafted and adopted in a
historical context. The vision of the Founding Fathers was enriched by the
histories of suffering of those who suffered oppression and a violation of
dignity both here and elsewhere. Yet, it would be difficult to dispute that
many of the problems which contemporary societies face would not have
been present to the minds of the most perspicacious draftsmen. No
generation, including the present, can have a monopoly over solutions or
the confidence in its ability to foresee the future. As society evolves, so
must constitutional doctrine. The institutions which the Constitution has
created must adapt flexibly to meet the challenges in a rapidly growing
knowledge economy. Above all, constitutional interpretation is but a
process in achieving justice, liberty and dignity to every citizen.
131. Undoubtedly, there have been aberrations. In the evolution of
the doctrine in India, which places the dignity of the individual and
freedoms and liberties at the forefront, there have been a few discordant
notes. Two of them need attention.
Discordant notes
(i) ADM, Jabalpur
132. In ADM, Jabalpur V. Shivakant Shukla ("ADM, Jabalpur"), the
issue before this Court was whether an order issued by the President
under Article 359(1) of the Constitution suspends the right of every
person to move any court for the enforcement of the right to personal
liberty under Article 21 upon being detained under a law providing for
preventive detention. The
submission of the detenues in this Court was that the suspension of the
remedy to enforce Article 21 does not automatically entail suspension of
the right or the rule of law and that even during an emergency the rule of
law could not be suspended. A majority of four Judges of this Court (H.R.
"33. Liberty is confined and controlled by law, whether common law
or statute. It is in the words of Burke a regulated freedom. It is not an
abstract or absolute freedom. The safeguard of liberty is in the good
sense of the people and in the system of representative and
responsible Government which has been evolved. If extraordinary
powers are given, they are given because the emergency is
extraordinary, and are limited to the period of the emergency."
133. Dealing with the issue as to whether Article 21 is the sole
repository of the right to life, Ray, C.J., observed that where any right
which existed before the commencement of the Constitution has been
incorporated in Part III, the Common law right would not exist under the
Constitution. In a concurring judgment Beg, J. held that while adopting
the Constitution, there was a notional surrender by the people of India of
the control over these rights to a sovereign republic and it is only the
Constitution which is supreme and which can confer rights and powers.
There was, in this view, a notional surrender of individual freedom. Beg,
"183.
The whole object of guaranteed fundamental rights is to
make those basic aspects of human freedom, embodied in
fundamental rights, more secure than others not so selected. In thus
recognising and declaring certain basic aspects of rights as
fundamental by the Constitution of the country, the purpose was to
protect them against undue encroachments upon them by the
legislative, or executive, and, sometimes even judicial (e.g. Article 20)
organs of the State. The encroachment must remain within permissible
limits and must take place only in prescribed modes. The intention
could never be to preserve something concurrently in the field of
natural law or common law. It was to exclude all other control or to
make the Constitution the sole repository of ultimate control over
those aspects of human freedom which were guaranteed there."
(emphasis supplied)
379)
"379.
The right to personal liberty has no hallmark and therefore
when the right is put in action it is impossible to identify whether the
right is one given by the Constitution or is one which existed in the pre
-Constitution era. If the argument of the respondents is correct, no
action to enforce the right to personal liberty can at all fall within the
mischief of the Presidential Order even if it mentions Articles 19, 20,
21 and 22 because, every preliminary objection by the Government to
a petition to enforce the right to personal liberty can be effectively
answered by contending
that what is being enforced is either the natural right to personal liberty
or generally, the pre-Constitution right to personal liberty. The error of
the respondents argument lies in its assumption, and in regard to the
argument of some of the counsel in its major articulate premise, that the
qualitative content of the non-constitutional or pre-constitutional right to
personal liberty is different from the content of the right to personal
liberty conferred by Part III of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
"383. It therefore does not make any difference whether any right
to personal liberty was in existence prior to the enactment of the
Constitution, either by way of a natural right, statutory right, common
law right or a right available under the law of torts. Whatever may be
the source of the right and whatever may be its jurisdiction, the right
in essence and substance is the right to personal liberty. That right
having been included in Part III, its enforcement will stand suspended
if it is mentioned in the Presidential Order issued under Article 359
(1)."
"459. Now, to my mind, it is clear that when this principle of rule of
law that the executive cannot deprive a person of his liberty except by
authority of law, is recognised and embodied as a fundamental right
and enacted as such in Article 21, it is difficult to comprehend how it
could continue to have a distinct and separate existence,
independently and apart from this article in which it has been given
constitutional vesture. I fail to see how it could continue in force under
Article 372 when it is expressly recognised and embodied as a
fundamental right in Article 21 and finds a place in the express
provisions of the Constitution. Once this principle is recognised and
incorporated in the Constitution and forms part of it, it could not have
any separate existence apart from the Constitution, unless it were also
enacted as a statutory principle by some positive law of the State."
(emphasis supplied)
In his view, it is the Constitution which is supreme and if it ordains that a
person who is detained otherwise than in accordance with law would not
be entitled to enforce the right of personal liberty, the Court was duty-
"487.
it cannot be overlooked that, in the ultimate analysis, the
protection of personal liberty and the supremacy of law which sustains
it must be governed by the Constitution itself. The Constitution is the
paramount and supreme law of the land and if it says that even if a
person is detained otherwise than in accordance with the law, he shall
not be entitled to enforce his right of personal liberty, whilst a
Presidential Order under Article 359 clause (1) specifying Article 21 is
in force, I have to give effect to it. Sitting as I do, as a Judge under
the Constitution, I cannot ignore the plain and emphatic command of
the Constitution for what I may consider to be necessary to meet the
ends of justice. It is said that law has the feminine
capacity to tempt each devotee to find his own image in her bosom. No
one escapes entirely. Some yield blindly, some with sophistication. Only a
few more or less effectively resist. I have always leaned in favour of
upholding personal liberty, for, I believe, it is one of the most cherished
values of mankind. Without it life would not be worth living. It is one of
the pillars of free democratic society. Men have readily laid down their
lives at its altar, in order to secure it, protect it and preserve it. But I do
not think it would be right for me to allow my love of personal liberty to
cloud my vision or to persuade me to place on the relevant provision of
the Constitution a construction which its language cannot reasonably
bear. I cannot assume to myself the role of Plato's "Philosopher King" in
order to render what I consider ideal justice between the citizen and the
State. After all, the Constitution is the law of all laws and there alone
judicial conscience must find its ultimate support and its final resting
place. It is in this spirit of humility and obedience to the Constitution and
driven by judicial compulsion, that I have come to the conclusion that the
Presidential Order dated 27-6-1975 bars maintainability of a writ petition
for habeas corpus where an order of detention is challenged on the
ground that it is mala fide or not under the Act or not in compliance with
it."
134. In his dissenting opinion, Khanna, J. emphatically held that the
suspension of the right to move any court for the enforcement of the
right under Article 21, upon a proclamation of emergency, would not
affect the enforcement of the basic right to life and liberty. The
Constitution was not the sole repository of the right to life and liberty :
"525.
I am of the opinion that Article 21 cannot be considered to
be the sole repository of the right to life and personal liberty. The right
to life and personal liberty is the most precious right of human beings
in civilised societies governed by the rule of law. Many modern
Constitutions incorporate certain fundamental rights, including the one
relating to personal freedom. According to Blackstone, the absolute
rights of Englishmen were the rights of personal security, personal
liberty and private property. The American Declaration of
Independence (1776) states that all men are created equal, and
among their inalienable rights are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness."
Even in the absence of Article 21, it would not have been permissible for
the State to deprive a person of his life and liberty without the authority
"530. Even in the absence of Article 21 in the Constitution, the
State has got no power to deprive a person of his life or liberty without
the authority of law. This is the essential postulate and basic
assumption of the rule of law and not of men in all civilised nations.
Without such sanctity of life and liberty, the distinction between a
lawless society and one governed
by laws would cease to have any meaning. The principle that no one shall
be deprived of his life or liberty without the authority of law is rooted in
the consideration that life and liberty are priceless possessions which
cannot be made the plaything of individual whim and caprice and that
any act which has the effect of tampering with life and liberty must
receive sustenance from and sanction of the laws of the land. Article 21
incorporates an essential aspect of that principle and makes it part of the
fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution. It does not,
however, follow from the above that if Article 21 had not been drafted
and inserted in Part III, in that event it would have been permissible for
the State to deprive a person of his life or liberty without the authority of
law. No case has been cited before us to show that before the coming
into force of the Constitution or in countries under the rule of law where
there is no provision corresponding to Article 21, a claim was ever
sustained by the courts that the State can deprive a person of his life or
liberty without the authority of law."
The remedy for the enforcement of the right to life or liberty would not
stand suspended even if the right to enforce Article 21 is suspended
:
"531.
Recognition as fundamental right of one aspect of the pre-
constitutional right cannot have the effect of making things less
favourable so far as the sanctity of life and personal liberty is
concerned compared to the position if an aspect of such right had not
been recognised as fundamental right because of the vulnerability of
fundamental rights accruing from Article 359."
135. Khanna, J. held that while wide powers to order preventive
detention are vested in the State, there is no antithesis between the
power to detain and power of the Court to examine the legality of such a
"574.
The impact upon the individual of the massive and
comprehensive powers of preventive detention with which the
administrative officers are armed has to be cushioned with legal
safeguards against arbitrary deprivation of personal liberty if the
premises of the rule of law is not to lose its content and become
meaningless."
136. The judgments rendered by all the four Judges constituting the
majority in ADM, Jabalpur5 are seriously flawed. Life and personal liberty
are inalienable to human existence. These rights are, as recognised in
Kesavananda Bharati98, primordial rights. They constitute rights under
Natural law. The human element in the life of the individual is integrally
founded on the sanctity of life. Dignity is associated with liberty and
freedom. No civilised State can contemplate an encroachment upon life
and personal liberty without the authority of law. Neither life nor liberty
are bounties conferred by the State
nor does the Constitution create these rights. The right to life has existed
even before the advent of the Constitution. In recognising the right, the
Constitution does not become the sole repository of the right. It would be
preposterous to suggest that a democratic Constitution without a Bill of
Rights would leave individuals governed by the State without either the
existence of the right to live or the means of enforcement of the right.
The right to life being inalienable to each individual, it existed prior to the
Constitution and continued in force under Article 372 of the Constitution.
Khanna, J. was clearly right in holding that the recognition of the right to
life and personal liberty under the Constitution does not denude the
existence of that right, apart from it nor can there be a fatuous
assumption that in adopting the Constitution the people of India
surrendered the most precious aspect of the human persona, namely,
life, liberty and freedom to the State on whose mercy these rights would
depend. Such a construct is contrary to the basic foundation of the Rule
of Law which imposes restraints upon the powers vested in the modern
State when it deals with the liberties of the individual. The power of the
Court to issue a writ of habeas corpus is a precious and undeniable
feature of the Rule of Law.
137. A constitutional democracy can survive when citizens have an
undiluted assurance that the Rule of Law will protect their rights and
liberties against any invasion by the State and that judicial remedies
would be available to ask searching questions and expect answers when a
citizen has been deprived of these, most precious rights. The view taken
by Khanna, J. must be accepted, and accepted in reverence for the
strength of its thoughts and the courage of its convictions.
138. When histories of nations are written and critiqued, there are
judicial decisions at the forefront of liberty. Yet others have to be
consigned to the archives, reflective of what was, but should never have
117
been. The decision of the US Supreme Court in Buck V. Bell ranks
amongst the latter. It was a decision in which Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.,
J. accepted the forcible sterilisation by tubular ligation of Carrie Bucks as
part of a programme of State sponsored eugenic sterilisation. Holmes, J.
while upholding the programme opined that:"three generations of
imbeciles is enough"118. In the same vein was the decision of the US
Supreme Court in Korematsu V. United States119, , upholding the
imprisonment of a citizen in a concentration camp solely because of his
Japanese ancestry.
139. ADM, Jabalpur 6 must be and is accordingly overruled. We also
overrule the decision in Union of India V. Bhanudas Krishna Gawde1 120
which followed ADM, Jabalpur6.
140. In I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N. 121 , this Court took the view that
ADM, Jabalpur 6 has been impliedly overruled by various subsequent
"29. During emergency, the fundamental rights were read even
more restrictively as interpreted by the majority in ADM, Jabalpur V.
Shivakant Shukla6. The decision in ADM, Jabalpur6 about the
restrictive reading of right to life and liberty stood impliedly overruled
by various subsequent decisions."
We now expressly do so.
141. As a result of the Forty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution,
Article 359 has been amended to provide that during the operation of a
proclamation of emergency, the power of the President to declare a
suspension of the right to move a court for the enforcement of the
fundamental rights contained in Part III shall not extend to Articles 20
and 21.
(ii) Suresh Kumar Koushal-
142. Another discordant note which directly bears upon the evolution
of the constitutional jurisprudence on the right to privacy finds reflection
in a two-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Suresh Kumar Koushal V.
Naz Foundation ("Koushal"). The proceedings before this Court arose
from a judgment12 122 of the Delhi High Court holding that Section 377 of
the Penal Code, insofar as it criminalises consensual sexual acts of adults
in private is violative of Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution. The
Delhi High Court, however, clarified that Section 377 will continue to
govern non-consensual penile, non-vaginal sex and penile non-vaginal
sex involving minors. Among the grounds of challenge was that the
statutory provision constituted an infringement of the rights to dignity
and privacy. The Delhi High Court held that : (Naz Foundation case2 ,
"48. The sphere of privacy allows persons to develop human
relations without interference from the outside community or from the
State. The exercise of autonomy enables an individual to attain
fulfilment, grow in self-esteem, build relationships of his or her choice
and fulfil all legitimate goals that he or she may set. In the Indian
Constitution, the right to live with dignity and the right to privacy both
are recognised as dimensions of Article 21."
Section 377 was held to be a denial of the dignity of an individual and to
criminalise his or her core identity solely on account of sexuality would
violate Article 21. The High Court adverted at length to global trends in
the protection of privacy-dignity rights of homosexuals, including
decisions emanating from the US Supreme Court, the South African
Constitutional Court
and the European Court of Human Rights. The view of the High Court was
that a statutory provision targeting homosexuals as a class violates
Article 14, and amounted to a hostile discrimination on the grounds of
sexual orientation (outlawed by Article 15). The High Court, however,
read down Section 377 in the manner which has been adverted to above.
143. When the matter travelled to this Court, Singhvi, J. speaking for
the Bench dealt with several grounds including the one based on privacy-
dignity. The Court recognised that the right to privacy which is
recognised by Article 12 of the Universal Declaration and Article 17 of
ICCPR has been read into Article 21 "through expansive reading of the
right to life and liberty". This Court, however, found fault with the basis
of the judgment of the High Court for the following, among other
"66.
the Division Bench of the High Court overlooked that a
miniscule fraction of the country's population constitutes lesbians,
gays, bisexuals or transgenders and in last more than 150 years less
than 200 persons have been prosecuted (as per the reported orders)
for committing offence under Section 377 IPC and this cannot be
made sound basis for declaring that section ultra vires the provisions
of Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
The privacy and dignity based challenge was repelled with the following
"77. In its anxiety to protect the so-called rights of LGBT persons
and to declare that Section 377 IPC violates the right to privacy,
autonomy and dignity, the High Court has extensively relied upon the
judgments of other jurisdictions. Though these judgments shed
considerable light on various aspects of this right and are informative
in relation to the plight of sexual minorities, we feel that they cannot
be applied blindfolded for deciding the constitutionality of the law
enacted by the Indian Legislature."
(emphasis supplied)
144. Neither of the above reasons can be regarded as a valid
constitutional basis for disregarding a claim based on privacy under
Article 21 of the Constitution. That "a miniscule fraction of the country's
population constitutes lesbians, gays, bisexuals or transgenders" (as
observed in the judgment of this Court) is not a sustainable basis to deny
the right to privacy. The purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature
of guaranteed fundamental rights is to insulate their exercise from the
disdain of majorities, whether legislative or popular. The guarantee of
constitutional rights does not depend upon their exercise being
favourably regarded by majoritarian opinion. The test of popular
acceptance does not furnish a valid basis to disregard rights which are
conferred with the sanctity of constitutional protection. Discrete and
insular minorities face grave dangers of discrimination for the simple
reason that their views, beliefs or way of life does not accord with the
"mainstream". Yet in a democratic Constitution founded on the Rule of
Law, their rights are as sacred
as those conferred on other citizens to protect their freedoms and
liberties. Sexual orientation is an essential attribute of privacy.
Discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual orientation is
deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality
demands that the sexual orientation of each individual in society must be
protected on an even platform. The right to privacy and the protection of
sexual orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by
Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution.
145. The view in Koushal- that the High Court had erroneously relied
upon international precedents "in its anxiety to protect the so-called
rights of LGBT persons" is similarly, in our view, unsustainable. The rights
of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population cannot be
construed to be "so-called rights". The expression "so-called" seems to
suggest the exercise of a liberty in the garb of a right which is illusory.
This is an inappropriate construction of the privacy-based claims of the
LGBT population. Their rights are not "so-called" but are real rights
founded on sound constitutional doctrine. They inhere in the right to life.
They dwell in privacy and dignity. They constitute the essence of liberty
and freedom. Sexual orientation is an essential component of identity.
Equal protection demands protection of the identity of every individual
without discrimination.
146. The decision in Koushal presents a de minimis rationale when it
asserts that there have been only two hundred prosecutions for violating
Section 377. The de minimis hypothesis is misplaced because the
invasion of a fundamental right is not rendered tolerable when a few, as
opposed to a large number of persons, are subjected to hostile treatment.
The reason why such acts of hostile discrimination are constitutionally
impermissible is because of the chilling effect which they have on the
exercise of the fundamental right in the first place. For instance, pre-
publication restraints such as censorship are vulnerable because they
discourage people from exercising their right to free speech because of
the fear of a restraint coming into operation. The chilling effect on the
exercise of the right poses a grave danger to the unhindered fulfilment of
one's sexual orientation, as an element of privacy and dignity. The
chilling effect is due to the danger of a human being subjected to social
opprobrium or disapproval, as reflected in the punishment of crime.
Hence the Koushal- rationale that prosecution of a few is not an index of
violation is flawed and cannot be accepted. Consequently, we disagree
with the manner in which Koushal has dealt with the privacy-dignity
based claims of LGBT persons on this aspect.
147. Since the challenge to Section 377 is pending consideration
before a larger Bench of this Court, we would leave the constitutional
validity to be decided in an appropriate proceeding.
J. India's commitments under international law
148. The recognition of privacy as a fundamental constitutional value
is part of India's commitment to a global human rights regime. Article 51
of the
Constitution, which forms part of the directive principles, requires the
State to endeavour to "foster respect for international law and treaty
obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another"123
Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, recognises the
right to privacy:
"12. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his
privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his
honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the
law against such interference or attacks."
Similarly, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was
adopted on 16-12-1979 and came into effect on 23-3-1976. India ratified
it on 11-12-1977. Article 17 of the ICCPR provides thus:
"The obligations imposed by this article require the State to adopt
legislative and other measures to give effect to the prohibition against
such interferences and attacks as well as to the protection of the
right."
149. The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 which has been
enacted by Parliament refers to ICCPR as a human rights instrument.
Section 2(1)(d) defines "human rights":
"2. (1)(d) "human rights" means the rights relating to life,
liberty, equality and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the
Constitution or embodied in the International Covenants and
enforceable by courts in India;"
Section 2(1)(f) defines "international covenants":
"2. (1)(f) "International Covenants" means the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 16-12-1966 and such other
Covenant or Convention adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify;"
Under Section 12(f) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, the
National Human Rights Commission:
"is entrusted with the function of studying treaties and other international instruments
on human rights and make recommendations for their effective implementation".
150. ICCPR casts an obligation on States to respect, protect and fulfil
its norms. The duty of a State to respect mandates that it must not
violate the right. The duty to protect mandates that the Government
must protect it against interference by private parties. The duty to fulfil
postulates that the Government must take steps towards realisation of a
right. While elaborating the rights under Article 17, general comment 16
specifically stipulates that:
" "... there is universal recognition of the fundamental importance,
and enduring relevance, of the right to privacy and of the need to
ensure that it is safeguarded, in law and practice."
Significantly, while acceding to ICCPR, India did not file any reservation or
declaration to Article 17. While India filed reservations against Articles 1,
9 and 13, there was none to Article 17:
"Article 1 refers to the right to self-determination. The reservation
to Article 1 states that:
1. The Government of the Republic of India declares that the words
"the right of self-determination" appearing in [this article] apply only
to the peoples under foreign domination and that these words do not
apply to sovereign independent States or to a section of a people or
nation which is the essence of national integrity.'
The reservation to Article 9, which refers to the right to liberty and
security of person, detention and compensation payable on wrongful
arrest or detention, states that:
'9. The Government of the Republic of India takes the position that
the provisions of the article shall be so applied as to be in consonance
with the provisions of clauses (3) to (7) of Article 22 of the
Constitution of India. Further under the Indian legal system, there is
no enforceable right to compensation for persons claiming to be
victims of unlawful arrest or detention against the State.'
The reservation to Article 13 - which refers to protections for
aliens, states that:
`13. The Government of the Republic of India reserves its right to
apply its law relating to foreigners.''
151. On 30-6-2014, a report was presented by the office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 124 The report underscores
that:
"13.
there is universal recognition of the fundamental importance,
and enduring relevance, of the right to privacy and of the need to
ensure that it is safeguarded, in law and in practice."
152. In Bachan Singh V. State of Punjab125 ("Bachan Singh"), this
Court considered in relation to the death penalty, the obligations
assumed by India in international law, following the ratification of ICCPR.
The Court held that the requirements of Article 6 of ICCPR are
substantially similar to the guarantees contained in Articles 20 and 21 of
the Constitution. The penal law of India was held to be in accord with its
international commitments. In Francis Coralie93, this Court, while
"8. there is implicit in Article 21 the right to protection against
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment which is enunciated
in Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
guaranteed by Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights."
153. In Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan 126 , this Court observed that in
the absence of domestic law, the Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) is applicable. In NALSA92
while
dealing with the rights of transgenders, this Court found that the
international conventions were not inconsistent with the fundamental
rights guaranteed by the Constitution and must be recognised and
followed.
154. The position in law is well settled. Where there is a contradiction
between international law and a domestic statute, the Court would give
effect to the latter. In the present case, there is no contradiction between
the international obligations which have been assumed by India and the
Constitution. The Court will not readily presume any inconsistency. On
the contrary, constitutional provisions must be read and interpreted in a
manner which would enhance their conformity with the global human
rights regime. India is a responsible member of the international
community and the Court must adopt an interpretation which abides by
the international commitments made by the country particularly where
its constitutional and statutory mandates indicate no deviation. In fact,
the enactment of the Human Rights Act by Parliament would indicate a
legislative desire to implement the human rights regime founded on
constitutional values and international conventions acceded to by India.
K. Comparative law
155. This section analyses the evolution of the concept of privacy in
other jurisdictions from a comparative law perspective. The Court is
conscious of the limits of a comparative approach. Each country is
governed by its own constitutional and legal structure. Constitutional
structures have an abiding connection with the history, culture, political
doctrine and values which a society considers as its founding principles.
Foreign judgments must hence be read with circumspection ensuring
that the text is not read isolated from its context. The countries which
have been dealt with are:
(i) United Kingdom;
(ii) United States;
(iii) South Africa; and
(iv) Canada.
The narrative will then proceed to examine the decisions of the European
Court of Human Rights, the Court of Justice of the European Union and
the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. These decisions are indicative
of the manner
in which the right to privacy has been construed in diverse jurisdictions
based on the histories of the societies they govern and the challenges
before them.
(i) The UK decisions
156. The first Common law case regarding protection of privacy is said
to be Semayne case15 (1604). The case related to the entry into a
property by the Sheriff of London in order to execute a valid writ. The
case is famous for the words of Sir Edward Coke : (ER p. 195)
"1. That the house of every one is to him as his castle and fortress,
as well for his defence against injury and violence, as for his repose
"
157. Then, in Entick V. Carrington 127 (1765), Entick's house had been
forcibly entered into by agents of the State/King. Lord Camden, C.J. held
that:
"By the laws of England, every invasion of private property, be it
ever so minute, is a trespass. No man can set his foot upon my ground
without my licence, but he is liable to an action, though the damage
be nothing; which is proved by every declaration in trespass, where
the defendant is called upon to answer for bruising the grass and even
treading upon the soil."
158. Privacy jurisprudence developed further in the 19th century. In
1849, in Albert V. Strange12 128 (1849), publication was sought to be
restrained of otherwise unpublished private etchings and lists of works
done by Prince Albert and Queen Victoria. In the High Court of Chancery,
Lord Cottenham observed that : (ER p. 1179)
"
where privacy is the right invaded, postponing the injunction
would be equivalent to denying it altogether. The interposition of this
Court in these cases does not depend upon any legal right, and to be
effectual, it must be immediate."
However, the approach adopted by the Court in Albert case28 took
a
different turn in Kaye V. Robertson29 (1991). In this case, when the
appellant, after an accident, was recovering from brain surgery in a
private hospital room, two journalists posed as doctors and took
photographs of him. The appellant attempted to obtain an order to
restrain publication of the photographs. The Court of Appeal held that:
"
in English law there is no right to privacy, and accordingly there
is no right of action for breach of a person's privacy."
159. The decision in R. V. Director of Serious Fraud Office, ex p
Smith130 (1993) discussed the question of the right to silence. The
applicant (the Chairman and Managing Director of a company) was
charged of doing acts
with the intent to defraud its creditors. After having been cautioned, he
was asked to answer questions of the Director of the Serious Fraud Office.
The issue was whether the requirement to answer questions infringed the
right to silence. It was held that the powers of the Director of the Serious
Fraud Office, under the Criminal Justice Act, 1987, entitled him/her to
compel the applicant to answer questions on pain of commission of a
criminal offence. Lord Mustill, who delivered the leading opinion of the
Court, held that : (AC p. 31)
"[It] is a simple reflection of the common view that one person
should so far as possible be entitled to tell another person to mind his
own business. All civilised States recognise this assertion of personal
liberty and privacy. Equally, although there may be pronounced
disagreements between States, and between individual citizens within
States, about where the line should be drawn, few would dispute that
some curtailment of the liberty is indispensable to the stability of
society; and indeed in the United Kingdom today our lives are
permeated by enforceable duties to provide information on demand,
created by Parliament and tolerated by the majority, albeit in some
cases with reluctance."
160. Lord Mustill's statement "underlines the approach taken by the
Common law to privacy" that "it recognised privacy as a principle of
general value" and that "privacy had only been given discrete and
specific protection at Common law". 131 This approach was diluted in
Wainwright V. Home Office132 (2004), where a mother and son were
subjected to a strip-search when visiting a prison in 1997, in accordance
with existing Prison Rules. The son, who was mentally impaired and
suffered from cerebral palsy, later developed post-traumatic stress
disorder. Claims for damages arising from trespass and trespass to the
person were issued. At the time of the incident, the Human Rights Act,
1998 (HRA) had not yet come into force. When the case reached before
the House of Lords, it was argued that : (AC p. 418, para 11)
"11.
the law of tort should give a remedy for any kind of distress
caused by an infringement of the right to privacy protected by Article
8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights..
"
It was further argued that reliance must be placed upon the judgment of
Sedley, L.J. in Douglas V. Hello! Ltd. 133 (2001), where it was said that
:
(Wainwright case132 , AC p. 422, para 28)
"28. `126. What a concept of privacy does, however, is accord
recognition to the fact that the law has to protect not only those
people whose trust has been abused but those who simply find
themselves subjected to an unwanted intrusion into their personal
lives. The law no longer needs to construct an artificial relationship of
confidentiality between intruder and victim : it can recognise privacy
itself as a legal principle drawn from the fundamental value of personal
autonomy." (Douglas case133 QB p. 1001, para 126)"
(emphasis supplied)
However, Lord Hoffman in Wainwright 132 rejected all the contentions and
held that : (AC p. 422, para 30)
"30. I do not understand Sedley, L.J. to have been advocating the
creation of a high-level principle of invasion of privacy. His
observations are in my opinion no more (although certainly no less)
than a plea for the extension and possibly renaming of the old action
for breach of confidence."
Lord Hoffman also observed that : (AC pp. 419 & 423, paras 19, 31 & 32)
"19. What the courts have so far refused to do is to formulate a
general principle of "invasion of privacy"...
*
*
*
31. There seems to me a great difference between identifying
privacy as a value which underlies the existence of a rule of law (and
may point the direction in which the law should develop) and privacy
as a principle of law in itself. The English common law is familiar with
the notion of underlying values-principles only in the broadest
sense-which direct its development.
32. Nor is there anything in the jurisprudence of the European Court
of Human Rights which suggests that the adoption of some high level
principle of privacy is necessary to comply with Article 8 of the
Convention. The European Court is concerned only with whether
English law provides an adequate remedy in a specific case in which it
considers that there has been an invasion of privacy contrary to Article
8(1) and not justifiable under Article 8(2)."
161. There has been a transformation in this approach after the
Human Rights Act, 1998 (HRA) came into force. For the first time,
134
privacy was incorporated as a right under the British law.
135
162. In Campbell V. MGN Ltd. (2004), a well-known model was
photographed leaving a rehabilitation clinic, following public denials that
she was a recovering drug addict. The photographs were published in a
publication run by MGN. She sought damages under the English law
through her lawyers to bring a claim for breach of confidence engaging
Section 6 of the Human Rights Act. The House of Lords by majority
decided in her favour. Lord Hope writing for the majority held : (AC p.
480, para 85)
"[I]f there is an intrusion in a situation where a person can
reasonably expect his privacy to be respected, that intrusion will be
capable of giving rise to liability unless the intrusion can be justified
[A] duty of confidence arises when confidential information comes to
the knowledge of a person where he has notice that the information is
confidential."
In holding so, Lord Hope relied upon the following statement of Lord
Woolf in A V. B plc13 [QB p. 207, para 11(ix)] (2003) : (Campbell
135
case
, AC p. 480, para 85)
"85.
a duty of confidence will arise whenever a party subject to
the duty is in a situation where he either knows or ought to know that
the other person can reasonably expect his privacy to be protected."
Lord Hope also held that the courts, in order to decide a case, must carry
out a "balancing operation, weighing the public interest in maintaining
confidence against a countervailing public interest favouring
disclosure" (AC p. 480, para 85).
1 Baroness Hale wrote a concurring judgment and held that
:
(Campbell case135, , AC pp. 494-95, para 132)
"132. The [Human Rights] 1998 Act does not create any new
cause of action between private persons. But if there is a relevant
cause of action applicable, the court as a public authority must act
compatibly with both parties' Convention rights. In a case such as
this, the relevant vehicle will usually be the action for breach of
confidence, as Lord Woolf, C.J. held in A V. B plc136 : (QB p. 202, para
4)
'Articles 8 and 10] have provided new parameters within which the
court will decide, in an action for breach of confidence, whether a
person is entitled to have his privacy protected by the court or whether
the restriction of freedom of expression which such protection involves
cannot be justified. The court's approach to the issues which the
applications raise has been modified because, under Section 6 of the
1998 Act, the court, as a public authority, is required not to act "in a
way which is incompatible with a Convention right". The court is able
to achieve this by absorbing the rights which Articles 8 and 10 protect
into the long-established action for breach of confidence. This involves
giving a new strength and breadth to the action so that it accommodates
the requirements of these articles.' "
164. Later, in Douglas V. Hello! Ltd. (No. 3)139, , it was held that : (QB
p. 157, para 82)
"82.
What the House [in Campbell135] was agreed upon was that
the knowledge, actual or imputed, that information is private will
normally impose on anyone publishing that information the duty to
justify what, in the absence of justification, will be a wrongful invasion
of privacy."
165. Subsequent cases establish the contribution the HRA has made
in jurisprudence on privacy in the UK. In Prince of Wales V. Associated
Newspapers Ltd.138 (2006), an appeal was made against the judgment in
respect of the claim of Prince Charles for breach of confidence and
infringement of copyright. The case was brought about when The Mail on
Sunday published extracts of a dispatch by the Prince of Wales. The Court
held that : (Ch pp. 125 & 128, paras 70 & 83)
"70. The information at issue in this case is private information,
public disclosure of which constituted an interference with Prince
Charles' Article 8 rights. As heir to the throne, Prince Charles is an
important public figure. In respect of such persons the public takes an
interest in information about them that is relatively trivial. For this
reason public disclosure of such information can be particularly
intrusive.
*
*
*
83.
Prince Charles has a valid claim based on breach of
confidence and interference with his Article 8 rights "
166. In Murray V. Express Newspapers plc13 (2008), a photographer
had taken a series of photographs of a writer's infant son, which were
later published in a newspaper. The issue was whether there was misuse
of private information by taking photographs. It was held that : (Ch pp.
502-03 & 507, paras 36 & 45)
"[T]he question whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy
is a broad one, which takes account of all the circumstances of the
case. They include the attributes of the claimant, the nature of the
activity in which the claimant was engaged, the place at which it was
happening, the nature and purpose of the intrusion, the absence of
consent and whether it was known or could be inferred, the effect on
the claimant and the circumstances in which and the purposes for
which the information came into the hands of the publisher.
*
*
*
[I]t is at least arguable that David had a reasonable expectation of
privacy. The fact that he is a child is in our view of greater significance
than the Judge thought."
167. R. (GC) V. Commr. of Police of the Metropolis140 (2011) was a
case concerning the extent of the police's power (under guidelines issued
by the Association of Chief Police Officers-the ACPO guidelines) to
indefinitely retain biometric data associated with individuals who are no
longer suspected of a criminal offence. The UK Supreme Court, by a
majority held that the police force's policy of retaining DNA evidence in
the absence of "exceptional circumstances" was unlawful and a violation
of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Lord Dyson, on
behalf of the majority, held that : (WLR pp. 1244 & 1245, paras 46 & 52)
"46.
It is important that, in such an important and sensitive area
as the retention of biometric data by the police, the court reflects its
decision by making a formal order to declare what it considers to be
the true legal position. But it is not necessary to go further. Section 8
(1) of the HRA gives the court a wide discretion to grant such relief or
remedy within its powers as it considers just and appropriate. Since
Parliament is already seized of the matter, it is neither just nor
appropriate to make an order requiring a change in the legislative
scheme within a specific period.
*
*
*
52.
the present ACPO guidelines are unlawful because they are
incompatible with Article 8 of ECHR. I would grant no other relief."
168. In JR38, In re141 (2015), the appellant was involved in rioting in
2010, when still only 14 years of age. The police, in order to identify
those responsible, and for the sake of deterrence, published CCTV footage
depicting the appellant in two newspapers. The issue involved
was: "Whether the publication of photographs by the police to identify a
young person suspected of being involved in riotous behaviour and
attempted criminal damage can ever be a necessary and proportionate
interference with that person's Article 8 rights?" The majority held that
Article 8 was not engaged, as there was no reasonable expectation of
privacy in the case. Lord Toulson (with whom Lord Hodge agreed), while
stating that the conduct of the police did not amount, prima facie, to an
interference with the appellant's right to respect for his private life, held
that : (WLR p. 185, para 98)
"98.
The reasonable or legitimate expectation test is an objective
test. It is to be applied broadly, taking account of all the
circumstances of the case (as Sir Anthony Clarke MR said in Murray
case39 and having regard to underlying value or values to be
protected. Thus, for example, the publication of a photograph of a
young person acting in a criminal manner for the purpose of enabling
the police to discover his identity may
not fall within the scope of the protection of personal autonomy which is
the purpose of Article 8, but the publication of the same photograph for
another purpose might."
Lord Clarke wrote a separate judgment concurring with Lord Toulson and
held that : (WLR pp. 188-89, para 112)
"112.
the criminal nature of what the appellant was doing was
not an aspect of his private life that he was entitled to keep private.
He could not have had an objectively reasonable expectation that such
photographs, taken for the limited purpose of identifying who he was,
would not be published."
142
169. The decision in PJS V. News Group Newspapers Ltd.
(2016)
dealt with an anonymised privacy injunction. 143 The injunction was
sought by the claimant to restrain publication of details of his sexual
relationship with two other people, on the ground that the publication
would breach his rights to privacy and confidentiality, protected by Article
8 of ECHR. The UK Supreme Court by majority ruled in favour of the
applicant. Speaking on behalf of the majority, Lord Mance held that
:
(WLR p. 1274, para 43)
"43.
having regard to the nature of the material sought to be
published and the identity and financial circumstances of the
appellant, that the appellant's real concern is indeed with the invasion
of privacy that would be involved in further disclosure and publication
in the English media, and that any award of damages, however
assessed, would be an inadequate remedy."
170. The HRA has rendered clarity on the existence of a right to
privacy in the UK jurisprudence and substantially resolved conflicting
approaches regarding privacy in decided cases. The HRA, by
incorporating the provisions of the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR), has adopted the guarantee of the right to privacy into the
UK domestic law. The Convention, together with its adoption into
domestic legislation, has led to a considerable change in the development
of protection of human privacy in English law.
(ii) The US Supreme Court decisions
171. The US Constitution does not contain an express right to privacy.
But the American privacy jurisprudence reflects that it has been
protected under several amendments144 of the US Constitution.
172. As early as 1886, in Boyd V. United States13, the question before
the US Supreme Court was whether compulsory production of a person's
private papers to be used in evidence against him in a judicial
proceeding, is an unreasonable search and seizure within the meaning of
the Fourth Amendment. Bradley, J. delivered the opinion of the Court and
"15. The principles laid down in this opinion affect the very essence
of constitutional liberty and security.
they apply to all invasions on
the part of the Government and its employees of the sanctity of a
man's home and the privacies of life. It is not the breaking of his doors
and the rummaging of his drawers that constitutes the essence of the
offence; but it is the invasion of his indefeasible right of personal
security, personal liberty, and private property
it is the invasion of
this sacred right
*
17.
And any compulsory discovery by extorting the party's oath,
or compelling the production of his private books and papers, to
convict him of crime or to forfeit his property, is contrary to the
principles of a free Government.
It may suit the purposes of
despotic power, but it cannot abide the pure atmosphere of political
liberty and personal freedom."
(emphasis supplied)
173. In two decisions in the 1920s, the Court read the Fourteenth
Amendment's liberty to prohibit States from making laws interfering with
the private decisions of parents and educators to shape the education of
their children. In Meyer V. Nebraska 45 (1923), the Court struck down
a
State law that prohibited the teaching of foreign languages to students
that had not yet completed the eighth grade. The Court in a 7 :
2
decision, written by McReynolds, J. concluded that the State failed to
show a compelling need to infringe upon the rights of parents and
teachers to decide on the best course of education for young students. On
"6.
Without doubt, it denotes not merely freedom from bodily
restraint but also the right of the individual to contract, to engage in
any of the common occupations of life, to acquire useful knowledge, to
marry, establish a home and bring up children, to worship God
according to the
dictates of his own conscience, and generally to enjoy those privileges
long recognised at common law as essential to the orderly pursuit of
happiness by free men. The established doctrine is that this liberty
may not be interfered with, under the guise of protecting the public
interest, by legislative action which is arbitrary or without reasonable
relation to some purpose within the competency of the State to effect."
Two years later, in Pierce V. Society of Sisters146 (1925), the Court,
relying upon Mayer V. Nebraska 45 struck down the Oregon Compulsory
Education Act, which mandated all children (between eight and sixteen
years) to attend public schools. It was held that the said statute is an
"unreasonable interference with the liberty of the parents and guardians
to direct the upbringing of the children, and in that respect violates the
174. In Olmstead V. United States54 (1928), the question before the
Court was whether the use of evidence of private telephone
conversations, intercepted by means of wiretapping amounted to a
violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments. In a 5 : 4 decision, it was
held that there was no violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments.
paras 25 & 27)
"25. The amendment itself shows that the search is to be of
material things-the person, the house, his papers, or his effects.
*
*
*
27.
The amendment does not forbid what was done here. There
was no searching. There was no seizure. The evidence was secured by
the use of the sense of hearing and that only. There was no entry of
the houses or offices of the defendants."
However, Louis Brandeis, J. wrote a dissenting opinion and observed
"53.
"time works changes, brings into existence new conditions
and purposes". Subtler and more far-reaching means of invading
privacy have become available to the Government. Discovery and
invention have made it possible for the Government, by means far
more effective than stretching upon the rack, to obtain disclosure in
court of what is whispered in the closet.
54. Moreover, "in the application of a Constitution, our
contemplation cannot be only of what has been, but of what may be".
The progress of science in furnishing the Government with means of
espionage is not likely to stop with wiretapping. Ways may someday
be developed by which the Government, without removing papers
from secret drawers, can reproduce them in court, and by which it will
be enabled to expose to a jury the most
intimate occurrences of the home. Advances in the psychic and related
sciences may bring means of exploring unexpressed beliefs, thoughts and
emotions. "
(emphasis supplied)
He questioned whether the Constitution affords no protection against
such invasions of individual security. Brandeis, J. answers this question in
"62.
The makers of our Constitution undertook to secure
conditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness.
They sought to
protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts, their emotions and
their sensations. They conferred, as against the Government, the right
to be let alone-the most comprehensive of rights and the right most
valued by civilised men. To protect that right, every unjustifiable
intrusion by the Government upon the privacy of the individual,
whatever the means employed, must be deemed a violation of the
Fourth Amendment.
"
(emphasis supplied)
175. The Court, in Griswold V. Connecticut52 (1965), invalidated a
State law prohibiting the possession, sale and distribution of
contraceptives to married couples, for the reason that the law violated
the right to marital privacy. Douglas, J. who delivered the main opinion,
observed that this right emanated from "penumbras" of the fundamental
constitutional guarantees and rights in the Bill of Rights, which together
SC para 16)
"16. The present case, then, concerns a relationship lying within the
zone of privacy created by several fundamental constitutional
guarantees.
Would we allow the police to search the sacred precincts
of marital bedrooms of tell-tale signs of the use of contraceptives? The
very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy surrounding the
marriage relationship."
para 35)
"35.
The fact that no particular provision of the Constitution
explicitly forbids the State from disrupting the traditional relation of
the family-a relation as old and as fundamental as our entire
civilization-surely does not show that the Government was meant to
have the power to do so. Rather, as the Ninth Amendment expressly
recognizes, there are fundamental personal rights such as this one,
which are protected from abridgment by the Government though not
specifically mentioned in the Constitution."
176. The 1967 decision in Katz V. United States66 ("Katz") overruled
Olmstead V. United States54 and revolutionised the interpretation of the
Fourth Amendment regarding the extent to which a constitutional right to
privacy applies against government interference. In this case, Charles
Katz was a gambler who used a public telephone booth to transmit illegal
wagers.
Unbeknownst to Katz, the FBI which was investigating Katz's activity,
was recording his conversations via an electronic eavesdropping device
attached to the exterior of the phone booth. Subsequently, Katz was
convicted based on these recordings. He challenged his conviction,
arguing that the recordings were obtained in violation of his Fourth
Amendment rights. The constitutional question in the case was whether
the Fourth Amendment protection from "unreasonable searches and
seizures" was restricted to the search and seizure of tangible property, or
did it extend to intangible areas such as conversations overheard by
others. It was held that the Government's eavesdropping activities
violated the privacy, upon which petitioner justifiably relied, while using
the telephone booth, and thus constituted a "search and seizure" within
the meaning of the Fourth Amendment, and that the Amendment
governs not only the seizure of tangible items, but extends as well to the
recording of oral statements.
177. Prior to 1967 when determining the "reasonable expectation of
privacy" for purposes of discussing the Fourth Amendment violations, the
analysis was focused on whether the authority had trespassed on a
private location. This "trespass doctrine" was the prevailing test until
Katz, which extended the protection of the Fourth Amendment from
"places" to "people", affording individuals more privacy even in public.
The "trespass doctrine" applied in Olmstead V. United States54
was
held
to be no longer relevant. Stewart, J. wrote the majority (7 : 1) opinion
"6.
One who occupies it [a telephone booth], shuts the door
behind him, and pays the toll that permits him to place a call is surely
entitled to assume that the words he utters into the mouthpiece will
not be broadcast to the world. To read the Constitution more narrowly
is to ignore the vital role that the public telephone has come to play in
private communication."
(emphasis supplied)
OnLine US SC para 25)
"25.
(a) that an enclosed telephone booth is an area where, like a
home
a person has a constitutionally protected reasonable
expectation of privacy; (b) that electronic, as well as physical intrusion
into a place that is in this sense private may constitute a violation of
the Fourth Amendment "
(emphasis supplied)
The reasonable expectation of privacy test was formulated as follows
:
"26.
"the Fourth Amendment protects people, not places". The
question, however, is what protection it affords to those people.
Generally, as here, the answer to that question requires reference to a
"place". My understanding of the rule that has emerged from prior
decisions is that
there is a twofold requirement, first that a person have exhibited an
actual (subjective) expectation of privacy and, second, that the
expectation be one that society is prepared to recognise as "reasonable".
Thus a man's home is, for most purposes, a place where he expects
privacy, but objects, activities, or statements that he exposes to the
"plain view" of outsiders are not "protected" because no intention to keep
them to himself has been exhibited. On the other hand, conversations in
the open would not be protected against being overheard, for the
expectation of privacy under the circumstances would be unreasonable."
(emphasis supplied)
179. In Stanley V. Georgia47 (1969), the Court analysed the
constitutionality of a statute imposing criminal sanctions upon the
knowing possession of obscene matter. The Court, in a unanimous
decision, held that mere private possession of obscene matter cannot
"7.
For also fundamental is the right to be free, except in very
limited circumstances, from unwanted governmental intrusions into
one's privacy.
*
*
*
9. [T]he rights that the appellant is asserting in the case before us.
the right to read or observe what he pleases-the right to satisfy his
intellectual and emotional needs in the privacy of his own home.
the
right to be free from State inquiry into the contents of his library.
10.
Whatever the power of the State to control public
dissemination of ideas inimical to the public morality, it cannot
constitutionally premise legislation on the desirability of controlling a
person's private thoughts."
180. Seven years after Griswold52, the Court expanded the right to
privacy beyond the "marital bedroom" to include unmarried persons. In
Eisenstadt V. Baird148 (1972), the Court invalidated a law prohibiting the
distribution of contraceptives to unmarried persons, ruling that it violated
148
OnLine US SC para 21)
"21.
It is true that in Griswold52 the right to privacy in question
inhered in the marital relationship. Yet the marital couple is not an
independent entity with a mind and heart of its own, but an
association of two individuals each with a separate intellectual and
emotional makeup. If the right to privacy means anything, it is the
right of the individual, married or single, to be free from unwarranted
governmental intrusion into matters so fundamentally affecting a
person as the decision whether to bear or beget a child."
181. The decision in Paris Adult Theatre I V. Slaton149 149 (1973), upheld
a State Court's injunction against the showing of obscene films in a
movie theatre, restricted to consenting adults. The Court distinguished
the case from Stanley V. Georgia47, on the ground that the privacy of the
home in Stanley147 was not the same as the commercial exhibition of
obscene movies in a theatre. Burger, C.J. observed that the prior
decisions of the Supreme Court on the right to privacy only included
those personal rights that were "fundamental" or "implicit in the concept
of ordered liberty" such as "the personal intimacies of the home, the
family, marriage, motherhood, procreation and child-bearing" and held
"23.
Nothing, however, in this Court's decisions intimates that
there is any "fundamental" privacy right "implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty" to watch obscene movies in places of public
accommodation.
24.
The idea of a "privacy" right and a place of public
accommodation are, in this context, mutually exclusive."
182. In the landmark decision on the right to abortion, Roe V. Wade53
(1973), the Court dealt with the question of the right of an unmarried
pregnant woman to terminate her pregnancy by abortion. The
constitutionality of a Texas Statute prohibiting abortions except with
respect to those procured or admitted by medical advice for the purpose
of saving the life of the mother was challenged on the ground that the
law improperly invaded the right and the choice of a pregnant woman to
terminate her pregnancy and was violative of the "liberty" guaranteed
under the Fourteenth Amendment and the right to privacy recognised in
Griswold52. The Court ruled 7 : 2 that a right to privacy under the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment extended to a woman's
decision to have an abortion, but that this right must be balanced against
the State's interests in regulating abortions. Blackmun, J. delivered the
42 & 43)
"42. The Constitution does not explicitly mention any right to
privacy. In a line of decisions, however
the Court has recognised
that a right of personal privacy, or a guarantee of certain areas or
zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution. In varying
contexts, the Court or individual Justices have, indeed, found at least
the roots of that right in the First Amendment
in the penumbras of
the Bill of Rights
in the Ninth Amendment
or in the concept of
liberty guaranteed by the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment
43. This right to privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth
Amendment's concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon State
action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the
Ninth Amendment's reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough
to encompass a woman's decision whether or not to terminate her
pregnancy."
(emphasis supplied)
183. The right to privacy in bank records was analysed by the US
Supreme Court in United States V. Miller66 (1976). In this case federal
agents were investigating the defendant for his involvement in a
bootlegging conspiracy. The agents subpoenaed two banks and received
his bank records. As a result, he was indicted. The question was whether
an individual reasonably can expect that records kept incidental to his
personal banking transactions will be protected from uncontrolled
government inspection. In a 6 : 3 opinion, the Supreme Court held that a
bank depositor has no Fourth Amendment interest in the records that his
bank is required to keep in compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act of
1970, and that Miller had no right to privacy in his bank records. Writing
for the majority, Lewis F. Powell, J. asserted that the "documents
subpoenaed are not [Miller's] 'private papers'," but instead, part of the
16)
"There is no legitimate "expectation of privacy" in the contents of
the original checks and deposit slips, since the checks are not
confidential communications, but negotiable instruments to be used in
commercial transactions, and all the documents obtained contain only
information voluntarily conveyed to the banks and exposed to their
employees in the ordinary course of business. The Fourth Amendment
does not prohibit the obtaining of information revealed to a third party
and conveyed by him to government authorities. The Act's
recordkeeping requirements do not alter these considerations so as to
create a protectable Fourth Amendment interest of a bank depositor in
the bank's records of his account."
(emphasis supplied)
30, 34 & 35)
"30.
A bank customer's reasonable expectation is that, absent a
compulsion by legal process, the matters he reveals to the bank will be
utilised by the bank only for internal banking purposes.
*
*
*
34. [A] depositor reveals many aspects of his personal affairs,
opinions, habits, associations. Indeed, the totality of bank records
provides a virtual current biography
35.
Development of
sophisticated instruments have
accelerated the ability of the Government to intrude into areas which a
person normally chooses to exclude from prying eyes and inquisitive
minds. Consequently, judicial interpretations of the constitutional
protection of individual privacy must keep pace with the perils created
by these new devices.''
184. Continuing its trend of expansion of individual rights in the
1960s and 1970s, particularly in the domain of reproductive health-the
right to contraceptives as well as the right to abortion, the decision in
Carey V. Population Services International1 (1977) expanded these
rights from adults to also include minors. In this case, a New York law
banning sale of even non-prescription contraceptives by persons other
than licensed pharmacists; sale or distribution to minors under sixteen;
and contraceptive display and advertising was declared unconstitutional.
Brennan, J. delivered the majority opinion of the Court and held that the
Fourteenth Amendment is not for "adults alone" and "Minors, as well as
"7.
This right of personal privacy includes "the interest in
independence in making certain kinds of important decisions". While
the outer limits of this aspect of privacy have not been marked by the
Court, it is clear that among the decisions that an individual may make
without unjustified Government interference are personal decisions
"relating to marriage
procreation
contraception
family
relationships and child-bearing and education
"
"8. The decision whether or not to beget or bear a child is at the
very heart of this cluster of constitutionally protected choices. This is
understandable, for in a field that, by definition, concerns the most
intimate of human activities and relationships, decisions whether to
accomplish or to prevent conception are among the most private and
sensitive. "
The Court also held that the right to privacy may be limited by a
regulation, which is governed by a sufficient "compelling State interest".
185. In Smith V. Maryland151 (1979), it was held that installation and
use of a "pen register" was not a "search" within the meaning of the
Fourth Amendment, and hence no warrant was required. Blackmun, J.
delivered the majority (5 : 4) opinion and held that the petitioner's claim
that he had a "legitimate expectation of privacy" could not be sustained :
"11.
First, we doubt that people in general entertain any actual
expectation of privacy in the numbers they dial. All telephone users
realise that they must "convey" phone numbers to the telephone
company, since it is through telephone company switching equipment
that their calls are completed. All subscribers realise, moreover, that
the phone company has facilities for making permanent records of the
numbers they dial, for they see a list of their long-distance (toll) calls
on their monthly bills. In fact, pen registers and similar devices are
routinely used by telephone
companies "for the purposes of checking billing operations, detecting
fraud and preventing violations of law"."
(emphasis supplied)
The majority adopted the "reasonable expectation of privacy" test as
formulated by Harlan, J. in Katz66 and held as follows : (Maryland
"7. [The] inquiry, as Mr Justice Harlan aptly noted in his Katz66
concurrence, normally embraces two discrete questions. The first is
whether the individual, by his conduct, has "exhibited an actual
(subjective) expectation of privacy" whether the individual has
shown that "he seeks to preserve [something] as private"
The
second question is whether the individual's subjective expectation of
privacy is "one that society is prepared to recognize as "reasonable"
"
whether
the individual's expectation, viewed objectively, is
"justifiable" under the circumstances.
8.
Since the pen register was installed on telephone company
property at the telephone company's central offices, petitioner
obviously cannot claim that his "property" was invaded or that police
intruded into a "constitutionally protected area"."
Thus the Court held that the petitioner in all probability entertained no
actual expectation of privacy in the phone numbers he dialled, and that,
even if he did, his expectation was not "legitimate". However, the
judgment also noted the limitations of the Katz66 test : (Maryland
"Situations can be imagined, of course, in which Katz66 two-
pronged inquiry would provide an inadequate index of Fourth
Amendment protection. In such circumstances, where an
individual's subjective expectations had been "conditioned" by
influences alien to well-recognised Fourth Amendment freedoms, those
subjective expectations obviously could play no meaningful role in
ascertaining what the scope of Fourth Amendment protection was."
(emphasis supplied)
Stewart, J. wrote the dissent, joined by Brennan, J. and held that there
was a legitimate expectation of privacy in this case : (Maryland case151, ,
"27.
the numbers dialed from a private telephone-like the
conversations that occur during a call-are within the constitutional
protection recognised in Katz66 It seems clear to me that information
obtained by pen register surveillance of a private telephone is
information in which the telephone subscriber has a legitimate
expectation of privacy. The information captured by such surveillance
emanates from private conduct within a person's home or office-
locations that without question
are entitled to Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment protection. Further,
that information is an integral part of the telephonic communication that
under Katz66 is entitled to constitutional protection
"
Marshal, J. dissented and opined on the dangers of permitting such
"37. The use of pen registers, I believe, constitutes such an
extensive intrusion. To hold otherwise ignores the vital role telephonic
communication plays in our personal and professional relationships
as well as the First and Fourth Amendment interests implicated by
unfettered official surveillance. Privacy in placing calls is of value not
only to those engaged in criminal activity. The prospect of unregulated
governmental monitoring will undoubtedly prove disturbing even to
those with nothing illicit to hide. Many individuals, including members
of unpopular political organisations or journalists with confidential
sources, may legitimately wish to avoid disclosure of their personal
contacts.
Permitting governmental access to telephone records on
less than probable cause may thus impede certain forms of political
affiliation and journalistic endeavor that are the hallmark of a truly free
society. Particularly given the Government's previous reliance on
warrantless telephonic surveillance to trace reporters' sources and
monitor protected political activity, I am unwilling to insulate use of
pen registers from independent judicial review."
(emphasis supplied)
186. In Planned Parenthood V. Casey (1992), several Pennsylvania
152
State statutory provisions regarding abortion such as spousal consent
were challenged. The Court reaffirmed-what it called-the "essential
US SC)
"
Our precedents "have respected the private realm of family life
which the State cannot enter"
These matters, involving the most
intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices
central to personal dignity and autonomy, are central to the liberty
protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. At the heart of liberty is the
right to define one's own concept of existence, of meaning, of the
universe, and of the mystery of human life. Beliefs about these matters
could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under
compulsion of the State.
*
*
*
The woman's right to terminate her pregnancy before viability is
the most central principle of Roe V. Wade53 It is a rule of law and a
component of liberty we cannot renounce."
187. In Minnesota V. Carter154 (1998), the question was whether the
Fourth Amendment protected against the viewing by an outside police
officer, through a drawn window blind, of the defendants' bagging
cocaine in an apartment. The Court answered this question in the
negative. Rehnquist, C.J. delivered the majority opinion of the Court
noting that "[t]he text of the Amendment suggests that its protections
extend only to people in "their" houses". The case was distinguished from
Minnesota V. Olson155 (1990), where the Supreme Court decided that an
overnight guest in a house had the sort of expectation of privacy that the
Fourth Amendment protects. The Court was of the view that while an
overnight guest in a home may claim the protection of the Fourth
Amendment, one who is merely present with the consent of the
householder may not. The respondents, in this case, were not overnight
guests, but were present for a business transaction and were only in the
SC)
"Property used for commercial purposes is treated differently for
Fourth Amendment purposes from residential property. 'An
expectation of privacy in commercial premises, however, is different
from, and indeed less than, a similar expectation in an individual's
home.'
And while it was a "home" in which the respondents were
present, it was not their home.
the purely commercial nature of the transaction engaged in here,
the relatively short period of time on the premises, and the lack of any
previous connection between the respondents and the householder, all
lead us to conclude
any search which may have occurred did not
violate their Fourth Amendment rights."
(emphasis supplied)
Ginsburg, J. wrote the dissenting opinion joined by Stevens and Souter,
"
"... Our decisions indicate that people have a reasonable expectation
of privacy in their homes in part because they have the prerogative to
exclude others.
*
*
Through the host's invitation, the guest gains a reasonable
expectation of privacy in the home. Minnesota V. Olson55, , so held with
respect to an overnight guest. The logic of that decision extends to
shorter term guests as well."
188. In Kyllo V. United States156 (2001), the Court held (5 : 4
majority) that the thermal imaging of the house of a person suspected of
growing marijuana was a violation of the right to privacy. Scalia, J.
delivered the opinion of the Court and held that there is no distinction
between "off-the-wall" and "through-the-wall" surveillance as both lead
"Limiting the prohibition of thermal imaging to "intimate details"
would not only be wrong in principle; it would be impractical in
application, failing to provide "a workable accommodation between the
needs of law enforcement and the interests protected by the Fourth
Amendment"
We
would have to develop a jurisprudence
specifying which home activities are "intimate" and which are not. And
even when (if ever) that jurisprudence were fully developed, no police
officer would be able to know in advance* whether his through-the-
wall surveillance picks up "intimate" details-and thus would be
unable to know in advance whether it is constitutional."
(emphasis supplied)
It was concluded that even though no "significant" compromise of the
homeowner's privacy had occurred due to the thermal imaging, "the long
view, from the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment" must be
taken forward.
189. In Lawrence V. Texas157, the Court in a 6 : 3 decision struck
down the sodomy law in Texas and by extension invalidated sodomy laws
in 13 other States, making same-sex sexual activity legal in every State
and territory of the United States. The Court overturned its previous
ruling on the same issue in the 1986 case, Bowers V. Hardwick158 (1986),
where it upheld a challenged Georgia statute and did not find a
constitutional protection of sexual privacy. Anthony Kennedy, J. wrote the
157
OnLine US SC)
"
The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The
State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by
making their private sexual conduct a crime.
'It is a promise of the
Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the
Government may not enter." The Texas statute furthers
no
legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the
personal and private life of the individual."
190. Informational privacy was the core issue in National Aeronautics
and Space Admn. ("NASA") V. Nelson159 (2011). The Court held
159
unanimously that NASA background checks of contract employees did
not violate any constitutional privacy right. The employees had argued
that their constitutional right to privacy as envisaged in previous the US
Supreme Court judgments, namely, Whalen V. Roe160 (1977) and Nixon
V. Administrator of General Services16 161 (1977), was violated
by
background checks. The majority judgment delivered by Alito, J. decided
the case assuming that there existed a constitutional right to privacy. The
"... We hold, however, that the challenged portions of the
Government's background check do not violate this right in the
present case. The Government's interests as employer and proprietor
in managing its internal operations, combined with the protections
against public dissemination provided by the Privacy Act of 1974
satisfy any "interest in avoiding disclosure" that may "arguably ha[ve]
its roots in the Constitution".
*
*
*
The Government has good reason to ask employees about their
recent illegal drug use."
The majority also rejected all the contentions regarding the misuse of
" the mere possibility that security measures will fail provides no
"proper ground" for a broad-based attack on government information-
collection practices. Respondents also cite a portion of SF-85 that
warns
of possible disclosure "[t]o the news media or the general public". By its
terms, this exception allows public disclosure only where release is "in
the public interest" and would not result in "an unwarranted invasion of
personal privacy". Respondents have not cited any example of such a
disclosure, nor have they identified any plausible scenario in which their
information might be unduly disclosed under this exception.
In light of the protection provided by the Privacy Act's nondisclosure
requirement, and because the challenged portions of the forms consist
of reasonable inquiries in an employment background check, we
conclude that the Government's inquiries do not violate a
constitutional right to informational privacy."
(emphasis supplied)
Scalia, J. in a concurring opinion joined by Thomas, J. agreed that the
background checks did not violate any constitutional rights, but argued
that the Court should have settled the constitutional privacy question in
the negative. The view held was that there exists no constitutional right
to informational privacy. Scalia, J. criticised the Court's decision to evade
"If, on the other hand, the Court believes that there is a
constitutional right to informational privacy, then I fail to see the
minimalist virtues in delivering a lengthy opinion analysing that right
while coyly noting that the right is "assumed" rather than "decided".
The Court decides that the Government did not violate the right
to informational privacy without deciding whether there is a right to
informational privacy, and without even describing what hypothetical
standard should be used to assess whether the hypothetical right has
been violated."
(emphasis supplied)
191. In United States V. Jones162 (2012), it was held unanimously
that installing a Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking device on a
vehicle and using the device to monitor the vehicle's movements
constitutes a search under the Fourth Amendment. However, the Judges
were split 5 : 4 as to the fundamental reasons behind the conclusion.
Scalia, J. delivered the majority judgment, applying the trespass test. It
was held that the Government's physical intrusion onto the defendant's
car for the purpose of obtaining information constituted trespass and
therefore a "search". Scalia, J. however, left unanswered the question
surrounding the privacy implications of a warrantless use of GPS data
without physical intrusion. Sonia Sotomayor, J. concurred with Scalia, J.
but addressed the privacy aspects of the judgment. Sotomayor, J. agreed
with Alito, J.'s concurrence that "physical intrusion is now unnecessary to
many forms of surveillance", and held that "[i]n cases of electronic or
other novel modes of surveillance that do not depend upon a physical
invasion on property, the majority opinion's trespassory test may provide
"GPS monitoring generates a precise, comprehensive record of a
person's public movements that reflects a wealth of detail about her
familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual associations.
(`Disclosed in [GPS] data will be trips the indisputably private
nature of which takes little imagination to conjure : trips to the
psychiatrist, the plastic surgeon, the abortion clinic, the AIDS
treatment center, the strip club, the criminal defense attorney, the by-
the-hour motel, the union meeting, the mosque, synagogue or church,
the gay bar and on and on'). The Government can store such records
and efficiently mine them for information years into the future.
And
because GPS monitoring is cheap in comparison to conventional
surveillance techniques and, by design, proceeds surreptitiously, it
evades the ordinary checks that constrain abusive law enforcement
practices: "limited police resources and community hostility".
The net result is that GPS monitoring-by making available at a
relatively low cost such a substantial quantum of intimate information
about any person whom the Government, in its unfettered discretion,
chooses to track-may "alter the relationship between citizen and
Government in a way that is inimical to democratic society"."
(emphasis supplied)
"[I] doubt that people would accept without complaint the
warrantless disclosure to the Government of a list of every website
they had visited [or phone numbers dialled] I would not assume
that all information voluntarily disclosed to some member of the public
for a limited purpose is, for that reason alone, disentitled to Fourth
Amendment protection."
192. In Florida V. Jardines163 (2013), the Court held that police use of
a trained detection dog to sniff for narcotics on the front porch of a
private home is a "search" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment
to the US Constitution, and therefore, without consent, requires both
probable cause and a search warrant. Scalia, J. who delivered the opinion
"We
regard the area "immediately surrounding and associated
with the home" as "part of the home itself for Fourth Amendment
purposes".
This area around the home is "intimately linked to the
home, both physically and psychologically", and is where "privacy
expectations are most heightened"."
(emphasis supplied)
"... Like the binoculars, a drug-detection dog is a specialised device
for discovering objects not in plain view (or plain smell). And as in the
hypothetical above, that device was aimed here at a home-the most
private
and inviolate (or so we expect) of all the places and things the Fourth
Amendment protects.
*
*
*
the device is not "in general public use", training it on a home
violates our "minimal expectation of privacy"-an expectation
"that-exists-, and that is acknowledged to be-reasonable-".
(emphasis supplied)
193. Three years ago, in Riley V. California 164 (2014), the Court
unanimously held that the warrantless search and seizure of digital
contents of a cellphone during an arrest is unconstitutional. Roberts, C.J.
delivered the opinion of the Court and commented on the impact on
Before cell phones, a search of a person was limited by physical
realities and tended as a general matter to constitute only a narrow
intrusion on privacy
the possible intrusion on privacy is not physically limited in the
same way when it comes to cell phones.
*
*
*
Data on a cell phone can also reveal where a person has been.
Historic location information is a standard feature on many smart
phones and can reconstruct someone's specific movements down to
the minute, not only around town but also within a particular building.
Mobile application software on a cell phone, or "apps", offer a range
of tools for managing detailed information about all aspects of a
person's life.
*
*
*
Modern cell phones are not just another technological convenience.
With all they contain and all they may reveal, they hold for many
Americans "the privacies of life". The fact that technology now allows
an individual to carry such information in his hand does not make the
information any less worthy of the protection for which the founders
fought. Our answer to the question of what police must do before
searching a cell phone seized incident to an arrest is accordingly
simple-get a warrant."
(emphasis supplied)
194. In Obergefell V. Hodges165, , the Court held in a 5 : 4 decision that
the fundamental right to marry is guaranteed to same-sex couples by
both the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Kennedy, J. authored the majority opinion
US SC)
"
Indeed, the Court has noted it would be contradictory 'to
recognize a right to privacy with respect to other matters of family life
and not with respect to the decision to enter the relationship that is
the foundation of the family in our society'."
(emphasis supplied)
195. The development of the jurisprudence on the right to privacy in
the United States of America shows that even though there is no explicit
mention of the word "privacy" in the Constitution, the courts of the
country have not only recognised the right to privacy under various
amendments to the Constitution but also progressively extended the
ambit of protection under the right to privacy. In its early years, the
focus was on property and protection of physical spaces that would be
considered private such as an individual's home. This "trespass doctrine"
became irrelevant when it was held that what is protected under the right
to privacy is "people, not places". The "reasonable expectation of privacy"
test has been relied on subsequently by various other jurisdictions while
developing the right to privacy. Having located the right to privacy in the
"person", American jurisprudence on the right to privacy has developed
to shield various private aspects of a person's life from interference by
the State-such as conscience, education, personal information,
communications and conversations, sexuality, marriage, procreation,
contraception, individual beliefs, thoughts and emotions, political and
other social groups. Various judgments of the Court have also analysed
technological developments which have made surveillance more
pervasive and affecting citizens' privacy. In all these cases, the Court has
tried to balance the interests of the individual in maintaining the right to
privacy with the interest of the State in maintaining law and order.
Decisions of the Supreme Court decriminalising consensual sexual
activity between homosexuals and guaranteeing same-sex couples the
right to marry indicate that the right to privacy is intrinsic to the
constitutional guarantees of liberty and equal protection of laws.
(iii) Constitutional right to privacy in South Africa
196. In South Africa, the right to privacy has been enshrined in
Section 14 of the Bill of Rights in the 1996 Constitution. Section 14
provides that:
"14. Privacy.-Everyone has the right to privacy, which includes
the right not to have-
(a) their person or home searched;
(b) their property searched;
(c) their possessions seized; or
(d) the privacy of their communications infringed."
197. In National Media Ltd. V. Jooste 166 (1996), Harms, J. defined
privacy in the following terms:
"Privacy is an individual condition of life characterised by exclusion
from the public and publicity. The condition embraces all those
personal facts which a person concerned has determined him to be
excluded from
the knowledge of outsiders and in respect of which he has the will that
they be kept private."
On the ambit of the right to privacy, the Court held that:
"A right to privacy encompasses the competence to determine the
destiny of private facts
The individual concerned is entitled to dictate the ambit of
disclosure
the purpose and method [of] the disclosure when and
under what conditions private facts may be made public. A contrary
view will place undue constraints upon the individual's so-called
"absolute rights of personality".
It will also mean that rights of personality are of a lower order than
real or personal rights."
198. In Bernstein V. Bester167 (1996), the South African Supreme
Court decided on a challenge to the constitutionality of certain sections of
the Companies Act, on the ground that examination under these sections
violated the general right to personal privacy (Section 13). It was held
that the provisions were not in breach of the Constitution. Ackermann, J.
expounded upon the concept of privacy as follows:
"The scope of privacy has been closely related to the concept of
identity and [that] the right. [is] based on a notion of the
unencumbered self, but on the notion of what is necessary to have
one's own autonomous identity."
The Court observed that like every other right, the right to privacy also
has its limits:
"67. In the context of privacy it is only the inner sanctum of a
person, such as his/her family life, sexual preference and home
environment, which is shielded from erosion by conflicting rights of the
community. This implies that community rights and the rights of
fellow members place a corresponding obligation on a citizen, thereby
shaping the abstract notion of individualism towards identifying a
concrete member of civil society. Privacy is acknowledged in the truly
personal realm, but as a person moves into communal relations and
activities such as business and social interaction, the scope of personal
space shrinks accordingly."
199. The constitutional validity of laws making sodomy an offence was
challenged in National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister
of Justice168 (1999). It was held that the Common law offence of sodomy
was inconsistent with the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
1996. Ackermann, J. described how discrimination leads to invasion of
privacy and held that:
"Privacy recognises that we all have a right to a sphere of private
intimacy and autonomy which allows us to establish and nurture
human relationships without interference from the outside community.
The way in which we give expression to our sexuality is at the core of
this area of private intimacy. If, in expressing our sexuality, we act
consensually and without harming one another, invasion of that
precinct will be a breach of our privacy..."
Sachs, J. discussed the interrelation between equality and privacy and
held that:
"
equality and privacy cannot be separated, because they are both
violated simultaneously by anti-sodomy laws. In the present matter,
such laws deny equal respect for difference, which lies at the heart of
equality, and become the basis for the invasion of privacy. At the same
time, the negation by the state of different forms of intimate personal
behaviour becomes the foundation for the repudiation of equality."
On the meaning of "autonomy", the Court observed that:
"Autonomy must mean far more than the right to occupy an
envelope of space in which a socially detached individual can act freely
from interference by the State. What is crucial is the nature of the
activity, not its site. While recognising the unique worth of each
person, the Constitution does not presuppose that a holder of rights is
as an isolated, lonely and abstract figure possessing a disembodied
and socially disconnected self. It acknowledges that people live in their
bodies, their communities, their cultures, their places and their times.
It is not for the state to choose or to arrange the choice of partner,
but for the partners to choose themselves."
(emphasis supplied)
Sachs, J. noted that the motif which links and unites equality and
privacy, and which runs right through the protections offered by the Bill
of Rights, is dignity.
200. In Investigating Directorate : Serious Economic Offences V.
Hyundai Motor Distributors (Pty) Ltd. 169 (2001), the Court was concerned
with the constitutionality of the provisions of the National Prosecuting
Authority Act that authorised the issuing of warrants of search and
seizure for purposes of a "preparatory investigation". Langa, J. delivered
judgment on the right to privacy of juristic persons and held that:
" privacy is a right which becomes more intense the closer it
moves to the intimate personal sphere of the life of human beings, and
less intense as it moves away from that core. This understanding of
the right flows from the value placed on human dignity by the
Constitution. Juristic persons are not the bearers of human dignity.
Their privacy rights, therefore, can never be as intense as those of
human beings. However, this does not mean that juristic persons are
not protected by the right to privacy. Exclusion of juristic persons
would lead to the possibility of grave violations of privacy in our
society, with serious implications for the conduct of affairs."
Highlighting the need to balance interests of the individual and the State,
it was held that:
"54.
Search and seizure provisions, in the context of a
preparatory investigation, serve an important purpose in the fight
against crime. That the state has a pressing interest which involves
the security and freedom of the community as a whole is beyond
question. It is an objective which is sufficiently important to justify the
limitation of the right to privacy of an individual in certain
circumstances On the other hand, state officials are not entitled
without good cause to invade the premises of persons for purposes of
searching and seizing property A balance must therefore be struck
between the interests of the individual and that of the State, a task
that lies at the heart of the inquiry into the limitation of rights."
(emphasis supplied)
201. In Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie170 (2006), the Constitutional
Court of South Africa ruled unanimously that same-sex couples have a
constitutional right to marry. The judgment delivered by Sachs, J. held
that:
"Section 9(1) of the Constitution provides:
'9. Equality.- Everyone is equal before the law and has the
right to equal protection and benefit of the law.'
Sections 9(1) and 9(3) cannot be read as merely protecting same
-sex couples from punishment or stigmatisation. They also go beyond
simply preserving a private space in which gay and lesbian couples
may live together without interference from the State. Indeed, what
the applicants in this matter seek is not the right to be left alone, but
the right to be acknowledged as equals and to be embraced with
dignity by the law
It is demeaning to adoptive parents to suggest that their family is
any less a family and any less entitled to respect and concern than a
family with procreated children. It is even demeaning of a couple who
voluntarily decide not to have children or sexual relations with one
another; this being a decision entirely within their protected sphere of
freedom and privacy "
(emphasis supplied)
202. In NM V. Smith171 (2007), the names of three women who were
HIV positive were disclosed in a biography. They alleged that the
publication, without their prior consent, violated their rights to privacy,
dignity and psychological integrity. The Court by majority held that
the
respondents were aware that the applicants had not given their express
consent but had published their names, thereby violating their privacy
and dignity rights. Madala, J. delivered the majority judgment on the
basis of the value of privacy and confidentiality in medical information
and held that:
"Private and confidential medical information contains highly
sensitive and personal information about individuals. The personal and
intimate
nature of an individual's health information, unlike other forms of
documentation, reflects delicate decisions and choices relating to issues
pertaining to bodily and psychological integrity and personal autonomy
Individuals value the privacy of confidential medical information
because of the vast number of people who could have access to the
information and the potential harmful effects that may result from
disclosure. The lack of respect for private medical information and its
subsequent disclosure may result in fear jeopardising an individual's
right to make certain fundamental choices that he/she has a right to
make. There is therefore a strong privacy interest in maintaining
confidentiality."
The decision of the Court was that there must be a pressing social need
for the right to privacy to be interfered with and that there was no such
compelling public interest in this case.
203. In the dissenting opinion, O'Regan, J. held in Smith case 171 that
the publication of the names and HIV status of the women was neither
intentional nor negligent. In that view, the respondents had assumed
that consent was given because the applicants' names and HIV status
were published in a publication, with no