(1994) 3 Supreme Court Cases 430 : 1994 Supreme Court Cases (Cri) 774
(BEFORE R.M. SAHAI AND B.L. HANSARIA, JJ.)
Dr. JACOB GEORGE
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF KERALA
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 638-39 of 1990 decided on April 13, 1994
A. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 314 - Causing death of the woman while causing miscarriage
with consent - Quack (Homeopathic doctor) while performing surgical operation for
abortion of a pregnant lady with her consent causing perforation of her uterus which
resulted in her death - Case not covered by any exception under S. 3 of Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 - On facts, conviction under S. 314 upheld - But
sentence of four years' RI imposed by High Court reduced to two months' imprisonment
already undergone and instead fine of Rs 5000 awarded by it (out of which Rs 4000 was to
be paid to the deceased's minor son) enhanced to Rs 1 lakh - Amount of fine directed to be
deposited in the name of deceased's son in a nationalised bank which would allow the child's
guardian to withdraw the interest for the child's maintenance till the child becomes major -
Sentence thus modified having regard to the purposes of punishment - Penology - Prayer
for release on probation refused having regard to nature of the offence and character and
conduct of the accused - Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, Ss. 4 and 5
B. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 314 - To be read subservient to S. 3 of Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act, 1971
C. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 314 - Death of woman in doctor's clinic after abortion -
Appreciation of evidence - Defence story that deceased's condition had become serious
because of attempt made by her near relation to abort the pregnancy by crude method
belied in view of the accused's failure to inform the police of the medico-legal situation -
Conviction can be based principally on evidence of the near relation who had played a vital
role in the case - Fact that the nurses of the doctor's clinic had turned hostile would not
weaken the prosecution case when evidence of the related witness was corroborated by
other evidence - Criminal Trial - Appreciation of evidence - Witness - Related witness
D. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 357 - Sentence of fine - Purpose and object of
- Quantum of compensation to be awarded to deceased's dependant - Depends upon facts
and circumstances of the case - Woman, deserted by her husband, dying while undergoing
operation for abortion with her consent - Her minor son born prior to her desertion,
becoming destitute - On the other hand, doctor responsible for causing the death having a
roaring practice - Held, these facts relevant for enhancing the amount of fine awarded by
High Court and issuing suitable directions for maintenance of the child with the interest
earned from that amount by depositing the same in bank - Constitution of India, Art. 136
- Compensation - Quantum of - Tort - Consumer Protection Act, 1986
E. Penology - Purposes of punishment - Retribution, prevention, deterrence and
reformation - Sentence to be awarded having regard to all these purposes
F. Constitution of India - Art. 21 - Right of a woman to undergo abortion if covered by
Art. 21 - Not considered
Within one and half years of marriage of the deceased, a son was born out of the wedlock.
Thereafter her husband deserted her, but there was reconciliation three months prior to her death
and she had become pregnant again. As she intended to go for abortion, she was got admitted by
PW 1, her cousin, to the clinic (hospital) of the appellant, a homeopath who used to do abortions.
The appellant performed operation at night but next morning the deceased expired. Police was
informed resulting in charge-sheeting of the appellant under various sections including Section 314
IPC. The autopsy revealed that the deceased's uterus got perforated because of untrained handling
of scientific gadgets by the appellant. The doctor who conducted post-mortem examination
corroborated the evidence of PW 1 as to the date and time of the death. However, the trial court
held that the charges had not been established beyond reasonable doubt and therefore, acquitted the
appellant. The State preferred appeal before High Court which also took suo motu cognizance
against the order of acquittal. The High Court found that the exercise undertaken by the appellant
was 'daring, crude and criminal' as a result of which an innocent life was sacrificed at the altar of a
quack. Accordingly it set aside the order of acquittal, convicted the accused under Section 314 IPC
and sentenced him to 4 years' RI and imposed a fine of Rs 5000 out of which Rs 4000 was directed
to be paid to the deceased's child towards compensation for loss of his mother. The defence case
was that it was PW 1 who sought to abort the pregnancy by crude method i.e. insertion of stick and
rod into the uterus. It was also submitted that the evidence of PW 1 was the only evidence to find
the appellant guilty inasmuch as PWs 3 and 4, the nurses of the clinic, had turned hostile. As regards
the sentence it was urged that the appellant having undergone imprisonment for about two months,
the sentence may be reduced to the period already undergone. A further prayer for grant of benefit
of Probation of Offenders Act was also made. In disposing of the
appeal of the accused-doctor while upholding the conviction but modifying the sentence
Held
There is no reason to disagree with the High Court in having placed reliance principally on the
evidence of PW 1, who was a near relation of the deceased and had played a vital role in the entire
episode. The defence case that PW 1 had sought to abort the pregnancy by crude method cannot be
believed as if the condition of the deceased had become serious because of such crude method, the
appellant, being the head of the clinic, must have informed police in view of the medico-legal
significance. The failure of the appellant to do so definitely speaks volumes against the veracity of the
defence suggestion. As to PWs 3 and 4 turning hostile it was an expected somersault because they
were the nurses of the clinic and discretion must have been taken by them to the better part of
valour.
(Paras 12 and 13)
Therefore, the conviction as awarded by the High Court has to be upheld. After the enactment of
the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, the provisions of the Penal Code relating to
miscarriage have become subservient to this Act because of the non obstante clause in Section 3 of
that Act. However, the present case is apparently not covered by any exception mentioned in
Section 3.
(Paras 7 and 14)
Keeping in view the nature of the offence and character of the appellant, he does not deserve the
benefit of probation. If a homeopath takes to his head to operate a pregnant lady and perforate her
uterus by trying to abort, he does not deserve the benefit of probation. It would have been a
different matter if a trained surgeon while carrying out the operation in question with the consent of
the lady would have committed some mistake of judgment resulting in death of the patient. The
present case is poles apart. Therefore, the benefit of that Act to the appellant is refused. If his
practice were to suffer because of the unwanted act undertaken by him, let it suffer, as it is required
to suffer.
(Paras 15 and 16)
V. Manickam Pillai V. State, (1972) 1 Cri LJ 1488 1972 Mad LW (Cri) 141, referred to
The purpose which punishment achieves or is required to achieve are four in number. First,
retribution: i.e. taking of eye for eye or tooth for tooth. The object behind this is to protect the
society from the depredations of dangerous persons; and so, if somebody takes an eye of another,
his eye is taken in vengeance. This form of protection may not receive general approval of the
society in our present state of education and understanding of human psychology. In any case, so far
as the matter at hand is concerned, retribution cannot have full play, because the sentence provided
by Section 314 is imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years
where the miscarriage has been caused with the consent of the woman as is the case at hand. So
death penalty is not provided. The retributive part of sentencing object is adequately taken care of by
the adverse effect which the conviction would have on the practice of the appellant. The other
purpose of sentence is preventive. The sentence of imprisonment already undergone would be an
eye-opener to the appellant and he would definitely not repeat the illegal act of the type at hand.
Deterrence is another object which punishment is required to achieve. Incarceration of about two
months undergone by the appellant and upholding of his conviction which is likely to affect his
practice adversely, would or should deter others to desist them from indulging in an illegal act like the
one at hand. Reformation is also an expected outcome of undergoing sentence. The reformative
aspect of punishment has achieved its purpose by keeping the appellant inside the prison boundaries
for about two months having enabled him to know during this period the trauma which one suffers in
jail, and so
the appellant is expected to take care to see that in future he does not indulge in such an act which
would find him in prison.
(Paras 17, 18, 19 and 20)
Section 314 has not visualised the sentence of imprisonment only, but permits imposition of fine
also. The High Court has imposed a fine of Rs 5000. The fine is required to be enhanced considerably,
because of what has been provided in Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which has a
message of its own in this regard. The power of imposing fine is intended to do something to
reassure the victim that he or she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system. It is a measure of
responding appropriately to crime as well as reconciling the victim with the offender. It is to some
extent a constructive approach to crimes and a step forward in a criminal justice system. It is
because of this that it was recommended that all criminal courts should exercise this power liberally
so as to meet the ends of justice, by cautioning that the amount of compensation to be awarded
must be reasonable. What is reasonable has to depend upon the facts and circumstances of each
case.
(Paras 21 and 22)
The present case was concerned with the death of a woman deserted by a husband and desiring
to abort. She had a son born to her earlier and that son must have become a destitute with no one
to look after. The appellant, on the other hand seems to have had a roaring practice as would
appear, inter alia, from the photographs of his clinic put on record. The building is an RCC one and is
three-storeyed and presents a good look. If a child has to be nursed in these days and nursed
reasonably, a sum of Rs 1000 per month would definitely be necessary. Therefore, the fine to be
imposed should be Rs one lakh. Therefore, sentence awarded by the High Court is modified by
reducing the substantive sentence of imprisonment to the one already undergone and by enhancing
the fine to a sum of Rs one lakh. Six months' time is granted to the appellant for depositing this
amount. On this amount being deposited with the Registry of the Supreme Court, steps would be
taken to deposit the same in a nationalised bank in the name of the son of the deceased after
ascertaining the same from the appropriate authority. The bank would allow the guardian of the
aforesaid son to withdraw the interest on the aforesaid amount till the son becomes major. On the
son becoming major, it would be for him to decide as how to use the money and the bank would
therefore act in accordance with the decision taken by the son. If the fine as enhanced, would not be
paid within six months from the date of this judgment, the sentence as awarded by the High Court
would get revived and the appellant would undergo the remaining part of imprisonment. To enable
the High Court to monitor the matter, the appellant would inform the High Court also about the fact
of his depositing the sum of Rs one lakh.
(Paras 23 and 25)
This judgment may not be understood to have expressed any opinion on the right of the
deceased or for that matter of any woman of this country to go for abortion, as this question has
not arisen directly in this case. No opinion is expressed whether such a right can be read in Article 21
of the Constitution; and if so, to what extent.
(Para 24)
R-M/T/13023/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
R.K. Jain, Senior Advocate (Ashish Malhotra, G. Prakash and K.R. Sasiprabhu,
Advocates, with him) for the Appellant;
M.T. George, Advocate, for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
B.L. HANSARIA, J. - Life is said to be the most sublime creation of God. It is this
belief and conception which lies at the root of the arguments, and forceful at that, by
many religious denominations that human beings cannot take away life, as they
cannot give life. This idea is so intense with some religious leaders that they would
even oppose any measure of birth control. Abortion or miscarriage would be opposed
with greater force by these persons.
2. Mahatma Gandhi, Father of the Nation, urged long back in Harijan that God alone
can take life because He alone gives it. For the Jains taking away of even animal life is
a sin, as, according to them, animals are as much part of God as human beings.
Buddhists too preach Ahimsa.
3. Our Rig Veda II recites:
"Grant us a hundred autumns that we may see the manifold world. May we attain
the long lives which have been ordained as from yore."
Atharva Veda I contains the following:
"May we be enabled to see the sun for a long time."
The aforesaid shows that life is beyond price and it is not only a legal wrong, but a
moral sin as well, to take away life illegally.
4. In the present appeals we are not concerned with taking away of life before its
birth. We are concerned with destruction of foetus life. This is what is known as
abortion or miscarriage. To dispel any doubt as to whether the foetus has a life, what
has been stated by Taylor in his Principle and Practice of Medical Jurisprudence may be
noted where the learned author has opined at p. 332 (13th Edn.) that legally both
abortion and miscarriage are synonymous because the foetus being regarded as a
"human life from the moment of fertilisation". It may, however, be stated that
sometimes the word 'miscarriage' is used for "spontaneous abortion" and "abortion"
for "miscarriage produced by unlawful means".
5. This distinction is, however, not material for our purpose because Section 312 of
the Penal Code speaks about causing of miscarriage and Section 314 punishes the
person who has intent to cause miscarriage of a woman and while doing so causes the
death of such woman. It is under this section that the appellant has been found guilty
by the High Court of Kerala after setting aside the acquittal order of the learned
Assistant Sessions Judge. For the offence under Section 314, the appellant has been
sentenced RI for 4 years and a fine of Rs 5000. The High Court had also taken suo
motu cognizance against the order of acquittal and it is because of this that along with
the criminal appeal filed by the State which was registered as Criminal Appeal No. 415
of 1989 the High Court disposed of CrRC No. 44 of 1989, which is relatable to its own
action. So, two aforesaid appeals have been preferred by the appellant. It may be
stated that out of fine of Rs 5000 as awarded, a sum of Rs 4000 was directed to be
paid to the children of the deceased towards compensation for loss of their mother, in
case of realisation of fine.
6. Our law-makers had faced some difficulty when our Penal Code was being
enacted. The authors of the Code observed as below while enacting Section 312:
"With respect to the law on the subject of abortion, we think it necessary to say
that we entertain strong apprehension that this or any other law on that subject
may, in this country, be abused to the vilest purposes. The charge of abortion is one
which, even where it is not substantiated often leaves a stain on the honour of
families. The power of bringing a false accusation of this description is therefore a
formidable engine in the hands of unprincipled men. This part of the law will, unless
great care be taken, produce few convictions but much misery and terror to
respectable families, and a large harvest of profit to the vilest pests of society. We
trust that it may be in our power in the Code of Criminal Procedure to lay down
rules which may prevent such an abuse. Should we not be able to do so, we are
inclined to think that it would be our duty to advise his Lordship in Council rather to
suffer abortion, where the mother is a party to the offence, to remain wholly
unpunished, than to repress it by provisions which would occasion more suffering to
the innocent than to the guilty."
So what finds place in the aforesaid section is the result of very mature and hard
thinking and we have to give full effect to it.
7. After the enactment of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, the
provisions of the Penal Code relating to miscarriage have become subservient to this
Act because of the non obstante clause in Section 3, which permits
abortion/miscarriage by a registered practitioner under certain circumstances. This
permission can be granted on three grounds:
(i) Health - when there is danger to the life or risk to the physical or mental
health of the woman;
(ii) humanitarian - such as when pregnancy arises from a sex crime like rape or
intercourse with a lunatic woman;
(iii) eugenic - where there is substantial risk that the child, if born, would suffer
from deformities and diseases.
(See Statement of Objects and Reasons).
8. The above shows that concern for even unborn child was evinced by the
legislature, not to speak of hazard to the life of the woman concerned.
9. The allegations which led the High Court to find the appellant guilty under
Section 314 were these. Deceased Thankamani was married to one Sathyan. After the
marriage they lived as husband and wife for about one and half years and a son was
born out of the wedlock. About six months thereafter, Sathyan reportedly deserted
Thankamani but then there was reconciliation three months prior to the death of
Thankamani who became pregnant again. For reasons not quite known, Thankamani
told her mother that she would desire to go for abortion since she did not want
another child. The mother, who was examined as PW 2 in the trial, sent for PW 1 her
brother-in-law and told him about the predicament of Thankamani. PW 1
happened to know the clinic (hospital) being run by the appellant in Nilambur where
abortions were being done.
10. Prosecution case is that on 14-1-1987, PW 1 and Thankamani went to the clinic
and the matter was discussed with the appellant. Thereafter, she was admitted and
the appellant agreed to abort her on payment of Rs 600 of which Rs 500 was paid
immediately undertaking to pay the balance afterwards, which amount was paid on 15
-1-1987. On that day Thankamani was taken to operation theatre at about 10 p.m.
and at midnight the appellant told that the operation was successful. PW 1 however
found Thankamani unconscious. She regained consciousness at about 5 a.m. on 16th
and asked for some water. PW 1 instead brought a cup of tea which Thankamani could
drink with difficulty and started shivering. On information given to appellant he came
with a nurse and on examination found Thankamani in sinking condition. Froth came
out from her mouth and life ebbed out of her. What happened thereafter is not
material, except that after sometime police was informed which set it into motion
resulting in charge-sheeting of the appellant under various sections including Section
314. In the trial which commenced, 16 witnesses were examined, apart from bringing
many documents on record. The learned trial court, however, held that charges had
not been established beyond reasonable doubt and therefore acquitted the appellant.
11. On appeal being preferred by the State and suo motu cognizance being taken
by the High Court, the acquittal order has been set aside and the appellant has been
convicted and sentenced as aforesaid, after refusing to give the benefit of Probation of
Offenders Act as prayed for. Hence these appeals under Article 136 of the Constitution.
12. A perusal of the impugned judgment of the High Court shows that it has placed
reliance principally on the evidence of PW 1, who is the cousin (sic) of Thankamani. As
he had played a vital role in the entire episode and is a near relation of Thankamani,
we find no reason to disagree with the High Court in having placed reliance on his
evidence. The defence case that it was PW 1 who sought to abort the pregnancy by
crude method i.e. insertion of stick and rod into the uterus was rightly disbelieved by
the High Court as if the condition of Thankamani became serious because of such a
crude method and Thankamani was brought to hospital for some emergent treatment,
as is the defence case, the appellant, being the head of the clinic, must have informed
police in view of the medico-legal significance, as pointed out by the High Court. The
failure of the appellant to do so definitely speaks volumes against the veracity of the
defence suggestion, as pointed out by the High Court.
13. The submission of Shri Jain that evidence of PW 1 is the only evidence to find
the appellant guilty inasmuch as PWs 3 and 4 had turned hostile, and so there was
virtually nothing to corroborate the evidence of PW 1, is not quite correct. As to PWs 3
and 4 turning hostile it was an expected somersault because they were the nurses of
the clinic and discretion must have been taken by them to the better part of valour.
But then, PW 5, who
too was an employee in the clinic did admit that Thankamani had been admitted in the
clinic on 14th and not on 15th night as was the defence case. The post-mortem
examination conducted by PW 11, according to whom the death should have taken
place at about 36 hours prior to his examination which was at about 3.00 p.m. on
17th, would also corroborate the evidence of PW 1 as to the date and time of the death
of Thankamani. What was found in autopsy would clearly show that the uterus got
perforated because of employing scientific gadgets by the appellant a homeopath,
which shows that he had absolutely no training to handle the gadgets. The High Court
has rightly described the exercise of the appellant in this regard as "daring, crude and
criminal". We therefore, agree with the High Court that an innocent life was sacrificed
at the altar of a quack.
14. We would, therefore, uphold the conviction as awarded by the High Court, as
the case is apparently not covered by any exception mentioned in the aforenoted
Pregnancy Termination Act. It may be pointed out that the High Court did not accept
the case of the prosecution insofar as the offence under Section 201 of the Penal Code,
1860, or for that matter, under Section 342, is concerned.
15. This takes us to the question of sentence. The High Court has awarded sentence
of 4 years and a fine of Rs 5000, of which a sum of Rs 4000 was made payable to the
children of the deceased towards compensation for the loss of their mother. Shri Jain
has urged that the appellant has undergone imprisonment for about two months, and
the sentence may be reduced to the period already undergone. Indeed the learned
counsel has further prayed in this regard to grant the benefit of Probation of Offenders
Act and referred us to a decision of Madras High Court in V. Manickam Pillai V. State1
where the High Court had granted such a benefit. We are, however, of the opinion that
keeping in view the nature of the offence and character of the appellant, he does not
deserve the benefit of probation. If a homeopath takes to his head to operate a
pregnant lady and perforate her uterus by trying to abort, he does not deserve the
benefit of probation. It would have been a different matter if a trained surgeon while
carrying out the operation in question with the consent of the lady, as in the present
case, would have committed some mistake of judgment resulting in death of the
patient. The present case is poles apart.
16. We, therefore, refuse to give benefit of the aforesaid Act to the appellant. We
may, however, put on record that Shri Jain advanced this submission as granting of
probation would have removed the disqualification attached to conviction because of
what has been stated in Section 12 of the aforesaid Act. We do not, however think that
if the appellant is required to be given this protection and if his practice were to suffer
because of the unwanted act undertaken by him, let it suffer, as it is required to
suffer.
17. Let us now deal with Shri Jain's submission that the substantive period of
imprisonment may be reduced to the one already undergone which
is of about 2 months. To decide whether this contention merits acceptance, we have to
inform ourselves as to why a punishment is required to be given for an offence of
criminal nature. The purpose which punishment achieves or is required to achieve are
four in number. First, retribution: i.e. taking of eye for eye or tooth for tooth. The
object behind this is to protect the society from the depredations of dangerous
persons; and so, if somebody takes an eye of another, his eye is taken in vengeance.
This form of protection may not receive general approval of the society in our present
state of education and understanding of human psychology. In any case, so far as the
matter at hand is concerned, retribution cannot have full play, because the sentence
provided by Section 314 is imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years where the miscarriage has been caused with the consent of the
woman as is the case at hand. So death penalty is not provided. The retributive part of
sentencing object is adequately taken care of by the adverse effect which the
conviction would have on the practice of the appellant.
18. The other purpose of sentence is preventive. We are sure that the sentence of
imprisonment already undergone would be an eye-opener to the appellant and he
would definitely not repeat the illegal act of the type at hand.
19. Deterrence is another object which punishment is required to achieve.
Incarceration of about two months undergone by the appellant and upholding of his
conviction by us which is likely to affect the practice adversely, would or should deter
others to desist them from indulging in an illegal act like the one at hand.
20. Reformation is also an expected outcome of undergoing sentence. We do think
that two months' sojourn of the appellant behind the iron bars and stone walls must
have brought home to him the need of his changing the type of practice he had been
doing as a homeopath. The reformative aspect of punishment has achieved its
purpose, according to us, by keeping the appellant inside the prison boundaries for
about two months having enabled him to know during this period the trauma which
one suffers in jail, and so the appellant is expected to take care to see that in future
he does not indulge in such an act which would find him in prison.
21. Section 314 has not visualised the sentence of imprisonment only, but permits
imposition of fine also. The High Court has imposed a fine of Rs 5000. According to us,
however, the fine is required to be enhanced considerably. We have taken this view,
inter alia, because of what has been provided in Section 357 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure which has a message of its own in this regard. It was spelt out by this Court
in Hari Singh V. Sukhbir Singh2 in which Shetty, J. speaking for a two-Judge Bench
stated that the power of imposing fine is intended to do something to reassure the
victim that he or she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system. It is a measure of
responding appropriately to crime as well as reconciling the victim with the offender.
It is to some extent a constructive
approach to crimes and a step forward in a criminal justice system. It is because of
this that it was recommended that all criminal courts should exercise this power
liberally so as to meet the ends of justice, by cautioning that the amount of
compensation to be awarded must be reasonable.
22. What is reasonable has to depend upon the facts and circumstances of each
case. Let us see what should be the quantum of fine to be imposed in the present
case. We are concerned here with the death of a woman deserted by a husband who
wanted to abort. We understand that she had a son born to her earlier and that son
must have become a destitute with no one to look after. The appellant, on the other
hand seems to have had a roaring practice as would appear, inter alia, from the
photographs of his clinic put on record. The building is an RCC one and is three-
storeyed and presents a good look.
23. If a child has to be nursed in these days and nursed reasonably, a sum of Rs
1000 per month would definitely be necessary. We, therefore, think that the fine to be
imposed should be of Rs one lakh, and so, we enhance the fine from Rs 5000 as
awarded by the High Court to a sum of Rs one lakh. We grant six months' time to the
appellant for depositing this amount, as prayed by Shri Jain. On this amount being
deposited with the Registry of this Court, steps would be taken to deposit the same in
a nationalised bank in the name of the son of the deceased after ascertaining the same
from appropriate authority. The bank would allow the guardian of the aforesaid son to
withdraw the interest on the aforesaid amount till the son becomes major. On the son
becoming major, it would be for him to decide as how to use the money and the bank
would therefore act in accordance with the decision taken by the son.
24. Before closing, we may state that this judgment of ours may not be understood
to have expressed any opinion on the right of Thankamani or for that matter of any
woman of this country to go for abortion, as this question has not arisen directly in
this case. We are not expressing any opinion whether such a right can be read in
Article 21 of the Constitution; and if so, to what extent.
25. The result is that the appeals are disposed of by upholding the conviction of the
appellant. The sentence awarded by the High Court is modified by reducing the
substantive sentence of imprisonment to the one already undergone and by enhancing
the fine to a sum of Rs one lakh to be deposited and dealt with as stated above. If the
fine as enhanced by us would not be paid within six months from today, the sentence
as awarded by the High Court would get revived and the appellant would undergo the
remaining part of imprisonment. To enable the High Court to monitor the matter, the
appellant would inform the High Court also about the fact of his depositing the sum of
Rs one lakh if and when he would do so. The High Court would wait for a period of six
months from today to see whether the aforesaid amount has been deposited. In case
it would be noted that it has not been done so, it would take necessary steps for
execution of the sentence as awarded by it.
+
From the Judgment and Order dated 16/19-10-1990 of the Kerala High Court in Crl. A. No. 415 of 1989 in Crl.
R.C. No. 44 of 1989
1
(1972) 1 Cri LJ 1488 : 1972 Mad LW (Cri) 141
2