In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD AND SURYA KANT, JJ.)
Mallada K Sri Ram
Appellant(s)
Versus
State of Telangana and Others Respondent(s)
Criminal Appeal No. 561 of 2022 (Arising out of SLP (Crl) No. 1788 of 2022)
Decided on April 4, 2022
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J.: - Leave granted.
2. This appeal arises from a judgment dated 25 January 2022 of a Division Bench of
the High Court for the State of Telangana dismissing the writ petition seeking a writ of
habeas corpus.
3. The brother1 of the appellant worked as an employee with an entity by the name
of
M/s Ixora Corporate Services2 Banjara Hills, Hyderabad. On 13 October 2020,
a
complaint was lodged on behalf of the Company with the SHO, Banjara Hills, alleging
that K Mahendar, another employee at the Company, had opened a salary account
with the Federal Bank without authorization and in conspiracy with the detenu
collected an amount of Rs. 85 lakhs from 450 job aspirants. It was alleged that the CO-
accused who was in charge of the HR Department at the Company had, in collusion
with the detenu, hatched a plan to collect money from individuals by misrepresenting
that they would be given a job at the Company and collected money from aspirants for
opening a bank account and supplying uniforms.
4. The first FIR, FIR No 675 of 2020, was registered on 15 October 2020 at Police
Station Banjara Hills against K Mahendar (A-1) and the detenu (A-2) for offences
punishable under Sections 408, 420, 506 and 120B of the Penal Code, 18603 On 17
December 2020, another FIR, FIR No 343 of 2020, was registered at Police Station
Chatrinaka against the detenu for offences punishable under Sections 408, 420 and
120B IPC based on similar allegations at the behest of another informant. The detenu
was arrested, in the first case, on 17 December 2020 and, in the second case, on the
execution of a PT warrant on 4 January 2021. In the first case, the detenu was
released on bail on 8 January 2021 in terms of an order dated 31 December 2020,
subject to the condition that he shall appear before the SHO, Police Station Banjara
Hills on Mondays between 10.30 am and 5 pm till the filing of the charge-sheet. In the
second case, the detenu was released on bail by an order dated 11 January 2021,
subject to the condition that he shall appear before the SHO, Police Station Chatrinaka
on Sundays between 2 pm and 5 pm for a period of three months. The Court has been
apprised of the fact that the charge-sheet has been submitted in the first case.
5. An order of detention was passed against the detenu on 19 May 2021 under the
provisions of Section 3(2) of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities of
Bootleggers, Dacoits, Drug-Offenders, Goondas, Immoral Traffic Offenders, Land
Grabbers, Spurious Seed Offenders, Insecticide Offenders, Fertiliser Offenders, Food
Adulteration Offenders, Fake Document Offenders, Scheduled Commodities Offenders,
Forest Offenders, Gaming Offenders, Sexual Offenders, Explosive Substances
Offenders, Arms Offenders, Cyber Crime Offenders and White Collar or Financial
Offenders Act 19864 The order of detention was challenged before the High Court in a
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. The Division Bench of the High Court
dismissed the petition by its impugned judgment and order dated 25 January 2022.
6. Mr. A Sirajudeen, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submits
that there is ex facie, non-application of mind by the detaining authority while passing
the order of detention. Senior counsel submitted that this would be evident from the
fact that the detenu had been granted bail almost five months prior to the order of
detention. The grant of bail was subject to the condition that the detenu would report
to the SHO of the police station concerned, in the first case, until the charge-sheet was
filed and, in the second case, for a period of three months on stipulated days of the
week. In the first case, the charge-sheet was submitted prior to the date of the order
of detention on 19 May 2021. On the above premises, it has been submitted that the
very basis of the order of detention stands vitiated since it will be apparent from the
condition which was imposed by the Court while granting bail that the detenu was
required to attend the police station concerned throughout the stipulated period and
even that period came to an end by the time the order of detention was passed.
Moreover, whereas the order of detention has proceeded on the basis that the acts of
the detenu had created a situation leading to a breach of public order in the case, on
the other hand, it is evident from the counter affidavit which has been filed by the
Commissioner before the High Court that there was only an apprehension that there
would be a likelihood of a breach of public order in the future. It was further submitted
that it is evident from the recording of facts that the order of detention was passed
nearly seven and five months after both the criminal cases were instituted. The
detention was, it is urged, based on stale material. It has been argued that the
ordinary course of criminal law would be sufficient to deal with the alleged violation
and on the above facts, the detention of the detenu is based on no cogent material
whatsoever.
7. Mr. Mohith Rao, counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, has submitted
that the nature of the acts which are attributed to the detenu are a part of a series of
organized activities involving white collar crime where job aspirants were allured into
parting with their money on the promise that they would get employment in the
future. Hence, it has been urged that the High Court has rightly held that the order of
detention should not be interfered with.
8. At the outset, it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions of the Telangana
Act of 1986:
"2. Definitions.- this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public
order" means when a bootlegger, a dacoit, a drug-offender, a goonda, an
immoral traffic offender, Land-Grabber, a Spurious Seed Offender, an Insecticide
Offender, a Fertiliser Offender, a Food Adulteration Offender, a Fake Document
Offender, a Scheduled Commodities Offender, a Forest Offender, a Gaming
Offender, a Sexual Offender, an Explosive Substances Offender, an Arms
Offender, a Cyber Crime Offender and a White Collar or Financial Offender is
engaged or is making preparations for engaging, in any of his activities as such,
which affect adversely, or are likely to affect adversely, the maintenance of public
order:
Explanation. For the purpose of this clause public order shall be deemed
to have been affected adversely or shall be deemed likely to be affected
adversely inter alia, if any of the activities of any of the persons referred to in
this clause directly, or indirectly, is causing or calculated to cause any harm,
danger or alarm or a feeling of insecurity among the general public or any
section thereof or a grave widespread danger to life or public health;
(x) "White collar offender" or "Financial Offender" means a person who
commits or abets the commission of offences punishable under the Telangana
Protection of Depositors of Financial Establishment Act, 1999 (Act 17 of 1999)
or under Sections 406 to 409 or 417 to 420 or under Chapter XVIII of the
Penal Code, 1860.
3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons.-(1) The Government
may, if satisfied with respect to any bootlegger, dacoit, drug-offender, goonda,
immoral traffic offender, Land-Grabber, Spurious Seed Offender, Insecticide
Offender, Fertilizer Offender, Food Adulteration Offender, Fake Document Offender,
Scheduled Commodities Offender, Forest Offender, Gaming Offender, Sexual
Offender, Explosive Substances Offender, Arms Offender, Cyber Crime Offender and
White Collar or Financial Offender that with a view to preventing him from acting in
any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, it is necessary so to do,
make an order directing that such person be detained.
(2) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely to prevail in any
area within the local limits of the jurisdiction of a District Magistrate or a
Commissioner of Police, the Government are satisfied that it is necessary so to do,
they may, by order in writing, direct that during such period as may be specified in
the order, such District Magistrate or Commissioner of Police may also, if satisfied
as provided in sub-section (1), exercise the powers conferred by the said sub-
section:
Provided that the period specified in the order made by the Government under
this sub-section shall not in the first instance, exceed three months, but the
Government may, if satisfied as aforesaid that it is necessary so to do, amend
such order to extend such period from time to time by any period not exceeding
three months at any one time.
13. Maximum period of detention.- The maximum period for which any
person may be detained, in pursuance of any detention order made under this Act
which has been confirmed under Section 12, shall be twelve months from the date
of detention."
9. The order of detention dated 19 May 2021 notes that that the detenu is a 'white-
collar offender' under Section 2(x) of the Telangana Act of 1986 whose offence of
cheating gullible job aspirants has been causing "large scale fear and panic among the
gullible unemployed job aspirants/youth and thus he has been acting in a manner
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order apart from disturbing the peace,
tranquillity and social harmony in the society" These alleged offences were noted as
the grounds for his detention, in addition to the apprehension that "he may violate the
bail conditions and there is an imminent possibility of his committing similar offences,
which would be detrimental to public order, unless he is prevented from doing so by
an appropriate order of detention".
10. The detenu was released on bail on 8 January 2021 by the Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad subject to the condition that he would have to
report to the SHO of the Police Station concerned on a stipulated day every week till
the charge sheet was filed. The order granting bail to the detenu in the second case
provided that the detenu was subject to the condition of appearing once every week
on Sunday before the Police Station concerned for a period of three months with effect
from 11 January 2021. As a consequence, the conditions attached to the orders
granting bail stood worked out in the month of April 2021. The order of detention
dated 19 May 2021 has failed to advert to these material aspects and suffers from a
non-application of mind. The basis on which the preventive detention of the detenu
has been invoked is that the detenu has cheated aspirants for jobs on the basis of fake
documents and that, as a consequence, 450 aspirants were duped, from whom an
amount of Rs. 85 lakhs had been collected. The order of detention records that the
detenu had moved bail applications in two cases in which he was in judicial custody
and that the Magistrate had granted him conditional bail. It was apprehended that he
may violate the bail conditions while committing similar offences. It is pertinent to
note that no application for cancellation of bail was moved by the investigating
authorities for violation of the bail conditions.
11. At this stage, it would also be material to note that the first case was registered
on 15 October 2020, while the second case was registered on 17 December 2020. Bail
was granted on 8 January 2021. The order of detention was passed on 19 May 2021
and was executed on 26 June 2021. The order of detention was passed nearly seven
months after the registration of the first FIR and about five months after the
registration of the second FIR. The order of detention is evidently based on stale
material and demonstrates non-application of mind on the part of the detaining
authority to the fact that the conditions which were imposed on the detenu, while
granting bail, were duly fulfilled and there was no incidence of a further violation. In
the counter affidavit which was filed before the High Court, the detaining authority
expressed only an apprehension that the acts on the basis of which the FIRs were
registered were likely to be repeated in the future, thereby giving rise to an
apprehension of a breach of public order. The High Court has failed to probe the
existence of a live and proximate link between the past cases and the need to detain
the detenu after seven months of registration of the first FIR and nearly five months of
securing bail.
12. The distinction between a disturbance to law and order and a disturbance to
public order has been clearly settled by a Constitution Bench in Ram Manohar Lohia V.
State of Bihar5 The Court has held that every disorder does not meet the threshold of
a disturbance to public order, unless it affects the community at large. The
Constitution Bench held:
"51. We have here a case of detention under Rule 30 of the Defence of India
Rules which permits apprehension and detention of a person likely to act in a
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. It follows that if such a
person is not detained public disorder is the apprehended result. Disorder is no
doubt prevented by the maintenance of law and order also but disorder is a broad
spectrum which includes at one end small disturbances and at the other the most
serious and cataclysmic happenings. Does the expression "public order" take in
every kind of disorders or only some of them? The answer to this serves to
distinguish "public order" from "law and order" because the latter
undoubtedly takes in all of them. Public order if disturbed, must lead to
public disorder. Every breach of the peace does not lead to public disorder.
When two drunkards quarrel and fight there is disorder but not public
disorder. They can be dealt with under the powers to maintain law and
order but cannot be detained on the ground that they were disturbing
public order. Suppose that the two fighters were of rival communities and
one of them tried to raise communal passions. The problem is still one of
law and order but it raises the apprehension of public disorder. Other
examples can be imagined. The contravention of law always affects order
but before if can be said to affect public order, it must affect the community
or the public at large. A mere disturbance of law and order leading to
disorder is thus not necessarily sufficient for action under the Defence of India
Act but disturbances which subvert the public order are. A District Magistrate is
entitled to take action under Rule 30(1)(b to prevent subversion of public order
but not in aid of maintenance of law and order under ordinary circumstances.
52. It will thus appear that just as "public order" in the rulings of this
Court (earlier cited) was said to comprehend disorders of less gravity than
those affecting "security of State" "law and order" also comprehends
disorders of less gravity than those affecting "public order" One has to
imagine three concentric circles. Law and order represents the largest circle
within which is the next circle representing public order and the smallest
circle represents security of State. It is then easy to see that an act may
affect law and order but not public order just as an act may affect public
order but not security of the State. By using the expression "maintenance of law
and order" the District Magistrate was widening his own field of action and was
adding a clause to the Defence of India Rules."
(emphasis supplied)
13. In Banka Sneha Sheela V. State of Telangana° a two-judge Bench of this Court
examined a similar factual situation of an alleged offence of cheating gullible persons
as a ground for preventive detention under the Telangana Act of 1986. The Court held
that while such an apprehension may be a ground for considering the cancellation of
bail to an accused, it cannot meet the standards prescribed for preventive detention
unless there is a demonstrable threat to the maintenance of public order. The Court
held:
"9.
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has raised three points
before us. First and foremost, he said there is no proximate or live connection
between the acts complained of and the date of the detention order, as the last act
that was complained of, which is discernible from the first 3 FIRs (FIRs dated 12-12
-2019, 12-12-2019 and 14-12-2019), was in December 2019 whereas the
detention order was passed 9 months later on 28-9-2020. He then argued, without
conceding, that at best only a "law and order" problem if at all would arise on the
facts of these cases and not a "public order" problem, and referred to certain
judgments of this Court to buttress the same. He also argued that the detention
order was totally perverse in that it was passed only because anticipatory bail/bail
applications were granted. The correct course of action would have been for the
State to move to cancel the bail that has been granted if any further untoward
incident were to take place.
12. While it cannot seriously be disputed that the detenu may be a "white collar
offender" as defined under Section 2(x) of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous
Activities Act, yet a preventive detention order can only be passed if his activities
adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the maintenance of public order.
"Public order" is defined in the Explanation to Section 2(a) of the Telangana
Prevention of Dangerous Activities Act to be a harm, danger or alarm or a feeling of
insecurity among the general public or any section thereof or a grave widespread
danger to life or public health.
15. There can be no doubt that what is alleged in the five FIRs pertain to the
realm of "law and order" in that various acts of cheating are ascribed to the detenu
which are punishable under the three sections of the Penal Code set out in the five
FIRs. A close reading of the detention order would make it clear that the reason for
the said order is not any apprehension of widespread public harm, danger or alarm
but is only because the detenu was successful in obtaining anticipatory bail/bail
from the courts in each of the five FIRs. If a person is granted anticipatory bail/bail
wrongly, there are well-known remedies in the ordinary law to take care of the
situation. The State can always appeal against the bail order granted and/or apply
for cancellation of bail. The mere successful obtaining of anticipatory bail/bail orders
being the real ground for detaining the detenu, there can be no doubt that the
harm, danger or alarm or feeling of insecurity among the general public spoken of
in Section 2(a) of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities Act is make-
believe and totally absent in the facts of the present case.
32. On the facts of this case, as has been pointed out by us, it is clear that at the
highest, a possible apprehension of breach of law and order can be said to be made
out if it is apprehended that the detenu, if set free, will continue to cheat gullible
persons. This may be a good ground to appeal against the bail orders granted
and/or to cancel bail but certainly cannot provide the springboard to move under a
preventive detention statute. We, therefore, quash the detention order on this
ground
"
14. In Sama Aruna V. State of Telangana1, a two-judge Bench of this Court
examined a case where stale materials were relied upon by the detaining authority
under the Telangana Act of 1986. The order of detention pertained to incidents which
had occurred between nine and fourteen years earlier in relation to offences involving a
criminal conspiracy, cheating, kidnapping and extortion. This Court held that a
preventive detention order that is passed without examining a live and proximate link
between the event and the detention is tantamount to punishment without trial. The
Court held:
"17. We are, therefore, satisfied that the aforesaid detention order was passed on
grounds which are stale and which could not have been considered as relevant for
arriving at the subjective satisfaction that the detenu must be detained. The
detention order must be based on a reasonable prognosis of the future behaviour of
a person based on his past conduct in light of the surrounding circumstances. The
live and proximate link that must exist between the past conduct of a person and
the imperative need to detain him must be taken to have been snapped in this
case. A detention order which is founded on stale incidents, must be regarded as an
order of punishment for a crime, passed without a trial, though purporting to be an
order of preventive detention. The essential concept of preventive detention is that
the detention of a person is not to punish him for something he has done but to
prevent him from doing it. See G. Reddeiah V. State of A.P. [G. Reddeiah V. State of
15. A mere apprehension of a breach of law and order is not sufficient to meet the
standard of adversely affecting the "maintenance of public order". In this case, the
apprehension of a disturbance to public order owing to a crime that was reported over
seven months prior to the detention order has no basis in fact. The apprehension of an
adverse impact to public order is a mere surmise of the detaining authority, especially
when there have been no reports of unrest since the detenu was released on bail on 8
January 2021 and detained with effect from 26 June 2021. The nature of the
allegations against the detenu are grave. However, the personal liberty of an accused
cannot be sacrificed on the altar of preventive detention merely because a person is
implicated in a criminal proceeding. The powers of preventive detention are
exceptional and even draconian. Tracing their origin to the colonial era, they have been
continued with strict constitutional safeguards against abuse. Article 22 of the
Constitution was specifically inserted and extensively debated in the Constituent
Assembly to ensure that the exceptional powers of preventive detention do not
devolve into a draconian and arbitrary exercise of state authority. The case at hand is a
clear example of non-application of mind to material circumstances having a bearing
on the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority. The two FIRs which were
registered against the detenu are capable of being dealt by the ordinary course of
criminal law.
16. We also note that after notice was issued by this Court, the respondents have
been served. No counter affidavit has been filed. We have declined to allow any further
adjournment for filing a counter affidavit since a detailed and comprehensive counter
affidavit which was filed before the High Court is already on the record and the present
proceedings have been argued on the basis of the material as it stood before the High
Court. The liberty of the citizen cannot be left to the lethargy of and the delays on the
part of the state. Further, in the counter affidavit filed before the High Court, the
respondents have argued that the detenu must move the Advisory Board and the writ
petition has been filed in a premature fashion. However, in Arnab Manoranjan
Goswami V. State of Maharashtra , a two-judge Bench of this Court has held that while
the ordinary procedural hierarchy among courts must be respected, the High Court's
writ jurisdiction under Article 226 extends to protecting the personal liberty of persons
who have demonstrated that the instrumentality of the State is being weaponised for
using the force of criminal law:
"68. Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Amit Desai and Mr. Chander Uday Singh are undoubtedly
right in submitting that the procedural hierarchy of courts in matters concerning the
grant of bail needs to be respected. However, there was a failure of the High Court
to discharge its adjudicatory function at two levels-first in declining to evaluate
prima facie at the interim stage in a petition for quashing the FIR as to whether an
arguable case has been made out, and secondly, in declining interim bail, as a
consequence of its failure to render a prima facie opinion on the first. The High
Court did have the power to protect the citizen by an interim order in a petition
invoking Article 226. Where the High Court has failed to do so, this Court would be
abdicating its role and functions as a constitutional court if it refuses to interfere,
despite the parameters for such interference being met. The doors of this Court
cannot be closed to a citizen who is able to establish prima facie that the
instrumentality of the State is being weaponised for using the force of criminal law.
Our courts must ensure that they continue to remain the first line of defence
against the deprivation of the liberty of citizens. Deprivation of liberty even for a
single day is one day too many. We must always be mindful of the deeper systemic
implications of our decisions."
17. It is also relevant to note, that in the last five years, this Court has quashed
over five detention orders under the Telangana Act of 1986 for inter alia incorrectly
applying the standard for maintenance of public order and relying on stale materials
while passing the orders of detention10. At least ten detention orders under the
Telangana Act of 1986 have been set aside by the High Court of Telangana in the last
one year itself. These numbers evince a callous exercise of the exceptional power of
preventive detention by the detaining authorities and the respondent-state. We direct
the respondents to take stock of challenges to detention orders pending before the
Advisory Board, High Court and Supreme Court and evaluate the fairness of the
detention order against lawful standards.
18. We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment of the
High Court dated 25 January 2022. The order of detention which has been passed
against the detenu on 19 May 2021 shall accordingly stand quashed and set aside.
19. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 1788/2022
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 25-01-2022 in WP No.
17120/2021 passed by the High Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad)
Mallada K. Sri Ram Petitioner(
Versus
State of Telangana and Others
Respondent(s)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
Date : 04-04-2022 This petition was called on for hearing today.
(BEFORE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD AND SURYA KANT, JJ.)
For Petitioner(s) Mr. A. Sirajudeen, Sr. Adv.
Mr. A.V.S. Raju, Adv.
Mr. Ch. Leela Sarveswar, Adv.
Mr. P. Prabhakar, Adv.
Mr. R. Ravi, Adv.
Mr. Somanatha Padhan, AOR
For Respondent(s) Mr. P. Mohith Rao, Adv.
Mr. S. Udaya Kumar Sagar, AOR
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
ORDER
20. Leave granted.
21. In terms of the signed reportable judgment, the appeal is allowed. The order of
detention which has been passed against the detenu on 19 May 2021 shall accordingly
stand quashed and set aside.
22. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of
1
"detenu"
2 "Company"
3
"IPC"
4 "Telangana Act of 1986"
5 AIR 1966 SC 740
7
8
9
10