(2022) 10 Supreme Court Cases 700 : (2022) 101 GSTR 262 :
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, SURYA KANT AND VIKRAM NATH, JJ.)
UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER
Appellants;
Versus
MOHIT MINERALS PRIVATE LIMITED THROUGH
DIRECTOR
Respondent.
Civil Appeals No. 1390 of 2022+ with Nos. 1391-95, 1397-99, 1402
-403, 1406-409, 1411-19 of 2022 1396 of 2022 1400 of
2022+ 1401 of 2022 1404 of 2022 , 1405 of 2022**, 1410 of
2022+++, 1420 of 2022++ 1445 of 2022+++ , 1446 of 2022+++ and
1447 of 2022***, , decided on May 19, 2022
A. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5 to 14 -
Core philosophy of GST Regime - Explained - Core taxable event under
GST Regime, held, is supply of goods or services, or, both, either individually
or as composite supply, which composite supply cannot be dissected and
taxed separately or additionally if the composite supply itself is taxable (see
also Shortnotes B and o) - The IGST Act and the CGST Act focus on
implementing a workable machinery to adequately capture the complexities
of supply in a global and digital age - GST is a consumption and destination
based tax
- GST laws mark a departure from the previous policy of taxing
sale/consignments and focuses on the taxing of supplies - The concept of a supply
-centric and destination-based tax runs through the scheme of the statutory
provisions and the proposals issued by the GST Council - Thus, an amendment to
the Constitution was introduced in the form of Art. 366(12-A) to create a tax on
the supply of goods, or services, or both - In the commercial reality of the times,
the conceptual lines between goods and services wear thin - Hence, the focus is
on the taxation of supply, as opposed to the creation of neat compartments
between goods and services - Constitution of India - Art. 366(12-A) - Central
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 7 to 15
(Paras 110, 136, 141, 164 to 170 and 171.5)
B. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5 to 14 -
Composite supply - Levy of GST on composite supply, held, rules out levy
of GST separately or additionally on any component of such composite
supply - The intent of Parliament is that a transaction which includes
different aspects of supply of goods or services, or both, and which are
bundled together, must be taxed as a composite supply
- Held, provisions of composite supply in the CGST Act and the IGST Act
play a specific role in the levy of GST - The idea of introducing "composite
supply" was to ensure that various elements of a transaction are not
dissected and the levy is imposed on the bundle of supplies altogether -
This finds specific mention in the illustration provided under S. 2(30) of the
CGST Act, where the principal supply is that of goods
- Thus held, in present case, since the Indian importer is liable to pay IGST on
the "composite supply", comprising of supply of goods and supply of services of
transportation, insurance, etc. in a CIF contract, a separate levy on the Indian
importer for the "supply of services" by the shipping line would be in violation of S.
8 of the CGST Act - Hence, impugned notifications purporting to levy such
separate levy of IGST only on the "service" aspect of the transaction, struck down
on this ground alone - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 7 to 15 and
S. 2(30)
(Paras 164 to 170 and 171.5)
C. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5 to 14 -
The essential legislative functions with respect to the GST law, held, are the
levy of tax, subject-matter of tax, taxable person, rate of taxation and
value for the purpose of taxation - The principles governing these essential
aspects of taxation find place in various provisions of the IGST Act and
CGST Act - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 7 to 15 and 2
(Para 93)
D. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5 to 14
r/w the CGST Act - Import of goods under CIF contract - Exigibility to GST
- Four essential elements of valid imposition of IGST, namely:
- (i) Taxable event [as in this case under S. 5(1) of the IGST Act : the inter-
State supply of goods and services] (see also Shortnote G);
- (ii) Taxable person i.e. person on whom the levy is imposed (see also
Shortnote L);
- (iii) Taxable rate i.e. the rate at which the levy is imposed [as in this case
under S. 5(1) of the IGST Act: rate notified bv the Union Government on the
recommendation of the GST Council]; and
- (iv) Measure or the value to which the rate will be applied [as in this case
value determined under S. 15 of the CGST Act] (see also Shortnote N)
- Existence/identification of - Law clarified - Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 15 and 7
E. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - S. 5 - Vires of
taxation measure - Determination of - Sub-sections of S. 5 - Manner in
which to be construed - S. 5(3) and S. 5(4) of the IGST Act, held, are
inextricably linked with S. 5(1) of the IGST Act which is the charging
provision - They must be construed together in determining the vires of the
taxation
- Hence, contention rejected that no charge was created for the ocean freight
transaction to be taxed in the hands of the importer on the basis that only S. 5(1)
is a charging provision and thus Ss. 5(3) and 5(4) cannot independently create a
charge - Though the impugned notifications found to be invalid on a different
ground (see Shortnotes F and o)
(Paras 96 to 99)
F. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5, 13(9)
and 2(11) r/w Ss. 2(93)(c) & 7 of the CGST Act, 2017 - Import of goods
under a CIF contract i.e. under a contract wherein freight, insurance, etc. are
availed by the non-taxable foreign exporter who engages and pays a foreign
shipping line of its choice, without the involvement of the Indian importer -
Exigibility to GST
- Held, Indian importer is liable to pay IGST on the "composite supply",
comprising of supply of goods and supply of services of transportation,
insurance, etc. in a CIF contract
- However, a levy on the Indian importer on the "service aspect" of the
transaction alone for the "supply of services" by the shipping line,
separately or in addition to the abovesaid liability to pay IGST on the
"composite supply", held, is impermissible, as the same would be in
violation of the principle of "composite supply" enshrined under the GST
Regime - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 2(93)(c), 15 and
7
G. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 13(9) and
2(11) - Test of taxable event - Satisfaction of - Imported goods procured
on CIF basis - Consideration of, as an inter-State supply (see also
Shortnote H) - Importers under CIF contracts - Consideration of, as
service recipients (see also Shortnote K)
- On a conjoint reading of Ss. 2(11) and 13(9) of the IGST Act r/w S. 2(93) of
the CGST Act, held, the import of goods by a CIF contract constitutes an "inter-
State" supply which can be subject to IGST where the importer of such goods
would be the recipient of shipping service
- However, further held, impugned levy imposed on the "service" aspect of the
transaction is in violation of the principle of "composite supply" enshrined under S. 2
(30) r/w S. 8 of the CGST Act - Since the Indian importer is liable to pay IGST on
the "composite supply", comprising of supply of goods and supply of services of
transportation, insurance, etc. in a CIF contract, a separate levy on the Indian
importer for the "supply of services" by the shipping line, held, would be in violation
of S. 8 of the CGST Act (see also in detail Shortnote o) - Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 2(93) and 7
(Paras 107 and 171.2)
H. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 13(9) and
2(11) - Test of taxable event - Satisfaction of - Imported goods procured
on a CIF basis - Held, constitutes an "inter-State" supply - Deeming fiction
under S. 13(9) of the IGST Act and S. 7(4) of the CGST Act - Effect of
- An Indian importer could be considered as an importer of the service of
shipping which is liable to IGST on inter-State supply, if the activity falls within the
definition of "import of service" for the IGST Act and the CGST Act - Further,
conditions for an "import of service" would entail three aspects : (i) the supplier of
service must be located outside India; (ii) the recipient of the service must be
located in India; and (iii) the place of supply of service ought to be in India -
Further, S. 13(9) of the IGST Act creates a deeming fiction, where in case of supply
of services of transportation of goods by a supplier located outside India, the place
of supply would be the place of destination of such goods - Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 7 and 2(93)
(Paras 108 to 123)
I. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - S. 5(3) -
Power exercisable under S. 5(3) - Scope and ambit of - Restriction power
under S. 5(3) to specifying categories of goods or services (or both), as
opposed to specifying the recipient of the supply of goods or services - See
also in detail Shortnote J for the effect of S. 5(4) as amended w.e.f. 1-2-
2019
- Notification issued under S. 5(3), whether ultra vires S. 5(3) as such
notification purported to deem recipient of the goods and services which is
beyond the scope of S. 5(3) - Clarificatory mentioning of corresponding
recipient of goods and services specified in such notification, who would
otherwise be such recipient in law, held, would not make such notification
ultra vires S. 5(3)
- S. 5(3) provides the Government the power to specify categories of supply
of goods or services or both on which tax shall be paid on a reverse charge basis
by the recipient and the Government is to exercise this power on the
recommendation of the GST Council - However, S. 5(3), held, does not confer
powers on the Central Government to create a deeming fiction vis-à-vis who
constitutes the recipient and merely enables the Central Government to identify
certain categories of goods and services, where the recipient of such services is
subject to a reverse charge, as opposed to the usual mode of taxation where the
supplier of the service is charged on a forward charge basis
- Government in exercise of its power under S. 5(3) issued Noti. No. 10 of
2017 specifying the "categories of the supply" subject to reverse charge -
Notification, besides specifying the criteria, also mentioned the corresponding
recipient in those categories - It was contended that since Notification identifies an
importer as a service recipient for the purposes of S. 5(3), it is ultra vires the
parent Act on the ground of excessive delegation - Rejecting the challenge to the
notification, held, IGST Act and the CGST Act define "reverse charge" and prescribe
the entity that is to be taxed for these purposes - Therefore, the stipulation of the
recipient in each of the categories is only clarificatory - Further, the Government
by notification did not specify a taxable entity different from that which is prescribed
in S. 5(3) for the purposes of reverse charge - Central Goods and Services Tax
Act, 2017, S. 2(93)
(Paras 71, 92, 95 and 142)
J. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - S. 5(3) and S.
5(4) [as amended w.e.f. 1-2-2019] "Recipient" of
supply
-
Determination of - Principles for - Power of Central Government to specify
or deem classes of persons as "recipients" imposing liability to pay GST on
reverse charge basis - Position of law obtaining before and after
amendment of S. 5(4) of the IGST Act w.e.f. from 1-2-2019 - Clarified
- (A) Classes of "recipient" that would be covered under S. 5(3) of IGST
Act r/w S. 2(93) of the CGST Act, and (B) Classes of "recipient" as deemed
to be so vide exercise of power under S. 5(4) of the IGST Act as amended
w.e.f. 1-2-2019 - Explained
- Held, prior to amendment of S. 5(4) of the IGST Act w.e.f. from 1-2-2019,
Central Government did not have the power to specify or deem recipient of supply
of goods or services - Central Government could only identify/specify the
categories of supply and goods and services which would be covered -
Furthermore, any taxable person identified for payment of reverse charge due their
compulsory registration under S. 24 of the CGST Act, held, does not automatically
become the recipient of such goods or service
- Interpreting the term "by the recipient" vis-à-vis the categories of goods and
services identified in S. 5(3) of the IGST Act, held, is necessarily governed by the
principles governing definition of "recipient" under S. 2(93) of the CGST Act - The
language employed in S. 2(93)(a) of the CGST Act clearly stipulates that when a
consideration is payable for supply, the recipient would mean the person who is
liable to pay that consideration - However, when no consideration is payable for
supply, S. 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act states that the recipient shall be the person to
whom the service is rendered - Further, S. 2(93) of the CGST Act provides that
"any reference to a person to whom supply is made shall be construed as a
reference to the recipient" - Hence, where the statute refers to a person to whom
a supply is made, it has to be construed as a reference to the recipient of service
- Further held, S. 5(4) as amended w.e.f. from 1-2-2019 enables the Central
Government to create a deeming fiction of declaring a class of registered persons
"as the recipient" of the supply of taxable goods or services - The effect of the
amending Act 32 of 2018 is as follows : (i) the powers of the Central Government
to specify through a notification has been clarified; and (ii) the power to specify a
class of registered persons as the recipient has been recognised - S. 5(4) of the
IGST Act, thus, enables the Central Government to specify a class of registered
persons as the recipients, thereby conferring the power of creating a deeming
fiction on the delegated legislation
- Thus, S. 5(4) as amended, clarifies that Central Government may designate a
class of registered persons as the recipient, thereby broadening the scope of S. 2
(93) of the CGST Act, which is anyway an inclusive definition since S. 2 of the CGST
Act is prefaced with "unless the context otherwise requires" - Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, S. 2(93)
(Paras 71 to 95, 127 to 132, 145 to 149 and 171.4)
K.
GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5(3), 13
(9) and 2(11) - Importers under CIF contracts - Held, amount to service
recipients - Meaning of the term "recipient" in the IGST - Construction of,
within the context laid down in the taxing statute (the IGST and the CGST
Acts) and not by a strict application of commercial principles - S. 13(9) of
the IGST Act r/w S. 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act, held, inherently create a
deeming fiction of the importer of goods to be the recipient of shipping
service - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 2(93) and 7
(Paras 135, 136 and 142)
L. GST - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 2(93), 2(107),
24 and 7 - Test of taxable person - Satisfaction/identification of
- S. 24(iii) of the CGST Act mandates persons required to pay tax under
reverse charge to be compulsorily registered under the CGST Act - Further, S. 2
(107) of the CGST Act defines a "taxable person" to mean a person who is
registered or liable to be registered under S. 24 of the CGST Act - Also, neither S.
2(107) nor S. 24 of the CGST Act qualify the imposition of reverse charge on a
"recipient of service" and broadly impose it on "the persons who are required to
pay tax under reverse charge"
- In the present case, held, since the impugned Noti. No. 10 of 2017 identifies
the importer as the recipient liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis under S. 5
(3) of the IGST Act, the argument of the failure to identify a specific person who is
liable to pay tax, held, does not stand - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act,
2017, Ss. 5(3), 13(9) and 2(11)
(Para 100)
M. GST - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - S. 15 - Valuation
- Principles for determination of - Held, may be prescribed by Rules or by
notification
- Held, Ss. 15(4) and 15(5) enable delegated legislation to prescribe methods
for determination of value, on the recommendations of the GST Council, either by
Rules or notification - Parliament has provided the basic framework and delegated
legislation provides necessary supplements to create a workable mechanism - Rule
31 of the CGST Rules, 2017 specifically provides for a residual power to determine
valuation in specific cases, using reasonable means that are consistent with the
principles of S. 15 of the CGST Act - This is where the value of the supply of goods
cannot be determined in accordance with Rules 27 to 30 of the CGST Rules, 2017
- Thus, held, the impugned Noti. No. 8 of 2017 cannot be struck down for
excessive delegation on the ground that it prescribes 10% of the CIF value as the
mechanism for imposing tax on a reverse charge basis - Central Goods and
Services Tax Rules, 2017, Rr. 27 to 31
(Paras 103 to 105)
N. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5, 13(9)
and 2(11) - Test of taxable value - Satisfaction of - Value determination
through notification - Permissibility of - By a corrigendum dt 8-6-2016,
Noti. No. 8 of 2017 was amended to include the measure of taxable value to
be 10% of the CIF value - Held, the impugned Noti. No. 8 of 2017 cannot
be struck down for excessive delegation when it prescribes 10% of the CIF
value as the mechanism for imposing tax on a reverse charge basis (see
also Shortnote M) - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 7 and 2
(93)
(Para 105)
O. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5 to 14,
13(9) and 2(11) - IGST on the "service" aspect of the transaction, held, is
impermissible, as the same would be in violation of the principle of
"composite supply" enshrined under the GST Regime - IGST on "service
aspect" alone of shipping services under a CIF contract - Impermissibility
of, when there is a concomitant imposition of IGST on supply of goods i.e. a
tax on the supply of a service, which has already been included by the
legislation as a tax on the composite supply of goods, cannot be allowed
- Provisions of composite supply in the CGST Act (and the IGST Act) play a
specific role in the levy of GST and the idea of introducing "composite supply" was
to ensure that various elements of a transaction are not dissected and the levy is
imposed on the bundle of supplies altogether i.e. the intent of Parliament was that a
transaction which includes different aspects of supply of goods or services and
which are naturally bundled together, must be taxed as a composite supply
- In a CIF contract, the supply of goods is accompanied by the supply of
services of transportation and insurance, the responsibility for which lies on the
seller (the foreign exporter in this case) - Further, the supply of service of
transportation by the foreign shipper forms a part of the bundle of supplies between
the foreign exporter and the Indian importer, on which the IGST is payable under S.
5(1) of the IGST Act r/w S. 20 of the IGST Act, Ss. 8 and 2(30) of the CGST Act
- Thus held, to levy the IGST on the supply of the service component of the
transaction would contradict the principle enshrined in S. 8 and be in violation of the
scheme of the GST legislation - Thus, it would be in violation of S. 8 of the CGST
Act and the overall scheme of the GST legislation - Also, under S. 7(3) of the
CGST Act, the Central Government has the power to notify an import of goods as
an import of services and vice versa - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017,
Ss. 7 to 15, 2(30) and 2(93)
(Paras 168 to 170 and 171.5)
P. GST - Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - S. 2(31) - Supply
for consideration - Scope of - May be made by "any other person" other
than the recipient also
- S. 2(31) of the CGST Act defines "consideration" to include payment made or
to be made, in money or any other form, for the inducement of supply of goods or
services to be made by the recipient or by any other person - Thus, in the case of
goods imported on a CIF basis, the fact that consideration is paid by the foreign
exporter to the foreign shipping line would not stand in the way of it being
considered as a "supply of service" under S. 7(4) of the IGST Act which is made for
a consideration, thereby constituting "supply of service" in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce that can be subject to IGST under S. 5(1) of the IGST Act -
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, Ss. 7 and 5
(Para 119)
Q. GST - Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 - Ss. 5, 7 and
13(9) - Levy of IGST on supply of transportation service by the shipping
line to the foreign exporter, for the import goods into India - Held, has real
connection to India, so as not to breach the extra-territoriality principle
to legislate over events occurring extra-territorially - The only requirement
imposed is that such an event must have a real connection to India - The
impugned levy on the supply of transportation service by the shipping line to the
foreign exporter to import goods into India, held, has a twofold connection - First
the destination of the goods is India and thus, a clear territorial nexus is established
with the event occurring outside the territory - Second, the services are rendered
for the benefit of the Indian importer - Thus, the transaction does have a nexus
with the territory of India
- Furthermore, S. 13(9) recognises the place of supply of services as the
destination of goods when the supplier is located outside India - Since the
destination of goods is India, the statute itself is broad enough to cover a taxable
event that has extra-territorial aspects, which bears a nexus to India - Constitution
of India - Art. 245 - Statute Law - Extra-territorial operation of Indian Laws -
Permissible scope - Real connection with India - Test of - Deeming fiction(s) -
Extent to which may be employed by the legislature
(Paras 121 to 123)
R. Constitution of India - Arts. 246-A, 246 and 254 - Goods and
Services Tax (GST) - Regime of Indirect Taxes in India - Pre and post GST
regimes - Explained
- In the pre-GST regime, the Union had the exclusive power to impose indirect
taxes, that is, on inter-State sale of goods, customs duty, service tax, and excise
duty while the States had the exclusive power to impose tax on intra-State sale of
goods, luxury tax, entertainment tax, purchase tax, and taxes on gambling and
betting - GST regime, however, subsumed all the indirect taxes - Further, Art.
246-A, introduced by the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 now vests Parliament
and the State Legislatures with the concurrent power to make laws with respect to
GST
- Held, Art. 246-A entrusts Parliament and State Legislatures with the power to
legislate on the goods and services tax, however, the power of the States is
subject to the conferment of an exclusive domain to Parliament to levy the goods
and services tax where the supply of goods or services takes place in the course of
inter-State trade and commerce - GST - Generally
(Paras 28 to 32)
S. GST - GST Council - Recommendations of GST Council - Held, not
binding on Union and State - Draft Art. 279-B - Deletion of Art. 279-B
while introducing the 2014 Amendment Bill (see also Shortnote T), absence
of the repugnancy provision in Art. 246-A and possession of
simultaneous/equal power to legislate on GST, where both the Union and
the States are conferred equal power to legislate on GST (see also
Shortnote V) - Significance of
- Constitution of India - Arts. 279-A and 246-A - Constitution (One Hundred
and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill. 2011
T. Constitution of India - Arts. 279-A and 246-A - Deletion of proposed
Art. 279-B - Relevance of - Explained
- Deletion of Art. 279-B while introducing the 2014 Amendment Bill and the
inclusion of Art. 279(11) in the text of the Constitution brought about two
substantial changes : (i) that instead of the creation of a dispute settlement
authority, the Council is vested with the power to decide on "modalities" of dispute
resolution; and (ii) while Art. 279-B stipulated that the authority shall adjudicate on
"disputes arising out of the deviation from the recommendations", Art. 279-A(11)
states that the disputes arising out of recommendations shall be resolved
- Held, the deletion of Art. 279-B and the inclusion of Art. 279(1) by the
Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 indicates that Parliament intended for the
recommendations of the GST Council to only have a persuasive value, particularly
when interpreted along with the objective of the GST regime to foster cooperative
federalism and harmony between the constituent units - GST - GST Council
U. Constitutional Interpretation - Aids to construction - External aids -
Historical background, Constituent Assembly Debates, etc. - Though the
traditional view of interpretation of statutes is that legislative history is not
readily used in interpreting a law, the modern trend of thinking on the
subject has enabled courts to look into the history of a legislation to
understand the full purport of the words used and the mischief sought to be
remedied by the law - Hence legislative history examined to interpret Art.
279-A of the Constitution on the issue of whether recommendations of GST
Council are binding on Parliament and the State Legislatures - See also
Shortnote T - Interpretation of Statutes External Aids
Legislative/Legal history
(Para 44)
V. Constitution of India - Arts. 279-A and 246-A - Powers of GST
Council - Scope of - Recommendations of GST Council - Held, not binding
on Union and State - Held, if the GST Council was intended to be a decision-
making authority whose recommendations transform to legislation, such a
qualification would have been included in Arts. 246-A or 279-A - Neither
does Art. 279-A begin with a non obstante clause nor does Art. 246-A
provide that the legislative power is "subject to" Art. 279-A
- Held, the "recommendations" of the GST Council are the product of a
collaborative dialogue involving the Union and the States and are recommendatory
in nature - Further, to regard them as binding edicts would disrupt fiscal federalism,
where both the Union and the States are conferred equal power to legislate on GST
- GST - GST Council
(Paras 59, 171.1 and 171.2)
W. GST - GST Council - Recommendations of GST Council - Bindingness
of, vis-à-vis rule-making power of Government - Held, the Government
while exercising its rule-making power under the provisions of the CGST Act
and the IGST Act is bound by the recommendations of the GST Council -
However, that does not mean that all the recommendations of the GST
Council made by virtue of the power of Art. 279-A(4) of the Constitution are
binding on the legislature's power to enact primary legislations -
Constitution of India, Arts. 279-A and 246-A
(Paras 66 and 171.3)
X. Constitution of India - Arts. 246-A & 279-A and Arts. 246 & 254 -
Nature of legislative powers re GST conferred on Centre and States under
Art. 246-A, held, is simultaneous or co-equal as there is no provision for
repugnancy - Therefore, as per Art. 246-A, both Parliament and the State
Legislature possess equal power to legislate on aspects of GST - This is a
departure from the scheme underlying Arts. 246 and 254
- Role and Powers of GST Council with such co-equal division of
legislative power between Centre and States, extensively examined
- Effect of such constitutional scheme on the nature of Indian
federalism, explained - Merely because a few provisions of the Constitution
provide the Union with a greater share of power, the provisions in which the
federal units are envisaged to possess equal power, such as Art. 246-A,
held, cannot be construed in favour of the Union
- GST Council is not only an avenue for the exercise of cooperative federalism
but also for political contestation across party lines - Thus, the discussions in the
GST Council impact both federalism and democracy - The constitutional design of
the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 is sui generis since it introduces unique
features of federalism - Art. 246-A treats the Centre and States as equal units by
conferring a simultaneous power of enacting law on GST - Art. 279-A in
constituting the GST Council envisions that neither the Centre nor the States can
act independent of the other
(Paras 49 to 53 and 171.1.2)
Y. Constitutional Law - Federalism - Models of federalism -
Competitive or dual federalism, and, cooperative federalism - Contrasted -
Indian model of cooperative federalism with a strong Centre, and impact of
GST Regime on Indian federalism - Explained
- The Indian Constitution has sometimes been described as auasi-federal or a
Constitution with a "centralising drift" - This is because when the Constitution is
read as a whole, the Union is granted a larger share of the power - Instances of
this centralising drift can be traced to Arts. 254, 248 and 353 - However, there
are instances such as Art. 246-A, where the Centre and the States are conferred
equal power - Merely because a few provisions of the Constitution provide the
Union with a greater share of power, the provisions in which the federal units are
envisaged to possess equal power, such as Art. 246-A, held, cannot be construed
in favour of the Union
(Paras 49 to 53 and 171.1.2)
Z. Constitutional Law - Federalism - Provisions of Indian Constitution
pertaining to its federal structure - Interpretation of - Overall quasi-
federal structure of Indian federalism with a strong Centre - Impact of -
Merely because a few provisions of the Constitution provide the Union with
a greater share of power, the provisions in which the federal units are
envisaged to possess equal power cannot be construed in favour of the
Union
(Para 52)
ZA. Constitutional Law - Federalism - Objective of federal system -
What is - The federal system is a means to accommodate the needs of a
pluralistic society to function in a democratic manner - It attempts to
reconcile the desire of unity and commonality along with the desire for
diversity and autonomy - Democracy and federalism are interdependent on
each other for their survival such that federalism would only be stable in
well-functioning democracies
(Para 53)
ZB. Administrative Law - Subordinate/Delegated Legislation -
Nomenclature/Form - Reiterated, as long as a source of power to legislate
or issue a notification is available, the lack of a mention, or an incorrect
reference or mistake does not vitiate the exercise of such power
(Para 149)
ZC. Administrative Law - Delegation of Legislative Function/Power -
Generally - Nature, Scope and Extent - The legislature is required to
perform its essential legislative functions - Once the skeletal structure of
the policy is framed by the legislature, the details can emerge through
delegated legislations - However, it is a settled position that the legislature
cannot delegate its "essential legislative functions"
(Para 93)
The respondents import non-coking coal from Indonesia, South Africa and the
US by ocean transport on a "Cost-Insurance-Freight" ("CIF") basis which is supplied
to domestic industries. The goods are transported from a place outside India, up to
the customs station in India. The respondent pays customs duties on the import of
coal, which includes the value of ocean freight. In the case of a CIF contract, the
freight invoice is issued by the foreign shipping line to the foreign exporter, without
the involvement of the importer. Ocean freight is paid by the importer only when
goods are imported under a "Free-on-Board" ("FOB") contract. In the case of a
high seas sale transaction, the coal is purchased from the original buyer before it
arrives at Indian ports.
With the advent of the GST regime, Notification No. 8 of 2017-Integrated Tax
(Rate) dated 28-6-2017 ("Notification No. 8 of 2017") was issued by the Central
Government on the advice of the Goods and Services Tax Council ("the GST
Council"), in exercise of powers under Section 5(1), Section 6(1) and Sections 20
(iii)-(iv) of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ("the IGST Act"), read
with Section 15(5) and Section 16(1) of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,
2017 ("the CGST Act"). Entry 9 of Notification No. 8 of 2017, effective from 1-7-
2017, levied an integrated tax @ 5% on the supply of specified services, including
transportation of goods, in a vessel from a place outside India up to the customs
station of clearance in India.
The respondent alleged that the impugned notifications create an element of
double taxation, as ocean freight is included in the value of goods for the purpose of
customs duty which the importer is liable to pay. The respondent does not dispute
the liability of integrated tax on supply of service of transportation when it imports
goods on an FOB basis.
On 28-6-2017, the Central Government issued Notification No. 10 of 2017
("Notification No. 10 of 2017"). Serial No. 10 of Notification No. 10 of 2017
categorised the recipient of services of supply of goods by a person in a non-
taxable territory by a vessel to include an importer under Section 2(26) of the
Customs Act, 1962.
The respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging Notification
No. 8 of 2017 and Notification No. 10 of 2017 (collectively referred as "the
impugned notifications") on the grounds that:
1. The notifications are ultra vires the IGST Act and the CGST Act.
2. Customs duty is levied on the component of ocean freight and the levy of
IGST on the freight element in the course of transportation would amount to
double taxation.
3. Though in the case of high sea sales, the importer is a different entity yet
this regime would tax the respondent as the importer and the recipient of
service.
4. In the case of a CIF contract, the supply of service of transport of goods
in a vessel is by a foreign shipping line located in a non-taxable territory to an
exporter located in a non-taxable territory by a vessel outside the territory of
India which cannot be subject to tax under the IGST Act.
5. Notification No. 10 of 2017 transgresses the provisions of Section 5(3) of
the IGST Act as instead of the "recipient" mentioned therein, the "importer" as
defined in Section 2(26) of the Customs Act, is made liable to pay tax.
6. Entry 9(ii) and Para 2 of Notification No. 8 of 2017, read with Notification
No. 10 of 2017, creates a deeming fiction and a separate taxable event which is
not permissible in law.
The Union of India urged before the High Court that although tax is being paid
twice on the value of ocean freight, it is not unconstitutional as the tax is on two
different aspects of the transaction, namely, the supply of service and import of
goods. The rationale for the impugned notifications, according to the Union
Government, is to remove the disparity between Indian and foreign shipping lines,
as the former are unable to claim input tax credit ("ITC") that forms a part of their
transportation costs, since supply of goods was hitherto exempt from service tax.
The levy of the integrated tax does not, according to the Union of India, impose an
additional cost on importers as the cost paid on inward transportation of goods and
import freight services is available to them as ITC.
The Division Bench of the High Court held that the impugned notifications are
unconstitutional for exceeding the powers conferred by the IGST Act and the CGST
Act. The High Court held:
1. The importer of goods on a CIF basis is not the recipient of the transport
services as Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines a "recipient" of services to
mean someone who pays consideration for the service, which is the foreign
exporter in this case.
2. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act enables the Government to stipulate
categories of supply, not specify a third-party as a recipient of such supply.
3. There is no territorial nexus for taxation since the supply of service of
transportation of goods is by a person in a non-taxable territory to another
person in a non-taxable territory from a place outside India up to the Indian
customs clearance station and this is neither an inter-State nor an intra-State
supply.
4. Section 2(11) of the IGST Act defines "import of service" to mean the
supply of service where the supplier of service is located outside India, the
recipient of service is located in India and the place of supply of service is in
India.
5. In this case, since the goods are transported on a CIF basis, the recipient
of service is the foreign exporter who is outside India.
6. Section 7(5)(c) of the IGST Act dealing with intra-State supply cannot be
read so extensively that it conflates the "supply of goods or services or both in
the taxable territory" to "place of supply".
7. Sections 12 and 13 of the IGST Act deal with determining the place of
supply. Neither of them will apply if both the supplier and recipient of service are
based outside India. The mere fact that the service terminates at India does not
make the service of supply of transportation to be taking place in India.
8. The provisions regarding time of supply, as contemplated in Section 20 of
the IGST Act and applicable to Section 13 of the IGST Act dealing with supply of
services, are applicable only vis-à-vis the actual recipient of the supply of
service, which is the foreign exporter in this case.
9. Section 15(1) of the CGST Act enables the determination of the value of
the supply, only between the actual supplier and actual recipient of the service.
10. Since the importer is not the "recipient" of the service under Section 2
(93) of the CGST Act, it will not be in a position to avail ITC under Section 16(1)
of the CGST Act.
11. Since the importer pays customs duties on the goods which include the
value of ocean freight, the impugned notifications impose double taxation
through a delegated legislation, which is impermissible.
The issue involved in this appeal was whether an Indian importer can be subject
to the levy of Integrated Goods and Services Tax ("IGST") on the component of
ocean freight paid by the foreign seller to a foreign shipping line, on a reverse
charge basis?
Held :
The Indirect Tax Regime after the Introduction of GST
In the pre-GST regime, the Union had the exclusive power to impose indirect
taxes, that is, on inter-State sale of goods, customs duty, service tax, and excise
duty. The States had the exclusive power to impose tax on intra-State sale of
goods, luxury tax, entertainment tax, purchase tax, and taxes on gambling and
betting. The GST regime has subsumed all the indirect taxes. Article 246-A which
was introduced by the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 vests Parliament and the
State Legislatures with the concurrent power to make laws with respect to GST.
(Para 28)
(Tax) 248, relied on
M.P.V. Sundararamien & Co. V. State of A.P., 1958 SCR 1422 : AIR 1958 SC 468 :
(1958) 9 STC 298, cited
The distribution of legislative power between federating units, the Union and the
&
States, is among the paramount features of a federal Constitution. Articles 246 and
254 have been central to the debate on the federal nature of the Indian
Constitution. Article 246-A, is a "special provision with respect to goods and
services tax", and begins with a non obstante clause overriding Articles 246 and
254. Article 246 sets down the constitutional framework defining the legislative
competence of Parliament and the State Legislatures. Article 254 provides the
framework for addressing inconsistency between Central and State laws on
matters in the Concurrent list. Article 246-A entrusts Parliament and State
Legislatures with the power to legislate on the goods and services tax. The power
of the States is however subject to the conferment of an exclusive domain to
Parliament to levy the goods and services tax where the supply of goods or
services takes place in the course of inter-State trade and commerce.
(Para 29)
H.M. Seervai : Constitutional Law of India, (N.M. Tripati Private Limited, 4th Edn.,
Vol. 1) 289, referred to
Article 246-A provides Parliament and the State Legislature with the concurrent
power to legislate on GST. Article 246-A has a non obstante provision which
overrides Article 254. Article 246-A does not provide a repugnancy clause. Unlike
Article 254 which stipulates that the law made by Parliament on a subject in the
Concurrent list shall prevail over conflicting laws made by the State Legislature, the
constitutional design of Article 246-A does not stipulate the manner in which such
inconsistency between the laws made by Parliament and the State Legislature on
GST can be resolved. The concurrent power exercised by the legislatures under
Article 246-A is termed as a "simultaneous power" to differentiate it from the
constitutional design on exercise of concurrent power under Article 246, the latter
being subject to the repugnancy clause under Article 254.
(Para 32)
Parliamentary debates
Though the traditional view of interpretation of statutes is that legislative history
is not readily used in interpreting a law, the modern trend of thinking on the subject
has enabled courts to look into the history of a legislation to understand
the full purport of the words used and the mischief sought to be remedied by the
law.
(Para 44)
The parliamentary debates and the legislative history of the Constitutional
amendment, and the committee reports on Articles 246-A and 279-A indicate that:
(1) The draft of Article 279-B, in the 2011 Amendment Bill, which sought to
introduce a GST Dispute Settlement Authority to adjudicate on any dispute
"arising out of deviation" from the recommendations of the GST Council was
deleted. The current Article 279-A(11) provides that the GST Council shall devise
a mechanism to adjudicate on any dispute that "arises out" of the
recommendations of the Council. The deletion of Article 279-B while introducing
the 2014 Amendment Bill and the inclusion of Article 279(11) in the text of the
Constitution has brought about two substantial changes : one, that instead of
the creation of a dispute settlement authority, the Council is vested with the
power to decide on "modalities" of dispute resolution; and second, while Article
279-B stipulated that the authority shall adjudicate on "disputes arising out of
the deviation from the recommendations", Article 279-A(11) states that the
disputes arising out of recommendations shall be resolved. The phrase
"deviation" has been omitted. Before the Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha,
the Government had stated that disputes shall be resolved by modalities
including mediation and arbitration. The Standing Committee of Finance in its
report specifically recommended the deletion of Article 279-B due to the
concerns raised by the States.
(2) Under the 2011 Amendment Bill, the GST Council could recommend only
when a unanimous decision would be reached. However, the Standing
Committee of Finance had recommended that since it would be difficult to arrive
at a consensus due to the socio-economic diversity amongst the States, the
recommendations be made with a majority instead of unanimity. While making
this recommendation, it was observed that if the GST Council functions like the
present Empowered Committee where the differences are resolved amicably in
an institutional mode, it would foster the spirit of cooperative federalism.
(para 46)
The nature of the recommendations of the GST Council
One of the important characteristics of a federal polity is the distribution of
legislative power between the Union and the States.
(Para 48)
Alok Prasanna: "For a mess of Potage : The GST's promise of increased revenue to
States comes at the cost of the federal structure of the Constitution", National
Law School of India Review, Vol. 28, No. 2(2016), pp. 97-113; Ajitesh
Kir:"India's Goods and Services Tax : A Unique Experiment in Cooperative
Federalism and a Constitutional Crisis in Waiting", Canadian Tax Journal (2021)
69 : 2, pp. 391-445, referred to
The surest way t legal research!"
The exclusive powers held by the States and the Centre on matters of taxation
are regarded as an important feature of India's federal polity. The Constitution
Amendment Act, 2016 alters the legislative distribution between the Centre and the
State on indirect taxation by providing Parliament and State Legislatures with
"simultaneous powers" and no provision for repugnancy. Therefore, according to
Article 246-A, both Parliament and the State Legislature possess equal power to
legislate on aspects of GST. It is the contention of the Union that the
recommendation of the GST Council should be binding on Parliament and the State
Legislatures precisely because equal power is granted to both the federal units. The
Union has argued that if the recommendations are not binding, then it would lead to
an impasse where different Central and State legislations could be guiding the same
field.
(Para 49)
Article 246-A vests Parliament and the State Legislatures with a unique,
simultaneous law-making power on GST. It is in this context that the role of the
GST Council gains significance. The recommendations of the GST Council are not
based on a unanimous decision but on a three-fourth majority of the members
present and voting, where the Union's vote counts as one-third, while the States'
votes have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast. There are two
significant attributions of the voting system in the GST Council. First, the GST
Council has an unequal voting structure, where the States collectively have a two-
third voting share and the Union has a one-third voting share; and second, since
India has a multi-party system, it is possible that the party in power at the Centre
may or may not be in power in various States. Therefore, the GST Council is not
only an avenue for the exercise of cooperative federalism but also for political
contestation across party lines. Thus, the discussions in the GST Council impact
both federalism and democracy. The constitutional design of the Constitution
Amendment Act, 2016 is sui generis since it introduces unique features of
federalism. Article 246-A treats the Centre and States as equal units by conferring a
simultaneous power of enacting law on GST. Article 279-A in constituting the GST
Council envisions that neither the Centre nor the States can act independent of the
other.
(Para 50)
The dual federalism model or the autonomy model views the constituting units
of the Centre and States as autonomous, independent and competing units. This
model is also termed as competitive federalism, where the constituent units
"compete" with each other. Proponents of the cooperative federalism model argue
that it is a mistake to view each unit as a separate autonomous entity. According
to the theory of cooperative federalism, integration and not autonomy is the
objective that federalism seeks to achieve. While dual federalism is termed as "layer
cake federalism" due to the delineation of the structures of power, cooperative
federalism is known as "marble cake federalism" due to the integrated approach of
the federal units. India follows the model of cooperative federalism where the Union
and the State Governments need to iron out the differences that arise in the course
of the path of development.
(Para 51)
Robert A. Schapiro: "Justice Steven's theory of Interactive Federalism", 74 Fordham
L Rev 2133 (2006); Jessica Bulman-Pozen and Heather K.
rken:"Uncooperative Federalism", Yale Law Journal, Vol. 118. No. 7 (May,
2009), pp. 1256-1310, referred to
The Indian Constitution has sometimes been described as quasi-federal or a
Constitution with a "centralising drift". This is because when the Constitution is read
as a whole, the Union is granted a larger share of the power. Instances of this
centralising drift can be traced to Articles 254, 248 and 353. However, there are
instances such as Article 246-A, where the Centre and the States are conferred
equal power. Merely because a few provisions of the Constitution provide the Union
with a greater share of power, the provisions in which the federal units are
envisaged to possess equal power cannot be construed in favour of the Union. The
Union and the States have a simultaneous power to legislate on GST. The GST
Council has the power to make recommendations on a wide range of
subjects relating to GST. Since the Constitution does not envisage a repugnancy
provision to resolve inconsistencies between the Central and State laws on GST,
the GST Council must ideally function, as provided by Article 279-A(6), in a
harmonised manner to reach a workable fiscal model through cooperation and
collaboration.
(Para 52)
The federal system is a means to accommodate the needs of a pluralistic
society to function in a democratic manner. It attempts to reconcile the desire of
unity and commonality along with the desire for diversity and autonomy.
Democracy and federalism are interdependent on each other for their survival such
that federalism would only be stable in well-functioning democracies.
(Para 53)
H.M. Seervai : Constitutional Law of India, (N.M. Tripati Private Limited, 4th Edn.,
Vol. 1) 289, referred to
Indian federalism is a dialogue in which the States and the Centre constantly
engage in conversations. Such dialogues can be placed on two ends of the
spectrum - collaborative discussions that cooperative federalism fosters at one
end of the spectrum and interstitial contestation at the other end.
(Para 54)
Jessica Bulman-Pozen and Heather K. Gerken: "Uncooperative Federalism", Yale
Law Journal, Vol. 118. No. 7 (May, 2009), pp. 1256-1310, referred to
The States can use various forms of contestation if they disagree with the
decision of the Centre. Such forms of contestation are also within the framework of
Indian federalism. The GST Council is not merely a constitutional body restricted to
the indirect tax system in India but is also an important focal point to foster
federalism and democracy.
(Para 55)
Jessica Bulman-Pozen and Heather K. Gerken: "Uncooperative Federalism", Yale
Law Journal, Vol. 118. No. 7 (May, 2009), p. 1284, referred to
One of the important features of Indian federalism is "fiscal federalism".
A
reading of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 2014 Amendment Bill, the
parliamentary reports and speeches indicate that Articles 246-A and 279-A were
introduced with the objective of enhancing cooperative federalism and harmony
between the States and the Centre. However, the Centre has a one-third vote
share in the GST Council. This coupled with the absence of the repugnancy provision
in Article 246-A indicates that recommendations of the GST Council cannot be
binding. Such an interpretation would be contrary to the objective of introducing the
GST regime and would also dislodge the fine balance on which Indian federalism
rests. Therefore, the argument that if the recommendations of the GST Council are
not binding, then the entire structure of GST would crumble does not hold water.
Such a reading of the provisions of the Constitution diminishes the role of the GST
Council as a constitutional body formed to arrive at decisions by collaboration and
contestation of ideas.
(Para 56)
The contextual meaning of "recommendations"
The nature and meaning of the term "recommendation" differs contextually.
(Para 58)
GST Council which is a constitutional body is entrusted with the duty to make
recommendations on a wide range of areas concerning GST. The GST Council has
plenary powers under Article 279-A(4)(h) where it could make recommendations
on "any other matter" related to GST as the Council may decide. The GST Council
has to arrive at its recommendations through harmonised deliberation between the
federal units as provided in clause (6) of Article 279-A. Unlike the other provisions
of the Constitution which provide that recommendations shall be made to the
President or the Governor, Article 279-A states that the recommendations shall be
made to the "Union and the States". The recommendation of the GST Council
made under Article 279-A is non-qualified. That is, there is no explanation on the
value of such a recommendation. Yet the notion that the recommendations of the
GST Council transform into legislation in and of themselves under Article 246-A
would be far-fetched. If the GST Council was intended to be a decision-making
authority whose recommendations transform to legislation, such a qualification
would have been included in Articles 246-A or 279-A. Neither does Article 279-A
begin with a non obstante clause nor does Article 246-A provide that the legislative
power is "subject to" Article 279-A.
(Para 59)
If the GST Council were intended to be a constitutional body whose
recommendations transform into legislation without any intervening act, there
would have been an express provision in Article 246-A. Article 279-A does not
mandate tabling the recommendations in the legislature. The use of the phrase
"recommendations to the Union or States" indicates that the GST Council is a
recommendatory body aiding the Government in enacting legislation on GST.
(Para 61)
Recommendations cannot create binding and enforceable rights,
in
contradistinction to a "direction" or "mandate".
(Para 64)
Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd. V. CWT, (1966) 2 SCR 688 : AIR 1966 SC 1370;
363, relied on
895, affirmed
Interpretation of "recommendation" vis-à-vis the provisions of the IGST
Act and the CGST Act
The provisions of the IGST Act and the CGST Act which provide that the Union
Government is to act on the recommendations of the GST Council must be
interpreted with reference to the purpose of the enactment, which is to create a
uniform taxation system. The GST was introduced since different States could
earlier provide different tax slabs and different exemptions. The recommendations
of the GST Council are made binding on the Government when it exercises its
power to notify secondary legislation to give effect to the uniform taxation system.
The Council under Article 279-A has wide recommendatory powers on matters
related to GST where it has the power to make recommendations on subject-
matters that fall outside the purview of the rule-making power under the provisions
of the IGST and the CGST Act. Merely because a few of the recommendations of
the GST Council are binding on the Government under the provisions of the CGST
Act and the IGST Act, it cannot be argued that all of the GST Council's
recommendations are binding. As a matter of first principle, the provisions of the
Constitution, which is the grundnorm of the nation, cannot be interpreted based on
the provisions of a primary legislation. It is only the provisions of a primary
legislation that can be interpreted with reference to the Constitution. The legislature
amends the Constitution by exercising its constituent power and legislates by
exercising its legislative power. The constituent power of the legislature is of a
higher constitutional order as compared to its legislative power. Even if it is
Parliament that has enacted laws making the recommendations of the GST Council
binding
on the Central Government for the purpose of notifying secondary legislations, it
would not mean that all the recommendations of the Council made by virtue of its
power under Article 279-A have a binding force on the legislature.
(Para 66)
Statutory provisions and scheme of the IGST Act
Section 5 of the IGST Act provides for the levy and collection of tax on inter-
State supplies of goods or services. The power to impose such tax is derived from
Article 286(2) read with Article 269-A(1).
(Para 70)
The proviso to Section 5(1) of the IGST Act clarifies that the tax is levied on
goods imported into India, in accordance with Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act,
1975. The value is determined under the Customs Tariff Act at the point when the
customs duties are levied in accordance with the Customs Act.
(Para 70)
The payment of IGST on a reverse-charge basis is contemplated in sub-sections
(3) and (4) of Section 5. Sub-section (3) provides that IGST may be paid on a
reverse charge basis on specified categories of supply of goods or services or both.
The Central Government is empowered to specify these categories on the
recommendations of the GST Council. Hence, on its plain terms, the payment of
IGST on a reverse charge basis is envisaged on specific categories of supply of
goods or services, or both as notified by the Central Government. The tax on a
reverse charge basis is payable by the recipient of such goods or services, or both.
The power, in other words, is to specify categories of goods or services (or both).
The provision does not empower the Government to specify the recipient of the
supply of goods or services. The unamended sub-section (4) of Section 5 provided
that the tax in respect of the supply of goods or services by an unregistered
supplier, shall be paid on a reverse charge basis by a specified registered person, as
the recipient of such supply of goods or services.
(Para 71)
On 28-6-2017, Notification No. 10 of 2017 was issued by the Central
Government in exercise of powers conferred by Section 5(3) of the IGST Act.
Notification No. 10 of 2017 specified the importer as the recipient of transportation
of service when the supplier is located in a non-taxable territory and the service of
transportation is supplied by a person in a non-taxable territory. Thus, Entry 10 of
Notification No. 10 of 2017 deems an importer of goods as the "recipient of
service" of transportation of goods by a foreign shipping line.
(Para 73)
Under the reverse charge mechanism, the liability to pay is on the recipient of
the supply of goods or services, as opposed to the supplier of goods or services.
Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act provides for compulsory registration of "persons
who are required to pay tax under the reverse charge".
(Para 76)
Do the impugned notifications suffer from excessive delegation?
Article 286(1) stipulates that the State shall not levy tax when the supply of
goods or services takes place outside the State or in the course of import or export
of goods or services from the territory of India. Clause (2) of Article 286 states
that Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when there is a
supply of goods or services as prescribed by clause (1).
(Para 89)
Article 269-A stipulates that Parliament may by law formulate principles for
determining (a) the place of supply and; (b) when the supply of goods or services
or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. Article 286(1)
empowers Parliament to formulate the principles by law for determining when a
supply of goods or services, or both, takes place (a) outside the State; and (b) in
the course of import into or export outside the territory of India. Parliament
enacted the IGST Act prescribing the principles as required under Articles 269-A and
286(1). The provisions of the IGST Act deal with the levy and collection of tax
[Section 5(1)], export of goods and services [Sections 2(5) and 2(6)], import of
goods and services [Sections 2(10) and 2(11)], identification of the location of the
supplier and recipient of services [Sections 2(14) and 2(15)], determination of the
nature of inter-State supply (Section 7), supplies in territorial waters (Section 9),
place of supply with respect to import to India and export from India (Section 11),
and place of supply of services where the location of the supplier and recipient is in
India and outside India (Sections 12 and 13).
(Para 91)
The contention of the respondents is that Section 5(3) of the IGST Act only
delegates the power to identify the categories of goods or services on which the
tax shall be paid on reverse charge basis. It is contended that since Notification No.
10 of 2017 identifies an importer as a service recipient for the purposes of Section
5(3), it is ultra vires the parent Act on the ground of excessive delegation.
(Para 92)
The legislature is required to perform its essential legislative functions. Once the
skeletal structure of the policy is framed by the legislature, the details can emerge
through delegated legislations. It is a settled position that the legislature cannot
delegate its "essential legislative functions". The essential legislative functions with
respect to the GST law are the levy of tax, subject-matter of tax, taxable person,
rate of taxation and value for the purpose of taxation. The principles governing
these essential aspects of taxation find place in the IGST Act : Section 5(1)
identifies the subject-matter of taxation as inter-State supplies of goods, services
or both; Section 2(107) of the CGST Act identifies a taxable person; Section 5(1)
provides a maximum cap of 40% as the rate of taxation; and Section 5(1)
stipulates that the value of taxation be determined under Section 15 of the CGST
Act.
(Para 93)
MCD V. Birla Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills, AIR 1968 SC 1232; Delhi Laws Act, 1912,
relied on
Both the IGST and the CGST Acts clearly define "reverse charge", "recipient" and
"taxable persons". Thus, the essential legislative functions vis-à-vis reverse charge
have not been delegated.
(Para 94)
Section 5(3) of the IGST Act provides the Government the power to specify
categories of supply of goods or services or both on which tax shall be paid on a
reverse charge basis by the recipient. The Government is to exercise this power on
the recommendation of the GST Council. The Government in exercise of its power
under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act issued the impugned Notification No. 10 of
2017 specifying the "categories of the supply" which shall be subject to reverse
charge. The notification, besides specifying the criteria, has also mentioned the
corresponding recipient in those categories. The IGST Act and the CGST Act define
"reverse charge" and prescribe the entity that is to be taxed for these purposes.
Therefore, the stipulation of the recipient in each of the categories is only
clarificatory. The Government by notification did not specify a taxable entity
different from that which is prescribed in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act for the
purposes of reverse charge.
(Para 95)
on this point, but reversed on facts
Charging Section : taxable person, taxable rate and manner of determining
value
The respondents have argued that no charge has been created for the ocean
freight transaction to be taxed in the hands of the importer. It has been alleged that
only Section 5(1) is a charging provision and Sections 5(3) and 5(4) cannot
independently create a charge.
(Para 96)
The four canons of taxation are as follows:
(i) The taxable event;
(ii) The person on whom the levy is imposed;
(iii) The rate at which the levy is imposed; and
(iv) The measure or the value to which the rate will be applied.
(para 97)
affirmed
Section 5(1) of the IGST Act specifically identifies the four canons of taxation :
(i) the inter-State supply of goods and services as the taxable event; (ii) the
"taxable person" as the person on whom the levy is imposed; (iii) the taxable rate
as such a rate notified by the Union Government on the recommendation of the
GST Council, capped at 40%; and (iv) the taxable value as the value determined
under Section 15 of the CGST Act.
(Para 98)
Section 5(3) and Section 5(4) of the IGST Act are inextricably linked with
Section 5(1) of the IGST Act which is the charging provision. They must be
construed together in determining the vires of the taxation.
(Para 99)
Taxable person
The respondents have alleged that the importer cannot be validly termed as a
taxable person. However, this argument has to fail on a close reading of the
impugned notifications alongside Sections 2(107) and 24 of the CGST Act. Section
4(iii) of the CGST Act mandates persons required to pay tax under reverse charge
to be compulsorily registered under the CGST Act. Section 2(107) of the CGST Act
defines a "taxable person" to mean a person who is registered or liable to be
registered under Section 24 of the CGST Act. Neither Section 2(107) nor Section
24 of the CGST Act qualify the imposition of reverse charge on a "recipient of
service" and broadly impose it on "the persons who are required to pay tax under
reverse charge". Since the impugned Notification No. 10 of 2017 identifies the
importer as the recipient liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis under Section 5
(3) of the IGST Act, the argument of the failure to identify a specific person who is
liable to pay tax does not stand.
(Para 100)
on this point
Taxable value
By a corrigendum dated 8-6-2016, Notification No. 8 of 2017 was amended to
include the measure of taxable value to be 10% of the CIF value. Section 5(1) of
the IGST Act enables the taxable value to be determined under Section 15 of the
CGST Act. The respondents have argued that the value has to be strictly
determined by
Section 15(1) of the CGST Act and not by way of delegated legislation. However,
Sections 15(4) and 15(5) enable delegated legislation to prescribe methods for
determination of value, on the recommendations of the GST Council.
(Para 103)
The respondents have urged that the determination of the value of supply has to
be specified only through rules, and not by notification. However, this would be an
unduly restrictive interpretation. Parliament has provided the basic framework and
delegated legislation provides necessary supplements to create a workable
mechanism. Rule 31 of the CGST Rules, 2017 specifically provides for a residual
power to determine valuation in specific cases, using reasonable means that are
consistent with the principles of Section 15 of the CGST Act. This is where the value
of the supply of goods cannot be determined in accordance with Rules 27 to 30 of
the CGST Rules, 2017. Thus, the impugned Notification No. 8 of 2017 cannot be
struck down for excessive delegation when it prescribes 10% of the CIF value as
the mechanism for imposing tax on a reverse charge basis.
(Para 105)
Taxable event : Is an ocean freight transaction for import of goods a valid
category of supply of services under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act?
The question that falls for the determination is whether the impugned
notifications issued in 2017, under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act, validly prescribe a
taxable event that constitutes an inter-State supply of goods and services with the
importer being a recipient of shipping services in CIF transactions.
(Para 106)
The analysis of whether import of goods under CIF contracts constitutes a valid
import of service has to be answered on two prongs : (i) whether classification of
imports as a specific category of supply of shipping service is valid under Section 5
(3) read with Section 5(1) of the IGST Act; and (ii) whether the recipient of the
imported goods is also a recipient of shipping services in CIF transactions under
Section 5(3).
(Para 107)
Do imported goods procured on a CIF basis constitute an inter-State supply
or is it an extra-territorial tax?
The respondents have argued that the supply of service of shipping in a CIF
contract is from the foreign shipping line to the foreign exporter. It is alleged that
this transaction has no territorial nexus to India and does not constitute "supply"
that can be taxed within the meaning of the CGST Act and the IGST Act.
(Para 108)
GST seeks to focus on the taxation of "supply" of goods or services. The
provisions of the IGST and the CGST Act focus on implementing a workable
machinery to adequately capture the complexities of supply in a global and digital
age.
(Para 110)
The term "supply" has been defined in the IGST Act with reference to the CGST
Act. Section 2(21) of the IGST Act provides that:
"2. (21) "supply" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Section 7
of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017."
(para 111)
Section 7 of the IGST Act defines the scope of "inter-State supply". Section 7(4)
of the IGST Act states that "supply of services imported into the territory of India
shall be treated to be a supply of services in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce".
(Para 113)
Section 7 of the CGST Act defines the term "supply" with a broad brush and
provides for an inclusive definition. Section 7(1)(b) of the CGST Act considers
import of services for a consideration to constitute "supply". Section 7(1)(c) of the
CGST Act captures any and all activities in Schedule 1 of the CGST Act, irrespective
of whether they are made for a consideration. Additionally, Section 7(3) confers the
power on the Central Government to specify which transactions are to be treated
as a supply of goods and not a supply of services, and vice versa. Section 7(4) of
the IGST Act states that supply of services imported into India would be considered
as a supply of services in the course of "inter-State trade or commerce". Thus, an
Indian importer could also be considered as an importer of the service of shipping
which is liable to IGST on inter-State supply, if the activity falls within the definition
of "import of service" for the IGST Act and the CGST Act.
(Para 114)
The conditions for an "import of service" would entail three aspects:
(i) the supplier of service must be located outside India;
(ii) the recipient of the service must be located in India; and
(iii) the place of supply of service ought to be in India.
The respondents have argued that Conditions (ii) and (iii) are not satisfied in the
case of CIF contracts since the recipient of shipping services would be the foreign
exporter and the place of supply would be the place of business of such foreign
exporter.
(Para 116)
Section 13(9) of the IGST Act appears to create a deeming fiction, where in
case of supply of services of transportation of goods by a supplier located outside
India, the place of supply would be the place of destination of such goods. The
supplier, the foreign shipping line, in this case would be a non-taxable person.
However, its services in a CIF contract for transport of goods would enter Indian
taxable territory as the destination of such goods. The place of supply of shipping
service by a foreign shipping line, would thus be India.
(Para 117)
In this case, it is clear the supplier of service-the foreign shipping line-is located
outside India; and the place of supply is India. Accordingly, Section 13 of the CGST
Act would be applicable to determine the time of such supply.
(Para 118)
The respondents have argued that the ocean freight transaction cannot be
considered as "supply" since Section 7(1)(b) of the IGST Act requires the import of
service to be for a "consideration".
(Para 119)
Section 2(31) of the CGST Act defines "consideration" to include payment made
or to be made, in money or any other form, for the inducement of supply of goods
or services to be made by the recipient or by any other person. Thus, in the case of
goods imported on a CIF basis, the fact that consideration is paid by the foreign
exporter to the foreign shipping line would not stand in the way of it being
considered as a "supply of service" under Section 7(4) of the IGST Act which is
made for a consideration, thereby constituting "supply of service" in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce that can be subject to IGST under Section 5(1) of
the IGST Act.
(Para 119)
on this point
The respondents have also challenged the impugned levy on the ground that the
transaction takes place beyond the territory of India and is thus, extra-territorial in
nature.
(Para 120)
The decision in GVK Industries case clearly recognises the power of Parliament
to legislate over events occurring extra-territorially. The only requirement imposed
by the Court is that such an event must have a real connection to India.
(Para 121)
The impugned levy on the supply of transportation service by the shipping line to
the foreign exporter to import goods into India has a twofold connection : first, the
destination of the goods is India and thus, a clear territorial nexus is established with
the event occurring outside the territory; and second, the services are rendered for
the benefit of the Indian importer. Thus, the transaction does have a nexus with the
territory of India.
(Para 122)
Section 13(9) recognises the place of supply of services as the destination of
goods when the supplier is located outside India. Since the destination of goods is
India, the statute itself is broad enough to cover a taxable event that has extra-
territorial aspects, which bears a nexus to India.
(Para 123)
on this point
Are importers service recipients under CIF contracts?
Section 5(3) of the IGST Act enables taxation of the recipients of certain
specified categories of supply of services on a reverse charge basis. It is pertinent
to note that the tax is payable "by the recipient" of such services, in
contradistinction to broad language such as "any person as may be prescribed"
which was otherwise used in Section 98(2) of the Finance Act, 1994 which taxed
services.
(Para 126)
The language employed in Section 2(93)(a) of the CGST Act clearly stipulates
that when a consideration is payable for the supply of services, the recipient would
mean the person who is liable to pay that consideration. However, when no
consideration is payable for the supply of a service, Section 2(93)(c) states that
the recipient shall be the person to whom the service is rendered. Further, Section
2(93) provides that "any reference to a person to whom supply is made shall be
construed as a reference to the recipient". Hence, where the statute refers to a
person to whom a supply is made, it has to be construed as a reference to the
recipient of service.
(Para 127)
In a CIF transaction, the foreign exporter contracts with a foreign shipping line.
The service of shipping is rendered by the foreign shipping line to the foreign
exporter and the consideration is accordingly payable by the latter to the former.
The cost of such shipping may form a component of the price that is eventually
charged to the importer, based on the negotiated terms.
(Para 128)
The power of the Central Government to designate persons and categories of
supply for reverse charge derives from Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act and
not Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act which mandates the compulsory registration as
a logical corollary to ensure tax collection. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act, which
defines "reverse charge" reiterates that it means the "liability to pay tax by the
recipient of supply of goods or services or both instead of the supplier..." It cannot
be construed to imply that any taxable person identified for payment of reverse
charge would automatically become the recipient of such goods or service. The
deeming fiction of treating the importer as a recipient must be found in the IGST
Act. As it currently stands, Section 5(3) of the IGST Act enables the delegated
legislation to create a deeming fiction on categories of supply of goods/services
alone.
(Para 130)
Interpreting the term "by the recipient" vis-à-vis the categories of goods and
services identified in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act should necessarily be governed by
the principles governing the definition of "recipient" under Section 2(93) of the
CGST Act.
(Para 131)
If Parliament's intention were to designate certain persons for reverse charge,
irrespective of them being the recipient of such goods and services, it must make a
suitable amendment to confer such power for exercise of delegated legislation.
(Para 132)
Section 13(9) of the IGST Act creates the deeming fiction of place of supply of
service to be the destination of goods when they are transported by means other
than mail or courier. No specific exemptions for importers have been carved out.
(Para 133)
When the place of supply of services is deemed to be the destination of goods
under Section 13(9) of the IGST Act, the supply of services would necessarily be
"made" to the Indian importer, who would then be considered as a "recipient" under
the definition of Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act. The supply can thus be
construed as being "made" to the Indian importer who becomes the recipient under
Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act.
(Para 135)
This conclusion comports with the philosophy of the GST to be a consumption
and destination based tax. The services of shipping are imported into India for the
purpose of consumption that is routed through the import of goods. Although the
consideration for shipping is payable by the foreign supplier to the foreign shipping
line in CIF contracts, the price is consequently factored into the price of the
shipment. The ultimate beneficiary of the shipping service is also the importer in
India who will finally receive the goods at a destination which is within the taxable
territory of India. Thus, the meaning of the term "recipient" in the IGST Act will have
to be understood within the context laid down in the taxing statute (the IGST and
the CGST Acts) and not by a strict application of commercial principles.
(Para 136)
GST laws mark a departure from the previous policy of taxing
sale/consignments and focuses on the taxing of supplies. The concept of a supply-
centric and destination-based tax runs through the scheme of the statutory
provisions and the proposals issued by the GST Council. Thus, an amendment to
the Constitution was introduced in the form of Article 366(12-A) to create a tax on
the supply of goods, or services, or both. In the commercial reality of the times,
the conceptual lines between goods and services wear thin. Hence, the focus is on
the taxation of supply, as opposed to the creation of neat compartments between
goods and services. Section 7(1)(c) of the CGST Act specifically characterises
import of services for a consideration to constitute "supply". The only question that
falls for determination is whether the imports of goods on a CIF basis would also
constitute import of shipping services, by way of deeming fiction.
(Para 141)
Section 13(9) of the IGST Act read with Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act
inherently create a deeming fiction of the importer of goods to be the recipient of
shipping service.
(Para 142)
on this point
Applicability of Section 5(4) of the IGST Act
The amended Section 5(4) came into effect on 1-2-2019. Amending Act 32 of
2018 enables the Central Government to create a deeming fiction of declaring a
class of registered persons "as the recipient" of the supply of taxable goods or
services. In deploying the language "as the", and not "by the" recipient, the
applicability of the definition of "recipient" vis-à-vis Section 2(93) of the CGST Act is
no longer necessary for determining the validity of such a notification. The effect of
the amending Act 32 of 2018 has been as follows : (i) the powers of the Central
Government to specify through a notification has been clarified; and (ii) the power
to specify a class of registered persons as the recipient has been recognised.
(Para 145)
The Union Government has argued that Notifications Nos. 8 and 10 of 2017
dated 28-6-2017 issued under Section 5(3) may also be read as issued under
Section 5(4) of the IGST Act, in which case, the importers would be liable to tax
with effect from 1-2-2019 though exempted for the period 13-10-2017 to 31-1-
2019.
(Para 146)
Recipient includes the importer. Further, Section 5(4) clarifies that it may
designate a class of registered persons as the recipient, thereby broadening the
scope of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, which is anyway an inclusive definition
since Section 2 is prefaced with "unless the context otherwise requires".
(Para 147)
As long as a source of power to legislate or issue a notification is available, the
lack of a mention, an incorrect reference or mistake does not vitiate the exercise of
such power.
(Para 149)
Ram Manohar Lohia V. State of Bihar, (1966) 1 SCR 709 : AIR 1966 SC 740, relied
on
held, partly overruled
The impugned notifications were issued with the intention of creating a level
playing field between the Indian and foreign shipping lines.
(Para 150)
The impugned notifications were issued after the GST Council took note of the
fact that since transport of imported goods by Indian shipping lines to India is not
treated as export of service, the Indian shipping lines pay IGST on the same on a
forward charge basis. On the other hand, on the same transportation service, the
foreign shipping lines are not required to pay tax as they are not taxable persons in
India. Therefore, to provide a level playing field to Indian shipping lines, the importer
in India has been made liable to pay IGST on transportation of goods by foreign
shipping lines on a reverse charge basis. If Indian shipping lines continue to be taxed
and not their competitors, namely, the foreign shipping lines, the margins arising out
of taxation from GST would not create a level playing field and drive the Indian
shipping lines out of business.
(Para 151)
Composite supply and issues of double taxation
The transaction at hand involves three parties-the foreign exporter, the Indian
importer and the shipping line. The first leg of the transaction involves a CIF
contract, wherein the foreign exporter sells the goods to the Indian importer and
the cost of insurance and freight are the responsibility of the foreign exporter. In
other words, the foreign exporter is liable to ensure that the goods reach their place
of destination and the Indian importer pays the transaction value to the exporter.
The second leg of the transaction involves an agreement between the foreign
exporter and the shipping line (whether foreign or Indian) for providing services for
transport of goods to the destination i.e. in the territory of India.
(Para 154)
The Union has urged that the contract between the foreign exporter and the
foreign shipping line-of which the Indian importer is not a party-cannot be
deemed to be a part of "composite supply". While the first leg of the transaction,
between the foreign exporter and Indian importer, is (according to the submission)
a composite supply, the second leg is an independent transaction.
(Para 160)
There is no doubt that different aspects of a transaction can be taxed through
separate provisions. However, the aspect theory does not allow the value of goods
to be included in services and vice versa.
(Para 163)
1945 PC 98 : (1945) 7 FCR 179, cited
In the present case, the question is whether the imposition of IGST on supply of
services can be sustained when there is a concomitant imposition of IGST on supply
of goods.
(Para 164)
The provisions of composite supply in the CGST Act (and the IGST Act) play a
specific role in the levy of GST. The idea of introducing "composite supply" was to
ensure that various elements of a transaction are not dissected and the levy is
imposed on the bundle of supplies altogether. This finds specific mention in the
illustration provided under Section 2(30) of the CGST Act, where the principal
supply is that of goods. Thus, the intent of Parliament was that a transaction which
includes different aspects of supply of goods or services and which are naturally
bundled together, must be taxed as a composite supply.
(Para 165)
The Union of India cannot be heard to urge arguments of convenience-treating
the two legs of the transaction as connected when it seeks to identify the Indian
importer as a recipient of services while on the other hand, treating the two legs of
the transaction as independent when it seeks to tide over the statutory provisions
governing composite supply.
(Para 167)
In a CIF contract, the supply of goods is accompanied by the supply of services
of transportation and insurance, the responsibility for which lies on the seller (the
foreign exporter in this case). The supply of service of transportation by the foreign
shipper forms a part of the bundle of supplies between the foreign exporter and the
Indian importer, on which the IGST is payable under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act
read with Section 20 of the IGST Act, Section 8 and Section 2(30) of the CGST Act.
To levy the IGST on the supply of the service component of the transaction would
contradict the principle enshrined in Section 8 and be in violation of the scheme of
the GST legislation. Based on this reason, while the impugned notifications are
validly issued under Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act, it would be in violation
of Section 8 of the CGST Act and the overall scheme of the GST legislation. Under
Section 7(3) of the CGST Act, the Central Government has the power to notify an
import of goods as an import of services and vice versa.
(Para 168)
A tax on the supply of a service, which has already been included by the
legislation as a tax on the composite supply of goods, cannot be allowed.
(Para 170)
on this point
Conclusion
It is thus concluded as below:
(1) The recommendations of the GST Council are not binding on the Union
and States for the following reasons:
(i) The deletion of Article 279-B and the inclusion of Article 279(1) by the
Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 indicates that Parliament intended for the
recommendations of the GST Council to only have a persuasive value,
particularly when interpreted along with the objective of the GST regime to
foster cooperative federalism and harmony between the constituent units.
(ii) Neither does Article 279-A begin with a non obstante clause nor does
Article 246-A state that it is subject to the provisions of Article 279-A.
Parliament and the State Legislatures possess simultaneous power to legislate
on GST. Article 246-A does not envisage a repugnancy provision to resolve the
inconsistencies between the Central and the State laws on GST. The
"recommendations" of the GST Council are the product of a collaborative
dialogue involving the Union and the States. They are recommendatory in
nature. To regard them as binding edicts would disrupt fiscal federalism, where
both the Union and the States are conferred equal power to legislate on GST. It
is not imperative that one of the federal units must always possess a higher
share in the power for the federal units to make decisions. Indian federalism is a
dialogue between cooperative and uncooperative federalism where the federal
units are at liberty to use different means of persuasion ranging from
collaboration to contestation.
(iii) The Government while exercising its rule-making power under the
provisions of the CGST Act and the IGST Act is bound by the recommendations
of the GST Council. However, that does not mean that all the recommendations
of the GST Council made by virtue of the power Article 279-A(4) are binding on
the legislature's power to enact primary legislations.
(2) On a conjoint reading of Sections 2(11) and 13(9) of the IGST Act, read
with Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, the import of goods by a CIF contract
constitutes an "inter-State" supply which can be subject to IGST where the
importer of such goods would be the recipient of shipping service.
(3) The IGST Act and the CGST Act define "reverse charge" and prescribe the
entity that is to be taxed for these purposes. The specification of the recipient-
in this case the importer-by Notification No. 10 of 2017 is only clarificatory. The
Government by notification did not specify a taxable person different from the
recipient prescribed in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act for the purposes of reverse
charge.
(4) Section 5(4) of the IGST Act enables the Central Government to specify
a class of registered persons as the recipients, thereby conferring the power of
creating a deeming fiction on the delegated legislation.
(5) The impugned levy imposed on the "service" aspect of the transaction is
in violation of the principle of "composite supply" enshrined under Section 2(30)
read with Section 8 of the CGST Act. Since the Indian importer is liable to pay
IGST on the "composite supply", comprising of supply of goods and supply of
services of transportation, insurance, etc. in a CIF contract, a separate levy on
the Indian importer for the "supply of services" by the shipping line would be in
violation of Section 8 of the CGST Act.
(para 171)
and partly affirmed in law
referred to
Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills, (1968) 3 SCR 251 : AIR 1968 SC 1232; Avinder Singh
cited
Empowered Committee, "First Discussion Paper on goods and services tax in
India", (2009), paras 1.13-1.14; Speech by Arun Jaitley in Lok Sabha on 24-4-
2015; Tarun Jain, Goods and Services Tax : Constitutional Law and Policy (EBC
2018) 16 & 117; Thirteenth Finance Commission, "Report of the Task Force on
GST" (2009) para 10.5; Standing Committee on Finance, The Constitution (One
Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011 (73rd report, 2013) paras 15 and
63, referred to
VN-D/69065/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
N. Venkataraman, Additional Solicitor General [Akshay Amritanshu,
Ms Nisha Bagchi, Rupesh Kumar, Sharath Nambiar, Ashutosh Jain,
Kartikey Singh and Mukesh Kr. Maroria (Advocate-on-Record),
Advocates], for the Appellants;
Harish N. Salve, Vikram Nankani, Arvind P. Datar, V. Sridharan and
Tarun Gulati, Senior Advocates [J.K. Mittal, Ms Neeha Nagpal, Malak
Manish Bhatt (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Vandana Mittal, Ms Aashna
Suri, Apurva Mehta, Shashank Shekhar, Tushar Joshi, Rajat Mittal
(Advocate-on-Record), Mahesh Agarwal, Dr C. Manickam, Rajat Mittal,
Abhishek A. Rastogi, Anshuman Srivastava, Rohan Talwar, Abhinabh
Garg, E.C. Agrawala (Advocate-on-Record), Harish Bindumadhavan,
Pawanshree Agrawal (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Shrayshree
Thyagarajan, Kumar Visalaksh, Harsh Shah, Ms Ruchita Shah, Uchit
Sheth, Rajesh Kr. Gautam, Udit Jain, Arihant Tater, Archit Gupta,
Ajitesh Dayal Singh, Abhishek Vikas (Advocate-on-Record), Rishabh
Sancheti, Ms Padma Priya, Anchit Bhandari, Suyash Jain, Ms Saloni
Bhandari, Zeeshan Ali, K. Paari Vendhan (Advocate-on-Record), Ranjan
Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), Kapil Dev Yadav, Sanjay Kumar, Avushka
Singh, Simranjeet Singh, Ms Rhea Dube, Ms Rudrakshi Deo, Mizan
Siddiqui, Sudhir Kr. Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), Manish Gupta, Ms
Hemantika Wahi (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Jesal Wahi, Santosh
Krishnan (Advocate-on-Record), M/s Ap & J. Chambers (Advocate-on-
Record), Parijat Sinha (Advocate-on-Record), Anand Nainawati, Aditya
Bhattacharya, Ms Apeksha Mehta, Sahil Parghi, Somesh Jain, Ms
Mounica Kasturi, Ms Charanya Lakshmikumaran (Advocate-on-Record),
Ms Deepanwita Priyanka (Advocate-on-Record), Vinay Shraff, Ravi
Bharuka (Advocate-on-Record), Ankit Agarwal, Ankit Kanodia, Prateek
Gattani, Abhishek A. Rastogi, Pratyushprava Saha, Mahir Chablani,
Rohit Ghosh, Ms Kanika Sharma, M/s Khaitan & Co. (Advocate-on-
Record), Sparsh Bhargava, Ankit Sachdeva, Vinayak Mathur, Ms
Anishka Gupta, Kamal Kr. Arya and Rahul Jain (Advocate-on-Record),
Advocates] for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Footsteps (India) (P) Ltd.
739d, 762b-c
V. Union of India (partly reversed and partly
affirmed in law
731a, 733e-f, 753a, 816g
(P) Ltd.
761e-f
761f-g, 762a-b
India
773e
Mehta V. Union of India
770c, 770c-d
Abhiram Singh V. C.D. Commachen
759e-f
Maharashtra
778e-f
737d-e, 750a, 801a-b,
802a
Karnataka
779g
Commr. of Customs
754b-c
741f-g, 752e-f, 814b, 814f-
g
India V. Pradip Kumar Dey
779g
M.P.
735c-d, 792d
of India
740d-e, 793f-g, 794g-h
761c-d, 772d-e, 774f
741e-f, 754c
T.N.
791b-c
Restaurant Assn. of India V. Union of India
814b, 814b-c
India Ltd. V. CIT
737d
of India V. Tulsiram Patel
809f
McDowell & Co. Ltd. V. CTO
737b, 814a
Govind Saran Ganga Saran V. CST
735c-d, 792e-f
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. V. State of Bihar
760b-c
V. Ben Hiraben Manilal
810c-d
Varghese V. ITO
770b
B.C. Srinivasa Setty
793a-b
Punjab
738f-g, 791b-c
Southern Railway V. T.R. Chellappan (held, partly
overruled)
810a-b
of A.P. V. T. Gopalakrishnan Murthi
779g
Orissa SEB
810e
Indurkhya V. State of M.P.
779b-c
33. (1968) 3 SCR 251 : AIR 1968 SC 1232, MCD V.
Birla Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills
738f
34. AIR 1968 SC 1232, MCD V. Birla Cotton Spg. &
Wvg. Mills
791b-c
35. (1966) 2 SCR 688 : AIR 1966 SC 1370, Kesoram
Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd. V. CWT
779g
36. (1966) 1 SCR 709 : AIR 1966 SC 740, Ram
Manohar Lohia V. State of Bihar
810c-d
37. 1958 SCR 1422 : AIR 1958 SC 468 : (1958) 9
STC 298, M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. V. State of
A.P.
760e
38. AIR 1955 SC 25, Edward Mills Co. Ltd. V. State of
Ajmer
791b-c
791b-c
:
(1945) 7 FCR 179, Governor-General in Council V.
Province of Madras
814d
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J.
INDEX
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
A.
Introduction
731
B.
Submissions
734
B.1.
Union of India
734
B.2.
Respondent assessees
742
C.
Constitutional architecture of GST
755
C.1.
Legislative history of the Constitution
758
Amendment Act, 2016
C.2.
The nature of the recommendations of the
771
GST Council
D.
Analysis
781
D.1.
Statutory provisions and scheme of the
781
IGST Act
D.2.
Do the impugned notifications suffer from
789
excessive delegation?
D.3.
Charging Section : taxable person, taxable
792
rate and manner of determining value
D.4.
Taxable event : Is an ocean freight
796
transaction for import of goods a valid
category of supply of services under
Section 5(3) of the IGST Act?
D.4. (a)
Do imported goods procured on a CIF basis
796
constitute an inter-State supply or is it an
extra-territorial tax?
D.4. (b)
Are importers service recipients under CIF
802
contracts?
D.5.
Applicability of Section 5(4) of the IGST
808
Act
D.6.
Composite supply and issues of double
812
taxation
E.
Conclusion
817
A. Introduction
1. The Union of India ("the Union Government" or "the Central
Government") is in appeal against a judgment of a Division Bench of
the Gujarat High Court dated 23-1-20201. The High Court allowed a
petition instituted by the respondents under Article 226 for challenging
the constitutionality of two notifications of the Central Government. The
bone of contention is whether an Indian importer can be subject to the
levy of Integrated Goods and Services Tax ("IGST") on the component
of ocean freight paid by the foreign seller to a foreign shipping line, on
a reverse charge basis.
2. The respondents import non-coking coal from Indonesia, South
Africa and the US by ocean transport on a "Cost-Insurance-
Freight" ("CIF") basis which is supplied to domestic industries. The
goods are transported from a place outside India, up to the customs
station in India. The respondent pays customs duties on the import of
coal, which includes the value of ocean freight. In the case of a CIF
contract, the freight invoice is issued by the foreign shipping line to the
foreign exporter, without the involvement of the importer. Ocean freight
is paid by the importer only when goods are imported under a "Free-on
-Board" ("FOB") contract. In the case of a high seas sale transaction,
the coal is purchased from the original buyer before it arrives at Indian
ports.
3. Prior to the enforcement of the Goods and Services Tax ("GST")
regime, service tax on ocean freight was exempted by Notification No.
25 of 2012-ST (Serial No. 34) dated 20-6-2012. This exemption was
withdrawn by Notification No. 01 of 2017-ST dated 12-1-2017 which
levied service tax on the importer, by a reverse charge mechanism.
With the advent of the GST regime, Notification No. 8 of 2017 -
Integrated Tax (Rate) dated 28-6-2017 ("Notification No. 8 of 2017")
was issued by the Central Government on the advice of the Goods and
Services Tax Council ("the GST Council"), in exercise of powers under
Section 5(1), Section 6(1) and Sections 20(iii)-(iv) of the Integrated
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ("the IGST Act"), read with Section
15(5) and Section 16(1) of the Central Goods and Services Act ("the
CGST Act"). Entry 9 of Notification No. 8 of 2017, effective from 1-7-
2017, levied an integrated tax @ 5% on the supply of specified
services, including transportation of goods, in a vessel from a place
outside India up to the customs station of clearance in India.
4. On 28-6-2017, the Central Government issued Notification No. 10
of 2017 ("Notification No. 10 of 2017"). Serial No. 10 of Notification No.
10 of 2017 categorised the recipient of services of supply of goods by a
person in a non-taxable territory by a vessel to include an importer
under Section 2(26) of the Customs Act, 1962.
5. Section 5(1) of the IGST Act authorises the levy of an integrated
tax on all inter-State supplies of goods and services or both. The
integrated tax can also be levied on goods imported into India on the
value determined under
Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 ("the Customs Tariff Act") at
the point when customs duties are levied on the goods under Section
12 of the Customs Act, 1962 ("the Customs Act"). Section 11 of the
IGST Act stipulates that the place of supply of goods in the case of
goods imported into India shall be the place of the importer. Section 13
(9) of the IGST Act contemplates that the place of supply of services, in
the case of transportation of goods shall be the destination of the
goods. The respondent alleges that the impugned notifications create
an element of double taxation, as ocean freight is included in the value
of goods for the purpose of customs duty which the importer is liable to
pay. The respondent does not dispute the liability of integrated tax on
supply of service of transportation when it imports goods on an FOB
basis.
6. The respondent filed a writ petition before the Gujarat High Court
challenging Notification No. 8 of 2017 and Notification No. 10 of 2017
(collectively referred as "impugned notifications") on the grounds that:
6.1. The notifications are ultra vires the IGST Act and the CGST Act.
6.2. Customs duty is levied on the component of ocean freight and
the levy of IGST on the freight element in the course of transportation
would amount to double taxation.
6.3. Though in the case of high sea sales, the importer is a different
entity yet this regime would tax the respondent as the importer and the
recipient of service.
6.4. In the case of a CIF contract, the supply of service of transport
of goods in a vessel is by a foreign shipping line located in a non-
taxable territory to an exporter located in a non-taxable territory by a
vessel outside the territory of India which cannot be subject to tax
under the IGST Act.
6.5. Notification No. 10 of 2017 transgresses the provisions of
Section 5(3) of the IGST Act as instead of the "recipient" mentioned
therein, the "importer" as defined in Section 2(26) of the Customs Act,
is made liable to pay tax.
6.6. Entry 9(ii) and Para 2 of Notification No. 8 of 2017, read with
Notification No. 10 of 2017, creates a deeming fiction and a separate
taxable event which is not permissible in law.
7. The Union of India urged before the High Court that although tax
is being paid twice on the value of ocean freight, it is not
unconstitutional as the tax is on two different aspects of
the
transaction, namely, the supply of service and import of goods. The
rationale for the impugned notifications, according to the Union
Government, is to remove the disparity between Indian and foreign
shipping lines, as the former are unable to claim input tax credit
(interchangeably referred as "ITC") that forms a part of their
transportation costs, since supply of goods was hitherto exempt from
service tax. The levy of the integrated tax does not, according to the
Union of India, impose an additional cost on importers as the cost paid
on inward transportation of goods and import freight services is
available to them as ITC.
8. Under the existing GST regime (presently under challenge),
taxability of ocean freight under different situations is tabulated below:
Service Availed
Shipping
Legal Provision
Implication
Company
Import
Indian
Section
12(8)
Transaction
is
of the IGST Act
liable for tax.
-
the
place of
Importer can
supply
of
claim
the
services
shall
amount paid as
be the location
tax as input tax
of the recipient.
credit.
Export
Indian
Section
12(8)
Transaction is
of the IGST Act
liable for tax.
-
the place of
The exporter
supply
of
can get refund
services
shall
of input tax
be the location
credit used for
of the recipient.
export.
Import
Foreign
Section
13
(9)
Transaction is
of the IGST Act
liable for tax as
- the place of
the place of
supply
of
supply is India.
services
of
Tax will be paid
transportation
under
reverse
of goods shall
charge and can
be
place
of
be claimed as
destination
of
input tax credit.
such goods.
Export
Foreign
Section
13(9)
Since the place
of the IGST Act
of supply will
- the place of
be
outside
supply
of
India,
the
services
of
transaction is
transportation
not
liable
for
of goods shall
tax.
be
place
of
destination of
such goods.
9. The Division Bench¹ of the Gujarat High Court held that the
impugned notifications are unconstitutional for exceeding the powers
conferred by the IGST Act and the CGST Act. The High Court held:
9.1. The importer of goods on a CIF basis is not the recipient of the
transport services as Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines a
"recipient" of services to mean someone who pays consideration for the
service, which is the foreign exporter in this case.
9.2. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act enables the Government to
stipulate categories of supply, not specify a third-party as a recipient of
such supply.
9.3. There is no territorial nexus for taxation since the supply of
service of transportation of goods is by a person in a non-taxable
territory to another person in a non-taxable territory from a place
outside India up to the Indian customs clearance station and this is
neither an inter-State nor an intra-State supply.
9.4. Section 2(11) of the IGST Act defines "import of service" to
mean the supply of service where the supplier of service is located
outside India, the recipient of service is located in India and the place
of supply of service is in India.
9.5. In this case, since the goods are transported on a CIF basis, the
recipient of service is the foreign exporter who is outside India.
9.6. Section 7(5)(c) of the IGST Act dealing with intra-State supply
cannot be read so extensively that it conflates the "supply of goods or
services or both in the taxable territory" to "place of supply".
9.7. Sections 12 and 13 of the IGST Act deal with determining the
place of supply. Neither of them will apply if both the supplier and
recipient of service are based outside India. The mere fact that the
service terminates at India does not make the service of supply of
transportation to be taking place in India.
9.8. The provisions regarding time of supply, as contemplated in
Section 20 of the IGST Act and applicable to Section 13 of the IGST Act
dealing with supply of services, are applicable only vis-à-vis the actual
recipient of the supply of service, which is the foreign exporter in this
case.
9.9. Section 15(1) of the CGST Act enables the determination of the
value of the supply, only between the actual supplier and actual
recipient of the service.
9.10. Since the importer is not the "recipient" of the service under
Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, it will not be in a position to avail ITC
under Section 16(1) of the CGST Act.
9.11. Since the importer pays customs duties on the goods which
include the value of ocean freight, the impugned notifications impose
double taxation through a delegated legislation, which is impermissible.
B. Submissions
B.1. Union of India
10. Mr N. Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor General
("ASG") appearing on behalf of the appellant-the Union of India-
urged the following submissions:
A. Constitutional architecture of IGST
10.1. Under Article 286(2), Parliament is empowered to formulate
inter alia the principles for determining when a supply of goods or
services takes place in any of the ways mentioned in Article 286(1),
which includes imports.
10.2. Article 269-A enables the Union Government to levy GST on
inter-State supplies. The Explanation to Article 269-A(1) creates a
deeming fiction that a supply of goods or services in the course of
imports is to be considered as a supply of goods or services or both in
the course of inter-State trade.
10.3. Article 269-A(5) enables Parliament to formulate the principles
for determining the place of supply and when a supply of goods and
services or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce. This constitutional mandate finds legislative effect in the
IGST Act.
10.4. As contemplated in Article 286(2) read with Article 269-A(1),
the IGST Act enacts provisions relating to the levy and collection of
integrated tax [Section 5(1)], export of goods [Section 2(5)], export of
services [Section 2(6)], import of goods [Section 2(10)], import of
services [Section 2(11)], location of recipient of services [Section 2
(14)] and location of supplier of services [Section 2(15)].
10.5. In terms of Article 269-A(5), the IGST Act contemplates
provisions for determining the nature of inter-State supply (Section 7),
supplies in territorial waters (Section 9), place of supply of goods
imported into or exported out of India (Section 11), place of supply of
services where the location of supplier and recipient is in India (Section
12) and place of supply of services where the location of supplier and
recipient is outside India (Section 13).
B. Charging Section
10.6. The charge created by Section 5(1) of the IGST Act can extend
to an ocean freight transaction to be taxed in the hands of the importer.
This creation of a charge is in compliance with the essential
components of taxation identified by a Constitution Bench in Mathuram
Agrawal V. State of M.P. 2 and further elaborated on by this Court in
Govind Saran Ganga Saran V. CST³.
10.7. The four fundamental principles of a taxing enactment are :
the taxable event, the person on whom the levy is imposed, the rate at
which the levy is imposed and the measure or the value to which the
rate will be applied.
10.8. Section 5(1) fulfils the above components of taxation:
(i) Taxable event "There shall be levied a tax called integrated
goods and services tax on all inter-State supplies of goods or
services or both except on the supply of alcoholic liquor for human
consumption."
(ii)
Taxable
value
"On the value determined under Section 15
of the CGST Act."
(iii) Taxable rate
"At such rates not exceeding 40% as may be
notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council
and collected in such manner as may be prescribed."
(iv) Taxable person "Shall be paid by the taxable person."
C. Concept of reverse charge
10.9. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge" to
mean the liability to pay tax by the recipient of supply of goods or
services or both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or
both under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of Section 9 of the CGST
Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of Section 5 of the IGST
Act. The impugned notifications are issued in exercise of the powers of
the Union Government vested by the aforesaid sections of the IGST Act
or the CGST Act.
10.10. A person covered by reverse charge becomes a taxable
person in terms of Section (107) of the CGST Act read with Section 24
(iii) of the CGST Act. Pertinently, Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act
employs the language of "persons who are required to pay tax under
reverse charge" and not "persons who are recipient of services under
Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, 2017".
10.11. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and Section 9(3) of the CGST
Act permit the Government, on the recommendation of the GST
Council, to specify the categories of goods or services or both, the tax
for which shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the recipient of such
goods or services or both.
10.12. Presently, neither the provisions nor the rules have identified
the taxable persons for reverse charge. Hence, the impugned
notifications are a legitimate exercise of delegated legislation.
Notification No. 10 of 2017 identifies an importer as a recipient for the
purposes of reverse charge. The power to issue such a notification can
be traced back to Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act.
D. Inter-State supply and place of supply
10.13. The import of service in this case is an inter-State supply in
terms of Section 7(4) read with Sections 13(1) and 13(9) of the IGST
Act. Although the contracting parties are foreign, the critical limb of the
transaction happens in the taxable territory, namely, India. Hence, the
transaction can also fall under Section 7(5)(c) read with Section 13(1)
and Section 13(9) of the IGST Act.
10.14. Section 13(9) of the IGST Act stipulates that the place of
supply of services of transportation of goods other than by way of mail
or courier shall be the place of destination of such goods. Even though
the contracting parties-the foreign shipping line and the foreign
exporter-are outside the territory of India, the provision of service is
for the Indian importer and consequently the consumption and
exhaustion of service which is a critical limb, both commercially and
legally, happens only in the hands of the Indian importer.
E. Time of supply
10.15. Section 13(5) of the CGST Act contains a residual provision
for determining time of supply to be the date on which the tax is paid.
Since the other sub-sections in Section 13 are not applicable for
construing the time of supply, Section 13 (5) of the CGST Act would be
applicable.
F. Composite supply
10.16. The CIF transaction and IGST on ocean freight are two
independent transactions, entitled to suffer independent levies and do
not qualify as a composite supply under Section 2(30) of the CGST.
10.17. GST and customs duties are not exclusive means of taxation.
GST is a destination-based tax. The integrated tax is being sought to be
imposed on the supply of service and not on the goods. Separate
aspects are being taxed, hence it cannot be termed as overlapping.
Moreover, the tax is on the value of goods, and not the freight. Tax paid
at an anterior stage is not double taxation if it is included in the overall
value.
10.18. The discharge of reverse charge taxation does not make two
independent contracts as a composite contract. The contract between
the foreign shipping line and the foreign exporter is distinct and
independent of the contract between the foreign exporter and the
Indian importer. Their concomitance does not make them composite.
10.19. What is sought to be taxed on the supply of goods on CIF
value basis is traceable to the proviso to Section 5(1) read with
Sections 3(7) and 3(8) of the Customs Tariff Act. On the other hand,
what is sought to be taxed under IGST on reverse charge basis derives
power under Section 5(1) (taxable person) read with Section 24(iii) of
the CGST Act and Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and the impugned
notifications.
10.20. A Constitution Bench of this Court in McDowell & Co. Ltd. V.
CTO4 has held that a single element can constitute the basis of a levy
and can also form part of the value for another transaction. This cannot
be termed as double taxation.
G. Extra-territoriality
10.21. There is sufficient territorial nexus for the purpose of taxation
since the importer is the final beneficiary of a service provided by a
foreign shipping line by way of transportation up to the customs station
of clearance in India. The transaction between the foreign exporter and
the foreign shipping line has a nexus to the taxable territory of India.
The importer is the beneficial owner of the goods at the time of
clearance. The appellant relies on the decisions of this Court in
Electronics Corpn. of India Ltd. V. CIT5 and GVK Industries Ltd. V. ITO6
where this Court has upheld taxing statutes having a territorial nexus
to India.
H. Service recipient
10.22. There are six reasons to term an Indian importer as the
recipient of service:
(a) Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act envisages a recipient of an
intangible service as one who does not pay consideration. In CIF
transactions, the Indian importer does not pay for ocean freight and
yet receives the benefit of transportation;
(b) Section 2 of the CGST Act is prefaced with "In this Act, unless
the context otherwise requires" which warrants a broad
interpretation of statutory definitions therein;
(c) Section 24(iii) read with Section 2(98) of the CGST Act, read
with Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and the impugned notifications
issued thereunder, allow any person to become a taxable person and
such a taxable person becomes the recipient of supply of goods or
services or both. Once "any person" is identified as a taxable person
for reverse charge under a
notification issued under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act, by sheer default
of the definition of reverse charge under Section 2(98) of the CGST Act,
such a taxable person on reverse charge becomes a service recipient;
(d) Section 5(3) of the IGST Act clearly enables the identification
of service recipients, and not just categories of goods or services or
both. Any contrary interpretation would be against the legislative
intention. On a conjoint reading of Section 5(3) of the IGST Act read
with Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, a service recipient can be
identified through a notification;
(e) The definition of "supply" without consideration under Section
7(c) of the CGST Act is not an exhaustive definition. Further, Section
2(31) of the CGST Act defines "consideration" and does not restrict
its payment to only the owner of such goods and services; and
(f) Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act reads " and any reference to
a person to whom a supply is made, shall be construed as a
reference to the recipient of the supply ...". A supply can be made to
"a person", "a registered person" and "a taxable person" and such a
supply shall be construed to be a supply to a recipient. Since the
Indian importer would qualify under all the aforementioned
categories, it can be termed as recipient of the service.
I. Applicability of Section 5(4) of the IGST Act
10.23. In the alternative, the impugned notifications would be saved
by Section 5(4) of the IGST Act which permits the Union Government,
on the recommendations of the GST Council, to specify a class of
registered persons who shall in respect of specified categories of goods
or services or both received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax
on reverse charge basis as the recipient and all the provisions of the Act
would apply to such a recipient.
10.24. It is admitted that the impugned notifications do not refer to
Section 5(4) of the IGST Act. However, it is settled law that once a
power is available to grant or identify the taxable person, taxable event,
rate and measure, non-reference of the source of power will not vitiate
its exercise and application in given facts and circumstances of the
case.
J. Parliamentary legislation V. Excessive delegation
10.25. This Court in MCD V. Birla Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills and
Avinder Singh V. State of Punjab 8 has held that only essential
legislative functions, such as policy guidelines and framework, need to
be performed by Parliament and the State Legislatures. Once these are
made available through the exercise of plenary power, the rest of the
details can always emerge through the exercise of delegated powers.
10.26. The constitutional mandate of Articles 269-A and 286 finds
effect under the IGST Act. The IGST Act, and specifically Section 5(1)
therein, has defined the subject-matter of taxation (inter-State supply
of goods and
services), the taxable person under Section 2(107) read with Section
24(iii) of the CGST Act, a maximum cap of 40% and determination of
taxable value in terms of Section 15 of the CGST Act. Only the
identification of the taxable person is delegated to the Union
Government which makes its decisions on the basis of the
recommendations of the GST Council.
K. GST Council recommendations - Cooperative federalism and
collaborative federalism
10.27. GST is a consumption tax and the tax jurisdiction extends to
the place the supply is consumed. Since the foreign shipping line or
foreign exporter are located in a non-taxable territory, the Indian
importer has to be taxed on a reverse charge basis since the service is
consumed in India. The purpose is to make the Indian shipping lines as
competitive as foreign shipping lines. ITC is available to the importer
and the tax paid on such a reverse charge can be offset in the
importer's output tax liability. Therefore, there is no additional burden
on the importer-it is a mere alteration of the mechanism.
10.28. The integrated tax was essential to level the playing field
between foreign shipping lines and Indian shipping lines since the
former were not required to charge any tax on the recipient of supply of
service.
10.29. The spirit of cooperative federalism must guide the
functioning of the GST Council as envisaged in Article 279-A(6). This
was espoused by this Court in Union of India V. VKC Footsteps (India)
(P) Ltd. ("VKC Footsteps"), wherein it was held that there is a need for
a harmonised structure of goods and services tax. The GST Council is
empowered to decide on every aspect of the GST law. The
recommendations of the GST Council are binding on the executive and
the legislature-while it frames laws relating to GST by the power under
Article 246-A.
10.30. The GST Council recommends the law, rules and notifications
through a voting architecture that is prescribed in Article 279-A(6) and
quorum requirements in Article 279-A(7). Every decision flows from
one common source.
10.31. The GST Council is the only constitutional body which acts as
a converging point or a platform for both the federal units to work in a
harmonious manner in structuring the goods and services tax, in the
process of developing a harmonised national market for goods and
services.
10.32. Article 246-A states that the power to legislate GST laws is
only with the Union of India and the States. Neither can Article 279-A
override Article 246-A nor can Article 246-A be made subject to Article
279-A. Judicial interpretation must strike a harmony such that
Parliament, the State Legislatures and the GST Council work in unison
and harmony.
10.33. The constitutional scheme therefore envisages a two-step
process. At the first level of the GST Council, Article 279-A(6)
envisages cooperative federalism and in the absence of either a non
obstante clause in Article 279-A or a "subject to" clause in Article 246-
A, the need or requirement is that both
the Union and the States should be supportive of this cooperative
federalism through the process of collaborative federalism.
10.34. Section 5(1) of the IGST Act, by design, chooses to delegate
certain functions to the GST Council in order to achieve the legislative
object. Even though Article 246-A does not subject Article 246-A to
Article 279-A, the Union and States after exercising their legislative
power and discretion under Article 246-A(1) have agreed to go by the
recommendations of the GST Council in every aspect of the GST law
wherever required. This is the spirit of collaborative federalism which
must be respected by upholding the constitutional validity of the
impugned notifications.
11. The learned ASG has urged the following supplementary
submissions by way of rejoinder:
11.1. The purpose of the integrated tax is to introduce a level
playing field between foreign shipping lines and Indian shipping lines.
It is a settled principle that to tax one subject, the revenue does not
have to tax everything.
11.2. The respondents have contended that the tax on an Indian
importer is on a reverse charge basis, and therefore the importer does
not fall under the definition of a "taxable person". However, Section 2
(107) of the CGST Act defines a "taxable person" as any person
registered or liable to be registered under Section 22 or Section 24 of
the CGST Act. Section 24 classifies persons liable for compulsory
registration, and Section 24(iii) includes persons governed by the
reverse charge mechanism.
11.3. In Laghu Udyog Bharati V. Union of India¹0 , this Court struck
down the imposition of service tax on a reverse charge basis since the
legislature had failed to identify the persons on whom service tax could
be imposed, enforced and collected. However, Section 2(107) read with
Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act specifically identifies the importer as a
taxable person who is liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis.
Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act also defines persons liable to pay tax on
reverse charge as taxable persons.
11.4. The respondents have argued that under Section 5(1) of the
IGST Act, the taxable value can be determined only through Section 15
of the CGST Act and its corresponding rules. It was contended that
Notification No. 8 of 2017 prescribes the valuation of 10% of CIF value
for the first time, which violates Section 5(1) of the IGST Act. The
appellant submits that in terms of Section 15(4) and Section 15(5) of
the CGST Act, Rules 27 to 31 of the Central Goods and Services Tax
Rules, 2017 ("the CGST Rules") have been formulated. The Revenue
can also assess the transaction by taking aid of a residual method
prescribed under Rule 31 of the CGST Rules. Any discretion vested in
quasi-judicial authorities must be regulated. The corrigendum dated 30
-6-2016 amending Notification No. 8 of 2017 and prescribing the
methodology for determining valuation can be read as a guideline for
dealing with infirmities in assessment practices. It is only a reference or
a guideline for making assessments. Even if it were to be held
inapplicable, the Revenue can assess the transaction under Rule 31 of
the CGST
Rules. Thus, Notification No. 8 of 2017 does not impinge on Rule 31 of
the CGST Rules but only aids uniformity.
11.5. The respondents rely on Section 2(87) of the CGST Act and
Section 5 of the IGST Act to argue that prescription can only be
through rules, and not notifications. However, Sections 15(1), (2) and
(3) of the IGST Act prescribes values. Sections 15(4) and 15(5) of the
IGST Act deal with cases where the valuation cannot be determined
under Section 15(1). Rule 31 of the CGST Rules also enables the
valuation to be conducted through "reasonable means". Thus,
delegation is envisaged in the statutory mechanism.
11.6. If the expression "by the recipient" is to be given a static
meaning as those falling under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, then one
would be denuding the power to notify persons for reverse charge
under Sections 5(1) and 5(3) of the IGST Act read with Section 24(iii)
of the CGST Act.
11.7. Alternatively, the concept of reverse charge and notifying
persons liable for reverse charge is envisaged in the statutory
mechanism. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge" as
imposed "only on the recipient". Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines
a "recipient". An Indian importer can be a recipient in six ways that
have been elaborated in the submissions. The Indian importer does not
pay any consideration of service in CIF imports since consideration is
paid by the foreign exporter. Section 2 is illustrative and not rigid. A
"person", as defined under Section 2(84), is deemed to be the recipient
of a service if such person satisfies the conditions under Section 2(93)
of the CGST Act. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act contemplates the
applicability of all provisions of the Act to the recipient. The fact that
consideration is paid by the foreign exporter to the foreign shipping line
does not vitiate the IGST Act's scheme which enables payment of tax
on a reverse charge basis.
11.8. Section 13(9) of the IGST Act states that the destination of
the goods shall be the place of supply, which is on Indian territory. This
Court in Union of India V. Jalyan Udyog11 11 has held that deeming fictions
can be created even by the executive i.e. through delegated legislation.
11.9. In case of a foreign exporter and a foreign shipping line, there
is a nexus with India since the importer would be Indian. Forward
charge taxation is envisaged in direct tax. Section 9(1)(6) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 taxes a non-resident outside India since the
income is generated in India.
11.10. The decision of this Court in BSNL V. Union of India- on
12
double taxation has no applicability to this case since that was on the
question of the overlap of VAT and service tax in the pre-GST regime
and was decided on the ground of the impingement on the exclusive
domain of the Union to impose service tax under Entry 97 List I.
11.11. In the alternative, the integrated tax derives authority from
Section 5(4) of the IGST Act which permits the Government to specify
a class of registered persons who receive goods or supplies from an
unregistered
supplier, who shall pay the tax on a reverse charge basis as the
recipient. If this section is deemed applicable, then the importers would
be liable for tax with effect from 1-2-2019, though exempted for the
period from 13-10-2017 till 31-1-2019.
11.12. The creation of the GST Council under Article 279-A
embodies the spirit of collaborative federalism. The GST Council is
constitutionally mandated, particularly under Article 279-A(6), to
promote harmony and alignment amongst the federal partners.
11.13. Under Article 279-A(4), decisions of the GST Council
transform into recommendations to the Unions and the States. The GST
Council is the only constitutional body that acts as a converging space
or platform for the federal units to work in a harmonious matter. The
principal function of the GST Council is to take decisions, which are
conveyed as recommendations. These recommendations have a unique
constitutional status and they are overridden in exceptional
circumstances.
11.14. It was contended by the respondents that instead of course
correcting the input tax mechanism, the Revenue has chosen to tax the
Indian importer on reverse charge. This is more a policy than a
perceptional issue. As long as the tax is legal and valid, the manner
and mode of taxation need not be questioned. A better manner and
mode would not result in the exercise of legislative discretion being
declared to be invalid or illegal.
11.15. The integrated tax was introduced to ensure a level playing
field between foreign and Indian shipping lines. This objective must be
appreciated while determining constitutionality.
B.2. Respondent assessees
12. Mr V. Sridharan, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
the respondents¹3 has urged the following submissions:
12.1. Under Section 5(4) of the IGST Act, the Government cannot
specify the person liable to pay service tax on a reverse charge basis:
(a) Section 5(3) of the IGST Act provides that the Government
may specify the categories of supply of goods or services or both on
which the tax shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the recipient
of the goods or services. Thus, the power under Section 5(3) is only
to specify the categories of supply, while the liability to pay tax is
fixed on the recipient. The Government cannot specify the person
liable to pay tax on reverse charge basis under Section 5(3).
(b) Notification No. 10 of 2017 has been issued under Section 5
(3) of the IGST Act. Since the power flows from Section 5(3), the
Government can by a notification only specify the "categories of
supply", as the liability for tax has been determined by Parliament;
(c) In contrast with Section 5(3), prior to the introduction of GST,
Section 68(2) of the Finance Act, 1994 provided that the service tax
shall
be paid by "such person as may be prescribed". In that case, the
liability of tax was not determined by the legislation;
(d) Under the CGST Act and the IGST Act, the only place where a
person other than a supplier or recipient is made liable to pay tax is
under Section 5(5) of the IGST Act, where an electronic commerce
operator through whom supply is made is taxed; and
(e) In case Parliament desired the tax to be collected from a
person other than a supplier or recipient, it would have expressly
provided so in the legislation. Since Parliament has specified the
person liable for tax, it is not a matter to be governed by delegated
legislation.
12.2. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge" as the
liability to pay tax by the recipient of supply of goods or services or
both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or both. In other
words, only the recipient can be made liable to pay tax under reverse
charge basis and the reverse charge cannot be disintegrated from the
recipient of supply.
12.3. Section 5(3) clearly stipulates that (i) the tax shall be paid on
a reverse charge basis and (ii) the tax is payable by the recipient.
12.4. GST laws contemplate only one recipient for one supply:
(a) The interpretation of the ASG that the foreign exporter is the
recipient under clause (a) of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act and the
Indian importer is the recipient under clause (c) of Section 2(93) of
the CGST Act leads to absurdity;
(b) Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, a "recipient" is defined
with reference to three situations- (a) where consideration is
payable for the supply of goods or services or both, (b) where no
consideration is payable for the supply of goods and (c) where no
consideration is payable for the supply of a service. Clauses (a), (b)
and (c) of Section 2(93) are mutually exclusive and cannot apply
simultaneously. In case the supply of goods or services is for
consideration, clause (a) applies and the recipient is the person who
is liable to pay the consideration;
(c) The question of who is the beneficiary of the supply or who
has received the supply are irrelevant in determining the "recipient"
under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act;
(d) Whether a supply of service is an "inter-State supply" under
Section 7(3) or "intra-State supply" under Section 8(2) of the IGST
Act depends on the location of the supplier and the place of supply.
In case there are two recipients of a single supply, as argued by the
ASG, then the transaction may become inter-State as well as intra-
State supply. Such a situation has not been envisaged by
Parliament;
(e) Only the recipient of the supply is entitled to avail input tax
credit. In case there are two recipients of a single supply, two
persons will be allowed to avail credit of tax by the supplier;
(f) The rate of tax is often dependent on the recipient of the
supply. For instance, services supplied to Government, local
authorities or charitable
institutions, are exempted or liable to a lower rate of tax. If there are
two recipients, this would result in an anomaly; and
(g) Even in case of a three-party transaction involving supply of
goods. Section 10(1)(b) of the IGST Act provides that the place of
supply of goods is the principal place of business of the recipient,
and not the person to whom the goods are delivered;
12.5. The last leg of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act does not create a
separate category of recipient:
(a) Section 2(93) provides three categories of recipients, namely,
where consideration is payable for supply of goods or services; where
no consideration is payable for supply of goods; and where no
consideration is payable for supply of services;
(b) Section 2(93) also provides that any reference to a person to
whom supply is made shall be construed as a reference to the
recipient of supply and shall include an agent acting on behalf of the
recipient; and
(c) The above provision implies that if the Act does not use the
term "recipient" but makes a reference to the person to whom
supply is made, then they shall be construed as a "recipient". It does
not however, create a new category of recipient.
12.6. The taxable event for levy of GST is "supply" of goods or
services. In the absence of supply, no tax can be levied under IGST,
CGST or the State Goods and Services Tax Act ("the SGST"):
(a) Article 366(12-A) of the Constitution defines the "goods and
services tax" as the tax on "supply" of goods or services or both;
(b) Section 5 of the IGST Act, which is the charging section for
levy of tax, also states that the IGST will be levied on all inter-State
"supplies" of goods or services or both; and
(c) Each transaction has to be evaluated independently to
determine its taxability. The transaction of supply takes place
between the contracting parties, that is, at whose instance the
supply is made.
12.7. The CGST Act does not envisage a taxable supply without
consideration, other than those specified in Schedule I:
(a) Clause (a) of Section 7(1) of the CGST Act defines the term
"supply" as all forms of supply of goods or services made for a
consideration in the course of or in furtherance of business. Clause
(b) of Section 7(1) of the CGST Act provides that import of service
for a consideration will be included in the term "supply" even if it is
not made in the course or furtherance of business. Clause (c)
provides that activities specified in Schedule I will be included in the
term "supply" even if they are made without consideration;
(b) Clause (a) requires two conditions to be satisfied : (i) that the
activity has been made in the furtherance of business and (ii) made
for a consideration. In clause (b), the condition of the supply being
made in
the course of business is absent. In clause (c), the condition of supply
being made for a consideration has not been incorporated but this only
for activities provided in Schedule I; and
(c) The argument that supplies can be made without
consideration for activities other than those specified in Schedule I
would make clause (c) of Section 7(1) redundant.
12.8. Notification No. 10 of 2017 cannot be sustained under Section
5(4) of the IGST Act:
(a) The unamended Section 5(4) of the IGST Act provides that
integrated tax in respect of supplies made by an unregistered
supplier to a registered person shall be paid by such person on
reverse charge basis as a recipient of supply;
(b) The section was a standalone section, operating on its own,
and did not require anything to be specified by way of a notification.
Thus, Notification No. 10 of 2017 cannot be sustained under Section
5(4);
(c) Pursuant to the Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Act,
2018, Section 5(4) was amended w.e.f. 1-2-2019 to provide that the
Government may, based on the recommendations of the GST
Council, by notification, specify a class of registered persons who
shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods or services
or both received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on
reverse charge basis as the recipient;
(d) The reliance placed by the Government on the amended
Section 5(4) of the IGST Act to justify Notification No. 10 of 2017 is
erroneous as:
(i) There was no power to issue a notification specifying the
class of registered person liable to pay tax under reverse charge
basis under Section 5(4) at the time when the impugned
notification was issued on 28-6-2017. The power has been
granted by amendment w.e.f. 1-2-2019;
(ii) Section 2(93) of the CGST Act provides that any reference
to a person to whom supply is made shall be construed as
reference to the recipient of supply. Thus, the person under
Section 5(4) who has received the supply is the recipient of the
supply. Even after the amendment of Section 5(4), only the
recipient can be specified as a person liable to pay tax; and
(iii) Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge" as
the liability to pay tax by the recipient of the supply instead of the
supplier. Thus, only the recipient can be made liable to pay tax on
a reverse charge basis.
12.9. Section 13(9) of the IGST Act is only relevant to determine the
place of supply and not the recipient of supply. Whether the supply of
service is an export of services under Section 2(6)(a) of the IGST Act or
an import of
services under Section 2(11), read with Section 7(4) of the IGST Act;
or an inter-State supply of service, is not determined by Section 13(9).
12.10. Notification No. 10 of 2017 has been issued on the
recommendation of the GST Council under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act
and not under Article 279-A of the Constitution. If the GST Council
intended to make a recommendation deeming the importer as recipient
of supply, then the proper course of implementation would be to make
an amendment in the IGST Act and seek parliamentary approval.
12.11. The objective of the tax or levy cannot validate an ultra vires
levy:
(a) The Government has contended that the levy of tax on
services of transportation of goods into India provided by a person in
a non-taxable territory to a person in a non-taxable territory, has
been introduced to create parity for Indian shipping lines with
foreign shippers;
(b) The notification for the levy and reverse charge has been lifted
from the erstwhile service tax regime into the GST regime without
considering the changes in language in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act
as opposed to Section 68(2) of the Finance Act, 1994. Thus, the
notification is ultra vires the Act.
12.12. The scheme of the IGST Act does not envisage a person other
than the supplier or the recipient as a person liable to pay tax:
(a) The time of supply of services is determined according to
Section 20 of the IGST Act along with Sections 12 and 13 of the
CGST Act. Section 12 deals with the time of supply of goods and
Section 13 deals with the time of supply of services;
(b) Section 13(1) states that the liability to pay tax on services
arises at the time of supply. Sub-section (2) determines the time of
supply on forward charge basis. Sub-section (3) deals with time of
supply when tax is payable on reverse charge basis. Under this sub-
section, time of supply of services is the earliest date of payment
entered in the books of accounts of the recipient or the date of debit
in the bank account or sixty days from the date of last issue of
invoice by the supplier. Thus, a person other than a recipient cannot
determine the time of supply;
(c) Section 13(5) of the CGST Act is only relevant for determining
the time of supply in case of clandestine supply or evasion of tax and
cannot be used to determine time of supply for ocean freight
services;
(d) The provisions relating to filing of returns apply whether a
person is a supplier or a recipient of supply, or apply only to an
outward supply and an inward supply. The supply of ocean freight
service is neither an inward supply nor an outward supply.
12.13. In case of CIF contracts, the customer contracts for a supply
of delivered goods at the port of destination. The contract for
transportation of goods is entered into by the foreign exporter with the
foreign shipper. Thus, the person liable to pay consideration to the
foreign shipper is the foreign exporter.
The importer of goods in India is not the person liable to pay the
consideration, and is thus, not the "recipient" of the service.
12.14. The contract of the Indian importer with the foreign exporter
is for supply of delivered goods. The service of transportation is a
component of the supply of goods similar to raw material,
manufacturing cost or employee cost of the supplier. To contend that
the purchaser has received the supply of raw material or the services of
an employee is illogical. Similarly, the argument that the Indian
importer has received transportation services is irrational.
12.15. Serial No. 9(ii) of Notification No. 8 of 2017 read with Para 4
and Serial No. 10 of Notification No. 9 of 2017-Integrated Tax (Rate)
dated 28-6-2019 describe the services as provided by a person located
in a non-taxable territory to a person located in a non-taxable territory.
These notifications recognise the exporter as the recipient of the service
of ocean freight.
12.16. The argument of the ASG that the IGST paid on goods at the
time of import is a customs duty and not a tax, and thus, there is no
dual levy of tax recovered on ocean freight from the exporter is
erroneous:
(a) The present case involves outright purchase of goods and
thus, it is a supply of goods under GST and an import of goods
according to customs law. The issue is whether the transaction is an
import of goods under customs law, but a supply of service under
GST law:
(b) Section 5(1) of the IGST Act is the charging section. The
proviso to Section 5(1) states that integrated tax on goods imported
into India shall be levied and collected in accordance with Section 3
of the Customs Tariff Act on the value as determined under the
Customs Tariff Act and at the point when duties of customs are
levied under Section 12 of the Customs Act;
(c) Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act provides that any article
imported into India shall, in addition, be liable to integrated tax;
(d) Both the proviso to Section 5(1) of the IGST Act and Section 3
(7) of the Customs Tariff Act provide that goods imported into India
shall be liable to integrated tax;
(e) The contention that the proviso to Section 5(1) of the IGST
Act does not contain the word "supply" and thus, the tax is imposed
on import of goods irrespective of whether the transaction is supply
or not, is erroneous;
(f) The absence of the word "supply" in the proviso will not lead to
an extreme result that the transaction of import of goods becomes
leviable to IGST even if it is not supply;
(g) The CGST Act has at various instances, such as Section 11(1),
Section 12(1), Section 13(1) and Section 49(9), omitted the word
"supply" and merely mentioned the liability to pay tax on goods or
services;
(h) The proviso under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act read with
Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act implies that the tax is leviable
only on supply of goods imported into India;
(i) The amount collected as IGST on import of goods is
apportioned between the Union and States as per Article 269-A of
the Constitution which provides for apportionment of GST on inter-
State supply of goods or services. If import IGST was a customs
duty, then the revenue proceeds would be distributed in accordance
with Article 270 of the Constitution;
(j) At the introduction of GST, the understanding of the
Government was in consonance with the above legal position and
accordingly, the Government issued a notification exempting goods
and services imported from an SEZ unit or developer under the IGST
Act. Subsequently, the Government rescinded the above exemption
notifications and issued separate notifications under the Customs Act
and the IGST Act; and
(k) The Government has also issued various notifications
exempting payment of IGST in case of import of goods on lease or
temporary import basis. The intention of the Government is not to
impose IGST in case of import of goods that do not amount to
supply.
13. Mr Harish Salve, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of
the respondent has submitted:
13.1. A CIF contract is an inclusive price covering cost of goods,
insurance and freight payable for carriage of goods to the destination
specified in the contract. The essence of the contract is that a seller
having shipped the goods in accordance with the contract, can fulfil his
part of the bargain by tendering to the buyer the proper shipping
documents. If he does this, he is not in breach even if the goods are
lost before such tender. In the event of a loss, the buyer must pay the
price on tender of documents and his remedies lie against the carrier
but not the seller.
13.2. A CIF contract has two components : (i) price is paid for the
freight, and (ii) the buyer is never obligated to pay it. The owner of the
vessel who enters into a contract of affreightment has a privity of
contract with the supplier of goods and is rendering a service to the
supplier. If the service is not received, then the question of reverse
charge does not arise.
13.3. Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act are merely machinery
provisions for collection of tax, and not the charging provision:
(a) Section 5(1) is the charging section which levies IGST. Since
there is no separate levy under Section 5(1) on ocean freight, as it is
an import of goods which already suffers IGST on CIF value, the
question of reverse charge does not arise;
(b) The proviso to Section 5(1) clarifies that the "value as
determined" is only the measure of tax and not the subject of tax;
and
(c) Section 5(3) cannot be treated as the charging section as it
would make it possible for the Government to impose separate taxes
under Sections 5(1) and 5(3) and charge for the services at both
ends.
13.4. There must be a taxable event in the CIF contract of the kind
contemplated under the IGST Act. In case there is no such event, it
cannot be created through delegated legislation by the GST Council.
There is an absence of a statutory fiction by which a CIF contract can
be split into a contract for supply of goods and services, and creating a
second layer of fiction by which the shipper is rendering a service to the
supplier of goods. Thus, the question of levy of tax by the GST Council
does not arise.
13.5. In the transaction of import of coal on CIF basis in the present
case, the recipient will fall under clause (a) of Section 2(93) of the
CGST Act as consideration is payable for the service of shipping. The
mere fact that an Indian is the recipient will not lead to the Indian
recipient making the payment separately under the contract of
affreightment. The Indian recipient is only a recipient of goods, not of
service.
13.6. The law recognises and maintains the integrity of a CIF
contract under Section 2(30) read with Section 2(93), and Section 8.
These sections maintain the integrity of a composite contract by
providing that where the goods come with insurance and freight, the
tax is imposed only on supply of goods.
13.7. The High Court has held that the notifications under challenge
were ultra vires. The Government has not urged that any of these
findings are incorrect and has only contended that Section 5(1) of the
IGST Act satisfies all ingredients of a valid tax law.
13.8. Notification No. 8 of 2017 is ultra vires the IGST Act. Section 5
(1) of the IGST Act only empowers the issuance of notifications for
rates and requires other provisions to be prescribed. Section 5(1) does
not empower the Government to define "description of service" which is
an essential legislative function.
13.9. Entry 9(ii) of Notification No. 8 of 2017 imposes a tax on
ocean freight in import of goods. Such a power, however, has not been
provided in the statute.
13.10. Para 4 of Notification No. 8 of 2017 determines the "value of
service" as 10% of the CIF value, which is contrary to Section 15(1) of
the CGST Act which says "transaction value".
13.11. Article 366(12-A) defines "goods and services tax" as
involving only supply of "goods or services or both". Section 7 of the
IGST Act has made a clear distinction between standalone supply of
goods, standalone supply of services and standalone supply of "goods
or services or both". Section 7(4) treats standalone services imported
into India as inter-State supply and does not artificially bifurcate by
assuming ocean freight in the transaction of import of goods.
13.12. Section 13 of the IGST Act has no application in the case
which relates to import of goods and not services standalone. Section
13 applies to place of supply of services, referring to standalone
services, and does not use the term "both" to apply to supply of goods
or services.
13.13. The IGST Act has no extra-territorial application as the Act
extends to the whole of India. Under Section 2(109) of the CGST Act,
"taxable
territory" means the territory to which the Act applies. Further, GVK
Industries6 states that Parliament may exercise its powers with respect
to an extra-territorial aspect when it has a nexus with India. It does not
however empower delegated legislation to exercise such power. Thus,
the activity brought within the tax net by the impugned notifications is
contrary to the IGST Act.
14. Mr Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf
of the respondent¹ has submitted:
14.1. The levy of IGST on ocean freight by way of Notification No. 10
of 2017-Integrated Tax (Rate) is extra-territorial and ultra vires Section
1 read with Section 2(22) of the IGST Act:
(a) The levy imposed is on the service of transportation of goods
rendered by the shipping line to the foreign vendor/exporter,
occurring outside the territory of India, that is, outside the taxable
territory;
(b) The only nexus of the service with India is that the service
results in the import of goods into India. However, this activity is
already subject to IGST under the IGST Act and customs duty under
the Customs Act;
(c) For a levy to be imposed under the IGST Act, the service must
be a "supply" under the provisions of the IGST Act read with Section
7 of the CGST Act. However, Section 1 of the CGST Act and the IGST
Act are limited to the territory of India. Thus, any service received
outside the territory of India cannot be considered to be "supply"
under the IGST Act or the CGST Act;
(d) To impose a levy on a service that is extra-territorial, there
has to be a deeming fiction in the form of a statutory provision which
deems the supply of transportation by a vessel to a non-resident
exporter. In this case, such a deeming fiction does not exist. Thus,
the transportation service cannot be deemed as a "supply" under the
IGST Act;
(e) Only once the service provided outside the territory of India is
deemed as a "supply" by way of statute, can there be a
determination of the supplier and the recipient;
(f) By way of the impugned notification, the freight charges
incurred abroad are sought to be taxed in India on the ground that
the service recipient is in India. If this argument is accepted, then
any service (such as insurance or incidental services) rendered
abroad can be taxed in India on the ground that the recipient is in
India. This practice is in contrast with international taxation laws and
will lead to hardship for Indian importers;
(g) Article 245(2) of the Constitution states that a law made by
Parliament will not be invalid on the ground that it has extra-
territorial operation. However, the expression "law made by
Parliament" does not include executive notifications, even if made on
the recommendations of the GST Council; and
(h) Tax can be levied outside the territory of India by way of
primary legislation. For instance, under Sections 6 and 7 of the
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and
Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, a legal fiction is created by which
India has the power to levy tax in the Exclusive Economic Zone and
Continental Shelf. Pursuant to this fiction, notifications levying
customs duty on supplies made to oil drilling rigs in the Continental
Shelf have been issued. In the absence of a primary legislation or
statutory provision to this effect, notifications cannot impose duties
on activities occurring outside India.
14.2. The value of a CIF contract is indivisible, making the
computation of tax on such a contract impossible:
(a) The only way to artificially dissect the value of a CIF contract
is by way of statute, which is absent in this case;
(b) If such a division is allowed, then the Government will be able
to tax not just ocean freight, but also insurance services; and
(c) Levy on contracts on a CIF basis will lead to hardships for the
Indian recipients. The advantage of entering into CIF contracts is to
ensure that the foreign supplier is responsible for arranging
transportation and insurance. However, if a CIF contract is made
subject to GST, then the Indian importers will have to make their
own arrangements to transport the goods, book an insurance policy
and arrange for shipping.
14.3. The ASG's reliance on the nexus theory to justify the levv of
GST on ocean freight, by equating it to the imposition of income tax on
income accruing in India or customs duty imposed on goods imported
into India-is erroneous:
(a) In case of imposition of income tax, the nexus is provided by
way of a deeming fiction under Section 5(2) of the Income Tax Act,
1961, where a non-resident is liable to tax only if the income is
deemed to accrue or arises in India;
(b) In case of customs duty, the taxing event is the goods
entering the territory of India; and
(c) In the absence of such a provision, the freight services
rendered outside India cannot be deemed to be received in India
merely because the recipient is in India.
14.4. The importer is not the "recipient" of services under Section 2
(93) of the CGST Act:
(a) Under clause (c) of Section 2(93), when there is no
consideration payable for the supply of services, then the person to
whom the services are rendered is the service recipient. However, in
this case, the importer is not the service recipient as the importer
does not pay the consideration or receive the services;
(b) The argument of the ASG that the importer is a "recipient" as
they are the ultimate beneficiary enlarges the scope of Section 2(93)
by adding words that are absent in the statute;
(c) Even if the ultimate beneficiary is considered to be the
recipient, the importer is not the beneficiary of the service of
transportation of goods. Under the terms of a CIF contract, the
foreign vendor is obligated to arrange for transportation of goods for
which he engages the services of a shipping line. Thus, the foreign
vendor is the ultimate beneficiary;
(d) The importer is only the beneficiary of the imported goods,
whose value is taxable as customs duty under the Customs Tariff Act
as well as under the IGST Act; and
(e) Additionally, reliance cannot be placed on clause (c) of Section
2(93) as it only refers to those supplies for which consideration is
not paid as mentioned in Schedule I of the CGST Act. This schedule
enumerates the activities deemed as supplies without consideration.
14.5. Imposition of IGST on ocean freight will lead to double
taxation:
(a) Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act states that goods
imported into India will be subject to IGST under Section 5 of the
IGST Act, on the value as determined by Section 3(8) and Section 3
(8)(a). Under Section 3(8), the value includes value of freight; and
(b) Rule 10 of the Customs Valuation (Determination of Value of
Imported Goods) Rules, 2007 includes cost of transportation and
insurance in the value of goods, which forms the basis of the levy of
IGST under the proviso to Section 5 of the IGST Act. The impugned
levy of IGST on ocean freight would thus amount to double taxation
on the same transaction.
14.6. The ASG's reliance on "aspect theory" to justify the impugned
levy is erroneous:
(a) The ASG relied on the "aspect theory" and submitted that the
impugned notification taxes the "service" element of ocean freight,
while the "goods" element is taxed under the proviso to Section 5 of
the IGST Act. However, such an approach is impermissible according
to the decision of this Court in BSNL
(b) The aspect theory is inapplicable as the freight element is
included by levying IGST; and
(c) The aspect theory in India permits taxation of two different
aspects or features of a transaction. For instance, in a catering
contract, supply of food was subject to value added tax and the
service aspect was subject to service tax. However, the aspect theory
does not permit double taxation of the same amount or value.
14.7. The GST Council which has been created by Article 279-A of
the Constitution is a recommendatory body, whose recommendations
can be implemented by either amending the CGST Act or the IGST Act
or by issuing a notification. However, notifications issued cannot be
ultra vires the parent legislation.
14.8. The principles of cooperative federalism are not relevant in this
case as they were not adjudicated before the High Court. The appeal
must test the correctness of the impugned judgment without
expanding its scope.
14.9. Interpretation of Article 279-A of the Constitution was not an
issue before the High Court and the present appeal should be restricted
to the validity of the impugned notification.
15. In addition to the above, Mr Vikram Nankani, learned Senior
Counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondent urged the following
submissions:
15.1. Section 7(4) of the IGST Act provides that supply of services
imported into the territory of India shall be treated as a supply of
services in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. Section 2(11)
of the IGST Act defines "import of services" when the supplier of
service is located outside India, the recipient of service is located in
India and the place of supply of service is in India. When these
provisions are read together, it implies that in case of import of services
into the territory of India, the location of the supplier of services is
outside India and the location of the recipient is in India. Thus the IGST
Act covers either import of goods or import of services and not services
subsumed into the value of goods imported into India.
15.2. The IGST Act was never intended to apply to the importer of
goods on a CIF basis as the services are provided and consumed before
the goods reach India and have no nexus with the Indian importer.
15.3. The transaction between two persons located outside India is
not chargeable under Section 5(1) read with the proviso and Section 7
(4) read with Section 2(11) of the IGST Act. Thus, Notification No. 8 of
2017 is ultra vires and Notification No. 10 of 2017, providing for reverse
charge is also ultra vires the IGST Act.
15.4. Section 13(9) of the IGST Act, which states that the place of
supply of services of transportation of goods is the destination of the
goods, cannot be read in isolation. Read with Section 7(4) of the IGST
Act, it implies that in case of import of services, the supplier must be
outside India while recipient must be in India.
15.5. The test of "ultimate beneficiary" relied upon by the ASG does
not have statutory backing since the charging section, that is Section 5,
makes the recipient of the services liable to pay tax. The Indian
importer is not a party to the CIF contract between the foreign exporter
and the shipping line.
16. Mr Uchit Sheth, counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondents submitted:
16.1. The importers in a CIF contract do not have any privity of
contract with the supplier of the transportation service since they
neither make payment
of consideration to the service provider, nor avail any service. The
importers only purchase and import goods.
16.2. The impugned levy is contrary to the object and purpose of the
IGST Act. Section 5 of the IGST Act clarifies that so far as imported
goods are concerned, IGST is levied at the point of clearance of goods
for home consumption and on the total value (including value additions
till that point). This was also clarified by Circular No. 3/1/2018-IGST
dated 25-5-2018 issued by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and
Customs. The impugned levy of IGST on the freight element of CIF
contracts and high seas purchase contracts is ultra vires as IGST is paid
on the total value of goods.
16.3. In Ispat Industries Ltd. V. Commr. of Customs18, in the
context of imposition of customs duty, it was held that in a CIF
contract, the freight is part of the price paid to the seller and further
addition of transportation charges is contrary to the statutory
provisions.
16.4. The judgment of this Court in Union of India V. Jalyan Udyog11
which states that a legal fiction can be created even by delegated
legislation, is inapplicable as in that case, the fiction created was within
the parameters of the parent provision. In this case, the fiction violates
Section 5(3) of the IGST Act.
17. Mr Rajesh Kumar Gautam, learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the intervener19 in SLP (C) No. 13958 of 2020, has submitted that
the argument of the ASG that the levy has been introduced to create a
level playing field is fallacious as:
17.1. Prior to 2016, all import transportation, whether undertaken
by Indian or foreign shipping lines was outside the scope of levy.
Service tax was imposed on import transactions undertaken by Indian
shipping lines only to allow them to avail CENVAT credit. This credit was
protected even though no service tax was payable on export
transportation. Further, Indian importers availing services of foreign
shipping lines were liable to pay service tax under reverse charge. This
position continued under the GST regime and the only transaction
outside the ambit was when the foreign exporter availed the services of
a foreign shipping line to transport goods to India.
17.2. The introduction of levy of service tax or GST on import
transactions was by way of an incentive to Indian shipping lines. Thus,
it cannot now be contended that the level playing field has been
affected because of this levy.
18. Similar submissions have been addressed by Dr C. Manickam ²0
Mr Rajat Mittal²1 and Mr Abhishek A. Rastogi22, which we have not
recorded separately for the sake of brevity.
19. The rival submissions will now be analysed.
C. Constitutional Architecture of GST
20. Before we proceed to analyse the vires of the impugned
notifications, it is pertinent to contextualise the constitutional
architecture of the GST. The Constitution (One Hundred and First
Amendment) Act, 2016 ("the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016") was
enacted on 8-9-2016 introducing Articles 246-A and 279-A. Article 246
-A stipulates that both Parliament and the State Legislatures have the
power to legislate on GST:
"246-A. Special provisions with respect to goods and
services tax.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Articles
246 and 254, Parliament, and, subject to clause (2), the legislature
of every State, have power to make laws with respect to goods and
services tax imposed by the Union or by such State.
(2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to
goods and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or
both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Explanation.- - The provisions of this article, shall, in respect of
goods and services tax referred to in clause (5) of Article 279-A, take
effect from the date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax
Council."
21. Article 279-A constitutes the GST Council which shall make
recommendations to the Union and the States on a wide range of
subjects relating to GST:
"279-A. Goods and Services Tax Council.-(1) The President
shall, within sixty days from the date of commencement of the
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, by
order, constitute a Council to be called the Goods and Services Tax
Council.
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the
following members, namely-
(a)
the Union Finance Minister
...
Chairperson;
(b)
the Union Minister of State in charge
...
Member;
of Revenue or Finance
(c)
the Minister in charge of Finance or
Members.
Taxation or any other Minister
nominated
by
each
State
Government
(3) The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred
to in sub-clause (c) of clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose
one amongst themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council
for such period as they may decide.
(4) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make
recommendations to the Union and the States on-
(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Union, the
States and the local bodies which may be subsumed in the goods
and services tax;
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to, or
exempted from the goods and services tax;
(c) model Goods and Services Tax Laws, principles of levy,
apportionment of goods and services tax levied on supplies in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce under Article 269-A and
the principles that govern the place of supply;
(d) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and
services may be exempted from goods and services tax;
(e) the rates including floor rates with bands of goods and
services tax;
(f) any special rate or rates for a specified period, to raise
additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster;
(g) special provision with respect to the States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand; and
(h) any other matter relating to the goods and services tax, as
the Council may decide.
(5) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall recommend the date
on which the goods and services tax be levied on petroleum crude,
high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural
gas and aviation turbine fuel.
(6) While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the
Goods and Services Tax Council shall be guided by the need for a
harmonised structure of goods and services tax and for the
development of a harmonised national market for goods and
services.
(7) One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and
Services Tax Council shall constitute the quorum at its meetings.
(8) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall determine the
procedure in the performance of its functions.
(9) Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be
taken at a meeting, by a majority of not less than three-fourths of
the weighted votes of the members present and voting, in
accordance with the following principles, namely-
(a) the vote of the Central Government shall have a weightage
of one-third of the total votes cast, and
(b) the votes of all the State Governments taken together shall
have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast,
in that meeting.
(10) No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council
shall be invalid merely by reason of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the
Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of
the Council; or
(c) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the
merits of the case.
(11) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall establish a
mechanism to adjudicate any dispute-
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States;
or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States
on one side and one or more other States on the other side; or
(c) between two or more States,
arising out of the recommendations of the Council or implementation thereof."
22. The Union Government has contended that the recommendations
of the GST Council are binding on the legislature and the executive. It
was submitted that since the recommendations are binding, the rule-
making power of the Government under the provisions of the IGST Act
and the CGST Act, exercisable on the "recommendations" of the GST
Council, are also very wide. The arguments of the Union Government
are as follows:
22.1. A combined reading of Articles 246-A and 279-A elucidates
The surest wayt to legal research!"
that the GST Council is the ultimate decision-making body in framing
the GST law since it is a constitutional body that acts as a converging
platform for both the Union and the States.
22.2. The functions and role of the GST Council are unique and
incomparable to other constitutional bodies. Therefore, interpretations
of other provisions of the Constitution do not have precedential value
while interpreting the role of the GST Council.
22.3. The power of Parliament and the State Legislature under
Article 246-A and the power of the GST Council under Article 279-A
must be balanced and harmonised, such that neither overrides the
other:
(a) Though Article 279-A does not begin with a non-obstante
clause overriding Article 246-A, the latter would not override the
former. The core theme of GST law-as it emanates from Article 279
(6)-is cooperation and harmony. A system premised on cooperation
cannot provide inter se supremacy. Therefore, Article 279-A has
rightly not been given an overriding effect over Article 246-A; and
(b) Article 246-A vests Parliament and the State Legislatures with
the power to enact laws on GST. This function, if delegated would
amount to abdication of Parliament's constitutional function.
Therefore, Article 246-A cannot be made subject to Article 279-A.
22.4. The ordinary legislative process for enacting a statute is that
bills are introduced and voted on by the legislature. However, Article
264-A departs from this as the framing of the policy, discussion on the
policy, and decision making are vested with the GST Council.
Parliament or the State Legislature cannot legislate a law on GST under
Article 246-A independent of the recommendations of the GST Council.
A reading of Sections 5, 6 and 22 of the IGST Act indicates that the
legislature and the executive are bound by the recommendations of the
GST Council on three preliminary provisions, namely, charge,
exemption and rule-making power. Therefore, Parliament bound itself
to the recommendations of the GST Council by enacting the IGST Act
and the CGST Act; and
22.5. The recommendations by the GST Council are transformed into
legislation on a combined reading of Article 279-A and Sections 5, 6
and 22 of the IGST Act, 2017 and Sections 9, 11 and 164 of the CGST
Act.
C.1. Legislative history of the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016
Statement of Objects and Reasons
23. As early as in 2004, the Task Force on implementation of the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003 had
recommended a shift to consumption taxes to increase efficiency in
production and enhance international competitiveness of Indian goods
and services. The need for such an enormous change in the tax regime
arose out of the distortions in the then existing indirect tax regime
which suffered from the drawback of multiplicity of taxes, taxable
events, compliances, and authorities. For instance, the rate of the sales
tax and value added tax on the same goods would differ across India.
Several States would impose entry taxes on goods before the goods
entered their boundaries. The First Discussion Paper on goods and
services tax in India released by the Empowered Committee in
November 2009 explained the rationale for introducing the GST regime
in the following terms : 23
"The introduction of GST at the Central level will not only include
comprehensively more indirect Central taxes and integrate goods
and service taxes for the purpose of set-off relief, but may also lead
to revenue gain for the Centre through widening of the dealer base
by capturing value added addition in the distributive trade and
increased compliance. In the existing State level VAT structure there
are also certain shortcomings as follows. There are, for instance,
even now, several taxes which are in the nature of indirect tax on
goods and services, such as luxury tax, entertainment tax, etc. and
yet not subsumed in the VAT. Moreover, in the present State level
VAT scheme, CENVAT load on the goods remains included in the value
to be taxed under State VAT, and contributing to that extent a
cascading effect on account of CENVAT element. This CENVAT load
needs to be removed.
[...]
However, for this GST to be introduced at the State level, it is
essential that the States should be given the power of levy of
taxation of all services. This power of levy of service taxes has so
long been only with Centre. A constitutional amendment will be
made for giving this power also to the States. Moreover, with the
introduction of GST, burden of Central Sales Tax (CST) will also be
removed. The GST at the State level is, therefore, justified for (a)
additional power of levy of taxation of services for the States, (b)
system of comprehensive set-off relief, including set-off for
cascading burden of CENVAT and services taxes, (c) subsuming of
several taxes in the GST and (d) removal of burden for CST. Because
of the removal of taxes in the GST, the burden of tax under GST on
goods will, in general, fall."
24. Parliament introduced the Constitution (One Hundred and
Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011 ("the 2011 Amendment Bill") which
sought to amend the provisions of the Constitution to introduce the
GST regime. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha referred the 2011
Amendment Bill to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance.
The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Second Amendment) Bill,
2014 ("the 2014 Amendment Bill") was introduced after incorporating
the recommendations of the Standing Committee. The 2014
Amendment Bill was introduced to replace almost all the indirect taxes
that were levied by the State Governments and the Union Government,
with a singular tax system to eliminate the cascading effect of multiple
taxes and to provide for a common national market. The Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the 2014 Amendment Bill reads as follows:
"The Constitution is proposed to be amended to introduce the
goods and services tax for conferring concurrent taxing powers on
the Union as well as the States including Union Territory with
legislature to make laws for levying goods and services tax on every
transaction of supply of goods or services or both. The goods and
services tax shall replace a number of indirect taxes being levied by
the Union and the State Governments and is intended to remove
cascading effect of taxes and provide for a common national market
for goods and services. The proposed Central and State goods and
services tax will be levied on all transactions involving supply of
goods and services, except those which are kept out of the purview
of the goods and services tax."
(emphasis supplied)
25. The Finance Minister while introducing the 2014 Amendment Bill
in Parliament noted that the object of the Constitutional amendment is
to bring about a "certain amount of convergence between these taxes
so that the taxation mechanism becomes extremely simple". 24 He also
highlighted the fact that there was no uniformity in the tax rates and
structure across the States. The Statement of Objects and Reasons and
the debates and speeches in the legislature indicate the intent behind
the introduction of the Bill. 25 The legislative history, Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Bill and the speech made when the bill was
introduced indicate the mischief that Articles 246-A and 279-A to the
Constitution sought to remedy, which is to simplify the indirect tax
regime to prevent the complexities inherent in and the cascading effect
of a multiplicity of taxes.
Simultaneous legislative distribution
26. Article 246 read with the Seventh Schedule vests Parliament and
the State Legislatures with the power to make laws on subject-matters
listed in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Before the
introduction of Articles 246-A and 279-A by the Constitution
Amendment Act, 2016, the legislative powers of the Union and the
States on taxation were exclusive. The general subjects of legislation
constitute one group in the Union List (Entries 1 to 81)
and the State List (Entries 1 to 44). The subject heads related to
taxation are clubbed together in both the Union and the State Lists
(Entries 82 to 92-B in the Union List and Entries 45 to 63 in the State
List). The concurrent list does not include any entry related to
26
taxation.
For example, while the Union primarily has the power to
impose income taxes, except from agriculture²7, the State has the
power to impose tax on agricultural income²8. Therefore, both the Union
and the States had a separate and an exclusive domain over specific
heads of taxation. The Union and the State could not impose tax under
the same head since the concurrent list did not include an entry for
taxes.
27. This Court, in its decision in Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. V.
State of Bihar29 recognised the exclusive powers held by the Union and
92-93, paras 75-76)
"75. Legislative relations between the Union and the States inter
se with reference to the three Lists in Schedule VII cannot be
understood fully without examining the general features disclosed by
the entries contained in those Lists' : Seervai in his Constitutional
Law of India, 3rd Edn., Vol. 1 at pp. 81-82. A scrutiny of Lists I and
II of the Seventh Schedule would show that there is no overlapping
anywhere in the taxing power and the Constitution gives
independent sources of taxation to the Union and the States.
Following the scheme of the Government of India Act, 1935, the
Constitution has made the taxing power of the Union and of the
States mutually exclusive and thus avoided the difficulties which
have arisen in some other Federal Constitutions from overlapping
powers of taxation.
76. It would therefore appear that there is a distinction made
between general subjects of legislation and taxation. The general
subjects of legislation are dealt with in one group of entries and
power of taxation in a separate group. In M.P.V. Sundararamien & Co.
V. State of A.P. 30 this Court dealt with the scheme of the separation
of taxation powers between the Union and the States by mutually
exclusive lists. In List I, Entries 1 to 81 deal with general subjects of
legislation; Entries 82 to 92-A deal with taxes. In List II, Entries 1 to
44 deal with general subjects of legislation; Entries 45 to 63 deal
with taxes. This mutual exclusiveness is also brought out by the fact
that in List III, the Concurrent Legislative List, there is no entry
relating to a tax, but it only contains an entry relating to levy of fees
in respect of matters given in that list other than court fees. Thus, in
our Constitution, a conflict of the taxing power of the Union and of
the States cannot arise. That being so, it is difficult to comprehend
the submission that there can be intrusion by a law made by
Parliament under Entry 33 of List III into a forbidden field viz. the
State's exclusive power to make a law
with respect to the levy and imposition of a tax on sale or purchase of
goods relatable to Schedule VII List II Entry 54. It follows that the two
laws viz. sub-section (3) of Section 5 of the Act and Para 21 of the
Control Order issued by the Central Government under sub-section (1)
of Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, operate on two separate
and distinct fields and both are capable of being obeyed. There is no
question of any clash between the two laws and the question of
repugnancy does not come into play."
28. In the pre-GST regime, the Union had the exclusive power to
impose indirect taxes, that is, on inter-State sale of goods, customs
duty, service tax, and excise duty. The States had the exclusive power
to impose tax on intra-State sale of goods, luxury tax, entertainment
tax, purchase tax, and taxes on gambling and betting. The GST regime
has subsumed all the indirect taxes. Article 246-A which was
introduced by the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 vests Parliament
and the State Legislatures with the concurrent power to make laws with
respect to GST.
29. The distribution of legislative power between federating units,
the Union and the States, is among the paramount features of a federal
Constitution.
31 Articles 246 and 254 have been central to the debate on
the federal nature of the Indian Constitution. Article 246-A, is a "special
provision with respect to goods and services tax", and begins with a
non-obstante clause overriding Articles 246 and 254. Article 246 sets
down the constitutional framework defining the legislative competence
of Parliament and the State Legislatures. Article 254 provides the
framework for addressing inconsistency between Central and State laws
on matters in the Concurrent list. Article 246-A entrusts Parliament and
State Legislatures the power to legislate on the goods and services tax.
The power of the States is however subject to the conferment of an
exclusive domain to Parliament to levy the goods and services tax
where the supply of goods or services takes place in the course of inter-
State trade and commerce.
30. In Union of India V. Mohit Mineral (P) Ltd. 32 , this Court while
deciding the constitutional validity of the GST (Compensation to States)
Act, 2017 noted that the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 introduced
changes in the legislative powers of Parliament and State Legislature
relating to indirect taxation. It observed that the amendment "confers
concurrent taxing powers on the Union as well as the States for levying
GST on transactions of supply of goods or services or both". In Baiju
A.A. V. STO3 , a writ petition was filed challenging the legality of the
notices and assessment orders issued under the Kerala Value Added
Tax Act, 2003 ("the KVAT Act") for Assessment Years 2010-11 and
2011-12. The notices and orders were challenged on the ground that
the authorities did not have the jurisdiction to issue them since the
amendments introduced to Section 25(1) of the KVAT Act through the
Kerala
Finance Acts, 2017 and 2018 did not operate retrospectively. The
Kerala High Court had to decide whether the Kerala State Legislature
had the legislative competence to amend the KVAT Act after the
introduction of Article 246-A to the Constitution, and the repeal of KVAT
pursuant to the amendment. The Court noted that the special power
introduced by Article 246-A allows Parliament and the State
Legislatures to "simultaneously" make laws. 33 Subsequently, while
explaining the "simultaneous" nature of power held by Parliament and
State Legislature, it was observed that the power under Article 246-A
can be exercised simultaneously by the State Legislature and
Parliament and none hold any "unilateral or exclusive" legislative
power 34
31. In its decision in VKC Footsteps , this Court noticed the changes
in the constitutional scheme introduced by Article 246-A. One of us (Dr
652, para 52)
"52. Article 246-A has brought about several changes in the
constitutional scheme:
52.1. Firstly, Article 246-A defines the source of power as well as
the field of legislation (with respect to goods and services tax)
obviating the need to travel to the Seventh Schedule.
52.2. Secondly, the provisions of Article 246-A are available both
to Parliament and the State Legislatures, save and except for the
exclusive power of Parliament to enact GST legislation where the
supply of goods or services takes place in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce.
52.3. Thirdly, Article 246-A embodies the constitutional principle
of simultaneous levy as distinct from the principle of concurrence.
Concurrence, which operated within the fold of the Concurrent List,
was regulated by Article 254."
(emphasis supplied)
32. Article 246-A provides Parliament and the State Legislature with
the concurrent power to legislate on GST. Article 246-A has a non-
obstante provision which overrides Article 254. Article 246-A does not
provide a repugnancy clause. Unlike Article 254 which stipulates that
the law made by Parliament on a subject in the Concurrent list shall
prevail over conflicting laws made by the State Legislature, the
constitutional design of Article 246-A does not stipulate the manner in
which such inconsistency between the laws made by Parliament and
the State Legislature on GST can be resolved. The concurrent power
exercised by the legislatures under Article 246-A is termed as a
"simultaneous power" to differentiate it from the constitutional design
on exercise of concurrent power under Article 246, the latter being
subject to the repugnancy clause under Article 254. The constitutional
role and functions of the GST Council must be understood in the
context of the simultaneous legislative power conferred on Parliament
and the State Legislatures. It is from that perspective that the role of
the GST Council becomes relevant.
Role of the GST Council
33. The Thirteenth Finance Commission set up the Task Force on
GST. The Task Force recommended that the Empowered Committee of
State Finance Ministers mav. upon the introduction of GST. be
transformed into a permanent constitutional body known as the
"Council of Finance Ministers". The Task Force had recommended that:
33.1. The Council would be responsible for modification in the
design of dual GST regulating the indirect tax system.
33.2. The Council would make decisions on the principle of majority
and not unanimity. The initial decision would be approved by the Union
and three-fourths of the States. The subsequent changes to the
decision could be made upon an agreement of the Union and two-third
of the States.
33.3. The body would maintain the "existing balance of federal fiscal
powers" since both the Union and the States would surrender their
35
fiscal autonomy to change to the GST regime.
33.4. The basis for levy should be common for both the Union and
the States upon agreement. This could be on the lines of the GST law in
Australia, where both the Union and the States will have to agree
36
before any change in the rate or base of GST could be implemented.
33.5. If the States deviate from the collectively agreed position on
GST rates, a mechanism ought to be established by which the
defaulting State pays penalty37.
34. The 2011 Amendment Bill sought to include Article 279-A in the
Constitution which constituted the GST Council. The provision
stipulated the constitution of the Council, the role of the Council and
the quorum necessary for making decisions:
"279-A. Goods and Services Tax Council.-(1) The President
shall, within sixty days from the date of commencement of the
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, by
order, constitute a Council to be called the Goods and Services Tax
Council.
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the
following members, namely-
(a)
the Union Finance Minister
Chairperson;
(b)
the Union Minister of State in
Member;
charge of Revenue or Finance
(c)
the Minister in charge of
Member.
Finance or Taxation or any
other Minister nominated by
each State Government
(3) The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred
to in sub-clause (c) of clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose
one amongst themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council
for such period as they may decide.
(4) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make
recommendations to the Union and the States on-
(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Centre, the
States and the local bodies which may be subsumed in the goods
and services tax;
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to or
exempted from the goods and services tax;
(c) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and
services tax may be exempted;
(d) the rates of goods and services tax; and
(e) any other matter relating to the goods and services tax, as
the Council may decide.
(5) While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the
Goods and Services Tax Council shall be guided by the need for a
harmonised structure of goods and services tax and for the
development of a harmonised national market for goods and
services.
(6) One-third of the total number of members of the Goods and
Services Tax Council shall constitute the quorum at its meetings.
(7) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall determine the
procedure in the performance of its functions.
(8) Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council taken at
a meeting shall be with the consensus of all the members present at
the meeting.
(9) No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council
shall be invalid merely by reason of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the
Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of
the Council; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting
the merits of the case.
Explanation.- the purposes of this article, "State" includes a
Union territory with Legislature."
35. According to the draft of Article 279-A, as it found place in the
2011 Amendment Bill, every decision of the GST Council had to be
taken with the consensus of all the members present at the meeting.
The Bill also provided for the establishment of a GST Dispute
Settlement Authority to adjudicate on any complaint referred to it by a
State Government or the Union Government, arising out of deviation
from any recommendations of the Council that resulted in the loss of
revenue or which affected the harmonised structure of the GST. The
draft provision also provided that Parliament may by law provide that
no court other than the Supreme Court shall exercise jurisdiction in
respect of the
dispute. The draft of Article 279-B, as in the 2011 Amendment Bill,
reads as follows:
"279-B. (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the
establishment of a Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement
Authority to adjudicate any dispute or complaint referred to it by a
State Government or the Government of India arising out of a
deviation from any of the recommendations of the Goods and
Services Tax Council constituted under Article 279-A that results in a
loss of revenue to a State Government or the Government of India or
affects the harmonised structure of the goods and services tax.
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority
shall consist of a Chairperson and two other members.
(3) The Chairperson of the Goods and Services Tax Dispute
Settlement Authority shall be a person who has been a Judge of the
Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court to be appointed by
the President on the recommendation of the Chief Justice of India.
(4) The two other members of the Goods and Services Tax
Dispute Settlement Authority shall be persons of proven capacity
and expertise in the field of law, economics or public affairs to be
appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Goods and
Services Tax Council.
(5) The Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority
shall pass suitable orders including interim orders.
(6) A law made under clause (1) may specify the powers which
may be exercised by the Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement
Authority and provide for the procedure to be followed by it.
(7) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may
by law provide that no court other than the Supreme Court shall
exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such adjudication or dispute or
complaint as is referred to in clause (1).
Explanation. - For the purpose of this article, "State" includes a
Union territory with Legislature."
36. The Standing Committee on Finance, Ministry of Finance in its
73rd report on the 2011 Amendment Bill explained the salient features
38
of the Amendment Bill introducing the GST regime. It was noted that
the GST Council will be a joint forum for the Union and the States to
discuss issues on GST and the recommendations of the GST Council will
be a benchmark and guiding force for the Union and State
Governments. 39 In the same vein, it was observed that the legislature
will be free to exercise its power on all issues recommended by the
Council : 39
"12.
(c) A Goods and Services Tax Council (Article 279-A) will
be created, which will be a joint forum for the Centre and the States
to discuss important issues relating to GST so that the objective of
having
a harmonised structure for GST and a harmonised national market can
be achieved. This Council would function under the Chairmanship of the
Union Finance Minister and will have Minister in charge of
Finance/Taxation or Minister nominated by each of the States and UTs
with legislatures, as members. The Council will make recommendations
to the Union and the States on important parameters like rates,
exemption list, threshold limits, etc. The recommendations made by
this Council will act as benchmark or guidance to Union as well as State
Governments. The Parliament as well as State Legislatures will be free
to exercise their power on all issues recommended by the Council. One-
third of the total number of Members of the Council will constitute the
quorum of GST Council. It is further provided that the decisions of the
GST Council shall be with the consensus of all members present at the
meeting. This is to protect the interests of each State and the Centre
when the Council takes a decision.
(d) In exercise of their powers, these legislative bodies may
deviate from the recommendations of the Council and may act in a
manner which is prejudicial to the harmonious working of GST or
which adversely impacts the revenue of some other State/Central
Government. Such deviations or actions are required to be kept to
the minimum, if the objective of having a common national market
and smooth working of GST is to be achieved. It is accordingly
proposed to set up Goods & Services Tax Dispute Settlement
Authority (Article 279-B), which may be approached by the affected
Government (whether the Centre or the States) seeking redressal for
any loss caused by any action due to a deviation from the
recommendations made by the Goods & Services Tax Council or for
adversely affecting the harmonious structure and implementation of
the GST."
(emphasis supplied)
37. The Committee also sought the opinion of the Attorney General
through the Department of Legal Affairs on whether the
recommendations of the GST Council would undermine the power of the
legislature. In response, the Attorney General stated that though the
GST Council has the power to make recommendations, both Parliament
and State Legislatures, have the power to either accept or reject those
recommendations. 40 The Attorney General stated:
"
'This is an important point which has been raised and the
short answer to it is that it is certainly open to Parliament to approve
any recommendation. However, this does not mean that the GSTC
recommendations will have no value. Having regard to the nature of
the Constitution of GSTC, the Council would have performed useful
role in making recommendations but the ultimate authority whether
to accept such recommendations can and must rest only in the
legislatures, namely, Parliament and the State Legislatures. In this
view of the matter, the setting up of the GSTC does not strike at the
root of the legislative powers over Finance. The powers of the
legislature over Finance are sacrosanct and are not affected by the
setting up of the GSTC.' "
38. The States raised concerns over the establishment of the GST
Dispute Settlement Authority on the ground that such authority would
have the power to override the supremacy of Parliament and the State
Legislatures since a legislation, though constitutional, could be struck
down if it deviated from the recommendations of the GST Council. The
Committee, while addressing the concerns raised by the States
recommended that the provision establishing the GST Dispute
Settlement Authority be omitted since it would affect the fiscal
autonomy of the States. It was further recommended that a provision
be made in Article 279-A itself empowering the GST Council to resolve
disputes arising out of its recommendations:
"60. On the GST Dispute Settlement Authority, the Chairman,
Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers stated that most
of the States have expressed the view that the provision pertaining
to the GST Dispute Settlement Authority should be omitted as this
authority shall have powers of overriding the supremacy of
Parliament and the State Legislatures. It shall affect the fiscal
autonomy of the States.
61. The Constitution confers autonomy on Parliament and the
State Legislatures to legislate within the respective fields assigned to
them and the fact that a statute enacted by a competent legislative
body can be called into question on grounds of deviations from the
recommendations of an essentially executive body, albeit
constitutional, is being construed as undermining the supremacy of
the legislature. Keeping in view the concerns expressed by the
States, and the fact that the proposed provision of GST Dispute
Settlement Authority will affect the fiscal autonomy of Parliament
and the State Legislatures, the proposed Article 279-B providing for
GST Dispute Settlement Authority may be omitted. However, any
dispensation involving multiple partners does require a mechanism
to resolve disputes. A provision can be made in Article 279-A itself
empowering the GST Council to decide about the mechanism to
resolve the disputes arising out of its recommendations."
(emphasis supplied)
39. The Committee reiterated in its conclusion that the GST Council
would only play a "constructive and enabling role" vis-à-vis the
legislature and would not override the role of the legislature41:
"15.
The Committee would thus expect the proposed GST
Council to follow the principles of cooperative federalism and
democratic governance. As this will be a political and
a
recommendatory body, it would be in a position to play a
constructive and enabling role vis-à-vis the legislature, which
needless to emphasise, would remain supreme in matters of
legislation including taxation. In the Committee's view the mandate
entrusted to the GST Council under the proposed Article 279-A of the
Constitution (Amendment) Bill does not in any way alter the existing
constitutional scheme insofar as the legislature, both Union and
State, is concerned."
40. Taking into account the recommendations of the Standing
Committee, Parliament introduced the 2014 Amendment Bill in which
Article 279-B was deleted and the GST Council was given the power
under Article 279-A(11) to devise a mechanism of dispute resolution.
The GST Council consists of the Union Finance Minister as the
Chairperson, the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or
Finance and the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other
Minister nominated by the State Government. The role of the GST
Council is to make recommendations to the Union and the States on
seven specific categories revolving around GST including principles of
levy and apportionment of GST. Sub-clause (h) of Article 279-A(1) also
provides the Council with plenary power by which it can make
recommendations with respect to "any other matter relating to GST", as
the Council may decide. Clause (6) stipulates that the
recommendations of the GST Council shall be guided by the "need for a
harmonised structure of goods and services tax". One half of the total
number of members of the Council shall constitute the quorum for
meetings. Clause (9) provides that the Council shall take a decision
with three-fourths majority of the members present and voting. The
vote of the Union Government is given the weightage of one-third of
the total votes cast, and the votes of the State Governments are given
a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes.
Parliamentary debates
41. The inclusion of Article 279-A in the 2014 Amendment Bill raised
two important concerns in Parliament : first, the GST Council could
effectively override the legislative sovereignty of Parliament and the
State Legislatures; and second, the fiscal autonomy of the States would
be diminished since the Centre has the power to stall a consensus
reached by all the States. On 5-5-2015, a Member of Parliament from
the State of Tamil Nadu raised the concern that the GST Council would
diminish the role of the States in fiscal policy42
"The GST Council as proposed in the Amendment will make
recommendations on a whole range of issues relating to subsuming
of taxes, cesses and surcharges under GST, exemption for goods and
services, model GST laws, etc. This will override the supremacy of
the legislature both at the Centre and the States in taxation matters.
In the GST Council, the Union Government has one-third weightage
in vote and only two-third of the weightage in vote is given to States
and Union Territories. Voting rights of States and Union Territories
are equal irrespective of their size. We, are therefore, opposed to the
idea of GST Council as a constitutional body as it compromises the
autonomy of the States including in fiscal matters."
In response, the Finance Minister had said4
"Once you get into the GST pipeline, the States and the Centre
will have to interact together; and once they interact together, the
State of Tamil
Nadu will be involved in determining and taking decisions relating to
the States. So, none of us is going to be surrendering his or her
authority or autonomy. We are both going to be pooling our sovereignty
together so that we are able to create a new taxation mechanism."
42. A Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha examined proposed
Article 279-A. It was suggested before the Select Committee that a
"dispute settlement body" to adjudicate on disputes arising from the
non-compliance of recommendations of the GST Council should be
constituted.
44
There was, in other words, a suggestion to reintroduce
Article 279-B as it found place in the 2011 Amendment Bill. The
Government submitted that Article 279-A(11) provides the GST Council
with the power to decide the "modalities" of dispute resolution, which
may range from mediation, arbitration or even judicial adjudication
depending on the nature of dispute:
"2.71. It may further be mentioned that Article 279-A(11) only
provides that GST Council may decide the "modalities" to resolve
disputes arising out of its recommendations. The "modalities" could
include any dispute resolution mechanism which could be inter alia
negotiation, mediation, arbitration or even a judicial authority as
deemed appropriate by the GST Council depending on the nature of
dispute before it. Thus, as per the proposed Bill, the GST Council
shall, by itself, not be resolving the disputes but decide on the
modalities for resolving the disputes."
43. The Government also submitted that the voting pattern between
the Union and the States does not provide unequal power to any one of
the constituent units:
2.68. The structure of GST Council represents the federal nature
of governance in this country. This has been done as per the
recommendations of the Empowered Committee after their meeting
in Bhubaneswar in January 2013, and also the recommendations of
the Parliamentary Standing Committee. This provision has been
consciously adopted to ensure the federal balance in the functioning
of the GST Council, and also to enhance cooperative federalism. The
existing pattern of vote-share in the GST Council ensures that no
decision can be taken by the Council either by the Centre or the
States acting on their own. Hence, neither the States nor the Centre
alone can take a decision in the Council. Providing 3/4th weightage
to the States would upset the federal balance between the Centre
and the States. Presently, in the concurrent list, in case of any
difference between Central and State legislation, the Central
legislation prevails. The present weightage of votes in the GST
Council would ensure that neither the Centre nor the States are able
to take a decision without the support of the other. In other words
both would enjoy a veto.
2.69. Further, with Centre holding only 1/3rd of the votes, the
Centre would require support of 20 States/Union Territories to get a
resolution passed. This shows that Centre would need cooperation of
States to get any decision taken at the GST Council."
44. Though the traditional view of interpretation of statutes is that
legislative history is not readily used in interpreting a law, the modern
trend of thinking on the subject has enabled courts to look into the
history of a legislation to understand the full purport of the words used
and the mischief sought to be remedied by the law. In K.P. Varghese V.
"8.
the speech made by the mover of the Bill explaining the
reason for the introduction of the Bill can certainly be referred to for
the purpose of ascertaining the mischief sought to be remedied by
the legislation and the object and purpose for which the legislation is
enacted."
45. In Kalpana Mehta V. Union of India46 Dipak Misra, C.J. held that
reports of the Parliamentary Committees and the speeches made in
Parliament can be referred to identify the circumstances that led to the
enactment of the legislation along with the intention of the legislature :
"129. We have referred to these authorities to highlight that the
reports or speeches have been referred to or not referred to for the
purposes indicated therein and when the meaning of a statute is not
clear or ambiguous, the circumstances that led to the passing of the
legislation can be looked into in order to ascertain the intention of
the legislature. It is because the reports assume significance and
become relevant because they precede the formative process of a
legislation."
46. The parliamentary debates and the legislative history of the
Constitutional amendment, and the committee reports on Articles 246-
A and 279-A indicate that:
46.1. The draft of Article 279-B, in the 2011 Amendment Bill, which
sought to introduce a GST Dispute Settlement Authority to adjudicate
on any dispute "arising out of deviation" from the recommendations of
the GST Council was deleted. The current Article 279-A(11) provides
that the GST Council shall devise a mechanism to adjudicate on any
dispute that "arises out" of the recommendations of the Council. The
deletion of Article 279-B while introducing the 2014 Amendment Bill
and the inclusion of Article 279(11) in the text of the Constitution has
brought about two substantial changes : one, that instead of the
creation of a dispute settlement authority, the Council is vested with
the power to decide on "modalities" of dispute resolution; and second,
while Article 279-B stipulated that the authority shall adjudicate on
"disputes arising out of the deviation from the recommendations",
Article 279-A(11)
states that the disputes arising out of recommendations shall be
resolved. The phrase "deviation" has been omitted. Before the Select
Committee of the Rajya Sabha, the Government had stated that
disputes shall be resolved by modalities including mediation and
arbitration. The Standing Committee of Finance in its report specifically
recommended the deletion of Article 279-B due to the concerns raised
by the States.
46.2. Under the 2011 Amendment Bill, the GST Council could
recommend only when a unanimous decision would be reached.
However, the Standing Committee of Finance had recommended that
since it would be difficult to arrive at a consensus due to the socio-
economic diversity amongst the States, the recommendations be made
with a majority instead of unanimity. While making this
recommendation, it was observed that if the GST Council functions like
the present Empowered Committee where the differences are resolved
amicably in an institutional mode, it would foster the spirit of
cooperative federalism.
C.2. The nature of the recommendations of the GST Council
Indian federalism Dialogue of cooperative federalism
47. The arguments in favour of reading the "recommendations" of
the GST Council as binding are twofold47 : first, if the GST Council
cannot make binding recommendations, the entire structure of GST will
collapse as each State would then levy a conflicting tax and collection
mechanism; and second, if the recommendations are non-binding, then
there would be no dispute to be resolved under Article 279(11) as the
States would be free to disregard the recommendations. The arguments
against interpreting the "recommendations" of the GST Council as
binding on the Union and the States are twofold48 : first, it would
violate the supremacy of Parliament and State Legislatures since both
have a simultaneous power to legislate on GST; and second, it would
violate the fiscal federalism of the States since the Centre has a one-
third vote share and the States collectively have a two-third vote share.
Therefore, no recommendation on a three-fourths majority can be
passed without the consent of the Centre.
48. One of the important characteristics of a federal polity is the
distribution of legislative power between the Union and the States. Mr
H.M. Seervai while arguing that India is a federal nation, referred to the
exclusive power of taxation held by the States to establish that the
States were not merely given the power to legislate on "subordinate"
matters:
"If by "subordinate" is meant "not important", then, with respect,
the present writer does not agree with Prof. Wheare's assessment of
the exclusive State List. Public order, the police, administration of
justice,
local government, public health and sanitation, to mention but a few,
are matters of great importance; and so are agriculture, water (subject
to Union control of the waters of inter-State rivers), land, and fisheries.
Again, the allocation of taxes between the Union and the States is
mutually exclusive, and the taxes allotted exclusively to the States are
not negligible. Thus sales tax is an expanding source of revenue in
India as it becomes increasingly industrialised under the successive five
year plans. In the industrialised State of Maharashtra, the yield from
sales tax was about Rs 1580 million for the year of 1971-72, and the
estimate for the year 1972-73 was about Rs 1780 million.
[...]
(k) The view that unimportant matters were assigned to the
States cannot be sustained in face of the very important subjects
assigned to the States in List II, and the same applies to taxing
powers of the States which are made mutually exclusive of the
taxing powers of the Union so that ordinarily the States have
independent source of revenue of their own. The legislative entries
relating to taxes in List II show that the sources of revenue available
to the States are substantial and would increasingly become more
substantial. In addition to the exclusive taxing powers of the States,
the States become entitled either to appropriate taxes collected by
the Union or to a share in the taxes collected by the Union."
49. P.B. Sawant, J. writing for himself and Kuldip Singh, J. in S.R.
Bommai V. Union of India49 referred to the exclusive and equal
legislative distribution of heads of taxation to establish the federal
nature of the Indian Constitution. 47 Therefore, the exclusive powers
held by the States and the Centre on matters of taxation was regarded
as an important feature of India's federal polity. The Constitution
Amendment Act, 2016 alters the legislative distribution between the
Centre and the State on indirect taxation by providing Parliament and
State Legislatures with "simultaneous powers" and no provision for
repugnancy. Therefore, according to Article 246-A, both Parliament and
the State Legislature possess equal power to legislate on aspects of
GST. It is the contention of the Union that the recommendation of the
GST Council should be binding on Parliament and the State Legislatures
precisely because equal power is granted to both the federal units. The
Union has argued that if the recommendations are not binding, then it
would lead to an impasse where different Central and State legislations
could be guiding the same field.
50. Article 246-A vests Parliament and the State Legislatures with a
unique, simultaneous law-making power on GST. It is in this context
that the role of the GST Council gains significance. The
recommendations of the GST Council are not based on a unanimous
decision but on a three-fourth majority of the
members present and voting, where the Union's vote counts as one-
third, while the States' votes have a weightage of two-thirds of the
total votes cast. There are two significant attributions of the voting
system in the GST Council. First, the GST Council has an unequal
voting structure, where the States collectively have a two-third voting
share and the Union has a one-third voting share; and second, since
India has a multi-party system, it is possible that the party in power at
the Centre may or may not be in power in various States. Therefore, the
GST Council is not only an avenue for the exercise of cooperative
federalism but also for political contestation across party lines. Thus,
the discussions in the GST Council impact both federalism and
democracy. The constitutional design of the Constitution Amendment
Act, 2016 is sui generis since it introduces unique features of
federalism. Article 246-A treats the Centre and States as equal units by
conferring a simultaneous power of enacting law on GST. Article 279-A
in constituting the GST Council envisions that neither the Centre nor
the States can act independent of the other.
51. The dual federalism model or the autonomy model views the
constituting units of the Centre and States as autonomous,
independent and competing units. This model is also termed as
competitive federalism, where the constituent units "compete" with
each other. Proponents of the cooperative federalism model argue that
it is a mistake to view each unit as a separate autonomous entity.
According to the theory of cooperative federalism, integration and not
autonomy is the objective that federalism seeks to achieve. While
50
dual federalism is termed as "layer cake federalism" due to the
delineation of the structures of power, cooperative federalism is known
as "marble cake federalism" due to the integrated approach of the
federal units. 51 This Court in State (NCT of Delhi) V. Union of India5
has observed that India follows the model of cooperative federalism
where the Union and the State Governments need to iron out the
differences that arise in the course of the path of development. Dipak
p. 593, para 119)
"119. Thus, the idea behind the concept of collaborative
federalism is negotiation and coordination so as to iron out the
differences which may arise between the Union and the State
Governments in their respective pursuits of development. The Union
Government and the State Governments should endeavour to
address the common problems with the intention to arrive at a
solution by showing statesmanship, combined action and sincere
cooperation. In collaborative federalism, the Union and the State
Governments should express their readiness to achieve the common
objective and work together for achieving it. In a functional
Constitution, the authorities should exhibit sincere concern to avoid
any
conflict. This concept has to be borne in mind when both intend to rely
on the constitutional provision as the source of authority. We are
absolutely unequivocal that both the Centre and the States must work
within their spheres and not think of any encroachment. But in the
context of exercise of authority within their spheres, there should be
perception of mature statesmanship so that the constitutionally
bestowed responsibilities are shared by them. Such an approach
requires continuous and seamless interaction between the Union and
the State Governments."
52. The Indian Constitution has sometimes been described as quasi-
federal or a Constitution with a "centralising drift". This is because
when the Constitution is read as a whole, the Union is granted a larger
share of the power. Instances of this centralising drift can be traced to
Articles 254, 248 and 353. However, there are instances such as Article
246-A, where the Centre and the States are conferred equal power.
Merely because a few provisions of the Constitution provide the Union
with a greater share of power, the provisions in which the federal units
are envisaged to possess equal power cannot be construed in favour of
the Union. The Union and the States have a simultaneous power to
legislate on GST. The GST Council has the power to make
recommendations on a wide range of subjects relating to GST. Since
the Constitution does not envisage a repugnancy provision to resolve
inconsistencies between the Central and State laws on GST, the GST
Council must ideally function, as provided by Article 279-A(6), in a
harmonised manner to reach a workable fiscal model through
cooperation and collaboration.
53. The federal system is a means to accommodate the needs of a
pluralistic society to function in a democratic manner. It attempts to
reconcile the desire of unity and commonality along with the desire for
diversity and autonomy. Democracy and federalism are interdependent
on each other for their survival such that federalism would only be
stable in well-functioning democracies. Additionally, the constituent
units in a federal polity check the exercise of power of one another to
prevent one group from exercising dominant power. The Indian
Constitution, though necessarily federal does confer the Union with a
higher share of power in certain situations to prevent chaos and provide
security.
31
However, even if the federal units are not entirely
autonomous as in the traditional federal system, the units still wield
power. The relationship between two constituent units that are not
autonomous but rely on each other for their functioning is not in
practice always collaborative or cooperative. If the States have been
conferred lesser power they can still resist the mandates of the Union
by using different forms of political contestation as permitted by
constitutional design. Such contestation furthers both the principle of
federalism and democracy. When the federal units are vested with
unequal power, the collaboration between them is not necessarily
cooperative. Harmonised decision thrives not just on cooperation but
also on contestation.
54. Indian federalism is a dialogue in which the States and the
Centre constantly engage in conversations. Such dialogues can be
placed on two ends of the spectrum - collaborative discussions that
cooperative federalism fosters at one end of the spectrum and
interstitial contestation at the other end. Jessica Bulman and Heather
K., in their essay connote interstitial contestation as "uncooperative
federalism". They argue that the States which possess lesser power
51
could use licensed dissent, dissent by using regulatory gaps or by civil
disobedience such as passing a resolution against the decision of the
Central Government as means of contestation. Differentiating the forms
of cooperative federalism from the dissent in uncooperative federalism,
the authors state:
"We think the best proxy for distinguishing dissent from routine
negotiations is whether the State's action can be fairly understood as
an effort to change national policy. An attempt to obtain an
accommodation or modification of federal policy within the State
should usually be understood as an example of cooperative
bargaining. An attempt to contest and alter national policy is rightly
understood as dissent."
55. Such form of contestation or as the authors term it,
"uncooperative federalism" is valuable since "it is desirable to have
some level of friction, some amount of State contestation, some
deliberation-generating froth in our democratic system."53 Therefore,
the States can use various forms of contestation if they disagree with
the decision of the Centre. Such forms of contestation are also within
the framework of Indian federalism. The GST Council is not merely a
constitutional body restricted to the indirect tax system in India but is
also an important focal point to foster federalism and democracy.
56. One of the important features of Indian federalism is "fiscal
federalism". A reading of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
2014 Amendment Bill, the Parliamentary reports and speeches indicate
that Articles 246-A and 279-A were introduced with the objective of
enhancing cooperative federalism and harmony between the States and
the Centre. However, the Centre has a one-third vote share in the GST
Council. This coupled with the absence of the repugnancy provision in
Article 246-A indicates that recommendations of the GST Council
cannot be binding. Such an interpretation would be contrary to the
objective of introducing the GST regime and would also dislodge the
fine balance on which Indian federalism rests. Therefore, the argument
that if the recommendations of the GST Council are not binding, then
the entire structure of GST would crumble does not hold water. Such a
reading of the provisions of the Constitution diminishes the role of the
GST Council as a constitutional body formed to arrive at decisions by
collaboration and contestation of ideas.
The contextual meaning of "recommendations"
57. The phrase "recommendation" is used in numerous provisions in
the Constitution but the import of the phrase differs contextually.
Based on the submission of the Union Government, there are five
categories into which the phrase "recommendation" has been deployed
in the Constitution:
57.1. Category 1 : Recommendation by the President prior to laying
before Parliament for voting : Articles 3, 109, 111, 113, 117, 203, 207,
255 and 274 discuss the recommendations of the President or the
Governor. Here the authority recommending the initiation of the
discussion and the decision-making authority are different.
57.2. Category 2 : Recommendation followed by consultation
:
Article 233 uses the phrases "consultation" and "recommendation".
Article 233(1) states that the District Judge shall be appointed by the
Governor in "consultation" with the High Court. Clause (2) states that
the criteria for the appointment of a person who is not already in the
service of the Union or the State is that he should have been a pleader
or an advocate for at least seven years and he should be recommended
by the High Court for the appointment to the post of a District Judge.
There is a two-step process for appointment, first, the candidature
must be recommended by the High Court; and second, the
recommended candidate is appointed by the Governor in "consultation"
with the High Court.
57.3. Category 3 : Recommendation with accountability : Articles
243-I, 243-Y, 280, 281, 338, 338-B and 340. Articles 243-I and 243-Y
stipulate that the Finance Commission shall make "recommendations"
to the Governor on apportionment of taxes to the Panchayats and
Municipalities. Article 280 states that it "shall be the duty of the
Commission to make recommendations to the President" on the
principles governing distribution of taxes between the Union and the
States. Article 281 fosters accountability by providing that every
recommendation made by the Finance Commission shall be laid before
the House together with an explanatory memorandum on the action
taken on such recommendations. Article 338(5)(e) states that the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes shall present a report to the
President annually listing the measures that should be taken to
enhance the protection and development of the Scheduled Castes.
Article 338(6) states that the President shall cause the report to be laid
before Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action
taken on the recommendations or the reason for non-acceptance, if
any. Article 338-A is a similar provision on the recommendatory nature
of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. The President has the
power to appoint a Commission to investigate the conditions of
Backward Classes. The Commission is required to investigate the
matters referred to them and present a report along with
recommendations to the President which shall be laid before Parliament
along with an explanation memorandum.
57.4. Category 4 : Non-qualifying recommendation : The
Presidential Order to establish an inter-State Council dated 28-5-1990
issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, and Article 2 Article 263
provides that the President may, in public interest, establish an inter-
State Council which shall make
recommendations for better coordination of policy and action. The inter-
State Council was constituted by the inter-State Council Order, 1990
consisting of the Prime Minister, Chief Ministers of all States, Chief
Ministers of Union Territories and six Ministers of Cabinet rank.
57.5. Category 5 : Recommendations which are obligatory in
nature : Articles 270, 275, 344, 349 and 371-A : Article 344
establishes the Commission and Committee of Parliament on Official
Languages. Article 344(2) states that it shall be the duty of the
Commission to make recommendations to the President on the usage of
official languages. Clause (3) states that recommendations shall be
made having due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific
advancement of India and the claim of non-Hindi speaking persons.
Article 344(4) constitutes a committee of the members of the Lok
Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The Committee will have to examine the
recommendations of the Commission and report its opinion to the
President. The President after considering the report, shall issue
directions in accordance with the whole or any part of the report. Article
349 deals with the special procedure for enactment of law relating to
language in the first fifteen years from the commencement of the
Constitution. Articles 270 and 275 stipulate that the percentage of tax
apportionment and fixation of the grants for the States from the
Consolidated Fund of India shall be ordered by the President on the
recommendation of the Finance Commission.
58. A survey of the above provisions indicates that the nature and
meaning of the term "recommendation" differs contextually. All the
provisions qualify the nature of recommendation. For instance, in
category one, the recommendation of the President is for the initiation
of the discussion; in category two, a decision on the recommendation is
arrived upon "consultation"; in category three, the decision-making
authority has to submit an explanatory note on the action or inaction
taken on the recommendations; in category four, the recommendations
are not qualified. Article 263 only states that the inter-State Council
has a duty to recommend. There is no further explanation on whether
the recommendation ought to be mandatorily accepted, or deliberated
upon; in category five, the recommendations of the authority are
expressly stated to be "binding" on the decision-making authority.
59. The GST Council which is a constitutional body is entrusted with
the duty to make recommendations on a wide range of areas
concerning GST. The GST Council has plenary powers under Article 279-
A(4)(h) where it could make recommendations on "any other matter"
related to GST as the Council may decide. The GST Council has to arrive
at its recommendations through harmonised deliberation between the
federal units as provided in clause (6) of Article 279-A. Unlike the other
provisions of the Constitution which provide that recommendations
shall be made to the President or the Governor, Article 279-A states
that the recommendations shall be made to the "Union and the States".
The recommendation of the GST Council made under Article 279-A is
non-qualified. That is, there is no explanation on the value of such a
recommendation. Yet the notion that the recommendations of the GST
Council transform into legislation in and of themselves under Article
246-A would be
far-fetched. If the GST Council was intended to be a decision-making
authority whose recommendations transform to legislation, such a
qualification would have been included in Articles 246-A or 279-A.
Neither does Article 279-A begin with a non-obstante clause nor does
Article 246-A provide that the legislative power is "subject to" Article
279-A.
60. The Constitution employs the phrase "consultation" in certain
contexts. For example, Article 320(3) states that the Public Service
Commission shall be "consulted" on matters relating to civil posts.
Article 320(3) reads as follows:
"320. (3) The Union Public Service Commission or the State
Public Service Commission, as the case may be, shall be consulted-
(a) on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil
services and for civil posts;
(b) on the principles to be followed in making appointments to
civil services and posts and in making promotions and transfers
from one service to another and on the suitability of candidates
for such appointments, promotions or transfers;"
(emphasis supplied)
61. If the GST Council were intended to be a constitutional body
whose recommendations transform into legislation without any
intervening act, there would have been an express provision in Article
246-A. Article 279-A does not mandate tabling the recommendations in
the legislature like the provisions in Category 3, where the
recommendations have to be mandatorily tabled in the legislature along
with an explanatory note. Only the secondary legislation which is
framed based on the recommendations of the Council under the
provisions of the CGST Act54 and the IGST Act55 is mandated to be
tabled before the Houses of Parliament. The use of the phrase
"recommendations to the Union or States" indicates that the GST
Council is a recommendatory body aiding the Government in enacting
legislation on GST.
62. In Manohar V. State of Maharashtra56, a two-Judge Bench of this
Court while interpreting Section 20(2) of the Right to Information Act,
2005 observed that the phrase "recommendation" must be interpreted
in contradistinction to "direction" or "mandate". It was observed as
"22. We may notice that proviso to Section 20(1) specifically
contemplates that before imposing the penalty contemplated under
Section 20(1), the Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of
being heard to the officer concerned. However, there is no such
specific provision in relation to the matters covered under Section 20
(2). Section 20(2) empowers the Central or the State Information
Commission, as the case may be, at the time of deciding a complaint
or appeal for the reasons stated in that section, to recommend for
disciplinary action to be taken against the Central Public Information
Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be,
under the relevant service rules. Power
to recommend disciplinary action is a power exercise of which may
impose penal consequences. When such a recommendation is received,
the disciplinary authority would conduct the disciplinary proceedings in
accordance with law and subject to satisfaction of the requirements of
law. It is a "recommendation" and not a "mandate" to conduct an
enquiry. "Recommendation" must be seen in contradistinction to
"direction" or "mandate". But recommendation itself vests the
delinquent Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer
with consequences which are of serious nature and can ultimately
produce prejudicial results including misconduct within the relevant
service rules and invite minor and/or major penalty."
In Naraindas Indurkhya V. State of M.P. 57 a Constitution Bench
observed that a "recommendation" has persuasive value. In this case,
this Court was dealing with the question of whether textbooks
"recommended" by the Board could be held to be in effect immediately.
"15.
there is a basic distinction between recommendation and
prescription of a textbook. When a textbook is prescribed by an
appropriate authority having legal power to do so, it has to be
followed by the schools. Prescription of a textbook carries with it
a
binding obligation to follow the textbook. There is no such obligation
when a textbook is merely recommended. Recommendation has
merely a persuasive effect, it being open to the schools to accept the
recommendation or to reject it as they think fit. The schools may use
the recommended textbook or they may not according as the
Principals choose. That is why no conferment of statutory power is
needed to enable the Board to recommend text books and no
question of ultra vires can arise in such a case. Now the text books
which formed the subject-matter of the Notifications dated 5-4-
1972, 25-4-1972, 26-4-1972 and 17-5-1972 were merely
recommended and not prescribed by the Board and being only
recommended textbooks as distinguished from prescribed textbooks,
they obviously could not be said to be "in force" immediately before
the appointed day. Section 4, sub-section (2) did not, therefore,
apply in respect of these textbooks and they could not be regarded
as textbooks prescribed under Section 4 sub-section (2)."
64. In numerous cases, this Court has reiterated that
recommendations cannot create binding and enforceable rights, in
contradistinction to a "direction" or "mandate".58
Interpretation of "recommendation" vis-à-vis the provisions of
the IGST Act and the CGST Act
65. The contention of the Union is that the recommendations of the
GST Council are binding since Parliament and the State Legislatures
have agreed to align themselves with the recommendations as is
evident from the provisions of the IGST Act and the CGST Act. Certain
provisions of the IGST Act, the CGST Act and the SGST Acts expressly
provide that the rule-making power delegated to the Government shall
be exercised on the recommendations of the GST Council. For instance,
Section 5 of the IGST Act provides that the taxable event, taxable rate
and taxable value shall be notified by the Government on the
"recommendations of the Council". Similarly, the power of the Central
Government to exempt goods or services or both from levy of tax shall
be exercised on the recommendations of the GST Council under Section
6 of the IGST Act. Section 22 provides that the Government may
exercise its rule-making power on the recommendations of the GST
Council. The CGST Act also provides for similar provisions in Sections 9,
11 and 164.
66. The provisions of the IGST Act and the CGST Act which provide
that the Union Government is to act on the recommendations of the
GST Council must be interpreted with reference to the purpose of the
enactment, which is to create a uniform taxation system. The GST was
introduced since different States could earlier provide different tax
slabs and different exemptions. The recommendations of the GST
Council are made binding on the Government when it exercises its
power to notify secondary legislation to give effect to the uniform
taxation system. The Council under Article 279-A has wide
recommendatory powers on matters related to GST where it has the
power to make recommendations on subject-matters that fall outside
the purview of the rule-making power under the provisions of the IGST
and the CGST Act. Merely because a few of the recommendations of the
GST Council are binding on the Government under the provisions of the
CGST Act and the IGST Act, it cannot be argued that all of the GST
Council's recommendations are binding. As a matter of first principle,
the provisions of the Constitution, which is the grundnorm of the
nation, cannot be interpreted based on the provisions of a primary
legislation. It is only the provisions of a primary legislation that can be
interpreted with reference to the Constitution. The legislature amends
the Constitution by exercising its constituent power and legislates by
exercising its legislative power. The constituent power of the legislature
is of a higher constitutional order as compared to its legislative power.
Even if it is Parliament that has enacted laws making the
recommendations of the GST Council binding on the Central
Government for the purpose of notifying secondary legislations, it would
not mean that all the recommendations of the Council made by virtue
of its power under Article 279-A have a binding force on the legislature.
67. With this background and context, we shall now proceed to
analyse the scheme of the GST legislation and whether the impugned
levy, imposed on the recommendations of the GST Council, is valid and
permissible under law.
D. Analysis
59
D.1. Statutory provisions and scheme of the IGST Act
68. The IGST Act enables the Central Government to impose IGST
on inter-State supply of goods and services. The Preamble to the IGST
Act describes it as:
"An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on inter-
State supply of goods or services or both by the Central Government
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto."
In aiding the levy and collection of IGST, the IGST Act provides for a
comprehensive scheme for determining the nature of supply, time of
supply and place of supply.
69. Statutory interpretation will determine whether the IGST Act
confers the powers on the Central Government, in consultation with the
GST Council, to designate imports as a supply of services under Section
5(3) of the IGST and whether the importer can be considered as the
recipient of such supply, liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis.
Further, it will determine if the Central Government, in consultation
with the GST Council, has the powers to designate the importer as a
recipient of a service under Section 5(4) of the IGST Act, when goods
are imported on a CIF basis. The critical fact in this case is that the
service of shipping in these CIF contracts is availed by the non-taxable
exporter who engages and pays a foreign shipping line of their choice,
without the involvement of the importer. In contrast, in FOB contracts,
the Indian importer pays for the services of shipping and directly deals
with the shipping line. The respondents herein are importers of non-
coking coal on a CIF basis.
70. Section 5 of the IGST Act provides for the levy and collection of
tax on inter-State supplies of goods or services. The power to impose
such tax is derived from Article 286(2) read with Article 269-A(1). Sub-
section (1) of Section 5 provides for the levy of the integrated goods
and services tax on all inter-State supplies of goods or services or both.
Section 5 reads as follows:
"5. Levy and collection.-(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), there shall be levied a tax called the integrated goods
and services tax on all inter-State supplies of goods or services or
both, except on the supply of alcoholic liquor for human
consumption, on the value determined under Section 15 of the
Central Goods and Services Tax Act and at such rates, not exceeding
forty per cent, as may be notified by the Government on the
recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as
may be prescribed and shall be paid by the taxable person:
Provided that the integrated tax on goods imported into India
shall be levied and collected in accordance with the provisions of
Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 on the value as determined
under the said Act at the
point when duties of customs are levied on the said goods under
Section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962."
The proviso to Section 5(1) of the IGST Act clarifies that the tax is
levied on goods imported into India, in accordance with Section 3 of the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The value is determined under the Customs
Tariff Act at the point when the customs duties are levied in accordance
with the Customs Act.
71. The payment of IGST on a reverse-charge basis is contemplated
in sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 5. Sub-section (3) provides that
IGST may be paid on a reverse charge basis on specified categories of
supply of goods or services or both. The Central Government is
empowered to specify these categories on the recommendations of the
GST Council. Hence, on its plain terms, the payment of IGST on a
reverse charge basis is envisaged on specific categories of supply of
goods or services, or both as notified by the Central Government. The
tax on a reverse charge basis is payable by the recipient of such goods
or services, or both. The power, in other words, is to specify categories
of goods or services (or both). The provision does not empower the
Government to specify the recipient of the supply of goods or services.
The unamended sub-section (4) of Section 560 provided that the tax in
respect of the supply of goods or services by an unregistered supplier,
shall be paid on a reverse charge basis by a specified registered person,
as the recipient of such supply of goods or services. The above
provisions read as follows:
"5. (3) The Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, by notification, specify categories of supply of goods or
services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge
basis by the recipient of such goods or services or both and all the
provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the
person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such
goods or services or both.
(4) The integrated tax in respect of the supply of taxable goods or
services or both by a supplier, who is not registered, to a registered
person shall be paid by such person on reverse charge basis as the
recipient and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such
recipient as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to
the supply of such goods or services or both."
72. On 28-6-2017, the Central Government issued Notification No. 8
of 2017, in exercise of its powers under Section 5(1), Section 6 (1) and
Section 20
of the IGST Act, read with Section 15(5) and Section 16(1) of the CGST
Act. Entry 9(ii) of Notification No. 8 of 2017 reads as follows:
SI.
Chapter,
Description of service
Rate
Condition
No.
Section or
(per
Heading
cent)
9
Heading
[...]
[...]
[...]
9965
(ii) Transport of goods
5
Provided that
(Goods
in a vessel including
credit of input
transport
services provided or
tax
charged
services)
agreed to be provided
on
goods
by a person located in
(other
than
non-taxable territory to
on
ships,
a person located in non
vessels
-taxable territory by
including bulk
way of transportation
carriers,
of goods by a vessel
tankers) used
from a place outside
in supplying
India up to the
the service
customs station of
has not been
clearance in India.
taken.
Explanation:
This condition
will not apply
where
the
supplier of
service
is
located in non
-taxable
territory.
[Please refer
to
Explanation
(iv)]
By Entry 9 (ii) of Notification No. 8 of 2017, an integrated tax of 5% was
levied on supply of specified services, including transportation of goods
in a vessel from a place outside India up to the customs station of
clearance in India.
73. On 28-6-2017, Notification No. 10 of 2017 was issued by the
Central Government in exercise of powers conferred by Section 5(3) of
the IGST Act. Notification No. 10 of 2017 specified the importer as the
recipient of transportation of service when the supplier is located in a
non-taxable territory and the service of transportation is supplied by a
person in a non-taxable territory. Entry 10 of Notification No. 10 of
2017 states the following:
SI.
Category of Supply
Supplier of
Recipient of Service
No.
of Services
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
10
Services
supplied
A person located in
"Importer",
as
by a person located
non-taxable
defined in clause
in
non-taxable
territory
(26) of Section 2 of
territory by way of
the Customs Act,
transportation of
1962 (52 of 1962),
goods by a vessel
located
in
the
from a place
taxable territory
outside India up to
the customs station
of clearance in
India
The surest way't legal research!"
Thus, Entry 10 of Notification No. 10 of 2017 deems an importer of
goods as the "recipient of service" of transportation of goods by a
foreign shipping line.
74. Both the impugned notifications, Notification No. 8 of 2017 and
Notification No. 10 of 2017, have been challenged as ultra vires the
IGST Act. Before adverting to the challenges raised by the parties, it
becomes necessary to advert to some of the key provisions contained in
the CGST Act, the IGST Act and the Customs Act. These provisions are
necessary to respond to several contentions raised by the respondents,
including:
(i) whether the taxable event stipulated by the impugned
notifications constitutes a "supply" under the IGST Act;
(ii) whether the importer of goods on a CIF basis can be deemed
to be the "recipient" of shipping services when they do not pay the
consideration; and
(iii) whether the import of goods constitutes a composite supply,
among others.
75. The provisions of the IGST Act apply to the whole of India as
provided under Section 1. Section 5 of the IGST Act is the charging
section. Sub-section (1) of Section 5 provides that the levy of IGST
shall be paid by the taxable person. The term "taxable person" is
defined in Section 2(107) of the CGST Act:
"2. (107) "taxable person" means a person who is registered or
liable to be registered under Section 22 or Section 24;"
76. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge":
"2. (98) "reverse charge" means the liability to pay tax by the
recipient of supply of goods or services or both instead of the
supplier of such goods or services or both under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4) of Section 9, or under sub-section (3) or sub-section
(4) of Section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;"
As defined in the above clause, under the reverse charge mechanism,
the liability to pay is on the recipient of the supply of goods or services,
as opposed to the supplier of goods or services. Section 24 (iii) of the
CGST Act provides for compulsory registration of "persons who are
required to pay tax under the reverse charge".
"24.
Compulsory
registration
in
certain
cases.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section 22,
the following categories of persons shall be required to be registered
under this Act-
(i) persons making any inter-State taxable supply;
(ii) casual taxable persons making taxable supply;
(iii) persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge;
*
*
*
(xii) such other person or class of persons as may be notified
by the Government on the recommendations of the Council."
(emphasis supplied)
77. Section 2(105) of the CGST Act defines the "supplier" in relation
to goods or services as:
"2. (105) "supplier" in relation to any goods or services or both,
shall mean the person supplying the said goods or services or both
and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of such supplier
in relation to the goods or services or both supplied;"
78. Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines the "recipient" of supply
of goods or services or both and provides:
"2. (93) "recipient" of supply of goods or services or both,
means-
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or
services or both, the person who is liable to pay that
consideration;
(b) where no consideration is payable for the supply of goods,
the person to whom the goods are delivered or made available, or
to whom possession or use of the goods is given or made
available; and
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of
a
service, the person to whom the service is rendered,
and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as a
reference to the recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as such
on behalf of the recipient in relation to the goods or services or both supplied;"
79. Sections 2(14) and 2(15) of the IGST Act define the "location of
the recipient of services" and the "supplier of services" as follows:
"2. (14) "location of the recipient of services" means-
(a) where a supply is received at a place of business for which
the registration has been obtained, the location of such place of
business;
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place
of business for which registration has been obtained (a fixed
establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment,
whether the place of business or fixed establishment, the location
of the establishment most directly concerned with the receipt of
the supply; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of
residence of the recipient;
(15) "location of the supplier of services" means-
(a) where a supply is made from a place of business for which
the registration has been obtained, the location of such place of
business;
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the place
of business for which registration has been obtained (a fixed
establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is made from more than one establishment,
whether the place of business or fixed establishment, the location
of the establishment most directly concerned with the provision of
the supply; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of
residence of the supplier;"
80. Chapter IV of the IGST Act determines the nature of the supply.
Section 7 of the IGST Act determines the nature of supply as inter-
State supply, Section 8 provides for intra-State supply and Section 9
provides for supplies in territorial waters.
81. Section 7 of the IGST Act lay down the conditions for a supply to
be construed as an "inter-State supply". The relevant provisions,
particularly sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 7 are as follows:
"7. Inter-State supply.-(1) Subject to the provisions of Section
10, supply of goods, where the location of the supplier and the place
of supply are in-
(a) two different States;
(b) two different Union Territories; or
(c) a State and a Union Territory,
shall be treated as a supply of goods in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.
*
*
*
(3) Subject to the provisions of Section 12, supply of services,
where the location of the supplier and the place of supply are in-
(a) two different States;
(b) two different Union Territories; or
(c) a State and a Union Territory,
shall be treated as a supply of services in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.
(4) Supply of services imported into the territory of India shall be
treated to be a supply of services in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce."
(emphasis supplied)
82. The term "supply" has been defined in the IGST Act with
reference to the CGST Act. Section 2(21) of the IGST Act provides that:
"2. (21) "supply" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in Section 7 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act;"
83. Section 7(1) of the CGST Act provides that:
"7. Scope of supply.-(1) For the purposes of this Act, the
expression "supply" includes-
(a) all forms of supply of goods or services or both such as
sale, transfer, barter, exchange, licence, rental, lease or disposal
made or agreed to be made for a consideration by a person in the
course or furtherance of business;
[(aa) the activities or transactions, by a person, other than an
individual, to its members or constituents or vice versa, for cash,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified
that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force or any judgment, decree or order of any court,
tribunal or authority, the person and its members or constituents
shall be deemed to be two separate persons and the supply of
activities or transactions inter se shall be deemed to take place from
one such person to another;]
[(b) import of services for a consideration whether or not in the
course or furtherance of business; [and]
(c) the activities specified in Schedule I, made or agreed to be
made without a consideration;"
(emphasis supplied)
The term "taxable territory" is defined in Section 2(22) of the IGST Act
to mean the "territory to which the provisions of this Act [the IGST Act]
apply".
84. Section 13 of the IGST Act deals with determining the place of
supply of services where the location of supplier or location of recipient
is outside India:
"13. Place of supply of services where location of supplier
or location of recipient is outside India.- (1) The provisions of
this section shall apply to determine the place of supply of services
where the location of the supplier of services or the location of the
recipient of services is outside India.
(2) The place of supply of services except the services specified in
sub-sections (3) to (13) shall be the location of the recipient of
services:
Provided that where the location of the recipient of services is not
available in the ordinary course of business, the place of supply shall
be the location of the supplier of services.
(3) The place of supply of the following services shall be the
location where the services are actually performed, namely-
*
*
*
(6) Where any services referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) is supplied at more than one location,
including a location in the taxable territory, its place of supply shall
be the location in the taxable territory.
*
*
*
(9) The place of supply of services of transportation of goods,
other than by way of mail or courier, shall be the place of destination
of such goods.
(10) The place of supply in respect of passenger transportation
services shall be the place where the passenger embarks on the
conveyance for a continuous journey.
*
*
*
(12) The place of supply of online information and database
access or retrieval services shall be the location of the recipient of
services.
Explanation.-Fo the purposes of this sub-section, person
receiving such services shall be deemed to be located in the taxable
territory, if any two of the following non-contradictory conditions are
satisfied, namely- -
(a) the location of address presented by the recipient of
services through internet is in the taxable territory;
(b) the credit card or debit card or store value card or charge
card or smart card or any other card by which the recipient of
services settles payment has been issued in the taxable territory;
(c) the billing address of the recipient of services is in the
taxable territory;
(d) the internet protocol address of the device used by the
recipient of services is in the taxable territory;
(e) the bank of the recipient of services in which the account
used for payment is maintained is in the taxable territory;
(f) the country code of the subscriber identity module card
used by the recipient of services is of taxable territory;
(g) the location of the fixed land line through which the service
is received by the recipient is in the taxable territory.
(13) In order to prevent double taxation or non-taxation of the
supply of a service, or for the uniform application of rules, the
Government shall have the power to notify any description of
services or circumstances in which the place of supply shall be the
place of effective use and enjoyment of a service."
(emphasis supplied)
85. Chapter IX of the IGST Act contains miscellaneous provisions,
under which Section 20 of the IGST Act provides that the provisions in
the CGST Act relating to the scope of supply, composite or mixed
supply, time and value of supply, shall apply mutatis mutandis to
integrated tax. In this regard, the time of supply of services is provided
in Section 13 of the CGST Act, while the value of taxable supply is
determined under Section 15 of the CGST Act.
86. Section 13 of the CGST Act states that the liability to pay tax on
services arises at the time of supply. Sub-section (3) of Section 13
provides for the time of supply when tax is paid on a reverse charge
basis:
"13. Time of supply of services.-(1)-(2
*
*
*
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to
be paid on reverse charge basis, the time of supply shall be the
earlier of the following dates, namely-
(a) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of
the recipient or the date on which the payment is debited in his
bank account, whichever is earlier; or
(b) the date immediately following sixty days from the date of
issue of invoice or any other document, by whatever name called,
in lieu thereof by the supplier:
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time of
supply under clause (a) or clause (b), the time of supply shall be the
date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of supply:
Provided further that in case of supply by associated enterprises,
where the supplier of service is located outside India, the time of
supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the
recipient of supply or the date of payment, whichever is earlier."
87. Sub-section (5) of Section 13 provides for the time of supply
when it cannot be determined under sub-sections (2), (3) or (4):
"13. (5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply
under the provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-
section (4), the time of supply shall-
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the
date on which such return is to be filed; or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid."
88. Section 15 of the CGST Act provides for the determination of the
value of taxable supply. Sub-section (1) provides that the value of
supply of goods or services shall be the transaction value; sub-section
(2) provides that the value of supply shall include taxes, duties, fees,
etc. charged separately under the goods and services tax regime,
incidental expenses, interest, late fee penalty, etc. Sub-sections (4)
and (5) provide for the value of the supply of goods or services if it
cannot be determined under sub-section (1):
"15. Value of taxable supply.-(1) The value of a supply of
goods or services or both shall be the transaction value, which is the
price actually paid or payable for the said supply of goods or services
or both where the supplier and the recipient of the supply are not
related and the price is the sole consideration for the supply.
*
*
*
(4) Where the value of the supply of goods or services or both
cannot be determined under sub-section (1), the same shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (4), the value of such supplies as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed."
D.2. Do the impugned notifications suffer from excessive
delegation?
89. Article 286(1) stipulates that the State shall not levy tax when
the supply of goods or services takes place outside the State or in the
course of import or export of goods or services from the territory of
India. Clause (2) of Article 286 states that Parliament may by law
formulate principles for determining when there is a supply of goods or
services as prescribed by clause (1):
"286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or
purchase of goods.-(1) No law of a State shall impose, or
authorise the imposition of, a
tax, or authorize the imposition of, a tax on the supply of goods or
services or both, where such supply takes place
(a) outside the State; or
(b) in the course of the import of the goods or services or both
into, or export of the goods or services or both out of, the territory
of India.
(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining
when a supply of goods or of services or both in any of the ways
mentioned in clause (1)."
90. Article 269-A provides that GST on supplies in the course of inter
-State trade or commerce shall be levied and collected by the Union
Government. The manner of apportionment between the Union and the
States has to be provided by Parliament on the recommendations of the
GST Council. The Explanation to Article 269-A(1) states that supply of
goods or services in the course of import shall be deemed to be supply
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. Clause (5) provides that
Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining the place of
supply and when the supply of goods or services takes place in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce:
"269-A. Levy and collection of goods and services tax in
course of inter-State trade or commerce.-(1) Goods and
services tax on supplies in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce shall be levied and collected by the Government of India
and such tax shall be apportioned between the Union and the States
in the manner as may be provided by Parliament by law on the
recommendations of the Goods and Services Tax Council.
Explanation.-Fo the purposes of this clause. supply of goods. or
of services, or both in the course of import into the territory of India
shall be deemed to be supply of goods, or of services, or both in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce.
*
*
*
(5) Parliament may, by law, formulate the principles for
determining the place of supply, and when a supply of goods, or of
services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce."
(emphasis supplied)
91. Article 269-A stipulates that Parliament may by law formulate
principles for determining : (a) the place of supply and; (b) when the
supply of goods or services or both takes place in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce. Article 286(1) empowers Parliament to
formulate the principles by law for determining when a supply of goods
or services, or both, takes place (a) outside the State; and (b) in the
course of import into or export outside the territory of India. Parliament
enacted the IGST Act prescribing the principles as required under
Articles 269-A and 286(1). The provisions of the IGST Act deal with the
levy and collection of tax [Section 5(1)], export of goods and services
[Sections 2(5) and 2(6)], import of goods and services [Sections 2(10)
and 2(11)], identification of the location of the supplier and recipient of
services [Sections 2(14) and 2(15)], determination of the nature of
inter-State supply (Section 7), supplies in territorial waters (Section 9),
place of supply with
respect to import to India and export from India (Section 11), and
place of supply of services where the location of the supplier and
recipient is in India and outside India (Sections 12 and 13).
92. The contention of the respondents is that Section 5(3) of the
IGST Act only delegates the power to identify the categories of goods or
services on which the tax shall be paid on reverse charge basis. It is
contended that since Notification No. 10 of 2017 identifies an importer
as a service recipient for the purposes of Section 5(3), it is ultra vires
the parent Act on the ground of excessive delegation.
93. The legislature is required to perform its essential legislative
functions. Once the skeletal structure of the policy is framed by the
61
legislature, the details can emerge through delegated legislations. It
is a settled position that the legislature cannot delegate its "essential
legislative functions". 62 The essential legislative functions with respect
to the GST law are the levy of tax, subject-matter of tax, taxable
person, rate of taxation and value for the purpose of taxation. The
principles governing these essential aspects of taxation find place in the
IGST Act : Section 5(1) identifies the subject-matter of taxation as
inter-State supplies of goods, services or both; Section 2(107) of the
CGST Act identifies a taxable person; Section 5(1) provides a maximum
cap of 40% as the rate of taxation; and Section 5(1) stipulates that the
value of taxation be determined under Section 15 of the CGST Act.
94. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge" as the
liability of the recipient of the supply of goods or services or both to pay
tax instead of the supplier. Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines
"recipient" with reference to three situations : (i) when consideration is
payable for the supply of goods or services or both; (ii) when no
consideration is payable for the supply of goods; and (iii) when no
consideration is payable for the supply of services. In the first situation,
the recipient is the person by whom consideration is payable. In the
second situation, the recipient is the person to whom (a) the goods are
delivered or made available; or (b) possession or the use of the goods
is given or made available. The CGST Act also stipulates a twofold
requirement for a recipient to be taxed on reverse charge basis-the
recipient must be a "person" as defined under Section 2(84) of the
CGST; and the person is a "taxable person" only if registered or is liable
to be registered under Section 22 or Section 24. Section 24 (iii) of the
CGST Act states that persons who are required to pay tax under reverse
charge must be registered. Therefore, both the IGST and the CGST Acts
clearly define "reverse charge", "recipient" and "taxable persons". Thus,
the essential legislative functions vis-à-vis reverse charge have not
been delegated.
95. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act provides the Government the power
to specify categories of supply of goods or services or both on which tax
shall be
paid on a reverse charge basis by the recipient. The Government is to
exercise this power on the recommendation of the GST Council. The
Government in exercise of its power under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act
issued the impugned Notification No. 10 of 2017 specifying the
"categories of the supply" which shall be subject to reverse charge. The
notification, besides specifying the criteria, has also mentioned the
corresponding recipient in those categories. As discussed above, the
IGST Act and the CGST Act define "reverse charge" and prescribe the
entity that is to be taxed for these purposes. Therefore, the stipulation
of the recipient in each of the categories is only clarificatory. The
Government by notification did not specify a taxable entity different
from that which is prescribed in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act for the
purposes of reverse charge.
D.3. Charging Section : taxable person, taxable rate and manner
of determining value
96. In determining the vires of the impugned notifications, a few
preliminary contentions raised by the respondents would have to be
addressed. The respondents have argued that no charge has been
created for the ocean freight transaction to be taxed in the hands of the
importer. It has been alleged that only Section 5(1) is a charging
provision and Sections 5(3) and 5(4) cannot independently create a
charge.
97. In assessing this claim, this Court is bound by a decision of the
Constitution Bench in Mathuram Agrawal ² which has identified three
essential elements of taxation:
(i) The subject of the tax;
(ii) The person who is liable to pay the tax; and
(iii) The rate at which the tax is to be paid.
This test has been further elaborated by a two-Judge Bench of this
Court in Govind Saran Ganga Saran³ by further requiring the
designation of the measure or the value to which the rate of the tax will
be applied. Thus, the four canons of taxation are as follows:
(i) The taxable event;
(ii) The person on whom the levy is imposed;
(iii) The rate at which the levy is imposed; and
(iv) The measure or the value to which the rate will be applied.
98. Section 5(1) of the IGST Act specifically identifies the four
canons of taxation : (i) the inter-State supply of goods and services as
the taxable event; (ii) the "taxable person" as the person on whom the
levy is imposed; (iii) the taxable rate as such a rate notified by the
Union Government on the recommendation
of the GST Council, capped at forty per cent; and (iv) the taxable value
as the value determined under Section 15 of the CGST Act.
99. Section 5(3) and Section 5(4) of the IGST Act are inextricably
linked with Section 5(1) of the IGST Act which is the charging
provision. They must be construed together in determining the vires of
the taxation. In CIT V. B.C. Srinivasa Setty63, a three-Judge Bench of
this Court has held that the machinery provisions of an Act and the
465, para 10)
"10.
A transaction to which those provisions cannot be applied
must be regarded as never intended by Section 45 to be the subject
of the charge. This inference flows from the general arrangement of
the provisions of the Income Tax Act, where under each head of
income the charging provision is accompanied by a set of provisions
for computing the income subject to that charge. The character of
the computation provisions in each case bears a relationship to the
nature of charge. Thus the charging section and the computation
provisions together constitute an integrated code. When there is a
case to which the computation provisions cannot apply at all, it is
evident that such a case was not intended to fall within the charging
section."
(emphasis supplied)
Taxable person
100. The respondents have alleged that the importer cannot be
validly termed as a taxable person. However, this argument has to fail
on a close reading of the impugned notifications alongside Sections 2
(107) and 24 of the CGST Act. Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act
mandates persons required to pay tax under reverse charge to be
compulsorily registered under the CGST Act. Section 2(107) of the
CGST Act defines a "taxable person" to mean a person who is registered
or liable to be registered under Section 24 of the CGST Act. Neither
Section 2(107) nor Section 24 of the CGST Act qualify the imposition of
reverse charge on a "recipient of service" and broadly impose it on "the
persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge". Since the
impugned Notification No. 10 of 2017 identifies the importer as the
recipient liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis under Section 5(3)
of the IGST Act, the argument of the failure to identify a specific person
who is liable to pay tax does not stand.
101. The decision in Laghu Udyog10, rendered by a two-Judge Bench
of this Court, invalidated certain service tax rules formulated under the
Finance Act, 1997 to give effect to the collection of service tax. Section
66 read with Section 68(1)(a) of the Finance Act, 1997 specifically
identified the taxable person to include only those persons responsible
for collecting the service tax. The rules had sought to effect a reverse
charge by identifying the customers of goods transport operators and of
clearing and forwarding agents as the assessee, even though they were
not responsible for collecting the service tax. The basis for nullifying the
rules was that the Finance Act, 1997 did not enable the
imposition of such a reverse charge on the person who is not supplying
"9. Section 68(1-A) is a special provision which has been inserted
by the Finance Act, 1997. According to Section 68(1) 'every person
who was providing the taxable service is the one who is required to
collect the service tax at the rate specified in Section 66'. With
respect to the taxable services referred in Items (g) to (r) of clause
(41) of Section 65, Section 68(1-A) provides that the service tax for
such service shall be collected from such person and in such manner
as may be prescribed and to such person all the provisions shall
apply as if he is the person responsible for collecting the service tax
in relation to such service. As we read Section 68 it does not in any
way seek to alter or change the charge of service tax levied under
Section 66, which is on the person responsible for collecting the
service tax. It also does not to our mind, in any way, amend any of
the clauses of Section 65 which contain the definitions of different
expressions. All that Section 68(1-A) enables to be done is that with
regard to the assessees or the persons who are responsible for
collecting the service tax, the individual or the officer concerned can
be identified and it is that person who would be a person responsible
for collecting the service tax. In other words this provision, namely,
Section 68(1-A) cannot be so interpreted as to make a person an
assessee even though he may not be responsible for collecting the
service tax. The service tax is levied by reason of the services which
are offered. The imposition is on the person rendering the service. Of
course, it may be an indirect tax; it may be possible that the same is
passed on to the customer but as far as the levy and assessment are
concerned it is the person rendering the service who alone can be
regarded as an assessee and not the customer. This is the only way
in which the provisions can be read harmoniously.
10. By amending the definition of "person responsible for
collecting of service tax" in the impugned rules with regard to
services provided by the clearing and forwarding agents and the
goods transport operator a person responsible is said to be the client
or the customer of the clearing and forwarding agents and the goods
transporter. In relation to the services provided by others and
referred to in clauses (i) to (xi) and (xiii) to (xvi) of Rule 2(d), the
definition of the person responsible is in consonance with the
definition of that expression occurring in Section 65 of the Act.
However, with regard to the services rendered by the clearing and
forwarding agents and the goods transport operator the definitions
contained in Rules (d)(xii) and (xvii), which seek to make the
customers or the clients as the assessee, are clearly in conflict with
Sections 65 and 66 of the Act."
(emphasis supplied)
102. The decision in Laghu Udyog10 has no applicability to the facts
of the present case since Parliament has statutorily incorporated the
concept of a reverse charge under Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST
Act. The impugned
Notification No. 10 of 2017 clearly specifies a taxable person who is
liable to pay a reverse charge that is envisaged in the statute. Thus, the
impugned notifications cannot be invalidated for an alleged failure to
identify a taxable person.
Taxable value
103. By a corrigendum dated 8-6-2016, Notification No. 8 of 2017
was amended to include the measure of taxable value to be ten per
cent of the CIF value. Section 5(1) of the IGST Act enables the taxable
value to be determined under Section 15 of the CGST Act. The
respondents have argued that the value has to be strictly determined
by Section 15(1)64 of the CGST Act and not by way of delegated
legislation. However, Sections 15(4) and 15(5) enable delegated
legislation to prescribe methods for determination of value, on the
recommendations of the GST Council. Section 15 is extracted below:
"15. Value of taxable supply.-(1)-(3)
*
*
*
(4) Where the value of the supply of goods or services or both
cannot be determined under sub-section (1), the same shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (4), the value of such supplies as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed."
104. Rules 27 to 31 of Chapter IV of the CGST Rules, 2017,
prescribe the manner of determining value of supply. Rule 31 also
provides for residual powers to the GST Council for prescribing modes
of valuation.
"31. Residual method for determination of value of supply
of goods or services or both.-Where the value of supply of goods
or services or both cannot be determined under Rules 27 to 30, the
same shall be determined using reasonable means consistent with
the principles and the general provisions of Section 15 and the
provisions of this Chapter : Provided that in the case of supply of
services, the supplier may opt for this rule, ignoring Rule 30."
105. The respondents have urged that the determination of the
value of supply has to be specified only through rules, and not by
notification. However, this would be an unduly restrictive interpretation.
Parliament has provided the basic framework and delegated legislation
provides necessary supplements to create a workable mechanism. Rule
31 of the CGST Rules, 2017 specifically provides for a residual power to
determine valuation in specific cases, using reasonable means that are
consistent with the principles of Section 15 of the CGST Act. This is
where the value of the supply of goods cannot be
determined in accordance with Rules 27 to 30 of the CGST Rules, 2017.
Thus, the impugned Notification No. 8 of 2017 cannot be struck down
for excessive delegation when it prescribes 10% of the CIF value as the
mechanism for imposing tax on a reverse charge basis.
D.4. Taxable event : Is an ocean freight transaction for import of
goods a valid category of supply of services under Section 5(3)
of the IGST Act?
106. The other limb for contesting the validity of the impugned
notification is with respect to its identification of a "taxable event". The
question that falls for the determination is whether the impugned
notifications issued in 2017, under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act, validly
prescribe a taxable event that constitutes an inter-State supply of
goods and services with the importer being a recipient of shipping
services in CIF transactions.
107. The analysis of whether import of goods under CIF contracts
constitutes a valid import of service has to be answered on two
prongs : (i) whether classification of imports as a specific category of
supply of shipping service is valid under Section 5(3) read with Section
5(1) of the IGST Act; and (ii) whether the recipient of the imported
goods is also a recipient of shipping services in CIF transactions under
Section 5(3).
D.4.(a) Do imported goods procured on a CIF basis constitute an
inter-State supply or is it an extra-territorial tax?
108. Notification No. 8 of 2017 specifically delineates the service
that is accompanied with the transportation of goods from a non-
taxable territory as a specified category of service under Section 5(3) of
the IGST Act. This categorisation taxes the recipient of such
transportation service on a reverse charge basis. The respondents have
argued that the supply of service of shipping in a CIF contract is from
the foreign shipping line to the foreign exporter. It is alleged that this
transaction has no territorial nexus to India and does not constitute
"supply" that can be taxed within the meaning of the CGST Act and the
IGST Act.
109. We shall now advert to certain key provisions relevant to
determine whether the taxable event in the present case that is,
"services supplied by a person located in a non-taxable territory by way
of transportation of goods by a vessel from a place outside India up to
the customs station of clearance in India" constitutes an "inter-State
supply" for the purposes of the charging Section 5(1) of the IGST Act,
read with Section 5(3) and the unamended Section 5(4).
110. Section 5(1) levies IGST on all "inter-State supplies" of goods
or services or both. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act confers power on the
Central Government, on the recommendation of the GST Council, to
specify categories of supply of goods or services or both where the tax
shall be paid on a reverse charge basis by the recipient. While
analysing the respondents' contention, it is important to contextualise
the purpose of GST and the constitutional amendment to effect it. In
modern commerce, the distinction between goods and services is
increasingly becoming a matter of degree than substance. GST seeks to
focus on the taxation of "supply" of goods or services. The provisions of
the IGST and the CGST Act focus on implementing a workable
machinery to adequately capture the complexities of supply in a global
and digital age.
111. The term "supply" has been defined in the IGST Act with
reference to the CGST Act. Section 2(21) of the IGST Act provides that:
"2. (21) "supply" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in Section 7 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act."
112. Section 7(1) of the CGST Act provides thus:
"7. Scope of supply.-(1) For the purposes of this Act, the
expression "supply" includes-
(a) all forms of supply of goods or services or both such as
sale, transfer, barter, exchange, licence, rental, lease or disposal
made or agreed to be made for a consideration by a person in the
course or furtherance of business;
[(aa) the activities or transactions, by a person, other than an
individual, to its members or constituents or vice versa, for cash,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
Explanation.-Fo the purposes of this clause, it is hereby
clarified that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force or any judgment, decree or order of
any court, tribunal or authority, the person and its members or
constituents shall be deemed to be two separate persons and the
supply of activities or transactions inter se shall be deemed to
take place from one such person to another;]
[(b) import of services for a consideration whether or not in the
course or furtherance of business; [and]
(c) the activities specified in Schedule I, made or agreed to be
made without a consideration;
*
*
*
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1), (1-A) and (2),
the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
specify, by notification, the transactions that are to be treated as-
(a) a supply of goods and not as a supply of services; or
(b) a supply of services and not as a supply of goods."
(emphasis supplied)
113. Further, Section 7 of the IGST Act defines the scope of "inter-
State supply". Section 7(4) of the IGST Act states that "supply of
services imported into the territory of India shall be treated to be a
supply of services in the course of inter-State trade or commerce":
"7. Inter-State supply.-(1) Subject to the provisions of Section
10, supply of goods, where the location of the supplier and the place
of supply are in-
(a) two different States;
(b) two different Union Territories; or
(c) a State and a Union Territory,
shall be treated as a supply of goods in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.
(2) Supply of goods imported into the territory of India, till they
cross the customs frontiers of India, shall be treated to be a supply
of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
(3) Subject to the provisions of Section 12, supply of services,
where the location of the supplier and the place of supply are in-
(a) two different States;
(b) two different Union Territories; or
(c) a State and a Union Territory,
shall be treated as a supply of services in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.
(4) Supply of services imported into the territory of India shall be
treated to be a supply of services in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce."
(emphasis supplied)
114. Section 7 of the CGST Act defines the term "supply" with a
broad brush and provides for an inclusive definition. Section 7(1)(b) of
the CGST Act considers import of services for a consideration to
constitute "supply". Section 7(1)(c) of the CGST Act captures any and
all activities in Schedule 1 of the CGST Act, irrespective of whether they
are made for a consideration. Additionally, Section 7(3) confers the
power on the Central Government to specify which transactions are to
be treated as a supply of goods and not a supply of services, and vice
versa. Section 7(4) of the IGST Act states that supply of services
imported into India would be considered as a supply of services in the
course of "inter-State trade or commerce". Thus, an Indian importer
could also be considered as an importer of the service of shipping which
is liable to IGST on inter-State supply, if the activity falls within the
definition of "import of service" for the IGST Act and the CGST Act.
115. The term "importer" is not defined in the IGST Act or the CGST
Act. Section 2(26) of the Customs Act defines an "importer" as:
"2. (26) "importer", in relation to any goods at any time
between their importation and the time when they are cleared for
home consumption, includes [any owner, beneficial owner] or any
person holding himself out to be the importer;"
The term "import of goods" is defined in Section 2(10) of the IGST Act
as:
"2. (10) "import of goods" with its grammatical variations
and cognate expressions, means bringing goods into India from a
place outside India;"
"Import of services" is defined in Section 2(11) of the IGST Act as:
"2. (11) "import of services" means the supply of any service,
where-
(i) the supplier of service is located outside India;
(ii) the recipient of service is located in India; and
(iii) the place of supply of service is in India;"
116. The conditions for an "import of service" would entail three
aspects:
(i) the supplier of service must be located outside India;
(ii) the recipient of the service must be located in India; and
(iii) the place of supply of service ought to be in India.
The respondents have argued that conditions (ii) and (iii) are not
satisfied in the case of CIF contracts since the recipient of shipping
services would be the foreign exporter and the place of supply would be
the place of business of such foreign exporter. However, in interpreting
the expressions "recipient" and "place of supply", this Court would have
to analyse these terms vis-à-vis the IGST Act and the CGST Act and not
exclusively from the provisions of the contract between the foreign
exporter and the foreign shipping line.
117. Chapter V of the IGST Act provides for methodologies to
determine the place of supply of goods or services or both. Section 13
of the IGST Act provides the place of supply of services where the
location of the supplier or location of recipient is outside India:
"13. Place of supply of services where location of supplier
or location of recipient is outside India.-(1) The provisions of
this section shall apply to determine the place of supply of services
where the location of the supplier of services or the location of the
recipient of services is outside India.
(2) The place of supply of services except the services specified in
sub-sections (3) to (13) shall be the location of the recipient of
services:
Provided that where the location of the recipient of services is not
available in the ordinary course of business, the place of supply shall
be the location of the supplier of services.
*
*
(9) The place of supply of services of transportation of goods,
other than by way of mail or courier, shall be the place of destination
of such goods."
(emphasis supplied)
Section 13(9) of the IGST Act appears to create a deeming fiction,
where in case of supply of services of transportation of goods by a
supplier located outside India, the place of supply would be the place of
destination of such goods. The supplier, the foreign shipping line, in
this case would be a non-taxable person. However, its services in a CIF
contract for transport of goods would enter Indian taxable territory as
the destination of such goods. The place of supply of shipping service
by a foreign shipping line, would thus be India.
118. The respondents argued that since Section 7(1)(b) of the CGST
Act does not define "supply" of import of service without consideration,
other than the ones specified in Schedule 1, this would be inapplicable
to importers with CIF contracts as the consideration is paid by the
exporter. Thus, the importer of goods cannot be said to be an importer
of shipping service since the latter is not an import of service for a
consideration under Section 7(1)(b) of the CGST Act. However, this
argument misses out on some crucial definitions. The
term "supply" has been defined in the IGST Act with reference to the
CGST Act. Thus, the three conditions for "import of services" under
Section 2(11)(iii) must be understood with reference to the provisions
of the CGST and the IGST Acts, including the provisions for
determination of place of supply under Section 13(9) of the IGST Act.
As mentioned previously, Section 13(9) of the IGST Act creates a
deeming fiction of place of supply of transportation services to be in
India when the destination of goods is in India. In this case, it is clear
the supplier of service-the foreign shipping line-is located outside
India; and the place of supply is India. Accordingly, Section 13 of the
CGST Act would be applicable to determine the time of such supply.
119. The respondents have argued that the ocean freight transaction
cannot be considered as "supply" since Section 7(1)(b) of the IGST Act
requires the import of service to be for a "consideration". The definition
of "consideration" in Section 2(31) of the CGST Act is instructive:
"2. (31) "consideration" in relation to the supply of goods or
services or both includes-
(a) any payment made or to be made, whether in money or
otherwise, in respect of, in response to, or for the inducement of,
the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the recipient
or by any other person but shall not include any subsidy given by
the Central Government or a State Government;
(b) the monetary value of any act or forbearance, in respect of,
in response to, or for the inducement of, the supply of goods or
services or both, whether by the recipient or by any other person
but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central
Government or a State Government:
Provided that a deposit given in respect of the supply of goods or
services or both shall not be considered as payment made for such
supply unless the supplier applies such deposit as consideration for
the said supply;
(emphasis supplied)
Thus, Section 2(31) of the CGST Act defines "consideration" to include
payment made or to be made, in money or any other form, for the
inducement of supply of goods or services to be made by the recipient
or by any other person. Thus, in the case of goods imported on a CIF
basis, the fact that consideration is paid by the foreign exporter to the
foreign shipping line would not stand in the way of it being considered
as a "supply of service" under Section 7(4) of the IGST Act which is
made for a consideration, thereby constituting "supply of service" in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce that can be subject to IGST
under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act.
120. At this stage, we note that the respondents have also
challenged the impugned levy on the ground that the transaction takes
place beyond the territory of India and is thus, extra-territorial
in
nature. Mr Arvind P. Datar and Mr Harish Salve, learned Senior Counsel
have urged that the service of transportation occurs outside India, that
is, outside the taxable territory and bears a nexus with India only as
the destination of goods is India. However,
the submission is that since the import of goods is taxed under Section
5(1) as "supply of goods", there remains no territorial nexus of the
transportation service with the Indian territory. An extension of this
argument is that in case Parliament seeks to levy a tax outside its
territory, it makes a deeming fiction in the statute and not by way of
delegated legislation.
121. A Constitution Bench in GVK Industries6, considered the
question whether Parliament is competent to enact legislation with
regard to extra-territorial aspects of certain events. Answering the
question in the affirmative, B. Sudarshan Reddy, J. speaking for the
"124.
The answer to the above would be yes. However,
Parliament may exercise its legislative powers with respect to extra-
territorial aspects or uses-events, things, phenomena (howsoever
commonplace they may be), resources, actions or transactions, and
the like- that occur, arise or exist or may be expected to do so,
naturally or on account of some human agency, in the social,
political, economic, cultural, biological, environmental or physical
spheres outside the territory of India, and seek to control, modulate,
mitigate or transform the effects of such extra-territorial aspects or
causes, or in appropriate cases, eliminate or engender such extra-
territorial aspects or causes, "only when* such extra-territorial
aspects or causes have, or are expected to have, some impact on, or
effect in, or consequences for : (a) the territory of India, or any part
of India; or (b) the interests of, welfare of, well-being of, or security
of inhabitants of India, and Indians.
125. It is important for us to state and hold here that the powers
of legislation of Parliament with regard to all aspects or causes that
are within the purview of its competence, including with respect to
extra-territorial aspects or causes as delineated above, and as
specified by the Constitution, or implied by its essential role in the
constitutional scheme, ought not to be subjected to some a priori
quantitative tests, such as "sufficiency" or "significance" or in any
other manner requiring a predetermined degree of strength. All that
would be required would be that the connection to India be real or
expected to be real, and not illusory or fanciful.
126. Whether a particular law enacted by Parliament does show
such a real connection, or expected real connection, between the
extra-territorial aspect or cause and something in India or related to
India and Indians, in terms of impact, effect or consequence, would
be a mixed matter of facts and of law. Obviously, where Parliament
itself posits a degree of such relationship, beyond the constitutional
requirement that it be real and not fanciful, then the courts would
have to enforce such a requirement in the operation of the law as a
matter of that law itself, and not of the Constitution:"
(emphasis supplied)
The decision in GVK Industries clearly recognises the power of
Parliament to legislate over events occurring extra-territorially. The only
requirement imposed by the Court is that such an event must have a
real connection to India.
122. The impugned levy on the supply of transportation service by
the shipping line to the foreign exporter to import goods into India has
a twofold connection : first, the destination of the goods is India and
thus, a clear territorial nexus is established with the event occurring
The surest way t to legal research!
outside the territory; and second, the services are rendered for the
benefit of the Indian importer. Thus, the transaction does have a nexus
with the territory of India.
123. As an alternative, the respondents submitted that though the
levy may have a nexus with the Indian territory, the levy of tax extra-
territorially must be provided by Parliament through statute and not by
the Union Government through delegated legislation. We do not find
any applicability of this submission to the facts at hand. As stated
above, the IGST Act under Section 13(9) recognises the place of supply
of services as the destination of goods when the supplier is located
outside India. Since the destination of goods is India, the statute itself
is broad enough to cover a taxable event that has extra-territorial
aspects, which bears a nexus to India.
124. In determining the vires of the impugned notifications, the only
question that falls for determination is whether the importer of goods
can be considered as the recipient of the service of shipping in CIF
contracts.
D.4.(b) Are importers service recipients under CIF contracts?
125. The impugned Notification No. 8 of 2017, inter alia, identifies
several categories of supply of services such as hotels, restaurants,
transportation by rail/road/air and legal and accounting services. The
respondents, as importers of goods under CIF transactions, are
aggrieved by the following categorisation:
"Transport of goods in a vessel including services provided or
agreed to be provided by a person located in non-taxable territory to
person located in non-taxable territory by way of transportation of
goods by a vessel from a place outside India up to the customs
station of clearance in India."
The respondents are aggrieved by the fact that this categorisation,
coupled with impugned Notification No. 10 of 2017, deems the importer
of goods as the recipient of the service of shipping, irrespective of
whether the import of goods was on the basis of a CIF or FOB contract.
126. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act enables taxation of the recipients
of certain specified categories of supply of services on a reverse charge
basis. It is pertinent to note that the tax is payable "by the recipient" of
such services, in contradistinction to broad language such as "any
person as may be prescribed" which was otherwise used in Section 98
(2) of the Finance Act, 1994 which taxed services. Section 5(3) states:
"5. (3) The Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, by notification, specify categories of supply of goods or
services or both, the tax
on which shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the recipient of such
goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to
such recipient as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation
to the supply of such goods or services or both."
(emphasis supplied)
127. The term "recipient" of a supply of service has been
exhaustively defined by Section 2(93) of the CGST Act:
"2. (93) "recipient" of supply of goods or services or both,
means-
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or
services or both, the person who is liable to pay that
consideration;
(b) where no consideration is payable for the supply of goods,
the person to whom the goods are delivered or made available, or
to whom possession or use of the goods is given or made
available; and
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a
service, the person to whom the service is rendered,
and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as
a reference to the recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as
such on behalf of the recipient in relation to the goods or services or both
supplied;"
(emphasis supplied)
Thus, the language employed in Section 2(93)(a) of the CGST Act
clearly stipulates that when a consideration is payable for the supply of
services, the recipient would mean the person who is liable to pay that
consideration. However, when no consideration is payable for the
supply of a service, Section 2(93)(c) states that the recipient shall be
the person to whom the service is rendered. Further, Section 2(93)
provides that "any reference to a person to whom supply is made shall
be construed as a reference to the recipient". Hence, where the statute
refers to a person to whom a supply is made, it has to be construed as
a reference to the recipient of service.
128. In a CIF transaction, the foreign exporter contracts with a
foreign shipping line. The service of shipping is rendered by the foreign
shipping line to the foreign exporter and the consideration is
accordingly payable by the latter to the former. The cost of such
shipping may form a component of the price that is eventually charged
to the importer, based on the negotiated terms. If an FOB contract
were to be negotiated, the importer would independently avail of the
service of shipping and pay for the consideration. The Union
Government has argued that import of goods on a CIF basis would be
construed as import of services where sub-clause (c) of Section (93)
applies to determine the recipient. The respondents have argued that
the importer in a CIF contract can be considered as a recipient of the
service only in a colloquial sense. The mere destination of the service of
shipping would not convert it into a service vis-à-vis the importer
without any elements of a contract. Hence, they urge that in the
absence of specific deeming provisions in the statute, overarching
principles of privity of contract are relevant for interpreting the term
"recipient" deployed in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act.
129. The Union Government has argued that Section 2 of the CGST
Act is prefaced with the term "unless the context otherwise requires",
and hence would enable taxation of the importer on a reverse charge
basis as the "recipient" of service under Section 2(93). However, this
argument overlooks the context of Section 5(3) of the IGST Act which
reiterates the taxable person to be the recipient of the service and only
enables the Union Government to notify categories of inter-State supply
of goods and services.
130. The Union Government has attempted to make a far-fetched
argument that Section 24 (iii) of the CGST Act mandating compulsory
registration of persons liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis
extends to designating any person to pay the tax on a reverse charge
basis, irrespective of their status as either a recipient or a supplier of
service. This argument inverts the identification of a category of goods
and services under Section 5(3) and the recipient therein, who is then
liable to compulsorily register themselves under Section 24(iii) of the
CGST Act. The power of the Central Government to designate persons
and categories of supply for reverse charge derives from Sections 5(3)
and 5(4) of the IGST Act and not Section 24 (iii) of the CGST Act which
mandates the compulsory registration as a logical corollary to ensure
tax collection. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act, which defines "reverse
charge" reiterates that it means the "liability to pay tax by the recipient
of supply of goods or services or both instead of the supplier.. It
cannot be construed to imply that any taxable person identified for
payment of reverse charge would automatically become the recipient of
such goods or service. The deeming fiction of treating the importer as a
recipient must be found in the IGST Act. As it currently stands, Section
5(3) of the IGST Act enables the delegated legislation to create a
deeming fiction on categories of supply of goods/services alone.
131. Interpreting the term "by the recipient" vis-à-vis the categories
of goods and services identified in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act should
necessarily be governed by the principles governing the definition of
"recipient" under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act. Contrary to the
arguments of the Union Government, such an interpretation would not
annihilate the mandate of compulsory registration under Section 24(iii)
of the CGST Act. It would be applicable to suitably worded provisions in
the CGST or the IGST Acts which permit the Central Government to
identify a taxable person for a reverse charge. In any event, it would be
applicable to all the recipients liable for reverse charge under Sections
5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act. The ineffectiveness of a tax collection
mechanism under Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act cannot be argued to
obfuscate the concept of a "recipient" of a good or service that is
uniformly understood across the IGST Act, the CGST Act and tax
jurisprudence.
132. The Union Government has argued that the expression "by the
recipient" in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act does not impede the
authority of the GST Council in making recommendations for issuance
of notifications for identifying such persons who shall be governed by
reverse charge and once
the identification is complete, such taxable person would automatically
be interpreted as "the recipient". This argument requires the Court to
completely discard the principles of determining the recipient of a
service and replace it with whichever taxable person is identified. The
appellant may argue for such an interpretation to achieve a favourable
outcome in this case. However, in matters of inter-State supply when
the supplier and recipient are within the territory of India, this Court
would have to follow this artificially bifurcated interpretation which
identifies recipients vis-à-vis the nature of service and supply in some
cases, and by a simple equation of the identified taxable person in
others without considering the literal and contextual definition of
"recipient". This is against settled rules of interpretation and would be
an act of judicial legislation. If Parliament's intention were to designate
certain persons for reverse charge, irrespective of them being the
recipient of such goods and services, it must make a suitable
amendment to confer such power for exercise of delegated legislation.
133. The only argument that supports the case of the appellant is
that of Section 13(9) of the IGST Act read together with Section 2(93)
(c) of the CGST Act which defines a "recipient". As noted in Part D.4.(a)
above (see paras 108 to 124), Section 13(9) of the IGST Act creates
the deeming fiction of place of supply of service to be the destination of
goods when they are transported by means other than mail or courier.
No specific exemptions for importers have been carved out. This Court
is inclined to accept this reasoning and read it into the definition of
"recipient" in Section 2(93) of the CGST Act which is as follows:
"2. (93) "recipient" of supply of goods or services or both,
means-
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or
services or both, the person who is liable to pay that
consideration;
(b) where no consideration is payable for the supply of goods,
the person to whom the goods are delivered or made available, or
to whom possession or use of the goods is given or made
available; and
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a
service, the person to whom the service is rendered,
and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as
a reference to the recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as
such on behalf of the recipient in relation to the goods or services or both
supplied;"
(emphasis supplied)
Since a reference to a person to whom a supply is made, is a reference
to the recipient, the place of supply is critical. By virtue of Section 13
(9) of the IGST Act, the place of supply is the destination of goods. The
time of supply is then determined through the provisions of Section 13
of the CGST Act.
134. Sections 2(14) and 2(15) of the IGST Act also define the
location of the recipient and supplier of services with respect to the
physical location where the supply of services is made or received:
"2. (14) "location of the recipient of services" means-
(a) where a supply is received at a place of business for which
the registration has been obtained, the location of such place of
business;
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place
of business for which registration has been obtained (a fixed
establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment,
whether the place of business or fixed establishment, the location
of the establishment most directly concerned with the receipt of
the supply; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of
residence of the recipient;
(15) "location of the supplier of services" means-
(a) where a supply is made from a place of business for which
the registration has been obtained, the location of such place of
business;
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the place
of business for which registration has been obtained (a fixed
establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is made from more than one establishment,
whether the place of business or fixed establishment, the location
of the establishment most directly concerned with the provision of
the supply; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of
residence of the supplier;"
(emphasis supplied)
135. In such a scenario, when the place of supply of services is
deemed to be the destination of goods under Section 13(9) of the IGST
Act, the supply of services would necessarily be "made" to the Indian
importer, who would then be considered as a "recipient" under the
definition of Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act. The supply can thus be
construed as being "made" to the Indian importer who becomes the
recipient under Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act.
136. This conclusion comports with the philosophy of the GST to be
a consumption and destination based tax. The services of shipping are
imported into India for the purpose of consumption that is routed
through the import of goods. Although the consideration for shipping is
payable by the foreign supplier to the foreign shipping line in CIF
contracts, the price is consequently factored into the price of the
shipment. The ultimate benefactor of the shipping service is also the
importer in India who will finally receive the goods at a destination
which is within the taxable territory of India. Thus, the meaning of the
term "recipient" in the IGST Act will have to be understood within the
context laid down in the taxing statute (the IGST and the CGST Acts)
and not by a strict application of commercial principles.
137. Some of the respondents have argued that the possibility of
two different recipients of services would create absurdities since
whether a supply of service is an inter-State supply under Section 7(3)
or intra-State supply under Section 8(2) of the IGST Act depends on
the location of the supplier
and the place of supply, which in most cases is the location of the
recipient of service. Since there can effectively be two recipients on a
reading of Sections 2(93)(a) and (c) of the CGST Act, the respondents
argue that the transaction may simultaneously become an inter-State
or intra-State supply. This could also mean that two recipients can
claim ITC. However, this argument is inapplicable to the case at hand
since Sections 7(3) and 8(2) of the IGST Act do not conflate the
concept of imports.
138. Section 8(2) deals with a scenario where the location of the
supplier and place of supply are within the same State/Union Territory
in India. This is inapplicable to determining imports where the supplier
is located outside India. Similarly, Section 7(3) deals with inter-State
supply within the territory of India. Further, both these sections are
subject to the provisions of Section 12 of the IGST Act where both-the
supplier and recipient are located in India. Section 12 of the IGST Act
does not create the deeming fiction under Section 13(9) of the IGST
Act which is applicable only when the supplier is located outside India.
The applicable section in this case would be Section 7(4) of the IGST
Act which clearly stipulates that "Supply of services imported into the
territory of India shall be treated to be a supply of services in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce". Thus, no absurdity is created
by the deeming fiction argued by the Union Government. In no scenario
would the foreign exporter be claiming ITC in India.
139. The respondents' arguments of identification of two recipients
do not have any bearing on the determination of the present dispute as
the foreign exporter is not sought to be taxed in this case. In the digital
age, the concepts of supplier and recipient of service have also been
altered and are not necessarily understood as two parties with a direct
chain of supply. The IGST Act tends to create several such deeming
fictions to adequately capture such complexities. For instance, Section
5(5) of the IGST Act taxes the electronic commerce operator as the
supplier of service in spite of it only being a conduit, in the commercial
sense. These deeming fictions need to be respected for the purpose of
the statute, as long as they have constitutional and parliamentary
sanction. Similarly, Section 2(14)(c) of the IGST Act recognises the
possibility of the supply being received in more than one
establishment:
"2. (14) "location of the recipient of services" means-
(a) where a supply is received at a place of business for which
the registration has been obtained, the location of such place of
business;
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place
of business for which registration has been obtained (a fixed
establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed
establishment;
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment,
whether the place of business or fixed establishment, the location
of the establishment most directly concerned with the receipt of
the supply; and
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of
residence of the recipient;"
140. Section 13 of the IGST Act is critical to effectively meet the aim
of the GST statute to tax the destination of supplies, as opposed to
their origins. The deeming fiction therein is critical to interpret the
charging provision under the IGST Act (Section 5). The respondents'
argument for the irrelevance of determining the beneficiary of the
supply or who has received the supply in view of the definition of
"recipient" of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act mis-reads Section 2(93)
which identifies the recipient, inter alia, on the basis of the person to
whom "supply is made" i.e. the place of supply.
141. GST laws mark a departure from the previous policy of taxing
sale/consignments and focuses on the taxing of supplies. The concept
of a supply-centric and destination-based tax runs through the scheme
of the statutory provisions and the proposals issued by the GST Council.
Thus, an amendment to the Constitution was introduced in the form of
Article 366(12-A) to create a tax on the supply of goods, or services, or
both. In the commercial reality of the times, the conceptual lines
between goods and services wear thin. Hence, the focus is on the
taxation of supply, as opposed to the creation of neat compartments
between goods and services. Section 7(1)(c) of the CGST Act
specifically characterises import of services for a consideration to
constitute "supply". The only question that falls for determination is
whether the imports of goods on a CIF basis would also constitute
import of shipping services, by way of deeming fiction.
142. We have held that Section 5(3) of the IGST does not confer the
powers on the Central Government to create a deeming fiction vis-à-vis
who constitutes the recipient. Section 5(3) merely enables the Central
Government to identify certain categories of goods and services, where
the recipient of such services is subject to a reverse charge, as opposed
to the usual mode of taxation where the supplier of the service is
charged on a forward charge basis. However, Section 13(9) of the IGST
Act read with Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act inherently create a
deeming fiction of the importer of goods to be the recipient of shipping
service.
D.5. Applicability of Section 5(4) of the IGST Act
143. By way of an arguendo, the Union Government has argued that
if the importers do not qualify as service recipients, the impugned
notifications would derive their validity from Section 5(4) of the IGST
Act. The unamended Section 5(4) of the IGST Act stated as follows:
"5. (4) The integrated tax in respect of the supply of taxable
goods or services or both by a supplier, who is not registered, to a
registered person shall be paid by such person on reverse charge
basis as the recipient and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to
such recipient as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in
relation to the supply of such goods or services or both."
(emphasis supplied)
144. On 29-8-2018, Section 5(4) was amended by amending Act 32
of 2018, to state the following:
"5. (4) The Government may, on the recommendations of the
Council, by notification, specify a class of registered persons who
shall, in respect of
supply of specified categories of goods or services or both received from
an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the
recipient of such supply of goods or services or both, and all the
provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the person
liable for paying the tax in relation to such supply of goods or services
or both."
(emphasis supplied)
145. The amended Section 5(4) came into effect on 1-2-201965.
Amending Act 32 of 2018 enables the Central Government to create a
deeming fiction of declaring a class of registered persons "as the
recipient" of the supply of taxable goods or services. In deploying the
language "as the", and not "by the" recipient, the applicability of the
definition of "recipient" vis-à-vis Section 2(93) of the CGST Act is no
longer necessary for determining the validity of such a notification. The
effect of the amending Act 32 of 2018 has been as follows : (i) the
powers of the Central Government to specify through a notification has
been clarified; and (ii) the power to specify a class of registered
persons as the recipient has been recognised.
146. The Union Government has argued that Notifications Nos. 8 and
10 of 2017 dated 28-6-2017 issued under Section 5(3) may also be
read as issued under Section 5(4) of the IGST Act, in which case, the
importers would be liable to tax with effect from 1-2-2019 though
exempted for the period 13-10-2017 to 31-1-2019.
147. The respondents have argued that the amended and
unamended Section 5(4) do not save the impugned notifications since
they still make the reference to the term "recipient". However, the
respondents crucially miss out that Section 5(4) employs the language
"as the recipient", in contradistinction to Section 5(3) of the IGST Act
which uses "by the recipient". We have held that recipient includes the
importer in Part D above. Further, Section 5(4) clarifies that it may
designate a class of registered persons as the recipient, thereby
broadening the scope of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, which is
anyway an inclusive definition since Section 2 is prefaced with "unless
the context otherwise requires".
148. It is settled law that non-reference of the source of power may
not vitiate its exercise and application in given facts and circumstances
of a case. In Union of India V. Tulsiram Patel66, , a Constitution Bench
held that when a source of power legally exists, a non-reference or an
incorrect reference during its exercise does not vitiate the action.
Speaking in the context of the Railway Service Rules which did not
account for the power of the disciplinary authority under Article 311(2),
"126. As pointed out earlier, the source of authority of a particular
officer to act as a disciplinary authority and to dispense with the
inquiry is derived from the service rules while the source of his
power to dispense with the disciplinary inquiry is derived from the
second proviso to Article 11(2). There cannot be an exercise of a
power unless such power exists
in law. If such power does not exist in law, the purported exercise of it
would be an exercise of a non-existent power and would be void. The
exercise of a power is, therefore, always referable to the source of such
power and must be considered in conjunction with it. The Court's
attention in Chellappan case6 was not drawn to this settled position in
law and hence the error committed by it in considering Rule 14 of the
Railway Servants Rules by itself and without taking into account the
second proviso to Article 11(2). It is also well-settled that where a
source of power exists, the exercise of such power is referable only to
that source and not to some other source under which were that power
exercised, the exercise of such power would be invalid and without
jurisdiction. Similarly, if a source of power exists by reading together
two provisions, whether statutory or constitutional, and the order refers
to only one of them, the validity of the order should be upheld by
construing it as an order passed under both those provisions. Further,
even the mention of a wrong provision or the omission to mention the
provision which contains the source of power will not invalidate an order
where the source of such power exists. (See Ram Manohar Lohia V.
State of Bihar68 and Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. V. Ben Hiraben
the impugned orders the relevant clause of the second proviso or the
relevant service rule will not, therefore, have the effect of invalidating
the orders and the orders must be read as having been made under the
applicable clause of the second proviso to Article 311(2) read with the
relevant service rule. It may be mentioned that in none of the matters
before us has it been contended that the disciplinary authority which
passed the impugned order was not competent to do so."
(emphasis supplied)
149. Similarly, in Titagarh Paper Mills Ltd. V. Orissa a three-
Judge Bench of this Court, in the context of the Electricity Supply Act,
1948, held that a mislabelling of the source of power would not vitiate
"9.
But, if there is one principle more well-settled than any
other, it is that, when an authority takes action which is within its
competence, it cannot be held to be invalid, merely because it
purports to be made under a wrong provision, if it can be shown to
be within its power under any other provision. A mere wrong
description of the source of power-a mere wrong label-cannot
invalidate the action of an authority, if it is otherwise within its
power...'
Thus, as long as a source of power to legislate or issue a notification is
available, the lack of a mention, an incorrect reference or mistake does
not vitiate the exercise of such power.
150. The impugned notifications were issued with the intention of
creating a level playing field between the Indian and foreign shipping
lines. In the Eighteenth GST Council meeting held on 31-6-2017, the
agenda of taxing importers on a reverse charge basis was discussed:
"Para 6.7.1 : Agenda Item 3(v) - Value for the purpose of levy of
GST on transportation of goods by a vessel from a place outside
India up to the customs station in India
6.7.1. In the existing Service Tax Law, with a view to provide level
playing field to the Indian shipping companies, it has been provided
that in cases where the goods are imported by an importer in India
on CIF (Cost, Insurance and Freight) basis and the service of
transportation of goods by a vessel from a place outside India up to
the customs station in India is provided by a person located in non-
taxable territory (a foreign shipping line) to a person located in non-
taxable territory (overseas supplier/exporter of goods), the importer
in India shall be liable to pay service tax on freight. In view of the
representations that where the importer purchases goods on CIF
basis, he may not have the invoice issued by the shipping line for
freight and may not know the amount of freight charged by the
foreign shipping line from the foreign supplier; it was stipulated in
the Service Tax Rules that in such cases the importer shall have the
option to pay an amount calculated @ 1.4% of the CIF value of
imported goods. This provision was stipulated on the basis that
freight roughly constitutes 10% of the CIF value of goods on an
average. Under GST too, it was decided that the liability to pay GST
on such transportation service provided by a foreign shipping line to
a foreign supplier shall be of the importer in India and the
notifications are being issued accordingly. It is proposed that the
similar provision deeming value of such service at 10% of the CIF
value may be incorporated in the IGST notification. Considering the
nature of the service, this provision is not required in the CGST,
SGST or UTGST notifications. The Council approved the proposal.
*
*
*
8. (v)
in respect of agenda Item 3 the Council approved to
incorporate a provision in the IGST notification that in cases where
the goods are imported by an importer in India on CIF basis and the
service of transportation of goods by a vessel from a place outside
India up to the customs station in India is provided by a person
located in non-taxable territory (a foreign shipping line) to a person
located in non-taxable territory (overseas supplier/exporter of goods)
and in case the importer did not know the amount of freight charged
by the foreign shipping line from the foreign supplier the deemed
value of such service shall be 10% of the CIF value."
151. The impugned notifications were issued after the GST Council
took note of the fact that since transport of imported goods by Indian
shipping lines to India is not treated as export of service, the Indian
shipping lines pay IGST on the same on a forward charge basis. On the
other hand, on the same
transportation service, the foreign shipping lines are not required to pay
tax as they are not taxable persons in India. Therefore, to provide a
level playing field to Indian shipping lines, the importer in India has
been made liable to pay IGST on transportation of goods by foreign
shipping lines on a reverse charge basis. If Indian shipping lines
continue to be taxed and not their competitors, namely, the foreign
shipping lines, the margins arising out of taxation from GST would not
create a level playing field and drive the Indian shipping lines out of
business.
152. It was contended by the respondents that instead of course
correcting the input tax mechanism, the Union Government has chosen
to tax the Indian importer on reverse charge. However, this Court is not
in a position to adjudicate the desirability of a taxation scheme, as long
as it is legally issued. Commenting on the efficacy of the tax
intervention with the desired goals would be delving into the arena of
policy.
D.6. Composite supply and issues of double taxation
153. Having examined whether the impugned levy is permissible
under Section 5 of the IGST Act, we shall now advert to the arguments
raised by the respondents regarding the impugned notifications
amounting to double taxation. The respondents have submitted before
this Court that the transaction between the foreign exporter and the
respondents is already subject to IGST under Section 5 of the IGST Act
read with Sections 3(7) and 3(8) of the Customs Tariff Act as "supply of
goods". An additional levy of IGST on imported goods, that is, on the
supply of transportation service, by designating the importer as the
recipient would amount to double taxation.
154. The transaction at hand involves three parties-the foreign
exporter, the Indian importer and the shipping line. The first leg of the
transaction involves a CIF contract, wherein the foreign exporter sells
the goods to the Indian importer and the cost of insurance and freight
are the responsibility of the foreign exporter. In other words, the
foreign exporter is liable to ensure that the goods reach their place of
destination and the Indian importer pays the transaction value to the
exporter. The second leg of the transaction involves an agreement
between the foreign exporter and the shipping line (whether foreign or
Indian) for providing services for transport of goods to the destination
i.e. in the territory of India.
155. On the first leg of the transaction, between the foreign exporter
and the Indian importer, the latter is liable to pay IGST on the
transaction value of goods under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act read with
Sections 3(7) and 3(8) of the Customs Tariff Act. Although this
transaction involves the provision of services such as insurance and
freight it falls under the ambit of "composite supply". We note from the
written submissions of the Union that the ASG has fairly submitted that
this transaction would include value elements of freight and insurance,
and yet the IGST is levied as a tax on supply of goods only. Such
transactions are termed as "composite supply" under the CGST Act.
156. Section 2(30) of the CGST Act defines "composite supply" as:
"2. (30) "composite supply" means a supply made by a taxable
person to a recipient consisting of two or more taxable supplies of
goods or services or both, or any combination thereof, which are
naturally bundled and supplied in conjunction with each other in the
ordinary course of business, one of which is a principal supply;
Illustration.- -Where goods are packed and transported with
insurance, the supply of goods, packing materials, transport and
insurance is a composite supply and supply of goods is a principal
supply."
(emphasis supplied)
157. Section 2(30) of the CGST Act clearly provides that a
transaction may have two or more taxable supplies, where one of them
is a principal supply. The illustration to Section 2(30) further clarifies
that a transaction such as the CIF contract for supply of goods reflects
a composite supply under the CGST Act, where the principal supply is
the supply of goods.
158. The tax liability on composite supply is provided under Section
8 of the CGST Act:
"8. Tax liability on composite and mixed supplies. The tax
liability on a composite or a mixed supply shall be determined in the
following manner, namely-
(a) a composite supply comprising two or more supplies, one of
which is a principal supply, shall be treated as a supply of such
principal supply; and
(b) a mixed supply comprising two or more supplies shall be
treated as a supply of that particular supply which attracts the
highest rate of tax."
(emphasis supplied)
Section 8 of the CGST Act provides that the tax liability on a composite
supply which comprises of two or more supplies, will only be levied on
the "principal supply". In a CIF transaction, the principal supply,
according to Section 2(30), is supply of goods. Thus, the tax would be
levied as if the transaction was one of supply of goods.
159. Section 20 of the IGST Act provides that the provisions relating
to "composite supply" under the CGST Act would apply mutatis
mutandis under the IGST Act. By extension, the IGST in a transaction
of composite supply would be levied on the principal supply of goods.
160. The respondents have urged before this Court that the
impugned levy which seeks to impose IGST on the "service" aspect of
the transaction would be in violation of the principle of "composite
supply" incorporated under Section 2(30) read with Section 8 of the
CGST Act, which applies equally to the imposition of IGST under
Section 20 of the IGST Act. In contrast, the Union Government has
submitted that the impugned levy is on the second leg of the
transaction, which is a standalone contract between the foreign
exporter and the foreign shipping line. Thus, the Union has urged that
the contract between the foreign exporter and the foreign shipping
line-of which the Indian importer is not a party-cannot be deemed to
be a part of "composite supply".
While the first leg of the transaction, between the foreign exporter and
Indian importer, is (according to the submission) a composite supply,
the second leg is an independent transaction. In this regard, the Union
has relied on the decision of this Court in McDowell4 to contend that a
single element can constitute a levy and a part of the value for another
transaction. Further the Union Government has urged that the levy is
on different aspects of the transaction.
161. We are unable to agree with the Union Government on this
count. The aspect theory that the Union Government has relied on finds
its place in various decisions of this Court, such as in Federation of
Hotel & Restaurant Assn. of India V. Union of India ¹1 and BSNL12.
162. In Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Assn. of India4 ,
a
challenge was raised regarding the imposition of an expenditure tax by
the Union Government. In discussing the various aspects of a
transaction, this Court, speaking through M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as
para 31)
"31. Indeed, the law "with respect to" a subject might incidentally
"affect" another subject in some way; but that is not the same thing
as the law being on the latter subject. There might be overlapping;
but the overlapping must be in law. The same transaction may
involve two or more taxable events in its different aspects. But the
fact that there is an overlapping does not detract from the
distinctiveness of the aspects. Lord Simonds in Governor-General in
Council V. Province of Madras72, FCR p. 193 in the context of
OnLine PC)
\
The two taxes, the one levied on a manufacturer in respect
of his goods, the other on a vendor in respect of his sales, may, as
is there pointed out, in one sense overlap. But in law there is no
overlapping. The taxes are separate and distinct imposts. If in fact
they overlap, that may be because the taxing authority, imposing
a duty of excise, finds it convenient to impose that duty at the
moment when the excisable article leaves the factory or workshop
for the first time on the occasion of its sale.' "
(emphasis supplied)
1 There is no doubt that different aspects of a transaction can be
taxed through separate provisions. However, this Court in BSNL12
observed that the aspect theory does not allow the value of goods to be
included in services and vice versa. In BSNL12, this Court dealt with the
question of whether provision of telephone services involved a transfer
of goods which would be amenable to sales tax. In this context, the
"88. No one denies the legislative competence of the States to
levy sales tax on sales provided that the necessary concomitants of a
sale are present in the transaction and the sale is distinctly
discernible in the transaction.
This does not however allow the State to entrench upon the Union List
and tax services by including the cost of such service in the value of the
goods. Even in those composite contracts which are by legal fiction
deemed to be divisible under Article 366(29-A), the value of the goods
involved in the execution of the whole transaction cannot be assessed
to sales tax."
164. In the present case, the question is whether the imposition of
IGST on supply of services can be sustained when there is a
concomitant imposition of IGST on supply of goods. However, we must
first analyse the context in which the IGST is levied on the import of
goods in this case.
165. The provisions of composite supply in the CGST Act (and the
IGST Act) play a specific role in the levy of GST. The idea of introducing
"composite supply" was to ensure that various elements of a
transaction are not dissected and the levy is imposed on the bundle of
supplies altogether. This finds specific mention in the illustration
provided under Section 2(30) of the CGST Act, where the principal
supply is that of goods. Thus, the intent of Parliament was that a
transaction which includes different aspects of supply of goods or
services and which are naturally bundled together, must be taxed as a
composite supply.
166. It is true that in this case, the first leg of the transaction
between the foreign exporter and the Indian importer is a composite
supply, while the second leg, between the foreign exporter and the
shipping line may, from a perspective, be regarded as a standalone
transaction. Both of them are independent transactions and ordinarily,
the IGST could be levied on both sets of transactions-one as supply of
goods (under the ambit of composite supply) and the other as supply of
services. However, the impugned notifications seek to tax the importer
as the deemed recipient of the supply of service. The ASG has
advanced an interpretation of Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act,
read with Section 2(93) of the CGST Act to contend that the importer
can be classified as the "recipient" of the services. On this
interpretation, we have upheld the validity of the impugned
notifications under Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act in Parts D.2-
D.5 of this judgment (see paras 89 to 152). The respondents as a
matter of fact urged that (i) the Indian importer is not privy to the
contract between the foreign exporter and the foreign shipping line;
(ii) the Indian importer does not pay consideration to the foreign
shipping line; and (iii) the Indian importer does not receive any
services from the foreign shipping line since the transportation services
are provided by the foreign shipping line to the foreign exporter. The
ASG, while advancing arguments on behalf of the Union Government,
has opposed these submissions.
167. The Union Government has urged that this Court must look
beyond the text of the contract between the foreign shipping line and
the foreign exporter to identify the Indian importer as the recipient of
the services. This Court has upheld the validity of the impugned
notifications on this ground. The Union Government is contradicting the
main plank of its submission now by contending that the two legs of
the transaction are separate standalone agreements. That would imply,
that while on the one hand the Union
Government seeks to levy tax on the Indian importer by going beyond
the text of the contract between the foreign shipping line and foreign
exporter (for the purpose of identifying the Indian importer as the
recipient of services), on the other hand, as far as the submissions on
composite supply are concerned, the Union Government urges that the
contracts must be viewed as separate transactions, operating in silos.
We are unable to subscribe to this view. The Union of India cannot be
heard to urge arguments of convenience-treating the two legs of the
transaction as connected when it seeks to identify the Indian importer
as a recipient of services while on the other hand, treating the two legs
of the transaction as independent when it seeks to tide over the
statutory provisions governing composite supply.
168. This Court is bound by the confines of the IGST and the CGST
Acts to determine if this is a composite supply. It would not be
permissible to ignore the text of Section 8 of the CGST Act and treat
the two transactions as standalone agreements. In a CIF contract, the
supply of goods is accompanied by the supply of services of
transportation and insurance, the responsibility for which lies on the
seller (the foreign exporter in this case). The supply of service of
transportation by the foreign shipper forms a part of the bundle of
supplies between the foreign exporter and the Indian importer, on
which the IGST is payable under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act read with
Section 20 of the IGST Act, Section 8 and Section 2(30) of the CGST
Act. To levy the IGST on the supply of the service component of the
transaction would contradict the principle enshrined in Section 8 and be
in violation of the scheme of the GST legislation. Based on this reason,
we are of the opinion that while the impugned notifications are validly
issued under Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act, it would be in
violation of Section 8 of the CGST Act and the overall scheme of the
GST legislation. As noted earlier, under Section 7(3) of the CGST Act,
the Central Government has the power to notify an import of goods as
an import of services and vice versa:
"7. Scope of supply.-(1)-(2)
*
*
*
(3) Subject to the provisions of a[sub-sections (1), (1-A) and
(2)], the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
specify, by notification, the transactions that are to be treated as-
(a) a supply of goods and not as a supply of services; or
(b) a supply of services and not as a supply of goods."
No such power can be noticed with respect to interpreting a composite
supply of goods and services as two segregable supply of goods and
supply of services.
169. The High Court in the impugned judgment1 has observed that :
"What has led to the present day problems in the implementation of the GST
133. The GST is implemented by subsuming various indirect
taxes. The difficulty which is being experienced today in proper
implementation of the
GST is because of the erroneous misconception of law, or rather,
erroneous assumption on the part of the delegated legislation that
service tax is an independent levy as it was prior to the GST and it go
vivisect the transaction of supply to levy more taxes on certain
components completely overlooking or forgetting the basic concept of
composite supply introduced in the GST legislation and the very idea of
levying the GST. Prima facie, it appears that while issuing the
impugned notification, the delegated legislature had in mind the
provision of the Finance Act, 1994, rather than keeping in mind the
object of bringing the GST by making the Constitution (101st)
Amendment Act, 2016 to merge all taxes levied on the goods and
services to one tax known as the GST.
134. It appears that despite having levied and collected the
integrated tax under the IGST Act, 2017, on import of goods on the
entire value which includes the ocean freight through the impugned
notifications, once again the integrated tax is being levied under an
erroneous misconception of law that separate tax can be levied on
The surest way't to legal research!
the services components (freight), which is otherwise impermissible
under the scheme of the GST legislation made under the CA Act,
2016.
135. All the learned Senior Counsel are right in their submission
that if such an erroneous impression is not corrected and if such
a
trend continues, then in future even the other components of supply
of goods, such as, insurance, packaging, loading/unloading, labour,
etc. may also be artificially vivisected by the delegated legislation to
once again levy the GST on the supply on which the tax is already
collected.
*
*
*
216. Thus, having paid the IGST on the amount of freight which is
included in the value of the imported goods, the impugned
notifications levying tax again as a supply of service, without any
express sanction by the statute, are illegal and liable to be struck
down."
(emphasis supplied)
170. We are in agreement with the High Court to the extent that a
tax on the supply of a service, which has already been included by the
legislation as a tax on the composite supply of goods, cannot be
allowed.
E. Conclusion
171. Based on the above discussion, we have reached the following
conclusion:
171.1. The recommendations of the GST Council are not binding on
the Union and States for the following reasons:
171.1.1. The deletion of Article 279-B and the inclusion of Article
279(1) by the Constitution Amendment Act, 2016 indicates that
Parliament intended for the recommendations of the GST Council to
only have a persuasive value, particularly when interpreted along with
the objective of the GST regime to foster cooperative federalism and
harmony between the constituent units.
171.1.2. Neither does Article 279-A begin with a non-obstante
clause nor does Article 246-A state that it is subject to the provisions of
Article 279-A. Parliament and the State Legislatures possess
simultaneous power to
legislate on GST. Article 246-A does not envisage a repugnancy
provision to resolve the inconsistencies between the Central and the
State laws on GST. The "recommendations" of the GST Council are the
The surest way t to legal research!
product of a collaborative dialogue involving the Union and the States.
They are recommendatory in nature. To regard them as binding edicts
would disrupt fiscal federalism, where both the Union and the States
are conferred equal power to legislate on GST. It is not imperative that
one of the federal units must always possess a higher share in the
power for the federal units to make decisions. Indian federalism is a
dialogue between cooperative and uncooperative federalism where the
federal units are at liberty to use different means of persuasion ranging
from collaboration to contestation.
171.1.3. The Government while exercising its rule-making power
under the provisions of the CGST Act and the IGST Act is bound by the
recommendations of the GST Council. However, that does not mean
that all the recommendations of the GST Council made by virtue of the
power Article 279-A(4) are binding on the legislature's power to enact
primary legislations.
171.2. On a conjoint reading of Sections 2(11) and 13(9) of the
IGST Act, read with Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, the import of goods
by a CIF contract constitutes an "inter-State" supply which can be
subject to IGST where the importer of such goods would be the
recipient of shipping service.
171.3. The IGST Act and the CGST Act define "reverse charge" and
prescribe the entity that is to be taxed for these purposes. The
specification of the recipient-in this case the importer-by Notification
No. 10 of 2017 is only clarificatory. The Government by notification did
not specify a taxable person different from the recipient prescribed in
Section 5(3) of the IGST Act for the purposes of reverse charge.
171.4. Section 5(4) of the IGST Act enables the Central Government
to specify a class of registered persons as the recipients, thereby
conferring the power of creating a deeming fiction on the delegated
legislation.
171.5. The impugned levy imposed on the "service" aspect of the
transaction is in violation of the principle of "composite supply"
enshrined under Section 2(30) read with Section 8 of the CGST Act.
Since the Indian importer is liable to pay IGST on the "composite
supply", comprising of supply of goods and supply of services of
transportation, insurance, etc. in a CIF contract, a separate levy on the
Indian importer for the "supply of services" by the shipping line would
be in violation of Section 8 of the CGST Act.
172. For the reasons stated above, the appeals are accordingly
dismissed. Pending application(s) if any, stand disposed of.
+
OnLine Guj 49 (Gujarat High Court, R/Special Civil Application No. 726 of 2018, dt. 23-1-2020)
[Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
+
OnLine Guj 49 (Gujarat High Court, R/Special Civil Application No. 726 of 2018, dt. 23-1-2020)
#
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Ruchi Soya Industries Ltd. V. Union of India, 2020
2020) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Gujarat State Electricity Corpn. Ltd. V. Union of
2019, dt. 4-3-2020) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
Guj 3445 (Gujarat High Court, Special Civil Application No. 17034 of 2019, dt. 5-2-2020)
[Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
# +
OnLine Guj 3448 (Gujarat High Court, Special Civil Application No. 6882 of 2019, dt. 29-1-
2020) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
##
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Gokul Agro Resources Ltd. V. Union of India, 2020
-2020) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Bharat Oman Refineries Ltd. V. Union of India,
18-8-2020) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
++#
OnLine Guj 3446 (Gujarat High Court, Special Civil Application No. 22085 of 2019, dt. 29-1-
2020) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Shree Mahesh Oil Products V. Union of India, 2021
2021) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
+ # # Arising from the Judgment and Order in Lakhpat Trading and Industrys (P) Ltd. V. Union of
dt. 13-7-2021) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
#++ Arising from the Judgment and Order in Mahesh Vegoils (P) Ltd. V. Union of India, 2021
2021) [Partly reversed and partly affirmed in law]
1
2
3
SC 1041
5
6
7
MCD V. Birla Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills, (1968) 3 SCR 251 : AIR 1968 SC 1232
8
9
10
13
In SLP (C) No. 3081 of 2021, SLP (C) No. 1625 of 2021 and SLP (C) No. 3760 of 2021
14
SLP (C) No. 13958 of 2020.
15 SLP (C) No. 3462 of 2021.
16 SLP (C) No. 843 of 2021.
17 In SLP (C) No. 3540 of 2021, SLP (C) No. 1281 of 2021, SLP (C) No. 1277 of 2021, SLP (C)
No. 2242 of 2021, SLP (C) No. 2198 of 2021, SLP (C) No. 2736 of 2021.
18
19
IA No. 118754 of 2021 in SLP (C) No. 13958 of 2020.
20 Appearing for the respondent in SLP (C) No. 3680 of 2021.
21 Appearing for the respondent in SLP (C) No. 1798 of 2021.
22
Appearing on behalf of the intervener in IA No. 74108 of 2021 in SLP (C) No. 13958 of
2020.
23
Empowered Committee, "First Discussion Paper on goods and services tax in India",
(2009), paras 1.13-1.14.
24
Speech by Arun Jaitley in Lok Sabha on 24-4-2015; Tarun Jain, Goods and Services Tax
:
Constitutional Law and Policy (EBC 2018) 16
25
26
Entry 47 of the concurrent list mentions that "[f]ees in respect of any of the matters in
this List, but not including fees taken in any court".
27 Entry 82 of List I.
28
Entry 46 of List II.
29
30
M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. V. State of A.P., 1958 SCR 1422 : AIR 1958 SC 468 : (1958) 9
STC 298
31
H.M. Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, (N.M. Tripati Private Limited, 4th Edn., Vol. 1)
33
33
34 Id, para 22.
35
Tarun Jain, Goods and Services Tax : Constitutional Law and Policy (EBC 2018) 117
36 Thirteenth Finance Commission, "Report of the Task Force on GST" (2009) para 10.5
37
Id, para 9.8.
38
Standing Committee on Finance, The Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2011 (73rd report, 2013).
39 Id, para 12.
40
Standing Committee on Finance, The Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth
Amendment) 2011 (73rd report, 2013), para
41
Standing Committee on Finance, The Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth
Amendment) 2011 (73rd report, 2013), para 15.
42 Speech of T.G Venkatesh Babu in Lok Sabha on 5-5-2015.
43 Speech of Mr Arun Jaitley in Lok Sabha on 8-8-2016.
44
Select Committee, Report on the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty Second
Amendment) Bill, 2014, (Submitted to the Rajya Sabha, 2015).
47
Alok Prasanna, "For a mess of Potage : The GST's promise of increased revenue to States
comes at the cost of the federal structure of the Constitution", National Law School of India
Review, Vol. 28, No. 2(2016), pp. 97-113.
48
Ajitesh Kir, "India's Goods and Services Tax : A Unique Experiment in Cooperative
Federalism and a Constitutional Crisis in Waiting", Canadian Tax Journal (2021) 69 : 2, pp.
391-445.
49
50 Robert A. Schapiro, "Justice Steven's theory of Interactive Federalism", 74 Fordham L Rev
2133 (2006).
51
Jessica Bulman-Pozen and Heather K. Gerken, "Uncooperative Federalism", Yale Law
Journal, Vol. 118. No. 7 (May, 2009), pp. 1256-1310.
53
Jessica Bulman-Pozen and Heather K. Gerken, "Uncooperative Federalism", Yale Law
Journal, Vol. 118. No. 7 (May, 2009), p. 1284.
54 Section 166 of the CGST Act.
55
Section 24 of the IGST Act.
58
Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd. V. CWT, (1966) 2 SCR 688 : AIR 1966 SC 1370; Som Mittal V.
59
Note : In order to facilitate convenience while reading the judgment, some of the
statutory provisions are reflected in more than one place in the judgment.
60
Sub-section (4) of Section 5 was amended by the Integrated Goods and Services Tax
(Amendment) Act, 2018 w.e.f. 1-2-2019 and reads as follows:
"5. (4) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify
a class of registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods
or services or both received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge
basis as the recipient of such supply of goods or services or both, and all the provisions of
this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation
to such supply of goods or services or both."
61 MCD V. Birla Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills, AIR 1968 SC 1232; Avinder Singh V. State of
62
63
64
"15. Value of taxable supply.-(1) The value of a supply of goods or services or both
shall be the transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the said supply
of goods or services or both where the supplier and the recipient of the supply are not
related and the price is the sole consideration for the supply."
*
Ed. : The words between two asterisks have been emphasised in original as well.
65
Notification No. G.S.R. 67(E) dated 29-1-2019.
66
67
68
Ram Manohar Lohia V. State of Bihar, (1966) 1 SCR 709 : AIR 1966 SC 740
71
72
98 : (1945) 7 FCR 179
a
Subs. for "sub-sections (1) and (2)" by Act 31 of 2018, Section 3(c) (w.r.e.f. 1-7-2017).