In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE HEMANT GUPTA AND SUDHANSHU DHULIA, JJ.)
AISHAT SHIFA (HIJAB CASE)
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF KARNATAKA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
Civil Appeals No. 7095 of 2022 with Nos. 6934 of 2022 , 6957 of
2022+2 7069 of 2022+3 +3 , 7072 of 2022+4 +4 , 7074 of 2022+5 7075 of
2022+6, 7076 of 2022+7, 7077 of 2022 -Superscript(8), 7078-83 of 2022-9, 7084
of 2022 , 7085 of 2022+11, , 7086 of 2022+12, 7087 of 2022+13, ,
7088 of 2022+14 7089 of 2022+15, 7090 of 2022+16 7091 of
2022+1 7092 of 2022+18, 7093 of 2022+19, 7096 of 2022+20 , 7098
of 2022+23 , 7099 of 2022+22, , 7070 of 2022+23, Writ Petitions (C)
Nos. 95 of 2022 and 120 of 2022, decided on October 13, 2022
A. Constitution of India - Pts. III and IV-A - Government/Government-
aided schools and educational institutions - Government Order dt. 5-2-
2022 requiring the wearing of uniform dress without any external addition
and subtraction as prescribed by school authorities, leading to prohibition on
wearing of hijab or headscarf by Muslim girl students in such
schools/institutions - Validity of - Disagreeing at the Bench, matter
referred to larger Bench
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., prohibiting hijab is not a denial of fundamental rights by
the State but instead a voluntary act of the student who may choose not to go to
school on ground of hijab - Rights of freedom of expression under Art. 19(1)(a)
and of privacy under Art. 21 are complementary to each other and not mutually
exclusive - In view of campus discipline and to ensure parity amongst students,
Court cannot substitute its own views in place of the school authority except in a
case of manifest injustice or to interfere with a decision which does not pass the
test of Wednesbury reasonableness - The impugned Government Order does not
impinge on the constitutional promise of fraternity and dignity - Instead, it
promotes an equal environment where such fraternal values can be imbibed and
nurtured without any hindrance of any kind - The Government Order only ensures
that the uniform prescribed is adhered to by the students and it cannot be said that
the State is restricting the access to education to the girl students through such an
order - Permitting one religious community to wear their religious symbols would
be antithesis to secularism - Thus, the Government Order cannot be said to be
against the ethic of secularism or to the objective of the Karnataka Education Act,
1983 - The mandate of the Karnataka Education Act, 1983 is to renounce
sectarian approach - Students carrying their religious beliefs to secular schools run
by the State would be antithesis of the mandate of the statute - Lastly, the
principle of reasonable accommodation does not arise in the present case - [Ed. :
for detailed views of Hemant Gupta, J. issue-wise, see Shortnotes B to L]
- Per Dhulia, J. (disagreeing), Court must be a judge of fact as well as a judge
of law - In the facts of the present case, there is no justification for the restriction
on hijab inside the public place of school or classroom - Although school is a public
place and degree of enjoyment of a right by an individual inside his house or
anywhere outside in a public space is different yet drawing a parallel between a
school and a jail or a military camp, is not correct - Although discipline in school is
required, it cannot be at the cost of freedom, nor at the cost of dignity
- Asking a pre-university schoolgirl to take off her hijab at her school gate, is an
invasion of her privacy and dignity - It is clearly violative of the fundamental right
given to her under Arts. 19(1)(a) and 21 of the Constitution - This right to her
dignity and her privacy she carries in her person, even inside her school gate or
when she is in her classroom - It is still her fundamental right, not a "derivative
right" as has been described by the High Court
and the ratio laid down therein - It is difficult to accept the views of the High Court
that schools cannot be allowed to be showrooms for diversity of culture to
reasonably accommodate the fundamental rights of the petitioners, that the
petitioners cannot assert their fundamental rights inside a classroom termed as
"qualified public places", that the rights inside a school are only "derivative right" and
that schoolgirls have to follow the dress code prescribed, which does not prescribe
hijab
- When reaching the school gate is never easy for a girl child as compared to a
male child, it would be unjust and unconstitutional to make it more difficult for her
to go to school merely because she wears a hijab - It is brought to notice of the
Court that due to the enforcement of hijab ban in the State some of the girl
students have not been able to appear in their Board examinations, and many
others were forced to seek transfer to other schools, most likely madrasas, where
they may not get the same standard of education
- A girl child has the right to wear a hijab in her house or outside her house, and
that right does not stop at her school gate - Not allowing this would be
unconstitutional - We live in a democracy - The question of diversity and our rich
plural culture is important in the context of our present case
- Children who are in pre-university colleges are at an impressionable age -
They are just waking up to the rich diversity of this nation - They therefore, need
to be counselled and guided, so that they imbibe our constitutional values of
tolerance and accommodation, towards those who may speak a different language,
eat different food, or even wear different clothes or apparels
- To promote the rich and composite culture of our country would be in
consonance with the National Education Policy 2020, the fundamental duties and
Preamble of the Constitution and the Karnataka Education Act, 1983
- Government Order dt. 5-2-2022, and the restrictions on the wearing of hijab
also go against our constitutional values of fraternity and human dignity -
Fraternity requires us to be tolerant, and reasonably accommodate the belief and
religious practices of others
- Consequently, the appeal should be allowed to the extent that there shall be
no restriction on the wearing of hijab anywhere in schools and colleges in the State
concerned
- Karnataka Education Act, 1983 (1 of 1995) - Ss. 143, 133, 7 and Preamble
B. Constitution of India - Arts. 21, 21-A, 39(f), 41, 46 and 51-A -
Mandate and object of promoting literacy and education - Literacy of
Muslim girl child who even otherwise finds it difficult to reach the school gate
as compared to a male child - Prohibition on wearing of hijab or headscarf
by Muslim girls in government/government-aided schools and institutions -
Effect of, on abovesaid rights of Muslim girl child
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., impugned Government Order cannot be said to be
contrary to the legitimate State goal of promoting literacy and education - The
Government Order only ensures that the uniform prescribed is adhered to by the
students and it cannot be said that the State is restricting the access to education
to the girl students through such an order
- Uniform is an equaliser of inequalities - Therefore, prescribing uniforms for
children at an impressionable age is not only important but has a salutary effect on
the mental development of the child to grow in an environment of oneness - The
said object is in tune with Art. 39(f) of the Constitution
- Art. 21-A is not applicable as all the students affected in the present case are
over 14 yrs of age - The headscarf is not permitted in the school for the students
who are studying in Class 10+1 or 10+2
- The rights of freedom of thought, conscience and religion contemplated under
the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005, enacted in pursuance of
the Convention on the Rights of Child cannot be larger than the rights available to
the
citizens under the Constitution - The pre-university college is open to all
students of all castes and religions - The doors of such institutions are not closed
to any student of any community
- If a particular student feels that she cannot compromise with the wearing of
headscarf or of any other student to wear any outwardly religious symbol, the
school would be justified not to allow such student, in the larger interest of treating
all the students alike as a part of mandate of Art. 14 of the Constitution, which is
central to the theme of Pt. III of the Constitution
- The students cannot assert that they have a right to education but they
would avail such right as per their own wish and in the manner which they consider
appropriate - Schools are to prepare the students for their future endeavours in life
- Discipline is one of the attributes which the students learn in schools - Defiance
to rules of the school would, in fact, be antithesis of discipline which cannot be
accepted from the students who are yet to attain adulthood - Therefore, they
should grow in an atmosphere of brotherhood and fraternity and not in the
environment of rebellion or defiance
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 198 to 205)
C. Constitution of India - Arts. 25, 26, 19, 21 and 14 - Freedom of
religion and freedom of conscience of students vis-à-vis campus discipline -
Decision of school authorities regarding uniform dress code amounting to a
prohibition on wearing hijab or headscarf by Muslim girls in
government/government-aided schools and institutions - Judicial review -
Scope of interference
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., in view of campus discipline and to ensure parity
amongst students, Court cannot substitute its own views in place of the school
authority except in a case of manifest injustice or to interfere with a decision which
does not pass the test of Wednesbury reasonableness
- Restrictions on freedom of religion and conscience have to be read conjointly
along with other provisions of Pt. III as laid down under the restrictions of Art. 25 -
The object of the impugned Government Order was to ensure that there is parity
amongst the students in terms of uniform - It was only to promote uniformity and
encourage a secular environment in the schools - This is in tune with the right
guaranteed under Art. 14 of the Constitution
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 62 to 94)
D. Constitution of India - Preamble, Arts. 25, 26, 19, 21 and 14 and
Arts. 51-A(e) & (f) - Fraternity and dignity - Prohibition on wearing of
hijab or headscarf by Muslim girls in government/government-aided schools
and institutions - Whether impinges upon the constitutional promise of
fraternity and dignity
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., the impugned Government Order does not impinge on
the constitutional promise of fraternity and dignity - Instead, it promotes an equal
environment where such fraternal values can be imbibed and nurtured without any
hindrance of any kind - The constitutional goal of fraternity would be defeated if
the students are permitted to carry their apparent religious symbols with them to
the classroom - Concept of fraternity will stand fragmented as the apparent
distinction of some of the students wearing headscarf would not form a
homogeneous group of students in a school where education is to be imparted
homogeneously and equally, irrespective of any religious identification mark
- None of the judgments referred to by the appellants deal with an issue of
fraternity in respect of a section of the citizens who wish to carry their religious
symbols to a classroom
- Argument that the wearing of a headscarf provides dignity to the girl students
is also not tenable - The students are attending an all-girls' college - In pre-
university college, the students should look alike, feel alike, think alike and study
together in a cohesive cordial atmosphere - That is the objective behind a uniform,
so as to bring about uniformity in appearances
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 156 to 175)
E. Constitution of India - Arts. 25, 26, 19, 14 and 21 - Secularism -
What is - Prohibition on wearing of hijab or headscarf by Muslim girls in
government/government-aided schools and institutions - Whether violated
the ethic of secularism
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., permitting one religious community to wear their
religious symbols in government/government-aided schools and institutions would
be antithesis to secularism - Thus, the impugned Government Order cannot be
said to be against the ethic of secularism or to the objective of the Karnataka
Education Act, 1983 - In fact, school uniform fosters a sense of "equality"
amongst students - School uniform instils a sense of oneness, diminishes individual
differences, helps focus on learning as students would not be bothered about their
social status, improves discipline, fewer conflicts in school, promotes school spirit -
Generates a sense of belonging, pride, loyalty towards the school, relieves
economic pressure on the parents, ensures equality before the educational
institution, serves the need of a diverse community and promotes a positive sense
of communal identity and does not lead to the growth of disparities of wealth and
style - School is the time to learn and lay the foundation for future pursuits in life
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 2 to 13 and 206 to 209)
F. Education Law - Karnataka Education Act, 1983 (1 of 1995) - Ss.
143, 133, 7 and Preamble - Mandate under, whether permits carrying of,
or, wearing of religious symbols, like hijab or headscarf by Muslim girls, to
school
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., the mandate of the Karnataka Education Act, 1983 is
to renounce sectarian approach - Students carrying their religious beliefs to secular
schools run by the State would be antithesis of the mandate of the statute -
Discipline and uniformity while imparting education, requires wearing of uniform
dress without any addition or subtraction to the same
- Plea based on a booklet published by the Department of Pre-University
Education that uniform is not mandatory, not tenable - Students were following
the uniform prescribed by the College Development Committee - What a
recognised educational institution in terms of S. 2(30) of the Act means, clarified
- Plea that the students wear Rudraksha or a Cross, hence wearing of hijab
should be permitted also, not tenable Government Order dt. 5-2-2022
necessarily excludes all religious symbols visible to the naked eye - Anything worn
by the students under his/her shirt cannot be said to be objectionable in terms of
the said Government Order
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 30 to 61)
G. Constitution of India - Arts. 19, 14, 21, 25, 29 and 51-A(f) - Rights
to conscience and religion, right to culture, right to identity, right to dignity,
autonomy and choice and the principle of secularism - Whether violated by
prohibition on wearing of hijab or headscarf, in prescribed school uniform of
government/government-aided schools and institutions
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., none of the fundamental rights is absolute - The
curtailment of the right is permissible by following due procedure which can
withstand the test of reasonableness - The intent and object of the Government
Order the effect of which is to prohibit the wearing of hijab, are only to maintain
uniformity amongst the students by adherence to the prescribed uniform - It is
reasonable as the same has the effect of regulation of the right guaranteed under
Art. 19(1)(a) - The said prohibition on the wearing of hijab is not a denial of rights
by the State but instead a voluntary act of the students - The State has not denied
admission to the students from attending classes - If they choose not to attend
classes due to the uniform that has been prescribed, it is a voluntary act of such
students and cannot be said to be in violation of Art. 29 or other rights - A student
cannot claim the right to wear a headscarf to a secular school as a matter of right
- The right to education under Art. 21 continues to be available but it is the
choice of the student to avail such right or not - The student is not expected to
put a condition that unless she is permitted to come to a secular school wearing a
headscarf, she would not attend the school - The decision is of the student and
not of school when the student opts not to adhere to the uniform rules
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 135 to 155 and 176 to 186)
H. Constitution of India - Arts. 25, 26 and 14 - Wearing of hijab or
headscarf by Muslim girls - Whether an essential religious practice -
Prohibition of the same in government/government-aided schools and
institutions - Whether violated Arts. 25, 26 and 14 - Interplay of Arts. 25
(1) and 25(2) in this regard
- Essential religious practice of one faith or religion - Determination of
- Whether practices or tenets of any other religion or faith may be
considered
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., right to equality cannot be breached by the State on
the basis of religious faith - Equality before law is to treat all citizens equally,
irrespective of caste, creed, sex or place of birth - Constitution has negatively
worded Art. 25(2), whereunder, the negative State action or laws made by
competent legislature for regulation of secular aspects connected with religion like
"social welfare" and "reform" would have primacy over the positive right to
essential religious practices under Art. 25(1)
- Art. 25(2) is an enabling provision and does not curtail or restrict the
otherwise positive right under Art. 25(1) in the absence of any intervention by the
State in the nature of legislative or executive power
- The essential religious practices of the followers of Sikh faith cannot be made
basis of wearing of hijab/headscarf by the believers of Islamic faith - It would not
be proper to discuss the essential religious practices of the followers of the said
faith without hearing them - The practices of each of the faith have to be
examined on the basis of the tenets of that religion alone
- Courts should not enter into an area of theology and attempt to interpret
religious scriptures
- The practice of wearing hijab could be restricted by the State in terms of the
Government Order - The religious belief cannot be carried to a secular school
maintained out of State funds - It is open to the students to carry their faith in a
school which permits them to wear hijab or any other religious mark
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 126 to 134)
I. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 19, 21, 25 and 26 - Wearing of hijab
or
headscarf
by
Muslim
girls
-
Prohibition
of
the
same
in
government/government-aided schools and institutions - Principle of
reasonable accommodation - Applicability - Fact that such prohibition may
be applicable only in some States, or, may not be applicable in Central
schools - Relevance of
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., the principle of reasonable accommodation does not
arise in the present case - Concept of reasonable accommodation came to be
introduced in respect of a special child or person wherein the Court held that the
real test of a true democracy is the ability of even an insignificant minority to find its
identity - In the case herein, democracy is not in test but the question is inequality
or disparity in the matter of wearing of uniform - Constitutional goals such as
secularism, fraternity, dignity mean equality for all, preference to none - The
accommodation sought is contrary to the spirit of Art. 14 as it would result in
different treatment of students in secular schools who may be following varied
religious beliefs
- Argument that the Kendriya Vidyalayas across the country permit wearing of
headscarf/hijab, not tenable - The schools concerned in the present case fall under
the jurisdiction of the State Government - The schools therein are under the
Central Government - Decision taken by the State Government herein cannot be
said to be arbitrary on that ground alone
- [Ed. : Dhulia, J. did not address the matter issue-wise, but rather in a
compendious manner - Hence, for the disagreeing view of Dhulia, J., see in detail
Shortnote A]
(Paras 187 to 196)
J. Constitution of India - Art. 13 and Arts. 73 and 162 and Arts. 19(2)
and 25(2) - "Law" - Scope of - Restriction/Regulation of fundamental
right(s) by delegated legislation - Permissibility
- Right of Muslim girls studying in government/government-aided
schools to wear hijab or headscarf - If any - College Development
Committee or the Board of Management being empowered by impugned
Government Order dt. 5-2-2022 to prohibit wearing of hijab within school
premises to enforce the discipline of uniform dress code - Such delegation
of power to College Development Committee or the Board of Management
- Whether valid
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., there is no merit in the submission that essential State
functions like putting restrictions on fundamental rights could not have been
delegated to College Development Committee
- It cannot be said that the constitution of the College Development Committee
contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder or that
the regulation of uniform by such Committee is beyond its scope
- Impugned Government Order relates to the powers conferred on the
executive under S. 133 of the Karnataka Education Act, 1983 and rule-making
power of the State under Art. 162 of the Constitution
- "Law", as contemplated under Arts. 19(2) and 25(2), falls within Pt. III of the
Constitution - Therefore, law, as defined under Art. 13(3), would include any
ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage in the
territory of India to have the force of law - The Order issued by the State
Government would thus be a law within the meaning of Art. 13(2) r/w Art. 13(3)
(a), which is a valid exercise of power under Art. 19(1)(a) r/w Art. 19(2), and Art.
25(1) r/w Art. 25(2) of the Constitution
- Furthermore, per Hemant Gupta, J., the impugned Government Order did not
violate R. 11 of the 1995 Rules - Education Law - Karnataka Educational
Institutions (Classification, Regulation and Prescription of Curricula, etc.) Rules,
1995, R. 11
(Paras 30 to 61)
K. Constitution of India - Arts. 25 and 145(3) - Prohibition on wearing
of hijab or headscarf in government/government-aided schools or
institutions - Prayer for analogous adjudication of present matter along
with review in Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion) case pending before a
nine-Judge Constitution Bench - Tenability of
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., it is not necessary to tag the present appeals along
with Kantaru Rajeevaru case - The questions referred to the larger Bench relate to
power of judicial review in the matters of essential religious practices - But the said
question need not be examined in the present matter as the issue herein is whether
a religious practice, which may be an essential religious practice, can be regulated
by the State in a secular institution
(Paras 25 to 27)
L. Constitution of India - Arts. 145(3) and 25 - Substantial question of
law as to interpretation of the Constitution - What is - Whether present
appeal should be referred to five-Judge Bench on the ground of substantial
question of law - Students claiming the right to express their religious
beliefs in a secular institution i.e. right to wear hijab or headscarf in
government/government-aided schools or institutions
- Per Hemant Gupta, J., just because right claimed by students is provided in
the Constitution does not mean that the issue raised becomes a substantial
question of law as to interpretation of the Constitution - Therefore, there is no
need to refer the matter to a five-Judge Constitution Bench
(Paras 28 and 29)
Referring the matter to a larger Bench in view of disagreement at the Bench, the
Supreme Court
Opined :
Per Hemant Gupta, J. (Sudhanshu Dhulia, J., disagreeing)
Question (i) : Whether the appeals should be heard along with Kantaru
Rajeevaru (Right to Religion) case pending before a nine-Judge Constitution
Bench and/or should the present appeals be referred to a five-Judge
Constitution Bench in terms of Article 145(3) of the Constitution?
The review in Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion) case is to consider much
wider questions. The argument that the matter should be referred to a larger Bench
to be heard along with such referred cases does not warrant consideration. The
questions referred to the larger Bench relate to the power of judicial review in
matters of essential religious practices. But the said question need not be examined
in the present matter as the issue herein is whether a religious practice, which may
be an essential religious practice, can be regulated by the State in a secular
institution. Therefore, it is not necessary to tag the present appeals along with
Kantaru Rajeevaru case.
(Para 27)
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn.,
The argument that the present appeals involve a substantial question of law as
to the interpretation of the Constitution, and thus should be referred to the Bench
of five Judges in terms of Article 145(3) of the Constitution is not tenable.
(Para 28)
The issue in the present matter is however as to whether the students can
enforce their religious beliefs in a secular institution. Thus, the issues raised do not
become a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution
only for the reason that the right claimed by the appellants is provided under the
Constitution. Hence, there is no need to refer the matter to a larger Bench. It is
also not necessary that the matter should be heard along with Kantaru Rajeevaru
case.
(Para 29)
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn.,
Question (ii) : Whether the State Government could delegate its decision to
implement the wearing of uniform to the College Development Committee
or the Board of Management and whether the Government Order insofar as
it empowers a College Development Committee to decide on the
restriction/prohibition or otherwise on headscarves is ex facie violative of
Section 143 of the Act?
There is no merit in the said argument raised by the appellants. The College
Development Committee is envisaged to be an in-house mechanism to ensure
better utilisation of grants as well as maintaining academic standards and
development of infrastructure. Such directions are relatable to Section 133(3) and
Section 145 of the Act. In any case, the constitution of the College Development
Committee is not in conflict with any of the provisions of the Act. The said circular
published in the Karnataka Gazette was issued in exercise of the executive powers
of the State, supplementing the provisions of the Act and not supplanting all or any
of the provisions thereof.
(Para 36)
The Government Order is in two parts. The first part is the Preamble which gives
the background leading to the order impugned before the High Court. The second
part i.e. the operative part of the order alone bears the Government Order number
and date. The order mandates that the uniform prescribed by the College
Development Committee or the Board of Management should be worn. The
appellants have though understood the order to be interfering with their essential
religious practices.
(Para 37)
The executive power under Article 73 extends to all matters in respect of which
Parliament has the power to make laws or under Article 162 in respect of the
matters where the legislature of the State has the power to make laws. The
question is whether restrictions can be imposed by the executive in respect of the
rights specified under Part III such as Articles 19, 21, 25 and 31-A.
(Para 38)
State of M.P. V. Bharat Singh, AIR 1967 SC 1170; State of W.B. V. Anwar Ali
Jawaya Kapur V. State of Punjab, AIR 1955 SC 549, referred to
There is no dispute about the proposition that in the absence of any statute or
statutory rule, but in the exercise of executive power, the State can issue an
executive order. However, the issue is whether restrictions under Part III of the
Constitution can only be imposed by way of a statutory law and not by way of
executive power.
(Para 39)
OnLine SC 1224; Dwarka Nath Tewari V. State of Bihar, AIR 1959 SC 249;
referred to
"Law", as contemplated under Articles 19(2) and 25(2), falls within Part III of
the Constitution. Therefore, law, as defined under Article 13(3), would include any
ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage in the
territory of India to have the force of law. The order issued by the State
Government would thus be a law within the meaning of Article 13(2) read with
Article 13(3)(a), which is a valid exercise of power under Article 19(1)(a) read with
Article 19(2), and Article 25(1) read with Article 25(2) of the Constitution.
(Para 48)
The Government Order relates to the powers conferred on the executive under
Section 133 of the Act and the rule-making power of the State under Article 162 of
the Constitution. The said Government Order does not run contrary to any of the
provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. Therefore, the executive
was well within its jurisdiction to ensure that the students come in the uniform
prescribed by the College Development Committee.
(Para 49)
The College Development Committees so constituted consists of Member of the
Legislative Assembly, representatives of the students, faculty members, etc.
Therefore, such authority is a representative body of the students and teachers
including the Member of the Legislative Assembly and the Principal of the College as
Member Secretary. Such a Committee cannot be said to be beyond the scope of
Section 143 of the Act. Such authority established in the exercise of the powers
vested with the State Government is not in contravention of any of the provisions
of the statute. In terms of Article 162 of the Constitution, the State Government
in
the exercise of its executive power could create the College Development
committee as such Committee does not contravene any of the provisions of the
statute or the rules framed thereunder.
(Para 50)
The State Government has the power to constitute a College Development
Committee by Notification dated 31-1-2014 in terms of Section 143 of the Act.
The State Government could confer its power to be exercised by such
office/authority subordinate to the State Government. It is noted that the word
"authority" has not been defined under the Act. The authority contemplated by the
Act could be a non-statutory authority such as of a person or a group of persons
who may be authorised to exercise powers under Section 143 of the Act.
(Para 51)
Further, it is well-settled that executive powers can be used to supplement the
statutory rules. It is true that the Government cannot amend or supersede
statutory rules by administrative instructions, but if the rules are silent on any
particular point, the Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and
issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed thereunder.
(Para 52)
Sant Ram Sharma V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 SC 1910; Union of India V.
to
1448; Joint Action Committee of Air Line Pilots' Assn. of India V. DG of Civil
The Preamble of the Act aims towards fostering harmonious development of the
mental and physical faculties of students and cultivating a scientific and secular
outlook through education.
(Para 53)
The curricula under Section 7(2) of the Act is substantially pari materia with the
fundamental duties enumerated in Part IV-A of the Constitution inserted by the
42nd Amendment and required to be followed by the institutions covered under the
Act.
(Para 54)
The said provisions show that the mandate of the statute is to renounce
sectional diversities, to develop humanism and to cultivate scientific and secular
outlook. The sectarian approach that certain students will carry their religious beliefs
to secular schools run by the State would be the antithesis of the mandate of the
statute. All students need to act and follow the discipline of the school. Out of the
many steps required to ensure uniformity while imparting education, one of them is
to wear the uniform dress without any addition or subtraction to the same. Any
modification to the uniform would cease to be the uniform, defeating the very
purpose of prescribing under Rule 11 and as mandated by the College Development
Committee.
(Para 55)
Reference was made to an extract which appears to be from a booklet
published by the Department of Pre-University Education containing guidelines for
the year 2021-2022. It is contended that such guidelines have contemplated that
uniform is not mandatory and that some College Principals and Management
Committee have imposed uniforms as mandatory, which is illegal.
(Para 56)
In respect of the said contention, I find that the students were following the
uniform prescribed by the College Development Committee. It is not the case of
any of the students that they were not wearing the uniform for the academic
session 2021-2022. The only claim raised was in relation to the right to wear the
headscarf during the academic year 2021-2022, the year in controversy, and to
which the guidelines relate.
(Para 57)
The recognised educational institution in terms of Section 2(30) of the Act
means an educational institution recognised under the Act and includes one deemed
to be recognised thereunder. The recognition of educational institutions is
contemplated by Section 36 of the Act whereas the educational institutions
established and run by the State Government or by the authority sponsored by the
Central or the State Government or by a local authority and approved by the
competent authority shall be deemed to be the educational institution recognised
under the Act.
(Para 58)
The students are not disputing the mandate to wear uniforms. It appears that
the guidelines have been made part of the brochure without taking into
consideration Rule 11 of the Karnataka Educational Institutions (Classification,
Regulation and Prescription of Curricula, etc.) Rules, 1995 ("the Rules") which
contemplates that every recognised educational institution may specify its own set
of uniform. Therefore, the guidelines run counter to the statutory Rule 11 framed in
exercise of the powers conferred under Section 145 of the Act. Thus, the uniform,
having been prescribed in terms of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder, the
guidelines to the contrary are non est and in any case had not been followed during
the academic year in question.
(Para 59)
The Government Order dated 5-2-2022 contemplates that the prescribed
uniform should be followed. It necessarily excludes all religious symbols visible to
the naked eye. The argument that the students wear Rudraksha or a Cross is
mentioned only to deal with an argument so raised. Anything worn by the students
under his/her shirt cannot be said to be objectionable in terms of the Government
Order issued.
(Para 60)
Therefore, it cannot be said that the constitution of the College Development
Committee contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules made
thereunder or that the regulation of uniform by such Committee is beyond its
scope.
(Para 61)
Question (iii) : What is the ambit and scope of right to freedom of
"conscience" and "religion" under Article 25?
At the outset, it is pertinent to mention that the Constitution does not define the
term "religion", though it is used in Articles 15, 16, 25, 26, 27, 28 and 30.
(Para 62)
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. XI, p. 979, Vol. VII, p. 39, dated 4-11-1948;
CAD Vol. VII, pp. 819, 831-32, 838; CAD Vol. VIII; Constituent Assembly, Vol.
VII, p. 781, referred to
Constituent Assembly Debates - Extent to which relevant
In respect of the Constituent Assembly Debates, the Court could only search for
the objective intent of the legislature primarily in the words used in the enactment,
aided by such historical material as reports of statutory committees. While it is not
proper to take into consideration the individual opinions of Members of the
Assembly to construe the meaning of a particular clause when a question is raised
about whether a certain phrase or expression was up for consideration at all or not,
a reference to the debates may be permitted.
(Para 71)
What is said during the debates is not conclusive or binding upon the Court
because several members may have expressed several views, all of which may not
be reflected in the provision finally enacted. Therefore, the views of the members of
the Constituent Assembly are not really to be relied upon after the Court in a
number of judgments has expressed about the rights under Article 25 of the
Constitution.
(Para 73)
Thus, the debates show the in-depth knowledge of the members of the
Constituent Assembly at that relevant point in time, but more than 70 years later,
with the interpretation of various provisions by the constitutional courts, it is not
advisable to rely solely upon views of the individual members in such debates.
(Para 74)
Hindu Religious Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur
Mutt, 1954 SCR 1005 : AIR 1954 SC 282; National Legal Services Authority V.
Circumstances under which the Government issued the impugned Order
dated 5-2-2022
It was on 23-6-2018, that the College Development Committee, Udupi,
prescribed a dress code for the students. On 31-12-2019, the College
Development Committee of another college i.e. Kundapura Pre-University College,
Udupi, unanimously resolved that the uniform of the students for the academic year
would continue to be the same as one prescribed in the previous years.
(Para 78)
The students at the time of admission to the pre-university course undertook to
comply with all the rules and regulations of the Pre-University College. It was
pointed out that suddenly in the middle of the academic term, the issue of hijab
was generated in social media by the activists of the Popular Front of India. The
police papers in this respect were handed over to the High Court. The charge-sheet
was filed. Thereafter, some representations were made by the parents of the
students and/or students requesting hijab to be worn in classrooms.
(Para 79)
The College Development Committee directed to maintain the status quo. Five
students thereafter filed Writ Petition No. 2146 of 2022 on 29-1-2022 seeking an
interim prayer that they be allowed to continue to attend school wearing
headscarves. On 31-1-2022, the College Development Committee, Udupi, decided
that students must not wear hijab in classrooms whereas the Kundapura Pre-
University College resolved it on 2-2-2022. There was a counter-reaction to the
demands raised. It is in these circumstances that the Government issued the
impugned Order dated 5-2-2022.
(Paras 80 and 14 to 21)
75; V. Kamalam V. MGR Medical University, WP No. 5981 of 2009, order dated
30-6-2009 (Mad); Staff Assn. V. Sir M. Venkata Subba Rao, Matriculation Higher
Campus discipline - Scope of judicial review - Court does not substitute its
own views in place of the decision of school authority except in a case of
manifest injustice or to interfere with a decision which does not pass the
test of Wednesbury reasonableness
The legality of Rule 11 of the Rules is not under challenge. In terms of the said
Rule, the educational institutions have a right to prescribe a uniform to the students
attending the said school. The scope of judicial review of the decisions of the
educational institutions vis-à-vis its pupil is narrower than a purely administrative
action.
(Para 82)
referred to
In the matters of campus discipline of the educational institutions, the Court
does not substitute its own views in place of the school authority except in a case
of manifest injustice or to interfere with a decision which does not pass the test of
Wednesbury reasonableness.
(Para 83)
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. V. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223
referred to
Educational institutions are temples of learning and thus discipline is required to
be maintained between the teacher and the taught.
(Para 84)
SCEC 125; Bihar State Madarasa Education Board V. Madarasa Hanfia Arabic
The right under Article 19(1)(g) is not absolute but is subject to reasonable
restrictions under Article 19(6) in the larger interest and welfare of the student
community and to promote merit, achieve excellence and curb malpractices, fees
and admissions could certainly be regulated.
(Para 86)
SCEC 1, referred to
Restrictions on freedom of religion and conscience have to be read
conjointly along with other provisions of Part III as laid down under the
restrictions of Article 25(1) of the Constitution
Religious freedoms guaranteed by Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution are
intended to be a guide to community life and ordain every religion to act according
to its cultural and social demands to establish an egalitarian social order. Articles 25
and 26, therefore, strike a balance between the rigidity of the right of religious belief
and faith and their intrinsic restrictions in matters of religion, and religious beliefs and
guaranteed freedom of conscience to commune with his Cosmos/Creator and
realise his spiritual self.
(Para 91)
Thus, religion believes in conscience and ethical and moral precepts. The
freedom of conscience is what binds a man to his own conscience and whatever
moral or ethical principles regulate the lives of men. There is a fine distinction
between freedom of conscience and religion. The scope of protection under Article
25 goes beyond religious beliefs. This provision affords to all persons freedom to
beliefs which may not necessarily be religious but which may spring from one's
conscience. Freedom of religion, on the other hand, grants one the right to follow
one's faith, the established form of which gives a set of ethical norms to its
followers and defines the rituals, observances, ceremonies and modes of worship.
(Para 92)
The right to freedom of conscience and religion needs to be examined in light of
the restrictions provided under Article 25(1) of the Constitution. Such right is not
just subject to public order, morality and health but also "other provisions of Part
III". This would also include Article 14 of the Constitution which provides for equality
before law. The Court reiterated that Article 25(1) is not only subject to public
order, morality and health, but also to other provisions of Part III of the
Constitution.
(Para 93)
referred to
The object of the Government Order was to ensure that there is parity amongst
the students in terms of uniform. It was only to promote uniformity and encourage
a secular environment in the schools. This is in tune with the right guaranteed under
Article 14 of the Constitution. Hence, restrictions on freedom of religion and
conscience have to be read conjointly along with other provisions of Part III as laid
down under the restrictions of Article 25(1).
(Para 94)
Question (iv) : What is the ambit and scope of essential religious practices
under Article 25 of the Constitution?
The essential religious practice doctrine was developed when the State interfered
with certain practices qua religious places or religious festivities or performance of
religious rituals in public or where such practices curtailed fundamental rights.
(Paras 95 to 126)
V. State of Bihar, AIR 1958 SC 731; Valia Peedikakkandi Katheessa Umma V.
Pathakkalan Narayanath Kunhamu, AIR 1964 SC 275; N.K. Mohd. Sulaiman Sahib
V. N.C. Mohd. Ismail Saheb, AIR 1966 SC 792; Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano
487 : AIR 1954 SC 388 : 1954 SCR 1055; Durgah Committee, Ajmer V. Syed
Hussain Ali, (1962) 1 SCR 383 : AIR 1961 SC 1402; Commr., Hindu Religious
Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, 1954 SCR
1005 : AIR 1954 SC 282; Venkataramana Devaru V. State of Mysore, AIR 1958
SC 255; Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC
cited
Mulla's Mohammedan Law, 5th Edn., 2019, at pp. 14 and 19; Mulla's
Mohammedan Law, 18th Edn., para 286, at p. 308, referred to
Right to equality cannot be breached by the State on the basis of religious
faith - Equality before the law is to treat all citizens equally, irrespective of
caste, creed, sex or place of birth
The essential religious practice in the cases referred to related to : (i) the right of
management of places of worship, (ii) the right of individual qua places of worship
and (iii) curtailment of fundamental rights of individuals through religious practices.
The claim of the appellants is not to perform a religious activity in a religious
institution but to wear a headscarf in a public place as a matter of social conduct
expected from the believers of the faith. But in the present, the students want to
subjugate their freedom of choice of dress to be regulated by religion rather than by
the State while they are in fact students of a State school. Equality before the law is
to treat all citizens equally, irrespective of caste, creed, sex or place of birth. Such
equality cannot be breached by the State on the basis of religious faith.
(Paras 126 to 127)
Regulation of secular aspects
The Constitution has negatively worded Article 25(2) of the Constitution. Article
25(2)(a) gives primacy to laws made by the competent legislature for regulation of
secular aspects and Article 25(2)(b) gives primacy to "social welfare" and "reform".
In other words, if the State seeks to regulate the economic, political, financial or
other secular aspects connected with religion, the State law is to
have primacy over the proposed right. Similarly, if a particular practice/belief/part of
any religion is in existence and is found to be subjected to either "social welfare" or
"reform", such right will have to give way to "social welfare" and "reform".
(Para 128)
Article 25(2) of the Constitution is an enabling provision and does not
curtail or restrict the otherwise positive right under Article 25(1) in the
absence of any intervention by the State in the nature of legislative or
executive power
Article 25(2) being negatively couched is clearly an enabling provision which
provides the power to the State in the matters mentioned therein. The said
provision does not curtail or restrict the otherwise positive right under Article 25(1)
in the absence of any intervention by the State in the nature of legislative or
executive power.
(Para 129)
Religion should not be understood in a narrow sectarian sense but by
encompassing our ethos that all should be treated alike. A secular State means
rising above all differences of religions and attempting to secure the good of all its
citizens irrespective of their religious beliefs and practices. The faith or belief of a
person is immaterial from the point of view of the State. For the State, all are equal
and all are entitled to be treated equally. The constitutional promises of social
justice, liberty of belief, faith or worship and equality of status and of opportunity
cannot be attained unless the State eschews the religion, faith or belief of a person
from its consideration altogether while dealing with him. Secularism is thus more
than a passive attitude of religious tolerance. It is a positive concept of equal
treatment of all religions. Therefore, the object of the State is to bridge the gap
between different sections of society and to harmonise the relationship between
the citizens to ensure the growth of the community in all spheres i.e. social,
economic and political.
(Para 130)
Comparison with the rights of the followers of the Sikh faith by arguing that
since kirpan is allowed in terms of Explanation I to Article 25, hence
wearing of hijab should also be permissible in government/government-
aided schools, not tenable
The appellants have also made a comparison with the rights of the followers of
the Sikh faith by arguing that since kirpan is allowed in terms of Explanation I to
Article 25, therefore, the students who want to wear headscarves should be equally
protected as in the case of the followers of the Sikh students. The Full Bench of the
that the essential religious practice of the followers of the Sikh faith includes
retaining hair unshorn, which is one of the most important and fundamental tenets
of the Sikh religion.
(Para 131)
It appears that no appeal has been filed against the judgment of the Full Bench in
Gurleen Kaur case. Thus, the said judgment is final as on today. The issue in the
present appeals is not the essential religious practices of the people following the
Sikh faith. It would not be proper to discuss the essential religious practices of the
followers of the said faith without hearing them. The practices of each faith have to
be examined on the basis of the tenets of that religion alone. The essential religious
practices of the followers of the Sikh faith cannot be made the basis of wearing of
hijab/headscarf by the believers of the Islamic faith.
(Para 132)
Courts should not enter into an area of theology and attempt to interpret
religious scriptures
Courts should not enter into an area of theology and attempt to interpret
religious scriptures.
(Para 133)
to
The practice of wearing hijab could be restricted by the State in terms of
the Government Order
There is no dispute about the proposition canvassed. The practice of wearing
hijab may be a "religious practice" or an "essential religious practice" or it may be
social conduct for the women of the Islamic faith. The interpretations by the
believers of the faith about wearing of a headscarf are the belief or faith of an
individual. Religious belief cannot be carried to a secular school maintained out of
State funds. It is open to the students to carry their faith in a school which permits
them to wear hijab or any other mark, maybe tilak, which can be identified to a
person holding a particular religious belief but the State is within its jurisdiction to
direct that the apparent symbols of religious beliefs cannot be carried to a school
maintained by the State from the State funds. Thus, the practice of wearing hijab
could be restricted by the State in terms of the Government Order.
(Para 134)
Question (v) : Whether fundamental rights of freedom of expression under
Article 19(1)(a) and right of privacy under Article 21 are mutually exclusive
or are they complementary to each other; and whether the Government
Order does not meet the injunction of reasonableness for the purposes of
Article 21 and Article 14 of the Constitution?
It is argued that a citizen is entitled to express oneself by not just wearing a
dress of her choice, but also in the context of her cultural traditions and that such
dress which allows others to identify that she belongs to a particular community,
&
embraces a particular culture, and represents the values of that culture.
(Para 135)
It is submitted that there cannot be any law which prohibits such expression as
long as it does not disturb the public order or violates the accepted norms of
decency and morality as prescribed by law. It is contended that it is the
responsibility of the State to protect the composite culture of India, but the same
has been intervened through the Government Order, contrary to the rights
enshrined in the Constitution. A citizen or student does not forego her fundamental
rights and protections guaranteed under the Constitution, which includes the
freedom to express her culture, the moment she steps into the school premises.
It
is also submitted that wearing an article of clothing, reflecting the distinct culture of
a citizen, is consistent with the fundamental right of a citizen to conserve her
culture under Article 29(1) and it is the fundamental duty of citizens to preserve and
protect that culture which is part of the rich heritage of India.
(Para 136)
The argument of the appellants is based upon the preamble of the Government
Order dated 5-2-2022 wherein it was recited that prohibition of a headscarf or a
garment covering the head is not violative of Article 25 of the Constitution, apart
from the fact that it is in terms of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. It is
also argued that the State Government has not mentioned the role of Popular
Front of India in the order passed, therefore, the State Government is not justified
to refer to Popular Front of India during the course of arguments. In other words,
the State cannot supplement the reasons other than what is mentioned in the
order.
(Para 137)
The object of the Act is to maintain discipline and control over the educational
institutions in the State with a view to foster the harmonious development of the
mental and physical faculties of the students. Therefore, discipline and control are
with regard to educational institutions, and not with regard to students.
(Para 145)
Plea based on Rule 11 of the Karnataka Educational Institutions
(Classification, Regulation and Prescription of Curricula, etc.) Rules, 1995
not tenable
Rule 11 of the Rules has mandated the recognised educational institutions
including private institutions to prescribe uniforms. Once the uniform is fixed, it is
provided that it shall not be changed for the period of next five years and when it is
intended to be changed, notice for the same shall be given to the parents at least
one year in advance. It is thus argued that specifications regarding the disallowance
of hijab were applied abruptly at the end of the academic section and also applied
retrospectively when the girls had been stopped from entering school on or about
31-12-2021, though the Government Order was notified on 5-2-2022.
(Para 147)
There is no merit in the above arguments raised by the appellants. The
Government Order is in the exercise of the executive powers of the State. The
reasons for enactment of a statute, rules and statutory order are not required to
be part of it. It is only when the issue of constitutionality is raised, the executive is
required to satisfy the court about the legality of the action taken. The right under
Article 19(1)(a) as a right of expression to dress as per one's own will, however, is
also subject to reasonable restrictions under clause (2) of Article 19. The State has
not put a restriction on the exercise of the right conferred under Article 19(1)(a)
but has regulated the same in a manner that during school hours on working days
and in class, the students shall wear the uniform as prescribed. Since it is a
regulatory provision for wearing of uniform, hence, the decision of the State
Government mandating the College Development Committee to ensure the
students wear the uniform as prescribed does not violate the freedom guaranteed
under Article 19(1)(a), rather reinforces the right to equality under Article 14. The
College Development Committee is constituted in terms of the statutory provisions
and, therefore, the direction of the State that the College Development Committee
shall ensure that the students wear the dress as prescribed cannot be said to be
violative of Part III of the Constitution.
(Para 148)
Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution - Right under, whether absolute -
Test of invasion of Article 19(1)(a)
The test of invasion of Article 19(1)(a) is required to be examined by the test of
doctrine of pith and substance.
(Para 149)
referred to
It is to be observed that the Act, Rules and the orders issued under the said Act
were enacted to provide for better organisation, development, discipline and control
of
the educational institutions in the State. The primary object was encouraging
holistic development through education and its various facets. The prescribing of
uniform is only an incidental action in furtherance of the core objectives of the Act.
Therefore, keeping in view the said test, some incidental effect on the right under
Article 19(1)(a) cannot be said to be an unreasonable restriction, also being mindful
of the fact that it is not an absolute right.
(Para 150)
The freedom of expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution means the
right to express one's opinions by word of mouth, printing, picture, or in any other
manner. It includes the freedom of communication and the right to propagate or
publish one's opinion. The communication of ideas could be made through any
medium, newspaper, magazine or movie. Such right is though subject to
reasonable restrictions on grounds set out under Article 19(2) of the Constitution.
(Para 151)
The protection provided by fundamental rights comes in isolated pools. On the
contrary, these rights together provide a comprehensive guarantee against
excesses by State authorities.
(Para 153)
Thus, the rights of citizens of this country cannot be compartmentalised into one
right or the other. The rights of citizens have to be read together so as to provide a
purposeful meaning to Part III of the Constitution. Thus, all the fundamental rights
under Part III of the Constitution are to be read in aid of each other. They constitute
a bouquet of rights which cannot be read in isolation and have to be read together
as a whole.
(Para 154)
However, it is to be noted that none of the fundamental rights is absolute. The
curtailment of the right is permissible by following due procedure which can
withstand the test of reasonableness. The intent and object of the Government
Order is only to maintain uniformity amongst the students by adhering to the
prescribed uniform. It is reasonable as the same has the effect of regulation of the
right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a). Thus, the right of freedom of expression
under Article 19(1)(a) and of privacy under Article 21 are complementary to each
other and not mutually exclusive and do meet the injunction of reasonableness for
the purposes of Article 21 and Article 14.
(Para 155)
Question (vi) : Whether the impugned Government Order impinges upon
the constitutional promise of fraternity and dignity under the Preamble as
well as fundamental duties enumerated under Articles 51-A(e) and (f) of
the Constitution
It is important to interpret the expressions "fraternity" and "dignity" in view of
the objective behind the Government Order. The concepts of fraternity and dignity
do not stand alone but have to be inferred from the context, circumstances and the
purpose sought to be achieved. There is no dispute, as asserted in the written
submissions, that the purpose of introducing fraternity as a constitutional value is to
invoke horizontal or social sensitivity towards inequalities, in addition to the vertical,
or top-down political prescriptions towards inequalities. Fraternity is in fact social
sensitivity. The students herein are in the age group of 15 to 18 years. The seed of
education should germinate equally amongst all students. Therefore, the
Preambular goal of justice, liberty, equality or fraternity would be better served by
removing any religious differences, and inequalities and treating students alike
before they attain the age of adulthood.
(Para 165)
The students have been given a uniform platform to grow and take a quantum
leap in their further pursuits. The homogeneity amongst the students in the matter
of uniform would prepare them to grow without any distinction on the basis of
religious symbols, if not worn during classroom studies in a pre-university college.
(Para 166)
Still, further, the Hindi word for fraternity is (ayed) that is, brotherhood.
Brotherhood is amongst all the citizens of the country and not of a particular
community. Fraternity is the antithesis of a segmented society wherein all humans
are treated equally and their innate genius is allowed an outlet by exposing them to
equal opportunities.
(Para 167)
There is no merit in the argument that the Government Order has created an
arbitrary barrier to education and to fraternal spaces.
(Para 168)
Fraternity is a noble goal but cannot be seen from the prism of one community
alone. It is a goal for all citizens of the country irrespective of caste, creed, sex and
religion. The abstract idea of fraternity, as discussed in the judgments referred to by
the appellants, has to be applied to the ground realities wherein some students
wearing headscarves in a secular school run by the State Government would stand
out and overtly appear differently. The concept of fraternity will stand fragmented
as the apparent distinction of some of the students wearing headscarves would not
form a homogeneous group of students in a school where education is to be
imparted homogeneously and equally, irrespective of any religious identification
mark. The constitutional goal of fraternity would be defeated if the students are
permitted to carry their apparent religious symbols with them to the classroom.
None of the judgments referred to by the appellants deals with an issue of fraternity
in respect of a section of the citizens who wish to carry their religious symbols to a
classroom. The constitutional goal as emanating from the Preamble would not be
achieved if fraternity is given a narrow meaning in respect of the students identifying
themselves with the religious symbols in the classroom.
(Para 169)
There is no merit in the argument raised that the use of the phrase "behave in a
fraternal manner by transcending their group identity as the young students" in the
impugned order can be said to be violative of any law. Before a student goes for
higher studies in college, she should not grow up with a specific identity, but under
the umbrella of equality guaranteed under Article 14 transcending the group identity.
Religion, which is a private affair, has no meaning in a secular school run by the
State. The students are free to profess their religion and carry out their religious
activities other than when they are attending a classroom where religious identities
should be left behind.
(Para 170)
The Government Order does not impinge on the constitutional promise of
fraternity and dignity. Instead, it promotes an equal environment where such
fraternal values can be imbibed and nurtured without any hindrance of any kind.
(Para 171)
In an earlier matter, the issue as to whether a person professing Islam can sport
a beard as a member of the Indian Air Force came up for consideration before the
Court. In respect of an airman employed by the Indian Air Force, a beard was not
found permissible in terms of the Rules framed.
(Para 173)
SCEC 404; Sri Adi Visheshwara of Kashi Vishwanath Temple V. State of U.P.,
OnLine P&H 2245 : 2008 Lab IC 4004; Ansari Aaftab Ahmed V. Union of India,
LPA No. 196 of 2008, order dated 31-7-2008 (P&H), referred to
Maulana Wahiduddin Khan : Islam the Voice of Human Nature, referred to
The uniform prescribed would lose its meaning if the student is permitted to add
or subtract any part of the uniform. The schools are nurseries for training the
citizens for future endeavours. If the norms of the uniform in the school are
permitted to be breached, then what kind of discipline is sought to be imparted to
the students? The freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) does
not extend to the wearing of a headscarf. Once the uniform is prescribed, all
students are bound to follow the uniform so prescribed. The uniform is to assimilate
the students without any distinction of rich or poor, irrespective of caste, creed or
faith and for the harmonious development of the mental and physical faculties of
the students and to cultivate a secular outlook. The wearing of hijab is not
permitted only during school time, therefore, the students can wear it everywhere
else except in schools. The wearing of anything other than the uniform is not
expected in schools run by the State as secular institutions. In a secular school
maintained at the cost of the State, the State is competent to not permit anything
other than the uniform.
(Para 174)
The argument that the wearing of a headscarf provides dignity to the girl
students is also not tenable. The students are attending an all-girls college. The
students are at liberty to carry their religious symbols outside the schools but in pre
-university college, the students should look alike, feel alike, think alike and study
together in a cohesive cordial atmosphere. That is the objective behind a uniform,
so as to bring about uniformity in appearances.
(Para 175)
Question (vii) : Whether, if the wearing of hijab is considered an essential
religious practice, the student can seek the right to wear a headscarf to a
secular school as a matter of right?
The argument is that hijab is an additional cloth worn on the head, and that it
does not cause any harm to any other person. The argument is based upon
Conscience and Religion (Article 25), Culture [Articles 29 and 51-A(f)], Identity
(Articles 19 and 21 - Autonomy, Dignity, Choice) and Secularism (Articles
19 and 21 - Autonomy, Dignity, Choice), therefore, the students have been
wrongly denied admission to an educational institution on the basis of religion. The
contention of the students is that by denying the right to wear a headscarf, they
have also been denied to attend classes which stands foul with the mandate of
The surest wayt legal research!
Article 29(2) of the Constitution.
(Para 176)
There is no merit in the said argument. The schools run by the State are open
for admission irrespective of any religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
Even the Act mandates that the students would be admitted without any restriction
on such grounds. However, the students are required to follow the discipline of the
school in the matter of uniforms. They have no right to be in the school in violation
of the mandate of the uniform prescribed under the statute and the Rules.
(Para 177)
(2006) 5 CTC 121, referred to
The State has not denied admission to the students attending classes. If they
choose not to attend classes due to the uniform that has been prescribed, it is a
voluntary act of such students and cannot be said to be in violation of Article 29 by
the State. It is not a denial of rights by the State but instead a voluntary act of the
students. It would thus not amount to a denial of the right to education if a student,
by choice, does not attend the school. A student, thus, cannot claim the right to
wear a headscarf to a secular school as a matter of right.
(Para 179)
Question (viii) : Whether a student-citizen in the constitutional scheme is
expected to surrender her fundamental rights under Articles 19, 21 and 25
of the Constitution as a precondition for accessing education in a State
institution?
The Government Order does not take away any right of a student available to
her under Article 21 of the Constitution, nor does it contemplate any barter of
fundamental rights. The right to education under Article 21 continues to be available
but it is the choice of the student to avail such right or not. The student is not
expected to put a condition that unless she is permitted to come to a secular
school wearing a headscarf, she would not attend the school. The decision is of the
student and not of the school when the student opts not to adhere to the uniform
rules.
(Para 186)
Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In re, 1959 SCR 995 : AIR 1958 SC 956; Nar Singh
referred to
Bhairav Acharya:" The Four Parts of Privacy in India", Economic & Political Weekly
(2015), Vol. 50, Issue 22 at p. 32, referred to
Question (ix) : Whether in the constitutional scheme, the State is obligated
to ensure "reasonable accommodation" to its citizens?
The argument is that the school should reasonably accommodate the students
for wearing a headscarf as it does not interfere with any of the rights of their fellow
students.
(Para 187)
The argument of the appellants is however that they are seeking reasonable
accommodation by the school authorities to permit them to attend school wearing
matching headscarf/hijab in addition to the prescribed uniform which would be in
conformity with the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 25 and 21 of the
Constitution.
(Para 192)
The concept of reasonable accommodation came to be introduced in respect of
that the real test of a true democracy is the ability of even an insignificant minority
to find its identity under the Constitution. In the case therein, students, believers of
Jehovah, expressed their inability to sing the National Anthem though they were
extending all respect when the National Anthem was to be played. In the case
herein, democracy is not in the test but the question is whether the school, having
prescribed the uniform, has a right to insist that all students wear the same uniform
so as not to have inequality or disparity in the matter of wearing of uniform. Rule
11 in fact shows that any change in uniform can be affected only after serving
notice to the parents and once uniform is prescribed, it cannot be changed in five
years, meaning thereby that there is a continuity of the uniform and the period for
which uniform is prescribed is to be followed.
(Para 193)
The argument that the Kendriya Vidyalayas across the country permit the
wearing of headscarf/hijab for Muslim girls, therefore, the same should be followed
in the State as well is not tenable. Kendriya Vidyalaya is an autonomous body under
the Ministry of Education, Government of India. The purpose of the same is to meet
the educational needs of children of transferable Central Government employees,
including Defence and Paramilitary personnel by providing a common programme of
education. The two institutions, one under the State and the other under the
Central Government have independent organisations and scope of work. It may be
that some States may permit headscarves and others do not. It is a decision taken
by the State which cannot be said to be arbitrary on that ground alone.
(Para 194)
Thus, though the principle of reasonable accommodation has been adopted by
the courts in our country, such contention does not arise in the present case.
Constitutional goals such as secularism, fraternity, and dignity mean equality for all,
preference to none. The accommodation sought is contrary to the spirit of Article
14 as it would result in different treatment of students in secular schools who may
be following varied religious beliefs.
(Para 196)
Question (x) : Whether the Government Order is contrary to the legitimate
State interest of promoting literacy and education as mandated under
Articles 21, 21-A, 39(f), 41, 46 and 51-A of the Constitution?
It is submitted that the Government Order is not in the "best interest of the
child", especially the child's identity, social well-being and physical, emotional and
intellectual development in terms of Section 2(9) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
(Para 198)
Reference is also made to the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act,
2005 enacted in view of the international treaty, Convention on the Rights of the
Child, acceded by India on 11-12-1992.
(Para 199)
The Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005, enacted in pursuance
of the Convention on the Rights of Child, has been referred to contemplate that the
right of freedom of thought, conscience and religion are to be subservient to the
rights provided under the Constitution of India. However, such rights cannot be
larger than the rights available to the citizens under the Constitution. Therefore,
freedom of religion in the Convention or the Act is not an independent right but has
to be read along with the constitutional provisions.
(Para 200)
The pre-university college is open to all students of all castes and religions. The
doors of such institutions are not closed to any student of any community. The
object of the State is to provide an opportunity for students to study in secular
schools. It is for the students to avail such a facility. If a particular student feels that
she cannot compromise with the wearing of a headscarf or of any other student to
wear any outwardly religious symbol, the school would be justified not to allow
such student, in the larger interest of treating all the students alike as a part of the
mandate of Article 14, which is central to the theme of Part III of the Constitution.
The headscarf is not permitted in the school for the students who are studying in
Class 10+1 or 10+2. The students have many years ahead of them where they
can carry on their religious faith but the Government Order mandating the wearing
of uniforms cannot be faulted since the object is in tune with the principles of the
Constitution.
(Para 201)
The right to education has been read into the right to life in Article 21. The
argument is that a child who is denied the right to access education is not only
deprived of his right to live with dignity, he is also deprived of his right to freedom of
speech and expression enshrined in Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. The right to
education is thus a part of Article 21. The State has not put any restriction to avail
such right of education. The right to education is available to every student. The
State has only regulated the right in a manner that students come to the school to
attend classes only in the prescribed uniform, and the same has been done to
achieve the statutory and constitutional goals. The students cannot assert that they
have a right to education but they would avail such right as per their own wish and
in the manner which they consider appropriate. Schools are to prepare students for
their future endeavours in life. Discipline is one of the attributes which students learn
in schools. Defiance to rules of the school would, in fact, be the antithesis of
discipline. Such defiance is not expected from students who are yet to attain
adulthood. Therefore, they should grow in an atmosphere of brotherhood and
fraternity and not in an environment of rebellion or defiance. The argument that the
school is insisting on surrendering or curtailing the right to wear a headscarf as a
precondition to access education is not tenable as the right to education is available
but the only condition is that the students should attend the classes in the
prescribed uniform.
(Para 202)
1 : 4 SCEC 453, referred to
The Government Order cannot be said to be contrary to the legitimate State
goal of promoting literacy and education. Article 21-A is not applicable as all the
students are over 14 years of age. The students have a right to education under
Article 21, but not by insisting on wearing something additional to the uniform, in a
secular school, as a part of their religion.
(Para 203)
In fact, the Act itself contemplates providing opportunities and facilities in a
healthy manner and maintaining the dignity of childhood and youth so that there is
no moral or material abandonment. The uniform for the students has been
prescribed so that there is no distinction between the students comina from diverse
backgrounds and that each student grows in an environment of equality, fairness
and equal opportunities. The uniform is an equaliser of inequalities. Therefore,
prescribing uniforms for children at an impressionable age is not only important but
has a salutary effect on the mental development of the child to grow in an
environment of oneness. The said object is in tune with Article 39(f) of the
Constitution.
(Para 204)
Hence, the Government Order cannot be said to be contrary to the State's goal
of promoting literacy and education as mandated under the Constitution. The
Government Order only ensures that the uniform prescribed is adhered to by the
students and it cannot be said that the State is restricting access to education to
the girl students through such an order.
(Para 205)
Question (xi) : Whether the Government Order neither achieves any
equitable access to education nor serves the ethic of secularism nor is true
to the objective of the Karnataka Education Act?
The argument is that the State is under a positive obligation to create an
environment conducive to the exercise of fundamental rights. Conversely, it means
that the subjects have no responsibility to create a conducive environment in a non
-discriminatory manner. If the students of one faith insist on a particular dress,
there is no stopping for the others to carry their faiths and beliefs to the schools. It
would not be conducive to the pious atmosphere of the school where the students
seek admission for education. In fact, uniform fosters a sense of "equality"
amongst students - instils a sense of oneness, diminishes individual differences,
helps focus on learning as students would not be bothered about their social status,
improves discipline, fewer conflicts in school, promotes school spirit - generates a
sense of belonging, pride, loyalty towards the school, relieves economic pressure
on the parents, ensures equality before the educational institution, serves the need
of a diverse community and promotes a positive sense of communal identity and
does not lead to the growth of disparities of wealth and style. School is the time to
learn and lay the foundation for future pursuits in life. The students are expected to
maintain discipline and the school is responsible to lay a strong foundation so as to
nurture the students as responsible citizens of the country.
(Para 206)
Secularism is applicable to all citizens, therefore, permitting one religious
community to wear their religious symbols would be antithesis to secularism. Thus,
the Government Order cannot be said to be against the ethic of secularism or the
objective of the Karnataka Education Act, 1983.
(Para 208)
Thus, all appeals and the writ petitions are dismissed, though on different
grounds than what prevailed before the High Court. No costs.
&
(Para 209)
Resham V. State of Karnataka, (2022) 1 HCC (Kar) 43 : AIR 2022 Kar 81, referred
to
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J. (disagreeing)
The decision which is of essential importance in this case for our purposes is the
decision given by the Supreme Court in Bijoe Emmanuel case.
(Para 258)
The case of the petitioners in Bijoe Emmanuel case was simple : they do not
show disrespect to the National Flag or the National Anthem. They stand
respectfully when the National Anthem is sung, they only do not participate in
singing as they sincerely believe their faith forbids them to sing for anyone but
Jehovah.
(Para 260)
624 (1943), referred to
60 S Ct 1010 : 310 US 586 (1940), held, overruled
The Court therein held that it is not disrespectful to the National Anthem if the
girls respectfully stand when the National Anthem was sung, but may not have
joined in the singing. The Court thus impliedly also meant that the freedom to sing
would also mean the freedom to remain silent.
(Para 267)
The girls herein face the same predicament as the Jehovah's Witnesses in the
above case. The present petitioners too wear hijab as an article of their faith. They
too believe that it is a part of their religion and social practice. Therefore, this case is
therein.
(Para 269)
Coming back to the order of the High Court there is another finding which is
difficult to accept. This is where the High Court determines that the petitioners
cannot assert their fundamental rights inside a classroom which the Court terms as
"qualified public places" and the rights inside a school are only "derivative right".
(Para 270)
The High Court rejects the case of the petitioners on "reasonable
accommodation", and also the argument that schools are a showroom for the
diversity of culture, for the reason that the schools being "qualified public places"
schoolgirls have to follow the dress code, which does not prescribe hijab.
(Para 271)
A comparison of a school with a war room or defence camp, seems odd, to say
the least. Schools are not required to have the discipline and regimentation of a
military camp.
(Para 272)
Nevertheless, what the High Court wanted to convey was that all public places
have a certain degree of discipline and limitations and the degree of enjoyment of a
right by an individual inside his house or anywhere outside a public space is different
to what he or she would enjoy once they are inside a public space. As a general
principle, one can have no quarrel with this proposition. But then laying down a
principle is one thing, justifying that to the facts of a case is quite another. The
Court must be a judge of fact as well as a judge of law. Do the facts of the case
justify the restrictions inside a classroom, which is admittedly a public place? In my
opinion, there is no justification for this.
(Para 272)
A school is a public place, yet drawing a parallel between a school and a jail or a
military camp, is not correct.
(Para 273)
Again, if the point which was being made by the High Court was regarding
discipline in a school, then that must be accepted. It is necessary to have discipline
in schools. But discipline is not at the cost of freedom, nor at the cost of dignity.
Asking a pre-university schoolgirl to take off her hijab at her school gate, is an
invasion on her privacy and dignity. It is clearly violative of the fundamental right
given to her under Articles 19(1)(a) and 21 of the Constitution. This right to her
dignity and her privacy she carries in her person, even inside her school gate or
when she is in her classroom. It is still her fundamental right, not a "derivative right"
as has been described by the High Court.
(Para 273)
The State had underlined the importance of the G.O. dated 5-2-2022 which was
to enforce discipline in schools, including in pre-university classes, and apply a dress
code. The object of the act, therefore, was the betterment of education and to
&
inculcate a sense of discipline among school-going children.
(Para 275)
It was submitted that the law in the present case which is the G.O. dated 5-2-
2022, is primarily for the enforcement of dress code in schools including pre-
university classes. It may only incidentally be giving an impact on the rights which
the petitioners claim under Articles 19 and 25 of the Constitution. What has to be
seen is the pith and substance of the law which is the enforcement of uniforms in
schools, which in turn is to maintain discipline in schools.
(Para 276)
referred to
All the same, the said submission is not correct and is not applicable to the facts
of the controversy herein. The G.O. specifically seeks to address the question of
hijab, which is evident from the preamble of the G.O.
(Para 278)
474 (CC); R (SB) V. Governors of Denbigh High School, (2007) 1 AC 100 (HL),
referred to
(1964) 1 SCR 332 : AIR 1963 SC 1295; A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras, 1950
524, para 60 (CC), cited
When a decision has to be made between school discipline and the cultural and
religious rights of minorities a balance has to be maintained.
(Para 286)
R (SB) V. Governors of Denbigh High School, (2007) 1 AC 100 (HL); Miller V. Gillis,
315 F Supp 94 (ND Ill 1969); Christmas V. El Reno Board of Education, 313 F
Supp 618 (WD Okla 1970); Employment Division Deptt. of Human Resources of
(1990), referred to
Professor Frances Raday : Culture, Religion and Gender; (2003), referred to
Another question which the School Administration and the State must answer in
the present case is as to what is more important to them : The education of a girl
child or the enforcement of a Dress Code! The Court has been informed at the Bar
by many of the Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners, that the unfortunate
fallout of the enforcement of hijab ban in schools in Karnataka has been that some
of the girl students have not been able to appear in their Board examinations, and
many others were forced to seek transfer to other schools, most likely madrasas,
where they may not get the same standard of education. This is for a girl child, for
whom it was never easy, in the first place, to reach her school gate.
(Para 289)
One of the best sights in India today is of a girl child leaving for her school in the
morning, with her school bag on her back. She is our hope, our future. But it is also
a fact that it is much more difficult for a girl child to get an education, as compared
to her brother. In villages and semi-urban areas in India, it is commonplace for a girl
child to help her mother in her daily chores of cleaning and washing before she can
grab her school bag. The hurdles and hardships a girl child undergoes in gaining
education are many times more than a male child. This case, therefore, has also to
be seen from the perspective of the challenges already faced by a girl child in
reaching her school. The relevant question is also whether the life of a girl child is
made any better by denying her education, merely because she wears a hijab!
(Para 290)
All the petitioners want is to wear a hijab! Is it too much to ask in a democracy?
How is it against public order, morality or health? or even decency or against any
other provision of Part III of the Constitution. These questions have not been
sufficiently answered in the Karnataka High Court judgment. The State has not
given any plausible reasons either in the Government Order dated 5-2-2022 or in
the counter-affidavit before the High Court. It does not appeal to my logic or
reason as to how a girl child who is wearing a hijab in a classroom is a public order
problem or even a law-and-order problem. To the contrary, reasonable
accommodation, in this case, would be a sign of a mature society which has learnt
to live and adjust to its differences.
(Para 291)
644 (1929), referred to
A girl child has the right to wear a hijab in her house or outside her house, and
that right does not stop at her school gate. The child carries her dignity and her
privacy even when she is inside the school gates, in her classroom. She retains her
fundamental rights. To say that these rights become derivative rights inside a
classroom is wholly incorrect.
(Para 293)
We live in a Democracy and under the Rule of Law, and the Laws which govern
us must pass muster with the Constitution of India. Amongst many facets of our
Constitution, one is Trust. Our Constitution is also a document of Trust. It is the
trust the minorities have reposed upon the majority. Commenting on the report of
the Advisory Committee on Minorities, Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel made a statement
before the Constituent Assembly on 24-5-1949, which is relevant.
(Para 294)
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VIII, referred to
The question of diversity, raised by the petitioners before the High Court was
not considered by the Court since it was thought to be a "hollow rhetoric", and the
submissions made by the lawyers on "unity and diversity", were dismissed as an
"oft-quoted platitude".
(Para 295)
The question of diversity and our rich plural culture is important in the context of
our present case. Our schools, in particular, our pre-university colleges are the
perfect institutions where our children, who are now at an impressionable age, and
are just waking up to the rich diversity of this nation, need to be counselled and
guided, so that they imbibe our constitutional values of tolerance and
accommodation, towards those who may speak a different language, eat different
food, or even wear different clothes or apparels! This is the time to foster in
them sensitivity, empathy and understanding towards different religions, languages
and cultures. This is the time when they should learn not to be alarmed by our
diversity but to rejoice and celebrate this diversity. This is the time when they must
realise that diversity is our strength.
(Para 296)
The National Education Policy 2020, of the Government of India, underlines the
need for inculcating the values of tolerance and understanding in education and
making the children aware of the rich diversity of this country.
(Para 297)
It is the fundamental duty of every citizen, under Part IV-A of the Constitution to
"value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture."
(Para 302)
Adverting to the statutory provisions applicable in this case, namely, the
Karnataka Education Act, 1983 which is the source of the G.O. dated 5-2-2022
speaks inter alia that the curriculum in schools and colleges must promote the rich
and composite culture of our country. Section 7 of the above Act prescribes that
one of the curricula in the school can be "moral and ethical education" and it further
says that the school should also "to promote harmony and the spirit of common
brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic, and
regional or sectional diversities to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women".
(Para 303)
The Preamble to the Constitution secures to all its citizens "liberty of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship." It is the Preamble again which seeks to
promote among them all, "fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the
unity and integrity of the Nation."
(Para 304)
The Government Order dated 5-2-2022, and the restrictions on the wearing of
hijab also go against our constitutional values of fraternity and human dignity.
(Para 305)
Liberty, equality, and fraternity, the triptych of the French Revolution, is also a
part of our Preamble. It is true that whereas liberty and equality are well-
established, properly understood, and recognised concepts in politics and law,
fraternity for some reason has largely remained incognito. The Framers of our
Constitution though had a different vision. Fraternity had a different and in many
ways a much larger meaning for the main architect of our Constitution, Dr
Ambedkar.
(Para 306)
Dr Ambedkar gave the highest place to fraternity as it was the only real
safeguard against the denial of liberty or equality.
(Para 307)
Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches, 2020 (Vol. XVII, Part III);
Preface; Speech of Dr Ambedkar on 25-11-1949 : Constituent Assembly
Debates, Vol. XI, referred to
Fraternity requires us to be tolerant, and reasonably accommodate the belief
and religious practices of others.
(Para 308)
Under our constitutional scheme, wearing a hijab should be simply a matter of
choice. It may or may not be a matter of essential religious practice, but it still is, a
matter of conscience, belief, and expression. If she wants to wear a hijab, even
inside her classroom, she cannot be stopped, if it is worn as a matter of her choice,
as it may be the only way her conservative family will permit her to go to school,
and in those cases, her hijab is her ticket to education.
(Para 309)
The unfortunate fallout of the hijab restriction would be that we would have
denied education to a girl child. A girl child for whom it is still not easy to reach her
school gate. This case here, therefore, has also to be seen in the perspective of the
challenges already faced by a girl child in reaching her school. The question the
Court would put before itself is also whether we are making the life of a girl child
any better by denying her education merely because she wears a hijab!
(Para 310)
Our Constitution has visualised a just society and it is for this reason that the
first virtue that is secured for the citizens is "Justice" which is the first of our
Preambular promises.
(Para 311)
Rawls, John (1921) : A Theory of Justice, Rev. Ed.; The Belknap Press of the
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, referred to
By asking the girls to take off their hijab before they enter the school gates, is
first an invasion of their privacy, then it is an attack on their dignity, and then
ultimately it is a denial to them of secular education. These are clearly violative of
Articles 19(1)(a), 21 and 25(1) of the Constitution.
(Para 312)
Consequently, I allow all the appeals as well as the writ petitions are allowed, but
only to the extent as ordered below:
(i) The order of the Karnataka High Court dated 15-3-2022, is hereby set
aside.
(ii) The G.O. dated 5-2-2022 is hereby quashed.
(iii) There shall be no restriction on the wearing of hijab anywhere in schools
and colleges in Karnataka.
(para 313)
Aishat Shifa V. State of Karnataka, SLP (C) No. 5236 of 2022, order dated 22-9-
Singh V. State of U.P., (1964) 1 SCR 332 : AIR 1963 SC 1295; Shayara Bano V.
Religious Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt,
1954 SCR 1005 : AIR 1954 SC 282; Commr. of Police V. Acharya
Committee, Ajmer V. Syed Hussain Ali, (1962) 1 SCR 383 : AIR 1961 SC 1402;
Resham V. State of Karnataka, (2022) 1 HCC (Kar) 43 : AIR 2022 Kar 81,
referred to
Order of the Court
In view of the divergent views expressed by the Bench, the matter is referred to
a larger Bench.
(Para 314)
SS-D/69509/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, K.M. Nataraj, Additional Solicitor
General, Prabhuling Navadgi, Advocate General, Nikhil Goel, Prasanna
Deshpande, Aruna Shyam, Y.H. Vijay Kumar, Additional Advocates
General, Gaurav Bhatia, Siddhartha Dave, Sanjay R. Hegde, Salman
Khurshid, Ms Jayna Kothari, Dushyant A. Dave, Devadatt Kamat, Guru
Krishna Kumar, Pran Krishna Jana, Yusuf Hatim Muchhala, R.
Venkataramani, Huzefa Ahmadi, Dr Aditya Sondhi, Kapil Sibal, A.M.
Dar, Ms V. Mohana, Ms Meenakshi Arora, Colin Gonsalves, Dama
Seshadri Naidu and Rajeev Dhawan, Senior Advocates [Shubhranshu
Padhi (Advocate-on-Record), Kanu Agarwal, Aneesh Shahade, Vishal
Banshal, Ms Rajeshwari Shankar, Niroop Sukirthy, Mohd. Ovais, Sushal
Tiwari, Adithya Koshi Roy, Chitransh Sharma, Abhishek Sriram, Nakul
Chengappa K.K., Aditya Vaibhav Singh, Abhikalp Pratap Singh, Kartik
Kaushal, Shailesh Madiyal, Vinayaka S. Pandit, Sudhanshu Prakash, H.
Vinayaka S. Pandit, Rajan Parmar, Vaibhav Sabharwal, Ms Vidhi T.,
Mehmood Umar Faruqui, Ms Koshy John, Ms Asifa Rashid Mir, Shereef
K.A., Mohd. Tahir, Muhammed Azaruddin, Anas Tanwir, Ms Masoom Raj
Singh, Ms Ritika Singh, Abdul Qadir, Raghav Gupta, Shahrukh Ali,
Farhan, Aftab Ali Khan, M.Z. Chaudhary, Ali Safeer Farooqi, Syed Imtiaz
Ali, Shahbaz, Mujeeb Rehman, Mumtaz Alam Siddiqui, Ms Tehsheena Z.
Hussain, Ms Lubna Naaz, Dr Lokendra Malik, Rahat Ali Chaudhary, Nitin
Kashyap, Ramesh Sachdeva, Ms Mariya Mansuri, Ms Azra Rehman,
Anshu Kapoor, Arvind Kr. Kanva, Bilal A. Khan, Ms Mitali Chauhan,
Danish Zubair Khan, Mareesh Pravir Sahay, Chandra Sekhar Padhi,
Roopesh Singh Bhadauria, Arpit Singh, Umesh Pratap Singh, Gaurav
Jain, Ms Eccha Shukla, Ms Awanitika, Sachin Kharb, Shahab Ahmad, Ms
Tanya Sharma, M.P. Sahay, Ms Saba Khan, Ms Vidhi Thaker, Ms Farheen
Fatima, Aftab Ali Khan (Advocate-on-Record), Dr Anindita Pujari, Azad
Bansaria, Prannv Dhavan, Ms Saaneya Hidayath, Ms Prakriti Rastogi,
M.R. Shamshad (Advocate-on-Record), Arijit Sarkar, Shashank Singh,
Ms Nabeela Jamil, Ms Niaz A. Faruqui, Ms Neha Sangwan, Ms Ashi
Shereen Ahmad, Shadul Hameed Reheman, Nishanth Patil (Advocate-
on-Record), Rajesh Inamdar, Harsh Pandey, Sabyasachi Banerjee,
Rakesh Kailash Sharma, Alok Singh, Vinay Kr. A., Ms Fauzia Shakil,
Shoumendu Mukherji (Advocate-on-Record), Praneet Pranav, Merusagar
Samantaray, Ms Archana Pathak Dave, Bhakti Vardhan Singh, Amit
Sharma, Arindam, Vinod Diwakar, Ms Megha Sharma, Vijay Pal, Pramod
Kr. Singh, Anubhav, M.A. Kartik, Deepankar, Shoeb Alam, Ujjwal Singh,
Agastya Sen, Javedur Rahman, Nizam Pasha, Shahul Hameed, Yojit
Singh, Mohd. Niyas S., Revanta Solanki, Nishant Patil, Mudassir, Aditya
Samaddar, Mohd. Niyas, Shoeb Khan, Kaleeswaram Raj, Nishe Rajen
Shonker, Ms Thulasi K. Raj, Ms Anu K. Joy, Alim Anvar, Pran Krisana
Jana, Ms Nazish Fatima, Arvind Gupta, Md. Tahir M. Hakim, Ejaz
Maqbool (Advocate-on-Record), Sagheer A. Khan, Ms Rashda S.
Ainapore, Mohamed Nawaz Haindaday, Ms Akriti Chaubey, Saif Zia,
Nachiketa Joshi, V.V.V. Pattabhiram, Santosh Kumar, Bhrigu Nath
Dubey, Puneet Sheron, Nisarg Choudhary, Ms Ankita Choudhary, Rahul
Tanwani, Chitwan Singhal, Baij Nath Patel, Rahamathulla Kothwal, Ms
Siddika Aisha, Kumail Abbas, Mohd. Shahrukh Ali, Pallabh, Nikhil, Adeel
Ahmed, Sachin Pahwa, Zulfiker Ali P.S. (Advocate-on-Record),
Shahrukh Alam, Manoj V. George, Ms Shilpa Liza George, Augustine
Peter, Faisal M. Aboobakar, Thoyyib Hudawai, Ms Lakshmi Sree, Ms
Sadiya Shakeel, Talha Abdul Rahman (Advocate-on-Record), Harsh
Vardhan Kediya, Mohd. Shaz Khan, Ms Disha Wadekar, Mohd. Afeef,
Rishabh Devan Parikh, Ms Rupali Samuel, Ms Aparajita Jamwal, Koshy
John, Dileep Poolakkot, Muhammed Siddick, Ms Shelna K., Haris
Beeran, Mushtaq Salim, Azhar Assees, Usman Ghani Khan, Ms Pallavi
Pratap (Advocate-on-Record), Ameen Hassan K., Danissh M. Dar, B.
Shafi, Anant Vikram Singh, Abhay Anand Jena, Dr Charu Mathur
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Tanvi Dubey, Rahul Unnikrishnan, Anukrit
Gupta, Sanjay Kr. Dubey, Mahesh Thakur (Advocate-on-Record),
Siddharth Thakur, Ms Vipasha Singh, Ajay Kanojiya, Ms Shivani, Ms
Neha Singh, Prastut Dalvi, Ms Shailja Das,
Dhawal Uniyal, Md. Irshad Hanif, Javed R. Shaikh, Aarif Ali, Rizwan
Ahmad, Mohd. Aslam, Mujahid Ahmad, Ms Rubina Jawed, Tausif Ahmed
Dar, Ahmed Parvez, Amar Kr. Raizada, Pankaj Tiwari, Mohd. Faseeh
Khan, Mohd. Waseem Akhtar, Shakeel Ahmed, Amir Kaleem, Mohit
Kumar, Shishir Raj, Mohd. Wasiq Khan, Sahid uddin Ahmed, Pulkit
Srivastava (Advocate-on-Record), Subodh Patil, Aayush Anand,
Pravartak Pathak, Gautam Singh, Ms Kriti Ranjan, Bharat Singh,
Joyadeep Roy, Rashmi Singhania, Avdhesh Singh, Pravar Pathak, Barun
Kr. Sinha, Ms Pratibha Sinha, Mudit Kaul, Ms Bebi Devi Boniya, Ms
Sudha Pal, Abhishek (Advocate-on-Record), Siddharth Sinha, Abhishek
Singh, Prashant Rawat, Tathagat Sharma, Ved Prakash, Ms Priya
Mishra, Shivam Singhania, Ms Fauzia Shakil (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Shivam, Archit Krishna, Shivam, Ms Sonal Chopra, Rishab Ahmad
Chowdhury, Ms Muskan Nagpal, Ms Kirti Singh, Archit Sharma, Aditya
Chatterjee, Raghu Vamsy Dasika, Anis Gupta, Puspinder Singh, Karthik
Sundar, Charudatta Mahindrakar (Advocate-on-Record), Mandeep
Singh, Vikram Hegde (Advocate-on-Record), Abhinav Hansaraman,
Chitwan Sharma, Jagrit Vyas, Nakul Mohta, Ms Misha Rohatgi Mohta
(Advocate-on-Record), Bharat Monga, Ms Richa, Prakash Shetty,
Shadan Farasat, Chandratanay Chaube, Bharat Gupta, Tushar Arora,
Shourya Dasgupta, Aman Naqvi, Ms Hrishika Jain, Dhruv Bhatnagar, Ms
Warisha Farasat, Nitesh, Ms Mugdha, Satya Mitra, Ankur Mittal, Jai
Anant Dehadrai, Neeleshwar Pavani, Sidharth Arora, Ms Tejaswini
Verma, Jaskaran Singh Chawla, Udito Koushik Sarmah, Prashant
Bhushan, Ms Rashmi Singh, Cheryl D' Sooja, Jaimon Andrews, Ms Piyo
Harold Jaimon, Firdouse C.P., Sandeep Thakur, Naresh Kumar, Abdulla
Naseeh V.T., Aswathi M.K. (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Sneha S.
Deshmukh, Hitesh Kr. Sharma, Akhileshwar Jha, Ms Susmita Kale, Ms
Yamini Sharma, Ms Deepti S. Rane, Ms Kavya Lokande, Ms Sanyali S.
Pawar, Amit K. Singh, Ms Mridula Singh, Ms Misha Rohtagi Mohta,
Siddhartha Sinha (Advocate-on-Record), Rahul G. Tanwani, Ms Shivali
Chaudhary, Siddharth S. Chapalgaonkar, Hitesh Singh, Poornachandian,
Ananvay Anandvardhan, Ms Sivani Kukumanu, Gursimar Singh,
Sandeep Singh, Ms Bharti Tyagi, Ms Alapana Sharma, Abhishek
Mahajan, Nrig Chamwibo Zeliang, Ayush Anand, Siddhartha Sinha,
Prashant Bhushan (Advocate-on-Record), Mehmood Umar Faruqui
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Anindita Pujari (Advocate-on-Record), Satya
Mitra (Advocate-on-Record), Aljo K. Joseph (Advocate-on-Record),
Naresh Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), Shadan Farasat (Advocate-on-
Record), Tanveer Ahmed Mir, Arjun Singh Bhati, Kartik Venu, Ms
Tasmiya Taleha, Ms Urja Pandey, Arjun Singh Bhati (Advocate-on-
Record), Adeel Ahmed (Advocate-on-Record), Anas Tanwir (Advocate-
on-Record), Prateek Yadav, Ranbir Singh Yadav (Advocate-on-Record),
Mohd. Shahruk, Puran Mal Saini, Ms Anzu K. Varkey, Pati Raj Yadav,
Ritesh Patil, Yogesh Yadav, Mareesh Pravir Sahay (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Aswathi M.K. (Advocate-on-Record), Javedur Rahman
(Advocate-on-Record), Aman Varma (Advocate-on-Record), Nachiketa
Joshi (Advocate-on-Record), Charudatta Vijayrao Mahindrakar
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Misha Rohatgi (Advocate-on-Record),
Shailesh Madiyal (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Mrinmoi Chatterjee
(Advocate-on-Record), K.V. Muthu Kumar (Advocate-on-Record),
Bhaskar Gowtham, Sayooj Mohandas, Akshay Ravi, Govind Kumar, Ms
Savita Singh, Shubhendu Anand, Mohd. Asif Iqbal, Abdul Shukoor
Mundambra, Rishad Ahmed Chowdhury (Advocate-on-Record), Mohd.
Irshad Hanif (Advocate-on-Record), Abhay Anand Jena (Advocate-on-
Record), Arvind Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), Sameer Shrivastava
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Charu Mathur (Advocate-on-Record),
Advocates], for the appearing parties;
Respondent-in-Person.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Pharmacy Council of India V. Rajeev College of
Pharmacy
54a, 57b, 57e
Union of India
109d-e
Karnataka
116f-g
4. (2022) 1 HCC (Kar) 43 : AIR 2022 Kar 81, Reshan89a-b, 115c, 116f-g, 117b-
V. State of Karnataka
C, 119a, 119d, 126g,
130a-b, 130c, 130c-d,
130e, 139e-f, 143e
5. SLP (C) No. 5236 of 2022, order dated 22-9-2022
(SC), Aishat Shifa V. State of Karnataka
115d-e
Kumar V. UPSC
109d-e, 110a
State of W.B.
113g
Religion, In re-9 J.) (2) V. Indian Young Lawyers
Assn.
51b-c
Prathvi Raj Chauhan V. Union of India
99a-b
Religion, In re-9 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers
Assn.
51b-c
Temple Review-5 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers
Assn.
51b
Temple-5 J.) V. Suresh Das
88e, 125f-g
(Sabarimala Temple-5 J.) V. State of Kerala
84c, 120f, 124d-e
Singh Johar V. Union of India
92g, 140f, 141a-b
Tehseen S. Poonawalla V. Union of India
100b-c
V. State of Kerala
45e-f, 90e
V. Union of India
d, 102d, 107e-f, 108c,
108d, 131a-b, 131b-c,
133c-d
Shayara Bano V. Union of India
80a-b, 86e, 120f, 124c,
124c-d
Ranjan V. State of Bihar
45f-g, 90e
Mohd. Zubair V. Union of India
104d-e
Jeeja Ghosh V. Union of India
109d-e, 109e-f
College & Research Centre V. State of M.P.
68e
Subramanian Swamy V. Union of India
98a
Amnah Bint Basheer V. CBSE
72a-b
Devidas Ramachandra Tuljapurkar V. State of
Maharashtra
91e-f
Authority V. Union of India
65d-e, 91b-c, 93a
Union of India V. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal
59a
Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan V. Union of
India
112c
Line Pilots' Assn. of India V. DG of Civil Aviation
59b-c
State of Punjab
87g, 88c-d
31. WP No. 5981 of 2009, order dated 30-6-2009
(Mad), V. Kamalam V. MGR Medical University
46a-b
Ansari Aaftab Ahmed V. Union of India
104d
33. LPA No. 196 of 2008, order dated 31-7-2008
(P&H), Ansari Aaftab Ahmed V. Union of India
104d-e
Bano V. State of U.P.
74a-b
96g
36. (2007) 1 AC 100 (HL), R (SB) V. Governors of
Denbigh High School
134a, 136a, 136f
(CC), Kwazulu-Natal V. Navaneethum Pillay
135f-g
M. Ajmal Khan V. Election Commission of India
105e-f
Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community V. State of
Maharashtra
86d-e
(CC), Minister of Home Affairs V. Marié Adriaana
Fourie
135e-f
71f, 72b-c, 80a, 83e-f,
Jagadishwarananda Avadhuta
123e, 124d
of Karnataka V. Praveen Bhai Thogadia
101d
Venkata Subba Rao, Matriculation Higher
Secondary School
46a-b
V. State of Haryana
79d-e, 79g-h, 124c-d
Foundation V. State of Karnataka
39e-f, 44a-b, 66f-g, 70f-g
Union of India
e
Fathema Hussain Sayed V. Bharat Education
Society
45g
Danial Latifi V. Union of India
74a-b
Singh Pal V. Union of India
107a
V. Feyaz Ahmed Malik
67b
Rangaswamaiah V. Karnataka Lokayukta
59b-c
Vishwanath Temple V. State of U.P.
70c, 101d
State of A.P.
C
Human Resources Development
42e-f
India
78g
41e-f
College V. University of Delhi
92d, 101d, 141a-b
1, Indra Sawhney V. Union of India
65a, 97f-g
Education Board V. Madarasa Hanfia Arabic
College
68b
494 US 872 (1990), Employment Division Deptt. of
Human Resources of Oregon V. L. Smith
137c-d, 137f
Ram
95c-d
Ramkrishnaiah V. Union of India
59b
Aggarwal V. State of U.P.
59b
Kerala
126g, 127a, 127e-f,
127f-g, 129a, 129c-d,
129e-f, 129g-h, 142f
Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum
74a-b, 78b-c
Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta V. Commr. of Police
83d, 123e, 123f-g
69e-f
Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan V. State of
U.P.
54a, 56c-d
Singh V. State of Punjab
94d-e, 95a-b, 132f-g
Election Commr.
90f
India
133d-e
of India V. Majji Jangamayya
59b
V. Brijmohan Ramdass Mehra
41d
Narain
41b
Xavier's College Society V. State of Gujarat
67e, 107b
of Kerala
40e-f, 41b-c, 87c-d
Union of India
92b-c, 133d
78. 313 F Supp 618 (WD Okla 1970), Christmas V. El
Reno Board of Education
137b-c
79. 315 F Supp 94 (ND III 1969), Miller V. Gillis
137b-c
80. AIR 1967 SC 1910, Sant Ram Sharma V. State of
Rajasthan
58g
81. AIR 1967 SC 1170, State of M.P. V. Bharat Singh
53h, 55d, 56a, 56b-c
82. AIR 1966 SC 792, N.K. Mohd. Sulaiman Sahib V.
N.C. Mohd. Ismail Saheb
77a-b
83. (1964) 1 SCR 332 : AIR 1963 SC 1295, Kharak
117h, 133c-d, 133d-e,
Singh V. State of U.P.
133e
84. AIR 1964 SC 275, Valia Peedikakkandi
Katheessa Umma V. Pathakkalan Narayanath
Kunhamu
77a-b
Bharatsingh V. State of M.P.
55d-e, 55e, 56a
86. AIR 1963 SC 1638, Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji
Maharaj V. State of Rajasthan
82e-f, 86c
87. (1962) 1 SCR 383 : AIR 1961 SC 1402, Durgah 81c-d, 81f, 83b-c, 86c,
Committee, Ajmer V. Syed Hussain Ali
123a, 123c
Committee, Ajmer
123b-c
89. 1959 SCR 995 : AIR 1958 SC 956, Kerala
Education Bill, 1957, In re
106d-e
90. AIR 1959 SC 249, Dwarka Nath Tewari V. State of
Bihar
57f-g
91. AIR 1958 SC 731, Mohd. Hanif Quareshi V. State
of Bihar
77a-b, 77c, 77d-e
92. AIR 1958 SC 255, Venkataramana Devaru V.
State of Mysore
82a-b
93. AIR 1955 SC 549, Ram Jawaya Kapur V. State of
Punjab
54f-g
Panachand Gandhi V. State of Bombay
81b, 86a-b, 122e, 122f
Chandra
133c-d, 133e
96. 1954 SCR 1005 : AIR 1954 SC 282, Commr., 65c-d, 80c-d, 80e-f, 81d,
Hindu Religious Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra
86a-b, 121b-c, 121e,
Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt
122a, 122f
Bombay Co. Ltd.
64f
The surest way t legal research!
Sarkar
54a, 55a-b
Theertha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt V. Commr.,
Hindu Religious Endowments
121c
64d-e, 133d
101. (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA), Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd. V. Wednesbury Corpn.
67b
319 US 624 (1943), West Virginia State Board of
127f-g, 128b, 128b-c,
Education V. Barnette
128d, 128e-f
60 S Ct 1010 : 310 US 586 (1940), Minersville
School Dist. V. Gobitis (held, overruled)
127f-g, 127g, 128b, 137g
Ras Behari Lal V. King Emperor
115b-c
279 US 644, para 22 (1929), United States V.
Schwimmer
138g
Administrator General of Bengal V. Prem Lal
Mullick
64g
The Opinions of the Court were delivered by
Hemant Gupta, J. (Sudhanshu Dhulia, J., disagreeing)- The
challenge in the present appeals is to an order passed by the Full Bench
of the Karnataka High Court on 15-3-2022-, dismissing the challenge to
the Government Order dated 5-2-2022. Such Government Order
directed the government schools in Karnataka to abide by the
prescribed uniform, and the private schools were directed to mandate a
uniform as decided by their Board of Management.
Preface
2. Before adverting to the submissions made by the counsel on both
sides, it is imperative to give a background of the ethos and principles
of secularism adopted in the Constitution of India. Though the term
"secular" has a wide amplitude and has been understood differently in
different parts of the world, it is important to comprehend the same in
the context of the Indian Constitution.
3. The word "secular" is now part of the Preamble to the
Constitution. What is meant by "Secular" in the Hindi version
of the Constitution) needs to be discussed first. The word "Secular" was
inserted in the Preamble to the Constitution by the 42nd Amendment
w.e.f. 3-1-1977. It is commonly understood in contradistinction to the
term "religious". The political philosophy of a secular Government has
been developed in the West in the historical context of the pre-
eminence of the established Church and the exercise of power by it
over the society and its institutions. The democratic State thereafter
gradually replaced and marginalised the influence of the Church. The
idea of secularism may have been borrowed in the Indian Constitution
from the West; however, it has adopted its own unique brand based on
its particular history and exigencies which are far distinct in many ways
from secularism as defined and followed in European countries, the
United States of America and Australia. 2
4. The use of the word "panthnirpeksh" in the Constitution brings
out the difference in the terms "Dharmanirpeksh" and "Panthnirpeksh".
"Panth", or sect, symbolises devotion towards any specific belief, way of
worship or form of God, but Dharma symbolises absolute and eternal
values which can never change, like the laws of nature. Dharma is what
upholds, sustains and results in the well-being and upliftment of the
Praja (citizens) and the society as a whole.
5. This Court in a judgment reported as A.S. Narayana Deekshitulu
Dharma explained by Justice M. Rama Jois in his Legal and
Constitutional History of India as
"59.
It is most difficult to define Dharma. Dharma has been
explained to be that which helps the upliftment of living beings.
Therefore,
that which ensures welfare (of living beings) is surely Dharma. The
learned rishis have declared that which sustains is Dharma.'"
581-82, para 61)
"61.
When dharma is used in the context of duties of the
individuals and powers of the King (the State), it means
constitutional law (Rajadharma). Likewise, when it is said that
Dharmarajya is necessary for the peace and prosperity of the people
and for establishing an egalitarian society, the word dharma in the
context of the word Rajya only means law, and Dharmarajya means
rule of law and not rule of religion or a theocratic State."
Any action, big or small, that is free from selfishness, is part of dharma.
Thus, having love for all human beings is dharma. This Court held as
"156. It is because of the above that if one were to ask "What are
the signs and symptoms of dharma?", the answer is : that which has
no room for narrow-mindedness, sectarianism, blind faith, and
dogma. The purity of dharma, therefore, cannot be compromised
with sectarianism. A sectarian religion is open to a limited group of
people whereas dharma embraces all and excludes none. This is the
core of our dharma, our psyche.
157. Nothing further is required to bring home the distinction
between religion and dharma; and so I say that the word "religion"
in Articles 25 and 26 has to be understood not in a narrow sectarian
sense but encompassing our ethos of
Let
us
strive
to achieve this; let us spread the message of our dharma by availing
and taking advantage of the freedom guaranteed by Articles 25 and
26 of our Constitution."
6. This Court in Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala- even prior
to the addition of the word "Secular" by the 42nd Amendment, held
that the fundamental features of the Constitution, namely, secularism,
democracy and the freedom of individual would always subsist in the
welfare State. Hon'ble Justice H.R. Khanna, J. in his judgment referred
to the statement of K. Santhanam, a prominent member of the
Constituent Assembly and Editor of a newspaper. It was observed as
"1481.
K. Santhanam, a prominent southern member of the
Assembly and editor of a major newspaper, described the situation
in terms of three revolutions. The political revolution would end, he
wrote, with independence. The social revolution meant 'to get (India)
out of the medievalism based on birth, religion, custom, and
community and reconstruct her social structure on modern
foundations of law, individual merit, and secular education'. The
third revolution was an economic one: 'The transition from primitive
rural economy to scientific and planned
agriculture and industry." Radhakrishnan (now President of India)
believed India must have a "socio-economic revolution" designed not
only to bring about 'the real satisfaction of the fundamental needs of
the common man', but to go much deeper and bring about 'a
fundamental change in the structure of Indian society'."
(emphasis supplied)
7. The secular character of the State was reiterated in a later
Constitution Bench judgment reported as Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj
the judgment (already reproduced above) that the secular character
of the State, according to which the State shall not discriminate
against any citizen on the ground of religion only cannot likewise be
done away with. The above observations show that the secular
character of the Constitution and the rights guaranteed by Article 15
pertain to the basic structure of the Constitution."
8. The word "Secular" after being added in the Preamble was also
considered by a three-Judge Bench judgment of this Court reported as
Ziyauddin Burhanuddin Bukhari V. Brijmohan Ramdass Mehra6. This
Court was considering an appeal against the setting aside of election of
the appellant under the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to the
Maharashtra State Assembly on the ground of speeches made by him in
44)
"44. The Secular State, rising above all differences of religion,
attempts to secure the good of all its citizens irrespective of their
religious beliefs and practices."
9. The term "Secular" was also considered by a nine-Judge Bench of
this Court reported as S.R. Bommai V. Union of India ². It was held that
our Constitution does not prohibit the practise of any religion either
privately or publicly. The relevant extract of the judgment reads thus :
"146. These provisions by implication prohibit the establishment
of a theocratic State and prevent the State either identifying itself
with or favouring any particular religion or religious sect or
denomination. The State is enjoined to accord equal treatment to all
religions and religious sects and denominations.
*
*
*
148. One thing which prominently emerges from the above
discussion on secularism under our Constitution is that whatever the
attitude of the State towards the religions, religious sects and
denominations, religion cannot be mixed with any secular activity of
the State. In fact, the encroachment of religion into secular activities
is strictly prohibited.
*
*
*
304. Both the expressions - "socialist" and "secular" - by
themselves are not capable of precise definition. We are, however,
not concerned with their general meaning or content. Our object is to
ascertain the meaning of the expression "secular" in the context of
our Constitution. As the discussion hereafter would demonstrate, the
42nd Amendment merely made explicit what was implicit in it.
While the citizens of this country are free to profess, practise and
propagate such religion, faith or belief as they choose, so far as the
State is concerned i.e. from the point of view of the State, the
religion, faith or belief of a person is immaterial. To it, all are equal
and all are entitled to be treated equally. How is this equal treatment
possible, if the State were to prefer or promote a particular religion,
race or caste, which necessarily means a less favourable treatment of
all other religions, races and castes. How are the constitutional
promises of social justice, liberty of belief, faith or worship and
equality of status and of opportunity to be attained unless the State
eschews the religion, faith or belief of a person from its consideration
altogether while dealing with him, his rights, his duties and his
entitlements? Secularism is thus more than a passive attitude of
religious tolerance. It is a positive concept of equal treatment of all
religions. This attitude is described by some as one of neutrality
towards religion or as one of benevolent neutrality."
(emphasis in original)
10. In the same year, in a judgment reported as Santosh Kumar V.
Ministry of Human Resources Development, a question arose as to
whether the inclusion of Sanskrit in the syllabus of the Central Board of
Secondary Education as an elective subject so far as teaching in
secondary school is concerned is permissible. This Court quoted that :
"17. It would be profitable to note that according to Justice H.R.
Khanna secularism is neither anti-God nor pro-God; it treats alike
the devout, the agnostic and the atheist. According to him,
secularism is not antithesis of religious devoutness. He would like to
dispel the impression that if a person is devout Hindu or devout
Muslim, he ceases to be secular."
11. The National Curriculum Framework for School Education
published by the National Council of Educational Research and Training
was challenged before this Court in a judgment reported as Aruna Roy
V. Union of India9. This Court relied upon S.B. Chavan Committee
Report, 1999 which strongly
recommended education about religions as an instrument of social
para 25)
"25.
a word of caution is required here. Education about
religions must be handled with extreme care. All steps must be
taken in advance to ensure that no personal prejudice or narrow-
minded perceptions are allowed to distort the real purpose of this
venture and no rituals, dogmas and superstitions are propagated in
the name of education about religions. All religions therefore have to
be treated with equal respect (sarva dharma sambhav) and that
there has to be no discrimination on the ground of any religion
(panthnirapekshata)."
"
paras 29 & 37)
"29. At this stage, we would quote the relevant part of the S.B.
Chavan Committee's Report as under:
*
*
*
'12. In view of the diverse character of our country, it is essential
that certain national values are also imbibed by our young students.
They should be acquainted with the history of India's freedom
struggle, cultural heritage, constitutional obligations and the
features comprising our national identity. The Committee feels that
some of these national values can be imparted indirectly at the
primary stage while at the middle and secondary levels, these can be
included in the curriculum.
13. Another aspect that must be given some thought is religion,
which is the most misused and misunderstood concept. The process
of making the students acquainted with the basics of all religions,
the values inherent therein and also a comparative study of the
philosophy of all religions should begin at the middle stage in
schools and continue up to the university level. Students have to be
made aware that the basic concept behind every religion is common,
only the practices differ. Even if there are differences of opinion in
certain areas, people have to learn to coexist and carry no hatred
against any religion."
*
*
*
37. Therefore, in our view, the word "religion" should not be
misunderstood nor contention could be raised that as it is used in
the National Policy of Education, secularism would be at peril. On the
contrary, let us have a secularistic democracy where even a very
weak man hopes to prevail over a very strong man (having post,
power or property) on the strength of rule of law by proper
understanding of duties towards the society. Value-based education
is likely to help the nation to fight against all kinds of prevailing
fanaticism, ill will, violence, dishonesty, corruption,
exploitation and drug abuse.
Let knowledge, like the sun, shine for all
and that there should not be any room for narrow-mindedness, blind
faith and dogma. For this purpose also, if the basic tenets of all
religions over the world are learnt, it cannot be said that secularism
would not survive."
(emphasis in original)
12. In T.M.A. Pai Foundation2, it was held that the State is not
prevented from making any law in relation to religious practice and the
same is permissible under Article 25(2)(a) of the Constitution of India.
The limited jurisdiction granted by Article 25(2) relates to the making
of a law in relation to economic, financial, political or other secular
activities associated with the religious practice. The Court held as
"83. Article 25(2) gives specific power to the State to make any
law regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other
secular activity, which may be associated with religious practice as
provided by sub-clause (a) of Article 25(2). This is a further
curtailment of the right to profess, practise and propagate religion
conferred on the persons under Article 25(1). Article 25(2)(a) covers
only a limited area associated with religious practice, in respect of
which a law can be made. A careful reading of Article 25(2)(a)
indicates that it does not prevent the State from making any law in
relation to the religious practice as such. The limited jurisdiction
granted by Article 25(2) relates to the making of a law in relation to
economic, financial, political or other secular activities associated
with the religious practice."
13. Thus, though the concept of secularism emerged in the West, it
has taken a different colour over a period of time. In a democratic
country like India, consisting of multiple religions, regions, faith,
languages, food and clothing, the concept of secularism is to be
understood differently. Secularism, as adopted under our Constitution,
is that religion cannot be intertwined with any of the secular activities
of the State. Any encroachment of religion in the secular activities is
not permissible. Secularism thus means treating all religions equally,
respecting all religions and protecting the practices of all religions. The
positive meaning of secularism would be non-discrimination by the
State on the basis of religious faith and practices. Secularism can be
practised by adopting a completely neutral approach towards religion or
by a positive approach wherein though the State believes and respects
all religions, but does not favour any.
Factual background
14. The challenge in the present appeals is to the Government Order
dated 5-2-2022, the translated copy of which reads as under:
"Proceedings of the Government of Karnataka
Subject - Regarding a dress code for students of all schools and
colleges of the State.
Refer - (1) Karnataka Education Act, 1983
(2) Government Circular : 509 SHH 2013, Date : 31-1-2014
Preamble:
As mentioned in the above at Reference No. 1, the Karnataka
Education Act, 1983 passed by the Government of Karnataka (1 of
1995) Section [7(2)(g)(v)]* stipulates that all the school students
studying in Karnataka should behave in a fraternal manner,
transcend their group identity and develop an orientation towards
social justice. Under Section 133 of the above law, the Government
has the authority to issue directions to schools and colleges in this
regard.
The abovementioned circular at Reference No. 2 underlines how
pre-university education is an important phase in the lives of
students. All the schools and colleges in the State have set up
development committees in order to implement policies in line with
the policies of the Government, utilise budgetary allocations,
improve basic amenities and maintain their academic standards. It is
recommended that the schools and colleges abide by the directions
of these development committees.
Any such supervisory committee in schools and colleges (SDMC in
government institutions and Parents-Teachers' Associations and the
management in private institutions) should strive to provide a
conducive academic environment and enforce a suitable code of
conduct in accordance with Government regulations. Such a code of
conduct would pertain to that particular school or college.
Various initiatives have been undertaken to ensure that students
in schools and colleges have a standardised learning experience.
However, it has been brought to the Education Department's notice
that students in a few institutions have been carrying out their
religious observances, which has become an obstacle to unity and
uniformity in the schools and colleges.
The question relating to a uniform dress code over individual
dressing choices has come up in several cases before the Honourable
Supreme Court and High Courts, which have ruled as below:
(1) In para 9 of the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala's ruling in
Fathima Thasneem V. State of Kerala¹0, dated : 4-12-2018, it
'9. The Supreme Court in Asha Ranjan V. State of Bihar11
accepted the balance test when competing rights are involved
and has taken a view that individual interest must yield to the
larger public interest. Thus, conflict to competing rights can be
resolved not by negating individual rights but by upholding
larger right to remain, to hold such relationship between
institution and students.'
(2) In Fathema Hussain Sayed V. Bharat Education Society 12,
in a similar incident regarding the dress code, when a controversy
occurred at Kartik High School, Mumbai. The Bombay High Court
appraised the
matter, and ruled that it was not a violation of Article 25 of the
Constitution for the Principal to prohibit the wearing of headscarf or
head covering in the school.
(3)
Subsequent to the Hon'ble Supreme Court's
abovementioned ruling, the Hon'ble Madras High Court in V.
Kamalam V. MGR Medical University13 upheld the modified dress
code mandated by the university. A similar issue has been
considered by the Madras High Court in Staff Assn. V. Sir M.
Venkata Subba Rao, Matriculation Higher Secondary School14
case.
As mentioned in the abovementioned rulings of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court and various High Courts, since the prohibition of a
headscarf or a garment covering the head is not a violation of Article
25 of the Constitution. Additionally, in terms of the [[Karnataka
Education Act, 1983 Section 133(2) and Sections 7(1)(i), 7(2)(g)(v)
and the Karnataka Institutions (Classification, Regulation and
Prescription of Curricula, etc.) Rules, 1995 as per Rule 11]**, the
Government has decreed as below-
Government Order No. : EP14 SHH 2022
Bengaluru Dated : 5-2-2022
In the backdrop of the issues highlighted in the proposal, using
the powers granted by the Karnataka Education Act, 1983 Section
133(2) [Sections 7(1)(i), 7(2)(g)(v) and Karnataka Institutions
(Classification, Regulation and Prescription of Curricula, etc.) Rules,
1995 as per Rule 11**, all the government schools in the State are
mandated to abide by the official uniform. Private schools should
mandate a uniform decided upon by their Board of Management.
In colleges that come under the Pre-University Education
Department's jurisdiction, the uniforms mandated by the College
Development Committee, or the Board of Management, should be
worn. In the event that the management does mandate a uniform,
students should wear clothes that are in the interests of unity,
equality and public order.
By the Order of the Governor of Karnataka,
And in his name
Padmini S.N.
Joint Secretary to the Government
Education Department (Pre-University)"
15. The Karnataka Education Act, 1983 (for short "the Act"), under
which the above Government Order has been issued, was enacted with
a view to foster the harmonious development of the mental and
physical faculties of students and cultivate a scientific and secular
outlook through education. The long title and some of the relevant
provisions of the Act read thus:
"An Act to provide for better organisation, development, discipline
and control of the educational institutions in the State.
Whereas it is considered necessary to provide for the planned
development of educational institutions, inculcation of healthy
educational practice, maintenance and improvement in the
standards of education and better organisation, discipline and control
over educational institutions in the State with a view to fostering the
harmonious development of the mental and physical faculties of
students and cultivating a scientific and secular outlook through
education;
*
*
5. Promotion of education of the weaker sections and the
handicapped. - The State Government shall endeavour to promote
the education of the handicapped, backward classes and the weaker
sections of the society including the economically weaker section
thereof and in particular of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
with special care by adopting towards that end such measures as
may be appropriate.
*
*
*
7. Government to prescribe curricula, etc.-(1) Subject to
such rules as may be prescribed, the State Government may, in
respect of educational institutions, by order specify-
*
*
*
(h) the facilities to be provided, such as buildings, sanitary
arrangements, playgrounds, furniture, equipment, library, teaching
aid, laboratory and workshops;
(i) such other matters as are considered necessary.
(2) The curricula under sub-section (1) may also include schemes
in respect of-
*
*
*
(v) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood
amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and
regional or sectional diversities to renounce practices derogatory to
the dignity of women;
(vi) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite
culture;
*
*
*
(viii) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of
inquiry and reform;
*
*
*
(x) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
collective activity, so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels
of endeavour and achievement."
16. The Act also contemplates withdrawal of recognition if any local
authority or the Governing Council of any private educational institution
denies admission to any citizen on the ground of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them [Section 39(1)(b)]; or directly or indirectly
encourages in the
educational institution any propaganda or practice wounding the
religious feelings of any class of citizens of India or insulting religion or
the religious belief of that class [Section 39(1)(c)].
17. The impugned Government Order has been issued by exercising
the powers conferred under Section 133 of the Act, which reads as
thus:
"133. Powers of Government to give directions.-(1) The
State Government may, subject to other provisions of this Act, by
order, direct the Commissioner of Public Instruction or the Director
or any other officer not below the rank of the District Educational
Officer to make an enquiry or to take appropriate proceeding under
this Act in respect of any matter specified in the said order and the
Director or the other officer, as the case may be, shall report to the
State Government in due course the result of the enquiry made or
the proceeding taken by him.
(2) The State Government may give such directions to any
educational institution or tutorial institution as in its opinion are
necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act or to
give effect to any of the provisions contained therein or of any rules
or orders made thereunder and the Governing Council or the owner,
as the case may be, of such institution shall comply with every such
direction.
(3) The State Government may also give such directions to the
officers or authorities under its control as in its opinion are necessary
or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and it shall be
the duty of such officer or authority to comply with such directions."
18. The State Government is also empowered to make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act under Section 145 of the Act. Sub-
section (2) thereof provides that in particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, the Rules may provide for the
establishment or maintenance and administration of educational
institutions [Section 145(2)(xii)]; the purposes for which the premises
of the educational institutions may be used and the restrictions and
conditions subject to which such premises may be used for any other
purpose [Section 145(2)(xxix)] and all matters expressly required by
the Act to be prescribed or in respect of which the Act makes no
provision or makes insufficient provision and a provision is, in the
opinion of the State Government, necessary for the proper
implementation of the Act [Section 145(2)(xL)].
19. In pursuance of the above statutory provisions, the Karnataka
Educational Institutions (Classification, Regulation and Prescription of
Curricula, etc.) Rules, 1995 (for short "the Rules") were framed. Rule
11 of the said Rules provides for uniform, clothing, textbooks, etc.
which reads thus:
"11. Provision of uniform, clothing, textbooks, etc.-(1)
Every recognised educational institution may specify its own set of
uniform. Such uniform once specified shall not be changed within
the period of next five years.
(2) When an educational institution intends to change the uniform
as specified in sub-rule (1) above, it shall issue notice to parents in
this regard at least one year in advance.
(3) Purchase of uniform clothing and textbooks from the school or
from a shop, etc. suggested by school authorities and stitching of
uniform clothing with the tailors suggested by the school authorities,
shall be at the option of the student or his parent. The school
authorities shall make no compulsion in this regard."
20. Rule 16 of the Rules provides for the constitution and functions
of the District-Level Education Regulating Authority. An order was
passed by the State on 31-1-2014 constituting College Betterment
Committee for the purpose of proper utilisation of the grants sanctioned
to it and for developing basic infrastructure and maintaining the quality
of education. Such Committee is chaired by the Member of Legislative
Assembly as well as representatives of parents, one of whom is a
woman, one SC/ST, another member with an interest in educational
field, two student representatives out of which one shall be girl, Vice-
Principal/senior teacher of High School and senior Lecturers of the
college. The Principal of the respective college is the Member-Secretary.
21. Such College Betterment Committee of the Government Pre-
University College for Girls, Udupi, on 23-6-2018, passed the following
resolution:
"RESOLUTION
*
*
*
4. Further, it is resolved to maintain the same uniform in this year
also as maintained in the last year like blue-coloured chudidar pants,
white colour with blue colour checks top and blue-coloured shawl on
the shoulders, in all the six days of the week. Also, it is decided to
hand over the responsibility of providing the uniform to the poor girl
students from the donors, to the Vice-President Yashpal Suvarna and
powers were given to the Principal to take decision to after checking
availability of the uniform in the shops."
22. The challenge to the Circular dated 5-2-2022 before the High
Court remained unsuccessful on various grounds which are not
necessary to be extracted herein.
23. Mr Sanjay Hegde, Mr Devadutt Kamat, Mr Rajeev Dhawan, Ms
Meenakshi Arora, Ms Jayna Kothari, Mr Salman Khurshid, Mr A.M. Dar,
Mr Kapil Sibal, Mr Colin Gonsalves, Mr Aditya Sondhi, Mr Yusuf
Muchhala, Mr Huzefa Ahmadi, Mr Dushyant Dave, learned Senior
Advocates and Mr Prashant Bhushan, Ms Kirti Singh, Mr Rishad Ahmed
Chowdhury, Mr Shoeb Alam, Mr Rahmatullah Kotwal, Ms Thulasi K. Raj,
Mohd. Nizamuddin Pasha, learned counsel have assisted the Court in
this matter on behalf of the appellants; whereas, Mr Tushar Mehta,
Solicitor General, Mr K.M. Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General, Mr
Prabhuling Navadgi, Advocate General for the State of Karnataka, Mr R.
Venkataramani, Ms V.
Mohana, Mr D.S. Naidu, learned Senior Advocates, argued on behalf of
the respondents. The arguments covered various issues which will be
dealt with hereinafter at appropriate stages.
24. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length. I
find that the following questions arise for consideration in the present
appeals:
The surest way t to legal research!"
24.1. (i) Whether the appeals should be heard along with Kantaru
Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.)14a and/or should the present
appeals be referred to the Constitution Bench in terms of Article 145(3)
of the Constitution?
24.2. (ii) Whether the State Government could delegate its decision
to implement the wearing of uniform by the College Development
Committee or the Board of Management and whether the Government
Order insofar as it empowers a College Development Committee to
decide on the restriction/prohibition or otherwise on headscarves is ex
facie violative of Section 143 of the Act?
24.3. (iii) What is ambit and scope of the right to freedom of
"conscience" and "religion" under Article 25?
24.4. (iv) What is the ambit and scope of essential religious
practices under Article 25 of the Constitution?
24.5. (v) Whether fundamental rights of freedom of expression
under Article 19(1)(a) and right of privacy under Article 21 mutually
exclusive or are they complementary to each other; and whether the
Government Order does not meet the injunction of reasonableness for
the purposes of Article 21 and Article 14?
24.6. (vi) Whether the Government Order impinges upon
constitutional promise of fraternity and dignity under the Preamble as
well as fundamental duties enumerated under Article 51-A clauses (e)
and (f)?
24.7. (vii) Whether, if the wearing of hijab is considered as an
essential religious practice, the student can seek right to wear
headscarf to a secular school as a matter of right?
24.8. (viii) Whether a student-citizen in the constitutional scheme is
expected to surrender her fundamental rights under Articles 19, 21 and
25 as a precondition for accessing education in a State institution?
24.9. (ix) Whether in the constitutional scheme, the State is
obligated to ensure "reasonable accommodation" to its citizens?
24.10. (x) Whether the Government Order is contrary to the
legitimate State interest of promoting literacy and education as
mandated under Articles 21, 21-A, 39(f), 41, 46 and 51-A of the
Constitution?
24.11. (xi) Whether the Government Order neither achieves any
equitable access to education, nor serves the ethic of secularism, nor is
true to the objective of the Karnataka Education Act?
Question (i) - Whether the appeals should be heard along with
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) 14a and/or
should the present appeals be referred to the Constitution Bench
in terms of Article 145(3) of the Constitution?
25. The preliminary submission of the learned counsel for the
appellants is that the present case ought to be referred to a larger
Bench in view of the order of this Court reported as Kantaru Rajeevaru
(Sabarimala Temple Review-5 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn. 15 One
of the arguments raised for such submission was that it has to be
decided as to what is considered to be essentially religious, essential to
religion and integral part of religion. The contention was that "religion"
is a means to express one's "faith". The larger Bench of this Court
framed the questions of law in an order16. However, the reasons17
recorded for the reference state the ambit to be "the contours of judicial
review in matters pertaining to essential religious practices". The
questions referred to in the said case relate to the extent to which the
Court can inquire into the issue as to whether a particular practice
would be qualified as an integral, essential part of religion.
26. It was also argued that the present case involves a substantial
question of law relating to interpretation of the Constitution, therefore,
ought to be referred to a Constitution Bench in terms of Article 145(3)
of the Constitution.
27. It is noted that the review in Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to
Religion, In re-9 J.)14a is to consider much wider questions. The
argument that the matter should be referred to a larger Bench to be
heard along with such referred cases does not warrant consideration.
The questions referred to the larger Bench relate to power of judicial
review in the matters of essential religious practices. But the said
question need not be examined in the present matter as the issue
herein is whether a religious practice, which may be an essential
religious practice, can be regulated by the State in a secular institution.
Therefore, I do not find it necessary to tag the present appeals along
with Kantaru Rajeevaru
28. The argument that the present appeals involve a substantial
question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, and thus
should be referred to the Bench of five Judges in terms of Article 145
(3) of the Constitution is not tenable. Reliance is placed on a nine-
Judge Bench judgment reported as K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 J.) V.
"502.
When a substantial question as to the interpretation of
the Constitution arises, it is this Court and this Court alone under
Article 145(3)
that is to decide what the interpretation of the Constitution shall be,
and for this purpose, the Constitution entrusts this task to a minimum
of five Judges of this Court."
29. There is no dispute about the proposition canvassed. The issue
in the present matter is however as to whether the students can
enforce their religious beliefs in a secular institution. Thus, the issues
raised do not become a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of the Constitution only for the reason that the right
claimed by the appellants is provided under the Constitution. Hence, I
do not find the need to refer the matter to a larger Bench or that the
same should be heard along with Kantaru Rajeevaru¹4a
Question (ii) - Whether the State Government could delegate its
decision to implement the wearing of uniform by the College
Development Committee or the Board of Management and
whether the Government Order insofar as it empowers a College
Development Committee to decide on the restriction/prohibition
or otherwise on headscarves is ex facie violative of Section 143
of the Act?
30. The argument raised is with reference to Section 143 of the Act.
It is contended that the State Government can delegate all or any of its
powers exercisable by it, or to be exercised also by such office/authority
subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in the
notification. It is the contention of the learned counsel for the
appellants that the Notification dated 31-1-2014 is to delegate the
essential State functions in favour of a non-statutory authority.
Therefore, such notification violates the mandate of Section 143 of the
Act.
31. Section 143 of the Act reads thus:
"143. Delegation.- - The State Government may by notification in
the Official Gazette, delegate all or any powers exercisable by it
under this Act or rules made thereunder, in relation to such matter
and subject to such conditions, if any as may be specified in the
direction, to be exercised also by such officer or authority
subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the
notification."
32. It is contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that
the power to maintain public order is the responsibility of the State
Government and, therefore, the State Government could not delegate
its authority to College Development Committee which is not State
within the meaning of Article 12 as it is a mechanism created by the
State. The Circular issued by the Government of Karnataka dated 31-1-
2014, published in the Official Gazette, reads thus:
"Government of Karnataka
No. ED 580 SHH 2013
Department
of
Education
Multistore Building Bangalore
dated 31-1-2014
CIRCULAR
Education Department is providing 1st and 2nd PUC education in
the State. PUC education is the main stage in the student's life. In
accordance with the Government and department direction and in
order to utilise the grants as well as in maintaining academic
standards and development of infrastructure, we are hereby directed
to form a College Development Committee and to follow the
guidelines as under:
1.
President
MLA of the respective constituency
2.
Vice-
Local representative nominated by the MLA
President
3.
Members
(1) 4 members from the students' parents and
among them 1 parent should be a female and 1
parent should belong to Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe.
(2) The person who is interested in the
education field.
(3) 2 members from the students
representative, among them 1 should be a girl
student (this is not applicable for boys college).
(4) Vice-Principal/senior teacher from respective
composite PU college.
(5) Senior Lecturer of PU college.
4.
Secretary
Principal of the respective PU college.
member
sd/-31-1-2014
(S.H. Curiyavar)
Under-Secretary to the Govt.
Dept. of Education (PU Education)."
33. Furthermore, the learned counsel for the appellants have also
vehemently argued that the Government Order dated 5-2-2022 refers
to some of the judgments which do not deal with the issue of wearing
hijab, but still it is concluded that use of headscarf or a garment
covering the head is not in violation of Article 25. It is averred that
though the operative part of the order seems to be facially religious-
neutral, it targets a particular community in effect. It is also contended
that the High Court has supplanted the reasons to uphold the said
Government Order even though the reasons recorded therein are not
sufficient to prohibit the use of headscarf. Hence, at the outset, the
State ought to prove the jurisdiction to issue such a circular.
34. The alternate argument is that the College Development
Committee, a non-statutory authority, cannot exercise power of the
State Government under Part III of the Constitution. It was contended
that the law which can restrict the right of an individual under Article
19(1)(a), Article 25(2), or any other right falling within Part III of the
Constitution, can only be by way of a law made by the competent
legislature. Mr Shoeb Alam referred to the judgments of this Court
reported as State of M.P. V. Bharat Singh19, State of W.B. V. Anwar Ali
Sarkar20 , Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan V. State of U.P. 21 and a
recent order passed by this Court reported as Pharmacy Council of India
V. Rajeev College of Pharmacy to support such contention. However,
Mr Dushyant Dave argued that the rights in Part III of the Constitution
can be restricted or regulated by a statute made by the competent
legislature and also includes any law as defined under Articles 13(2)
and (3) of the Constitution.
35. Articles 13(2) and (3) of the Constitution are relevant for the
purposes of the present proposition, which read thus:
"13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the
fundamental
rights.-(1)
*
*
*
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or
abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in
contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention,
be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) "law" includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule,
regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of
India the force of law;"
36. I do not find any merit in the said argument raised by the
appellants. The College Development Committee is envisaged to be an
in-house mechanism to ensure better utilisation of grants as well as
maintaining academic standards and development of infrastructure.
Such directions are relatable to sub-section (3) of Section 133 and
Section 145 of the Act. In any case, the constitution of the College
Development Committee is not in conflict with any of the provisions of
the Act. The said circular was published in the Karnataka Gazette,
issued in exercise of the executive powers of the State, supplementing
the provisions of the Act and not supplanting all or any of the
provisions thereof.
37. The Government Order is in two parts. The first part is the
Preamble which gives the background leading to the order impugned
before the High Court. The second part i.e. the operative part of the
order alone bears the Government Order number and date. The order
mandates that the uniform prescribed by the College Development
Committee or the Board of Management should be worn. The appellants
have though understood the order to be interfering with their essential
religious practices.
38. The executive power under Article 73 extends to all matters in
respect of which Parliament has power to make laws or under Article
162 in respect of the matters where the legislature of the State has
power
to make laws. 23 The question is whether restrictions can be
imposed by the executive in respect of the rights specified under Part
III such as Articles 19, 21, 25 and 31-A.
39. There is no dispute about the proposition that in the absence of
any statute or the statutory rule, but in exercise of the executive power,
the State can issue an executive order. However, the argument raised
is that restrictions
under Part III of the Constitution can only be imposed by way of a
statutory law and not by way of an executive power.
40. Now, coming to the judgments referred to by the learned
counsel for the appellant for the abovementioned contention; in Anwar
Ali Sarkar20, this Court was considering the conviction of the
respondent by the Special Court established under Section 3 of the
West Bengal Special Courts Ordinance, 1949, which was replaced by
the West Bengal Special Courts Act, 1950. It was the provision of the
Act which was set aside being discriminatory. This Court, in fact, inter
"112.
This is further made clear by defining "law" in Article 13
(which renders void any law which takes away or abridges the rights
conferred by Part III) as including, among other things, any "order"
or "notification", so that even executive orders or notifications must
not infringe Article 14. The trilogy of articles thus ensures non-
discrimination in State action both in the legislative and the
administrative spheres in the Democratic Republic of India."
Thus, the said judgment is thus not helpful to the argument raised.
41. In Bharat Singh19, this Court dismissed an appeal filed by the
State against the judgment of the High Court reported as Bharatsingh
V. State of M.P.24 The High Court struck down Section 3(1)(b) of the
Madhya Pradesh Public Security Act, 1959 when the writ petitioner
before the High Court was prohibited to be in Raipur District and was
directed to remain within the municipal limits of Jhabua District and
was also ordered to report daily to the Police Station Officer, Jhabua.
"For the foregoing reasons, our conclusion is that clauses (a) and
(c) of Section 3(1) of the Act are valid, but clause (b) being violative
of Article 19(1)(d) of the Constitution is invalid. As clause (b) is
invalid, the direction made against the appellant Bharatsingh under
that clause asking him to reside in Jhabua was clearly illegal and was
rightly quashed by the learned Single Judge. On quashing that
direction, the further direction that Bharatsingh should notify his
movements by reporting himself daily to the Police Station Officer,
Jhabua, cannot survive. The learned Single Judge, therefore, rightly
quashed the order made against Bharatsingh directing him to notify
his movements and report himself daily to the Police Station Officer,
Jhabua, though he did so on the erroneous view that clause (c) of
Section 3(1) was inextricably woven with clause (b) thereof and was
invalid. The result is that both these appeals are dismissed. In the
circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs
of the two appeals."
42. An appeal against the said judgment was dismissed by this
Court wherein this Court held as under : (Bharat Singh case19 AIR p.
1174, para 7)
"7. We are, therefore, of the view that the order made by the
State in exercise of the authority conferred by Section 3(1)(b) of the
Madhya Pradesh Public Security Act 25 of 1959 was invalid and for
the acts done to the prejudice of the respondent after the declaration
of emergency under Article 352 no immunity from the process of the
Court could be claimed under Article 358 of the Constitution, since
the order was not supported by any valid legislation."
43. The aforementioned judgment in Bharat Singh19 is in respect of
the statute enacted by a State Legislature, the provision of which was
found to be invalid. The issue raised in the aforesaid case has no parity
with the facts of the present case.
44. In Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan21 the State Government
contended that the impugned teleprinter message dated March 31,
1981 was in the nature of an executive instruction issued by the State
Government under its powers under Article 162 of the Constitution for
the due observance of the provisions of the U.P. Foodgrains Dealers
(Licensing and Restriction on Hoarding) Order, 1976 and the Uttar
Pradesh Foodgrains (Procurement and Regulation of Trade) Order,
1978. It was the stand of the State that no person can carry on
business in foodgrains as a dealer or as a commission agent, except
under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a valid
licence issued in that behalf under the two orders. In these
41)
"33. Under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, a citizen has the
right to carry on any occupation, trade or business and the only
restriction on this unfettered right is the authority of the State to
make a law imposing reasonable restrictions under clause (6).
*
*
41. There still remains the question whether the seizure of wheat
amounts to deprivation of property without the authority of law.
Article 300-A provides that no person shall be deprived of his
property save by authority of law. The State Government cannot
while taking recourse to the executive power of the State under
Article 162, deprive a person of his property. Such power can be
exercised only by authority of law and not by a mere executive fiat or
order. Article 162, as is clear from the opening words, is subject to
other provisions of the Constitution. It is, therefore, necessarily
subject to Article 300-A. The word "law" in the context of Article 300
-A must mean an Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, a
rule, or a statutory order, having the force of law, that is positive or
State-made law."
The writ petitions filed by the dealers were dismissed. In the aforesaid
case, the restriction was put by an executive order, which was found to
be a reasonable restriction in terms of Article 19(6) of the Constitution.
Even the said judgment does not aid the appellants and has no
applicability to the facts of the present case.
45. Furthermore, reliance on a recent judgment of this Court
reported as Pharmacy Council of India²2 is unfound as it has no
parity
with the facts of the present case. The Pharmacy Council of India, an
authority created under the Pharmacy Act, 1948, resolved on 17-7-
2019 to put a moratorium on the opening of new pharmacy colleges for
running diploma as well as degree courses in Pharmacy for a period of
five years. The argument raised by the appellant was that Sections 3,
10 and 12 of the Pharmacy Act confer the power to regulate, therefore,
such power would include the power to prohibit also. This Court
"55. Since we have held that the Resolutions/communications
dated 17-7-2019 and 9-9-2019 of the Central Council of the
appellant PCI, which are in the nature of executive instructions,
could not impose restrictions on the fundamental right to establish
educational institutions under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of
India, we do not find it necessary to consider the submissions
advanced
on
other
issues.
We
find
that
the
Resolutions/communications dated 17-7-2019 and 9-9-2019 of the
Central Council of the appellant PCI are liable to be struck down on
this short ground."
46. A perusal of the above judgment in Pharmacy Council of India²2
shows that an authority under the Act had put a moratorium on the
opening of new pharmacy colleges, thus, prohibiting the right conferred
on an individual under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. The same,
however, was by virtue of a resolution not supported by any statute.
Therefore, the said judgment of this Court has no applicability to the
facts of the present case.
47. Furthermore, this Court in a judgment reported as Dwarka Nath
Tewari V. State of Bihar25 was considering Article 182 of the Bihar
Education Code. The Court found that Article 182 of the Code is not in
exercise of any power granted under the statute and thus cannot
deprive the petitioners of their rights in the properties which were the
subject-matter of the writ petition. This Court held as under : (AIR p.
253, para 9)
"9.
It is clear, therefore, from the portion of the preface
extracted above, that Article 182 of the Code has no greater sanction
than an administrative order or rule, and is not based on any
statutory authority or other authority which could give it the force of
law. Naturally, therefore,
the learned Solicitor General, with his usual fairness, conceded that the
article relied upon by the respondents as having the force of law, has
no such force, and could not, therefore, deprive the petitioners of their
rights in the properties aforesaid."
48. "Law", as contemplated under Articles 19(2) and 25(2), falls
within Part III of the Constitution. Therefore, law, as defined under
Article 13(3), would include any ordinance, order, bye-law, rule,
regulation, notification, custom or usage in the territory of India to have
the force of law. The order issued by the State Government would thus
be a law within the meaning of Article 13(2) read with Article 13(3)(a),
which is a valid exercise of power under Article 19(1)(a) read with
Article 19(2), and Article 25(1) read with Article 25(2) of the
Constitution.
49. The Government Order relates to the powers conferred on the
executive under Section 133 of the Act and rule-making power of the
State under Article 162 of the Constitution. The said Government Order
does not run contrary to any of the provisions of the Act and the Rules
framed thereunder. Therefore, the executive was well within its
jurisdiction to ensure that the students come in the uniform prescribed
by the College Development Committee.
50. The College Development Committee so constituted consists of
Member of the Legislative Assembly, representatives of the students,
faculty members, etc. Therefore, such authority is a representative
body of the students and teachers including the Member of the
Legislative Assembly and Principal of the College as Member-Secretary.
Such Committee cannot be said to be beyond the scope of Section 143
of the Act. Such authority established in exercise of the powers vested
with the State Government is not in contravention of any of the
provisions of the statute. In terms of Article 162 of the Constitution,
the State Government in exercise of its executive power could create
the College Development Committee as such committee does not
contravene any of the provisions of the statute or the rules framed
thereunder.
51. In view of the above, I find that the State Government has the
power to constitute a College Development Committee by Notification
dated 31-1-2014 in terms of Section 143 of the Act. The State
Government could confer its power to be exercised by such
office/authority subordinate to the State Government. It is noted that
the word "authority" has not been defined under the Act. The authority
contemplated by the Act could be a non-statutory authority such as of a
person or a group of persons who may be authorised to exercise powers
under Section 143 of the Act.
52. Further, it is well settled that executive powers can be used to
supplement the statutory rules. This Court in a judgment reported as
Sant Ram Sharma V. State of Rajasthan26 held that it is true that the
Government cannot amend or supersede statutory rules by
administrative instructions, but if the rules are silent on any particular
point, the Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules
and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed
thereunder. This Court in a judgment reported as Union of India
V. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal held as under : (Ashok Kumar Aggarwal
"59. The law laid down above has consistently been followed
and it is a settled proposition of law that an authority cannot issue
orders/office memorandum/executive instructions in contravention of
the statutory rules. However, instructions can be issued only to
supplement the statutory rules but not to supplant it. Such
instructions should be subservient to the statutory provisions. (Vide
Union of India V. Majji Jangamayya28 P.D. Aggarwal V. State of
U.P.² Paluru Ramkrishnaiah V. Union of India ³ 0, C. Rangaswamaiah
V. Karnataka Lokayukta³1 and Joint Action Committee of Air Line
Pilots' Assn. of India V. DG of Civil Aviation32.)"
53. The Preamble to the Act aims towards fostering harmonious
development of the mental and physical faculties of students and
cultivating a scientific and secular outlook through education.
54. The curricula under Section 7(2) of the Act is to promote
harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional
diversities, to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women,
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture, to
develop scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform and to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
collective activity, so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of
endeavour and achievement. The said provision is substantially in pari
materia with the fundamental duties enumerated in Part IV-A of the
Constitution inserted by the 42nd Amendment, required to be followed
by the institutions covered under the Act.
55. The said provisions show that the mandate of the statute is to
renounce sectional diversities, to develop humanism and to cultivate
scientific and secular outlook. The sectarian approach that certain
students will carry their religious beliefs to secular schools run by the
State would be antithesis of the mandate of the statute. All students
need to act and follow the discipline of the school. Out of the many
steps required to ensure uniformity while imparting education, one of
them is to wear the uniform dress without any addition or subtraction
to the same. Any modification to the uniform would cease to be the
uniform, defeating the very purpose of prescribing under Rule 11 and
as mandated by the College Development Committee.
56. Mr Dushyant Dave referred to an extract which appears to be
from a booklet published by the Department of Pre-University Education
containing guidelines for the year 2021-2022. It is contended that such
guidelines have
contemplated that uniform is not mandatory and that some College
Principals and Management Committee have imposed uniforms as
mandatory, which is illegal. The relevant clause reads as under:
"Uniform is not mandatory for students studying in pre-university
college
under
Government/Pre-University Education
Department/Education Act. But some College Principals and
Management Committee members have imposed uniforms as
mandatory which is illegal. Any violation of the foregoing instructions
will be taken seriously."
57. In respect of the said contention, I find that the students were
following uniform prescribed by the College Development Committee. It
is not the case of any of the students that they were not wearing
uniform for the academic session 2021-2022. The only claim raised was
in relation to right to wear the headscarf during the academic year
2021-2022, the year in controversy, and to which the guidelines relate.
58. The recognised educational institution in terms of Section 2(30)
of the Act means an educational institution recognised under the Act
and includes one deemed to be recognised thereunder. The recognition
of educational institutions is contemplated by Section 36 of the Act
whereas the educational institutions established and run by the State
Government or by the authority sponsored by the Central or the State
Government or by a local authority and approved by the competent
authority shall be deemed to be the educational institution recognised
under the Act.
59. The students are not disputing the mandate to wear uniform. It
appears that the guidelines have been made part of the brochure
without taking into consideration Rule 11 of the Rules which
contemplates that every recognised educational institution may specify
its own set of uniform. Therefore, the guidelines run counter to the
statutory Rule 11 framed in exercise of the powers conferred under
Section 145 of the Act. Thus, the uniform, having been prescribed in
terms of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder, the guidelines to the
contrary are non est and in any case had not been followed during the
academic year in question.
60. The Government Order dated 5-2-2022 contemplates that the
prescribed uniform should be followed. It necessarily excludes all
religious symbols visible to the naked eye. The argument that the
students wear Rudraksha or a Cross is mentioned only to deal with an
argument so raised. Anything worn by the students under his/her shirt
cannot be said to be objectionable in terms of the Government Order
issued.
61. In view of the above enunciation of law, I do not find that the
constitution of the College Development Committee contravenes any of
the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder or that the
regulation of uniform by such Committee is beyond its scope.
Question (iii) - What is the ambit and scope of right to freedom
of "conscience" and "religion" under Article 25?
62. At the outset, it is pertinent to mention that the Constitution
does not define the term "religion", though it is used in Articles 15, 16,
25, 26, 27, 28 and
30. The Articles which are under consideration for the purpose of the
present appeals read thus:
"14. Equality before law.-The State shall not deny to any
person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws
within the territory of India.
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion,
race, caste, sex or place of birth.-(1) The State shall not
discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex,
place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability,
restriction or condition with regard to-
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of
public entertainment; or
(b)
*
*
*
19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of
speech, etc.-(1) All citizens shall have the right-
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
*
*
*
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the
operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any
law, insofar as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the
exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or
morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement
to an offence.
*
*
*
25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and
propagation of religion.-(1) Subject to public order, morality and
health and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally
entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess,
practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing
law or prevent the State from making any law-
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or
other secular activity which may be associated with religious
practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open
of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes
and sections of Hindus."
Mr Huzefa Ahmadi and Mr Dushyant Dave have quoted from the
proceedings of the Constituent Assembly Debates, to bring about the
thought process which had gone into to present the Constitution to the
People of India. Mr Ahmadi relies upon the speech of Dr Ambedkar to
the Constituent Assembly on 25-11-1949 (Constituent Assembly
Debates, Vol. XI, p. 979) to the following effect:
"... The third thing we must do is not to be content with mere
political democracy. We must make our political democracy a social
democracy as well. Political democracy cannot last unless there lies
at the base of it social democracy. What does social democracy
mean? It means a way of life which recognises liberty, equality and
fraternity as the principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality
and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity.
They form a union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the
other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be
divorced from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor
can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without
equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the
many. Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without
fraternity, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the
many. Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without
fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course of
things".
(emphasis supplied)
64. Mr Dave referred to the report dated 25-5-1949 of the Advisory
Committee on Minorities by the Constituent Assembly, presided by
Hon'ble Sardar Vallabhbhai J. Patel, wherein it was stated as under :
(CAD Vol. VIII)
"... It is not our intention to commit the minorities to a particular
position in a hurry. If they really have come honestly to the
conclusion that in the changed conditions of this country, it is in the
interest of all to lay down real and genuine foundations of a secular
State, then nothing is better for the minorities than to trust the good
sense and sense of fairness of the majority, and to place confidence
in them. So also it is for us who happen to be in a majority to think
about what the minorities feel, and how we in their position.
"
65. In Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, p. 39, dated 4-11-
1948, it was opined as under:
The Draft Constitution is also criticised because of the
safeguards it provides for minorities. In this, the Drafting Committee
has no responsibility. It follows the decisions of the Constituent
Assembly. Speaking for myself, I have no doubt that the Constituent
Assembly has done wisely in providing such safeguards for
minorities as it has done. In this country both the minorities and the
majorities have followed a wrong path. It is wrong for the majority to
deny the existence of minorities. It is equally wrong for the
minorities to perpetuate themselves. A solution must be found which
will serve a double purpose. It must recognise the existence of the
minorities to start with. It must also be such that it will enable
majorities and minorities to merge someday into one.
"
(emphasis supplied)
66. In the Constituent Assembly Debates dated 6-12-1948, while
considering the draft Article 19, which is now Article 25, Pandit Lakshmi
Kanta Maitra expressed his views as follows : (CAD Vol. VII, pp. 831-
32)
"
By secular State, as I understand it, is meant that the State is
not going to make any discrimination whatsoever on the ground of
religion or community against any person professing any particular
form of religious faith. This means in essence that no particular
religion in the State will receive any State patronage whatsoever.
The State is not going to establish, patronise or endow any particular
religion to the exclusion of or in preference to others and that no
citizen in the State will have any preferential treatment or will be
discriminated against simply on the ground that he professed a
particular form of religion. In other words in the affairs of the State
the professing of any particular religion will not be taken into
consideration at all. This I consider to be the essence of a secular
State."
67. Mr Kamat also referred to the proposed amendment moved by
Mr Tajamul Husain on 3-12-1948 proposing an amendment to the
following effect : (CAD Vol. VII, p. 838)
"
No person shall have any visible sign or mark or name, and no
person shall wear any dress whereby his religion may be
recognised."
68. The argument raised is that since the amendment was not
accepted, therefore, the citizens have a right to have visible sign, mark
or name or dress so that their religion may be recognised. Though the
amendment was not moved, but the fact that such discussion had
taken place in the Constituent Assembly shows that the Constituent
Assembly was aware of wearing of different clothing by the People of
India which the member was suggesting to be not carried out. Since
the Constitution is silent about the clothes to be worn by the citizens,
therefore, the concern shown by a member of the Constituent Assembly
should not be put under the carpet.
69. In fact, Mr Tajamul Husain further raised an argument as under :
(CAD Vol. VII, p. 819)
"Mr Tajamul Husain : I wish to point out that religion is a private
affair between man and his God. It has no concern with anyone else
in the world. What is the religion of others is also no concern of
mine. Then why have visible signs by which one's religion may be
recognised? You will find, Sir, that in all civilised countries-and
civilised countries now-a-days are the countries in Europe and
America-there is no visible sign or mark by which a man can be
recognised as to what religion he professes.
So I do not want
these things. I know I am 100 years ahead of the present times. But
still, I shall have my say.
In civilised countries in England there was a time when there was
no uniformity of dress. In this country you find all sorts of dresses.
You find dhoties, you find pyjamas, you find kurtas, you find
shirts, -and again, no shirts, no dhoties, nakedness, all sorts of
things. That was the same thing in England at one time.
*
*
*
Mr Tajamul Husain : I am sorry for the interruption of the
Maulana. My name I will change when the whole country adopts my
resolution. Then, he will not be able to find out what I am and who I
am.
Now, Sir, I was talking about dress. There was an England when
there was no uniformity, but the Honourable the Law Minister will
agree with me that an Act was actually passed in Parliament by
which there was uniformity of dress and now in England and in the
whole of Europe and in America there is uniformity of dress. We are
one nation. Let us all have one kind of dress; one kind of name; and
no visible signs. In conclusion, I say we are going to be a secular
State. We should not, being a secular State, be recognised by our
dress. If you have a particular kind of dress, you know at once that
so and so is a Hindu or a Muslim. This thing should be done away
with. With these words, I move my amendment.
(Amendment 589 and 583 were not moved.)"
70. On the other hand, the learned Solicitor General referred to the
speech of Dr B.R. Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly, Vol. VII, p.
781, which reads as under:
"
The religious conceptions in this country are so vast that they
cover every aspect of life from birth to death. There is nothing which
is not religion and if personal law is to be saved, I am sure about it
that in social matters we will come to a standstill. I do not think it is
possible to accept a position of that sort. There is nothing
extraordinary in saying that we ought to strive hereafter to limit the
definition of religion in such a manner that we shall not extend it
beyond beliefs and such rituals as may be connected with
ceremonials which are essentially religious."
71. In respect of the Constituent Assembly Debates, this Court in
A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras33 held that the Court could only search
for the objective intent of the legislature primarily in the words used in
the enactment, aided by such historical material such as reports of
statutory committees. The Court did not put any importance on the
speeches made by some of the members of the Constituent Assembly
in the course of the debate on Article 15 (now Article 21). The result
appears to be that while it is not proper to take into consideration the
individual opinions of Members of Assembly to construe the meaning of
a particular clause, when a question is raised whether a certain phrase
or expression was up for consideration at all or not, a reference to the
debates may be permitted.
72. In State of Travancore-Cochin V. Bombay Co. Ltd. 34 , this Court
held that the speeches made by the members of the Constituent
Assembly in the course of debates on the draft Constitution is
unwarranted. It was noted that this form of extrinsic aid to the
interpretation of statutes is not admissible has been generally accepted
in England, and the same rule has been observed in the construction of
the Indian statutes as well - see Administrator General of Bengal V.
Prem Lal Mullick3 , IA at p. 118.
73. In a nine-Judge Bench judgment in Indra Sawhney V. Union of
36
India , this Court held that what is said during the debates is not
conclusive or binding upon the Court because several members may
have expressed several views, all of which may not be reflected in the
provision finally enacted. Therefore, views of the members of the
Constituent Assembly are not really to be relied upon after this Court in
a number of judgments has expressed about the rights under Article 25
of the Constitution.
74. Thus, the debates show the in-depth knowledge of the members
of the Constituent Assembly at that relevant point of time, but more
than 70 years later, with the interpretation of various provisions by the
constitutional courts, it is not advisable to rely solely upon views of the
individual members in such debates.
75. Further, the argument of Mr Dave is that Article 25 protects
religious practices and that the expression "essential religious practice"
has been wrongly used by this Court in Shayara Bano V. Union of
It was contended that the judgment in Commr., Hindu
Religious Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur
Mutt3 has not used the expression "essential religious practice".
Therefore, wearing of a headscarf may not be essential, but is a
religious practice, thus, protected by Article 25.
76. Dr Dhawan, in support of his arguments, argued that the rights
available to the students are the right to dress, free speech and
expression not affecting public order or morality and the right of
privacy, relying upon the judgments in National Legal Services
Authority V. Union of India ³9 and K.S. Puttaswamy18. It is contended
that wearing of hijab is an essential religious practice, and that the
action of the State is discriminatory on the grounds of religion and sex.
77. Mr Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing for the
State rebutted the arguments raised on behalf of the appellants and
gave the background of issuance of the Government Order dated 5-2-
2022. He submitted that on 29-3-2013, the College Development
Committee, Udupi, prescribed the uniform for the girl students and
since then the same was being followed by them. On 31-1-2014, a
Circular was issued by the Government regarding formation of a College
Development Committee comprising inter alia the local Member of the
Legislative Assembly, representatives of parents, student
representatives and teachers and Principal of the pre-university college.
78. It was on 23-6-2018, that the College Development Committee,
Udupi, prescribed a dress code for the students. On 31-12-2019, the
College Development Committee of another college i.e. Kundapura Pre-
University College, Udupi, unanimously resolved that the uniform of the
students for the academic year would continue to be same as one
prescribed in the previous years.
79. The students at the time of admission to the pre-university
course undertook to comply with all the rules and regulations of the Pre
-University College. It was pointed out that suddenly in the middle of
the academic term, the issue of hijab was generated in the social media
by the activists of Popular Front of India. The police papers in this
respect were handed over to the High Court in a sealed cover as
It is stated that the charge-sheet has since been filed. Thereafter, some
representations were made by the parents of the students and/or
students requesting hijab to be worn in classrooms.
80. The College Development Committee directed to maintain status
quo. Five students thereafter filed Writ Petition No. 2146 of 2022 on 29
-1-2022 seeking an interim prayer that they be allowed to continue to
attend school wearing headscarves. On 31-1-2022, the College
Development Committee, Udupi, decided that students must not wear
hijab in classrooms whereas the Kundapura Pre-University College
resolved it on 2-2-2022. There was a counter-reaction for the demands
raised. It is in these circumstances that the Government issued the
impugned order.
81. It is contended that such directions were issued to the
colleges/institutions and not to the individual students as per the
mandate of the Act. The Preamble to the Act is to provide for the
planned development of educational institutions, inculcating healthy
educational practice, maintenance and improvement in the standards of
education, better organisation, discipline and control over educational
institutions so as to cultivate a scientific and secular outlook through
education. Section 133(2) of the Act empowers the State Government
to give directions to any educational institution as in its opinion are
necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Therefore, the Government Order was issued to direct the
colleges/institutions to ensure that wherever uniform is mandated by
the College Development Committee or the Board of Management, it
should be worn. But if such uniform is not mandated, the students
should wear clothes which are in the interest of unity, equality and
public order. Therefore, the circular was issued to the colleges to ensure
compliance of norm of uniform in a non-discriminatory manner,
irrespective of any religious faith of the students.
82. The legality of Rule 11 of the Rules is not under challenge. In
terms of the said Rule, the educational institutions have a right to
prescribe a uniform to the students attending the said school. The
scope of judicial review of the decisions of the educational institutions
vis-à-vis its pupil is narrower than a purely administrative action.
Reference was made to T.M.A. Pai Foundation2 wherein it was held as
"64. An educational institution is established only for the purpose
of imparting education to the students. In such an institution, it is
necessary for all to maintain discipline and abide by the rules and
regulations that have been lawfully framed. The teachers are like
foster parents who are required to look after, cultivate and guide the
students in their pursuit of education. The teachers and the
institution exist for the students and
not vice versa. Once this principle is kept in mind, it must follow that it
becomes imperative for the teaching and other staff of an educational
institution to perform their duties properly, and for the benefit of the
students."
83. In the matters of campus discipline of the educational
institutions, the Court does not substitute its own views in place of the
school authority except in a case of manifest injustice or to interfere
with a decision which does not pass the test of Wednesbury40
reasonableness. This Court in a judgment reported as J&K State Board
para 20)
"20.
From the discussions in the impugned judgment, it is clear
that the High Court has taken upon itself the task of finding out a
scheme to tackle the problem of mass malpractice in examination. In
our considered view the approach of the High Court in the matter is
erroneous and this has vitiated the judgment. In matters concerning
campus discipline of educational institutions and conduct of
examinations the duty is primarily vested in the authorities in charge
of the institutions. In such matters the court should not try to
substitute its own views in place of the authorities concerned nor
thrust its views on them. That is not to say that the court cannot at
all interfere with the decisions of the authorities in such matters. The
court has undoubtedly the power to intervene to correct any error in
complying with the provisions of the rules, regulations or
notifications and to remedy any manifest injustice being perpetrated
on the candidates."
84. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society V. State of Gujarat42,
it was held that the educational institutions are temples of learning and
thus discipline is required to be maintained between the teacher and
"30. Educational institutions are temples of learning. The virtues
of human intelligence are mastered and harmonised by education.
Where there is complete harmony between the teacher and the
taught, where the teacher imparts and the student receives, where
there is complete dedication of the teacher and the taught in
learning, where there is discipline between the teacher and the
taught, where both are worshippers of learning, no discord or
challenge will arise. An educational institution runs smoothly when
the teacher and the taught are engaged in the common ideal of
pursuit of knowledge.
The right to administer is to be tempered
with regulatory measures to facilitate smooth administration. The
best administration will reveal no trace or colour of minority. A
minority institution should shine in exemplary eclecticism in the
administration of the institution. The best
compliment that can be paid to a minority institution is that it does not
rest on or proclaim its minority character.
31. Regulations which will serve the interests of the students,
regulations which will serve the interests of the teachers are of
paramount importance in good administration. Regulations in the
interest of efficiency of teachers, discipline and fairness in
administration are necessary for preserving harmony among
affiliated institutions."
85. In respect of minority institutions, this Court in a judgment
reported as Bihar State Madarasa Education Board V. Madarasa Hanfia
Arabic College43 held that the State has power to regulate the
para 6)
"6.
This Court has all along held that though the minorities
have right to establish and administer educational institution of their
own choice but they have no right to maladminister and the State
has power to regulate management and administration of such
institutions in the interest of educational need and discipline of the
institution. Such regulation may have indirect effect on the absolute
right of minorities but that would not violate Article 30(1) of the
Constitution as it is the duty of the State to ensure efficiency in
educational institutions. The State has, however, no power to
completely take over the management of a minority institution.
Minority institutions cannot be allowed to fall below the standard of
excellence on the pretext of their exclusive right of management but
at the same time their constitutional right to administer their
institutions cannot be completely taken away by superseding or
dissolving Managing Committee or by appointing ad hoc committees
in place thereof."
44
86. In Modern Dental College & Research Centre V. State of M.P. , it
was held that the right under Article 19(1)(g) is not absolute but is
subject to reasonable restrictions under clause (6) in the larger interest
and welfare of student
community and to promote merit, achieve excellence and curb
malpractices, fee and admissions could certainly be regulated. This
"57. It is well settled that the right under Article 19(1)(g) is not
absolute in terms but is subject to reasonable restrictions under
clause (6). Reasonableness has to be determined having regard to
the nature of right alleged to be infringed, purpose of the restriction,
extent of restriction and other relevant factors. In applying these
factors, one cannot lose sight of the directive principles of State
policy. The Court has to try to strike a just balance between the
fundamental rights and the larger interest of the society. The Court
interferes with a statute if it clearly violates the fundamental rights.
The Court proceeds on the footing that the legislature understands
the needs of the people. The Constitution is primarily for the
common man. Larger interest and welfare of student community to
promote merit, achieve excellence and curb malpractices, fee and
admissions can certainly be regulated."
87. It has been argued that Article 25 of the Constitution must be
given a conjunctive meaning. In Article 25(1), the term "conscience"
needs to be given not only the widest connotation but also an
interconnected meaning. It is contended to be wide enough to cover
the use of hijab, which reflects an expression of conscience. It is argued
that the terms "conscience", "profess" and "practice", as occurring in
Article 25(1), are distinct and at the same time, interconnected.
Practice would necessarily include conscience, and therefore both are
inseparable.
88. It is further submitted that the right to dress inheres in the right
to freedom of speech and expression, right to identity, and the right to
dignity under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Restriction on
dress, even in the context of uniform, must have a rational nexus with
the object sought to be achieved. Dress has been referred also in the
context of expression of self. It is submitted that Muslim women
wearing hijab is a symbolic expression of their identity to the public as
a woman who follows Islam. The wearing of hijab does not cause any
issue of public disorder or disturbance. Moreover, an arbitrary,
unsubstantiated and illogical constraint imposed on the appearance of
Muslim women and their choice of self-presentment is constitutionally
impermissible and an explicit violation of Article 19 guaranteed in the
Constitution. It was submitted that the purpose of uniform is not to
erase the markers of individuality. Simply by wearing the prescribed
dress code, diverse distinctions which exist amongst the students
would not evaporate. In multi-cultural societies, students should be
taught to acknowledge, accept and respect diversities in the society. It
is further submitted that the impugned Government Order is
exclusionary and destructive of tolerance and diversity in the
classroom. The classroom is expected to be uniform but not
homogeneous.
67, para 20)
"20. It is obvious that religion, undefined by the Constitution, is
incapable of precise judicial definition either. In the background of
the provisions of the Constitution and the light shed by judicial
precedent, we may say religion is a matter of faith. It is a matter of
belief and doctrine. It concerns the conscience i.e. the spirit of man.
It must be capable of overt expression in word and deed, such as,
worship or ritual. So, religion is a matter of belief and doctrine,
concerning the human spirit, expressed overtly in the form of ritual
and worship. Some religions are easily identifiable as religions; some
are easily identifiable as not religions. There are many in the
penumbral region which instinctively appear to some as religions and
to others as not religions."
90. Further, in A.S. Narayana Deekshitulu³, this Court held that
:
"86. A religion undoubtedly has its basis in a system of beliefs
and doctrine which are regarded by those who profess religion to be
conducive to their spiritual well-being.
Every religion must believe
in a conscience and ethical and moral precepts. Therefore, whatever
binds a man to his own conscience and whatever moral or ethical
principles regulate the lives of men believing in that theistic,
conscience or religious belief that alone can constitute religion as
understood in the Constitution which fosters feeling of brotherhood,
amity, fraternity and equality of all persons which find their foothold
in secular aspect of the Constitution. Secular activities and aspects
do not constitute religion which brings under its own cloak every
human activity."
91. In Sri Adi Visheshwara of Kashi Vishwanath Temple V. State of
U.P.46, this Court held that the religious freedoms guaranteed by
Articles 25 and 26 are intended to be a guide to a community life and
ordain every religion to act according to its cultural and social demands
to establish an egalitarian social order. Articles 25 and 26, therefore,
strike a balance between the rigidity of right of religious belief and faith
and their intrinsic restrictions in matters of religion, religious beliefs
and guaranteed freedom of conscience to commune with his
Cosmos/Creator and realise his spiritual self.
92. Thus, religion believes in conscience and ethical and moral
precepts. The freedom of conscience is what binds a man to his own
conscience and whatever moral or ethical principles regulate the lives of
men. There is a fine distinction between freedom of conscience and
religion. The scope of protection under Article 25 goes beyond religious
beliefs. This provision affords to all persons freedom to beliefs which
may not necessarily be religious but which may spring from one's
conscience. Freedom of religion, on the other hand, grants one the right
to follow one's faith, the established form of which gives a set of ethical
norms to its followers and defines the rituals, observances, ceremonies
and modes of worship.
93. I need to examine the right to freedom of conscience and
religion in light of the restrictions provided under Article 25(1) of the
Constitution. Such right is not just subject to public order, morality and
health but also "other provisions of Part III". This would also include
Article 14 which provides for equality before law. In T.M.A. Pai
Foundation², this Court reiterated that Article 25(1) is not only subject
to public order, morality and health, but also to other provisions of Part
82)
"82. Article 25 gives to all persons the freedom of conscience and
the right to freely profess, practise and propagate religion. This right,
however,
is not absolute. The opening words of Article 25(1) make this right
subject to public order, morality and health, and also to the other
provisions of Part III of the Constitution. This would mean that the
right given to a person under Article 25(1) can be curtailed or regulated
if the exercise of that right would violate other provisions of Part III of
the Constitution, or if the exercise thereof is not in consonance with
public order, morality and health. The general law made by the
Government contains provisions relating to public order, morality and
health; these would have to be complied with, and cannot be violated
by any person in exercise of his freedom of conscience or his freedom to
profess, practise and propagate religion. For example, a person cannot
propagate his religion in such a manner as to denigrate another religion
or bring about dissatisfaction amongst people."
94. The object of the Government Order was to ensure that there is
parity amongst the students in terms of uniform. It was only to
promote uniformity and encourage a secular environment in the
schools. This is in tune with the right guaranteed under Article 14 of
the Constitution. Hence, restrictions on freedom of religion and
conscience have to be read conjointly along with other provisions of
Part III as laid down under the restrictions of Article 25(1).
Question (iv) - What is the ambit and scope of essential
religious practices under Article 25 of the Constitution?
95. The appellants have contended that wearing of a headscarf is an
essential religious practice followed by the women following Islam since
time immemorial. It is averred that the same has been provided for in
their religious scriptures and thus is essential to the religion. The
argument is that the impugned Government Order impinges upon their
right of wearing headscarf as an essential religious practice, and is thus
violative of the right guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution.
96. To rebut the said argument of essential religious practice, Mr
Tushar Mehta relied upon a judgment of this Court reported as Commr.
of Police V. Acharya Jagadishwarananda Avadhuta47 wherein, this Court
held that essential part of a religion means the core beliefs upon which
a religion is founded. It is upon the cornerstone of essential parts or
practices that the superstructure of a religion is built, without which a
religion will be no religion. The test to determine whether a part or
practice is essential to a religion is to find out whether the nature of the
religion would be changed without that part or practice. If taking away
of that part or practice results in a fundamental change in the character
of that religion or in its belief, then such part could be treated as an
essential or integral part of the religion.
97. The argument of the learned Solicitor General is that in the writ
petition filed titled Aishat Shifa V. State of Karnataka and others, there
is a reference to Verse 31 Surah 24 and Verse 31 Surah 34 of the Holy
Quran. In Shaheena and another V. State of Karnataka and others (Writ
Petition No. 3038 of 2022),
the petitioners have quoted Verse 26 Surah 7, Verse 31 Surah 24 and
Verse 59 Surah 33 of the Holy Quran indicating that wearing of
headscarf is part of the religious identity and essential in Islamic faith.
The reliance was also placed upon the judgment of the Kerala High
Court reported as Amnah Bint Basheer V. CBSE
98. It is contended by the learned Solicitor General that wearing of
hijab may be a practice, it may be an ideal or a permissible practice,
but to raise it to the level of an essential religious practice, something
more is required to be pleaded and proved and it has to be shown that
if the headscarf is not worn, the identity of the person as a believer in
the faith itself would be jeopardised as explained by this Court in A.S.
Narayana Deekshitulu3 and Acharya Jagadishwarananda Avadhuta (2)
47 , referred to above.
99. Mr Prabhuling K. Navadgi, learned Advocate General referred to
Verse 31 of Surah 24 of the Holy Quran to assert that wearing of a
headscarf is not an essential feature of the Islamic practice. It is argued
that wearing of a headscarf may be a religious practice but is not
essential to the religion as non-following of such practice would not
lead a believer to be non-Muslim. The essential religious practices are
those practices, if not followed, would render the person religion less.
The learned Advocate General of the State of Karnataka argued that the
protection under Article 25 is only to the essential religious practices
and not to every religious belief. What constitutes the essential part of
religion is primarily to be ascertained with reference to the doctrine of
that religion itself. Article 25(2)(a) contemplates not the regulation by
the State of all religious practices as such, but regulation of essential
religious practices which are economic, commercial or political, though
they are associated with religious practice.
100. To appreciate the argument raised, I firstly need to examine
the tenets of Muslim Law. In Mulla's Mohammedan Law, 5th Edn.,
2019, it was stated that the Prophet Muhammad himself declared that
the Holy Quran was revealed to him by the angel "Gabriel" in various
portions and at different times. The texts are held by Mohammedans to
be decisive as being the words of God transmitted to man through the
Prophet. It is explained that there are four sources of Mohammedan
Law, namely, (1) the Quran; (2) Hadis i.e. precepts, actions and
sayings of the Prophet Muhammad, not written down during his
lifetime, but preserved by tradition and handed down by authorised
persons; (3) Ijmaa i.e. a concurrence of opinion of the companions of
Muhammad and his disciples; and (4) Qiyas, being analogical
deductions derived from a comparison of the first three sources when
they do not apply to the particular case.
101. Still further, five duties49 49 have been laid down for the Muslims
by the Prophet, the same are reproduced as under:
"(i) Kalma : It is the duty of every Muslim to recite kalma. Kalma
implies certain hymns proclaiming the unity of God accepting
Mohammed as the Prophet.
(ii) Namaz : Every Muslim must say prayers (Namaz) five times a
day and on every Friday he must offer his afternoon prayer at the
mosque.
(iii) Zakat : It is the duty of every Muslim to offer zakat or charity
to the poor and needy.
(iv) Ramzan : The most pious duty of every Muslim is to observe
fasts in the holy month of "Ramzan".
(v) Haj : Every Muslim, should go for Haj or pilgrimage to Mecca
at least once in his lifetime."
102. In same Chapter50, according to the "Shariat", religious
commandment (Hukum) of Allah are of five types, which reads thus:
"(i) Farz - Five daily prayers (namaz) - One must do strictly.
(ii) Haram - Drinking wine - One must forbade strictly.
(iii) Mandub/Additional Prayers on the Id - One may do.
(iv) Makrum - Eating certain kinds of fish prohibited - One may
refrain from.
(v) Jaiz or Mubah - Thousands of Jaiz things, such as travelling
by air - Shariat is indifferent towards it."
103. Chapter 751 also gives the description of laws which have
modified the Mohammedan Law. Such statutes are as under:
"(i) The Indian Contract Act, 1872.
(ii) The Usuary Law Repeal Act.
(iii) Usurious Loans Act.
(iv) The Religious Toleration Act.
(v) The Freedom of Religion Act, 1850.
(vi) The Waqf Validating Act.
(vii) The Shariat Act, 1937.
(viii) The Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act, 1939.
(ix) The Special Marriages Act, 1954. (When a Muslim solemnises
or registers his marriage under this Act, such marriage and the
liability for Mahr, the dissolution of such marriage and succession to
the property of such Muslim and of the issue of such marriage is not
governed by Muslim Law).
(x) Constitution of India : The Muslim Law of Pre-emption stands
subject to Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
(xi) Muslim Law relating to crimes, procedure and slavery stand
abrogated by laws enacted in this regard by the legislature."
104. There are various textbooks interpreting the verses of the Holy
Quran. However, reference is made to the interpretation given by
Abdullah Yusuf Ali, translation in English published alongside the
original Arabic text, completed in Lahore on 4-4-1937. The
interpretation by Yusuf Ali has been referred to by this Court in a
number of judgments52. Mr Aditya Sondhi and Mohd. Nizamuddin Pasha
have also referred to the Holy Quran by Abdullah Yusuf Ali in their
written submissions. The English translation and meaning ascribed to
such translation available online The Glorious Quran read thus:
"Surah 24 Verse 31
31. And say to the believing women that they should lower their
gaze and guard (2984) their modesty; that they should not display
their beauty and ornaments (2985) except what (must ordinarily)
appear thereof; that they should draw their veils over their bosoms
and not display their beauty except to their husbands, their fathers,
their husband's fathers, their sons, their husbands' sons, their
brothers or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women
or the slaves whom their right hands possess, or male servants free
of physical needs, or small children who have no sense of the shame
of sex; and that they should not strike their feet in order to draw
attention to their hidden ornaments. (2986) And O ye Believers! turn
ye all together towards Allah, that ye may attain Bliss. (2987)
2984 The need for modesty is the same in both men and
women. But on account of the differentiation of the sexes in
nature, temperaments, and social life, a greater amount of privacy
is required for women than for men, especially in the matter of
dress and the uncovering of the bosom.
2985 Zinah means both natural beauty and artificial
ornaments. I think both are implied here, but chiefly the former.
The woman is asked not to make a display of her figure or appear
in undress except to the following classes of people : (1) her
husband, (2) her near relatives who would be living in the same
house, and with whom a certain amount of neglige is permissible;
(3) her women i.e. her maid-servants, who would be constantly in
attendance on her : some commentators include all believing
women; it is not good form in a Muslim household for women to
meet other women, except when they are properly dressed; (4)
slaves, male and female, as they would be in constant attendance
(but with the abolition of slavery this no longer applies); (5) old
or infirm men-servants; and (6) infants or small children before
they get a sense of sex. Cf. also 33 : 59.
2986 It is one of the tricks of showy or unchaste women to
tinkle their ankle ornaments, to draw attention to themselves.
2987 While all these details of the purity and good form of
domestic life are being brought to our attention, we are clearly
reminded that the chief object we should hold in view is our
spiritual welfare. All our brief life on this earth is a probation, and
we must take our individual, domestic, and social life all
contribute to our holiness, so that we can get the real success and
bliss which is the aim of our spiritual endeavour. (R)."
Surah 33 Verse 36
36. It is not fitting for a Believer, man or woman, when a matter
has been decided by Allah and His Messenger to have any option
about their decision : (3721) if any one disobeys Allah and His
Messenger, he is indeed on a clearly wrong Path.
3721 We must not put our own wisdom in competition with
Allah's wisdom. Allah's decree is often known to us by the logic of
facts. We must accept it loyally, and do the best we can to help in
our own way to carry it out. We must make our will consonant to
Allah's Will. (R)."
(emphasis supplied)
105. The students in one of the writ petitions before the High Court
referred to the following verses from the Holv Ouran. Such verses from
the Book The Glorious Quran by Yusuf Ali read as under:
"Surah 34 Verse 31
31. The Unbelievers say: "We shall neither believe in this scripture
nor in (any) that (came) before it." (3834) Couldst thou but see
when the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord,
throwing back the word (of blame) (3835) on one another! Those
who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones : (3836) "Had it
not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!"
3834 To the Pagans all scriptures are taboo, whether it be the
Qur'an or any Revelation that came before it. The people of the
Book despised the Pagans, but in their arrogant assumption of
superiority, prevented them, by their example, from accepting the
latest and most universal Scripture when it came in the form of
the Qur'an. This relative position of men who fancy themselves on
their knowledge, and men whom they despise but exploit and
mislead, always exists on this earth. I have mentioned the people
of the Book and the Pagan Arabs merely by way of illustration.
3835 One disbelief is as bad as another. There is little to
choose between them. But when the final account will be taken,
there will be mutual recriminations between the one and the
other.
3836 The Pagans will naturally say to the people of the Book;
"You misled us; you had previous Revelations, and you should
have known how Allah sent His Messengers; had it not been for
your bad example, we should have received Allah's Revelation and
become Believers". Or the humble followers will say this to their
leaders, or those less
gifted will say to those by whom they were misled and exploited. The
dichotomy is between such as pretentiously held their heads high in the
world and such as they profited by but held in contempt.
Surah 33 Verse 59
59. O Prophet! Tell thy wives and daughters, and the believing
women, (3764) that they should cast their outer garments over
(3765) their persons (when abroad) : that is most convenient, that
they should be known (3766) (as such) and not molested. And Allah
is Oft-Forgiving, (3767) Most Merciful.
3764 This is for all Muslim women, those of the Prophet's
household, as well as the others. They were asked to cover
themselves with outer garments when walking around. (R).
3765 Jilbab, plural Jalabib : an outer garment : a long gown
covering the whole body, or a cloak covering the neck and bosom.
3766 The object was not to restrict the liberty of women but to
protect them from harm and molestation. In the East and the
West a distinctive public dress of some sort or another has always
been a badge of honour or distinction, both among men and
women. This can be traced back to the earliest civilisations.
Assyrian Law in its palmiest days (say, 7th century BC), enjoined
the veiling of married women and forbade the veiling of slaves
and women of ill fame : see Cambridge Ancient History, III, 107.
3767 That is, if a Muslim woman sincerely tries to observe this
rule, but owing to human weakness falls short of the ideal, then
"Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful" (Cf.24 : 30-31). (R).
Surah 7 Verse 26
26. O ye Children of Adam! We have bestowed raiment (1008)
upon you to cover your shame, as well as to be an adornment to you.
But the raiment of righteousness, - that is the best. Such are
among the Signs of Allah, that they may receive admonition!
1008 There is a double philosophy of clothes here, to
correspond with the double signification of Verse 20 above, as
explained in N. 1006. Spiritually, Allah created man "bare and
alone" (6 : 94) : the soul in its naked purity and beauty knew no
shame because it knew no guilt : after it was touched by guilt and
soiled by evil, its thoughts and deeds became its clothing and
adornments, good or bad, honest or meretricious, according to the
inner motives which gave them colour. So in the case of the
body : it is pure and beautiful, as long as it is not defiled by
misuse; its clothing and ornaments may be good or meretricious,
according to the motives in the mind and character; if good, they
are the symbols of purity and beauty; but the best clothing and
ornament we could have comes from righteousness, which covers
the nakedness of sin, and adorns us with virtues. (R)."
(emphasis supplied)
106. The Hedaya, Commentary on Islamic Laws, 2nd Edn. was
published in April 1870. The same is available online. The reprint of
such publication, word-to-word, line-to-line and page-to-page was
published in the vear 1979 bv Kitab Bhavan. New Delhi. The
interpretation of the Holy Quran in the Hedaya had been quoted by this
Court in a number of judgments53. Vol. I, Book VI of Vows is now
regulated by the Penal Code (Note at the end of Vol. I); Vol. II Book
VIII relating to Larceny stands omitted as now regulated by the Penal
Code, Act 45 of 1860; Books V and XII dealing with Ittak, or the
Manumission of Slaves stands deleted in consequence of the abolition
of slavery by Act 45 of 1843.
107. It is noted that the issue of essential religious practices in the
context of Islamic law has been raised at earlier instances also before
this Court, though for other practices. In a judgment reported as Mohd.
Hanif Quareshi V. State of Bihar52 , this Court found the sacrifice of a
cow to be not obligatory and essential to the religion of Islam. The
Court negated the argument of the appellants when it was held that
there is : (AIR p. 740, para 13)
"13.
no material on the record before us which will enable us to
say, in the face of the foregoing facts, that the sacrifice of a cow on
that day in an obligatory overt act for a Mussalman to exhibit his
religious belief and idea. In the premises, it is not possible for us to
uphold this claim of the petitioners."
108. This Court held as under : (Mohd. Hanif Quareshi case , AIR
pp. 739-40, para 13)
"13. Coming now to the arguments as to the violation of the
petitioners' fundamental rights, it will be convenient to take up first
the complaint founded on Article 25(1).
*
*
What then, we inquire, are the materials placed before us to
substantiate the claim that the sacrifice of a cow is enjoined or
sanctioned by Islam?
All that was placed before us during the argument were Surah
XXII, Verses 28 and 33, and Surah CVIII. What the Holy book
enjoins is that people should pray unto the Lord and make sacrifice.
We have no affidavit before us by any Maulana explaining the
implications of those verses or throwing any light on this problem.
We, however, find it laid down in Hamilton's translation of Hedaya
Book XLIII at p. 592 that it is the duty of every free Mussulman,
arrived at the age of maturity, to offer a sacrifice on the Yd Kirban, or
festival of the sacrifice, provided he be then possessed of Nisab and
be not a traveller. The sacrifice established for one person is a goat
and that for seven a cow or a camel. It is therefore, optional for a
Muslim to sacrifice a goat for one person or a cow or a camel for seven
persons. It does not appear to be obligatory that a person must
sacrifice a cow. The very fact of an option seems to run counter to the
notion of an obligatory duty. It is, however, pointed out that a person
with six other members of his family may afford to sacrifice a cow but
may not be able to afford to sacrifice seven goats.
We have, however,
no material on the record before us which will enable us to say, in the
face of the foregoing facts, that the sacrifice of a cow on that day is an
obligatory overt act for a Mussalman to exhibit his religious belief and
idea. In the premises, it is not possible for us to uphold this claim of
the petitioners."
109. In Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum55, this Court held
that the provisions of Muslim Personal Law do not countenance cases in
which the wife is unable to maintain herself after the divorce. Though
the effect of the said judgment was nullified by a statute, but the fact
remains that the personal law was not approved by this Court. It was
"14. These statements in the textbooks are inadequate to
establish the proposition that the Muslim husband is not under an
obligation to provide for the maintenance of his divorced wife, who is
unable to maintain herself. One must have regard to the entire
conspectus of the Muslim Personal Law in order to determine the
extent, both in quantum and in duration, of the husband's liability to
provide for the maintenance of an indigent wife who has been
divorced by him. Under that law, the husband is bound to pay Mahr
to the wife as a mark of respect to her. True, that he may settle any
amount he likes by way of dower upon his wife, which cannot be less
than 10 Dirhams, which is equivalent to three or four rupees (Mulla's
Mahomedan Law, Eighteenth Edn., Para 286, p. 308). But, one must
have regard to the realities of life. Mahr is a mark of respect to the
wife. The sum settled by way of Mahr is generally expected to take
care of the ordinary requirements of the wife, during the marriage
and after. But these provisions of the Muslim Personal Law do not
countenance cases in which the wife is unable to maintain herself
after the divorce. We consider it not only incorrect but unjust, to
extend the scope of the statements extracted above to cases in
which a divorced wife is unable to maintain herself. We are of the
opinion that the application of those statements of law must be
restricted to that class of cases, in which there is no possibility of
vagrancy or destitution arising out of the indigence of the divorced
wife."
(emphasis in original)
110. The Constitution Bench in a judgment reported as M. Ismail
56
Faruqui V. Union of India held that offering of prayer or worship is a
religious practice, but its offering at every location where such prayers
can be offered would not be an essential or integral part of such
& 82)
"77. It may be noticed that Article 25 does not contain any
reference to property unlike Article 26 of the Constitution. The right
to practise, profess
and propagate religion guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution
does not necessarily include the right to acquire or own or possess
property. Similarly this right does not extend to the right of worship at
any and every place of worship so that any hindrance to worship at a
particular place per se may infringe the religious freedom guaranteed
under Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution. The protection under
Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution is to religious practice which
forms an essential and integral part of the religion. A practice may be a
religious practice but not an essential and integral part of practice of
that religion.
78. While offer of prayer or worship is a religious practice, its
offering at every location where such prayers can be offered would
not be an essential or integral part of such religious practice unless
the place has a particular significance for that religion so as to form
an essential or integral part thereof. Places of worship of any religion
having particular significance for that religion, to make it an
essential or integral part of the religion, stand on a different footing
and have to be treated differently and more reverentially.
*
*
*
82.
A mosque is not an essential part of the practice of the
religion of Islam and namaz (prayer) by Muslims can be offered
anywhere, even in open."
111. Later, a three-Judge Bench judgment of this Court reported as
Javed V. State of Haryana57 negated the argument that no religious
scripture or authority has been brought to the notice of the Court which
provides that marrying less than four women or abstaining from
procreating a child from each and every wife would be irreligious or
391, para 44)
"44. The Muslim law permits marrying four women. The personal
law nowhere mandates or dictates it as a duty to perform four
marriages. No religious scripture or authority has been brought to
our notice which provides that marrying less than four women or
abstaining from procreating a child from each and every wife in case
of permitted bigamy or polygamy would be irreligious or offensive to
the dictates of the religion. In our view, the question of the
impugned provision of the Haryana Act being violative of Article 25
does not arise."
112. In Shayara Bano 37, Nariman, J. speaking for himself and Lalit,
J. noted that "a practice does not acquire the sanction of religion simply
because it is permitted" and applied the essential religious practices
"54.
it is clear that triple talaq is only a form of talaq which is
permissible in law, but at the same time, stated to be sinful by the
very Hanafi school which tolerates it. According to Javed5 57 , therefore,
this would not form part of any essential religious practice. Applying
the test stated in Acharya Jagadishwarananda4 it is equally clear that
the fundamental nature of the Islamic religion, as seen through an
Indian Sunni Muslim's eyes, will not change without this practice."
113. Kurian Joseph, J., concurring with Nariman and Lalit, JJ. in
Shayara Bano case³7 held that on an examination of the Holy Quran
and Islamic legal scholarship, the practice of triple talaq could not be
considered an essential religious practice. He opined that "merely
because a practice has continued for long, that by itself cannot make it
valid if it has been expressly declared to be impermissible".
114. The judgments referred to above had the direct or indirect
effect on modifying the understanding of the verses of the Holy Quran,
apart from the statutes mentioned by Mulla in his book referred to
above. But I would examine the question that if the believers of the
faith hold an opinion that wearing of hijab is an essential religious
practice, the question is whether the students can seek to carry their
religious beliefs and symbols to a secular school.
115. A reading of the judgment in Sri Shirur Mutt 38 shows an
argument that secular activities which may be associated with religion
but do not really constitute an essential part of it are amenable to State
regulation. The power to legislate in respect of all secular activities was
not accepted. The question examined was the scope of clause (b) of
Article 26 which speaks of management of its own "affairs in matters of
religion". The language undoubtedly suggests that there could be other
affairs of a religious denomination or a section thereof which are not
matters of religion and to which the guarantee given by this clause
would not apply. The question is, where is the line to be drawn between
what are matters of religion and what are not.
116. It was held that what constitutes an essential part of a religion
is primarily to be ascertained with reference to the doctrines of that
religion itself. This Court held as under : (Sri Shirur Mutt case3 38 AIR p.
290, paras 17-19)
"17.
A religion undoubtedly has its basis in a system of beliefs
or doctrines which are regarded by those who profess that religion as
conducive to their spiritual well-being, but it would not be correct to
say that religion is nothing else but a doctrine or belief.
18. The guarantee under our Constitution not only protects the
freedom of religious opinion but it protects also acts done in
pursuance of a religion and this is made clear by the use of the
expression "practice of religion" in Article 25.
*
*
*
19.
What constitutes the essential part of a religion is primarily
to be ascertained with reference to the doctrines of that religion
itself. If the tenets of any religious sect of the Hindus prescribe that
offerings of food should be given to the idol at particular hours of the
day all these
would be regarded as parts of religion and the mere fact that they
involve expenditure of money or employment of priests and servants or
the use of marketable commodities would not make them secular
activities partaking of a commercial or economic character; all of them
are religious practices and should be regarded as matters of religion
within the meaning of Article 26(b)."
(emphasis supplied)
117. In Ratilal Panachand Gandhi V. State of Bombay588, , it has been
religious practices or performances of acts in pursuance of
religious belief are as much a part of religion as faith or belief in
particular doctrines and the distinction between matters of religion
and those of secular administration of religious properties may, at
times, appear to be a thin one. But in cases of doubt, the court
should take a common sense view and be actuated by considerations
of practical necessity.
118. In a judgment reported as Durgah Committee, Ajmer V. Syed
Hussain Ali59, the challenge was to the Durgah Khwaja Saheb Act 36 of
1955. The challenge was in respect of freedom guaranteed under
Articles 26(c) and (d) of the Constitution. The property in respect of
which claim had been made consisted of offerings made either in or
outside the shrine. This Court quoted from Sri Shirur Mutt³8
to
say
that
the word "religion" has not been defined in the Constitution and is a
term which is hardly susceptible of any rigid definition. It was held that
the practices, though religious, may have sprung from merely
superstitious beliefs and may in that sense be extraneous and
unessential
accretions to religion itself, cannot be accepted unless such practices
are found to constitute an essential and integral part of a religion and
their claim for the protection under Article 26 may have to be carefully
scrutinised. It was held that protection must be confined to such
religious practices as are an essential and an integral part of it and no
other.
119. This Court held that Articles 25 and 26 together safeguard the
citizen's right to freedom of religion. It was observed as under : (Syed
Hussain Ali case59, AIR p. 1415, para 33)
"33.
Whilst we are dealing with this point it may not be out of
place incidentally to strike a note of caution and observe that in
order that the practices in question should be treated as a part of
religion they must be regarded by the said religion as its essential
and integral part; otherwise even purely secular practices which are
not an essential or an integral part of religion are apt to be clothed
with a religious form and may make a claim for being treated as
religious practices within the meaning of Article 26. Similarly, even
practices though religious may have sprung from merely
superstitious beliefs and may in that sense be extraneous and
unessential accretions to religion itself. Unless such practices are
found to constitute an essential and integral part of a religion their
claim for the protection under Article 26 may have to be carefully
scrutinised; in other words, the protection must be confined to such
religious practices as are an essential and an integral part of it and
no other."
(emphasis supplied)
120. In Venkataramana Devaru V. State of Mysore60 60 the question
examined was whether the right of a religious denomination to manage
its own affairs in matters of religion guaranteed under Article 26(b) is
subject to, and can be controlled by, a law protected by Article 25(2)
(b). This Court held that Article 25 deals with the rights of individuals
and Article 26 protects the rights of denominations. It was observed as
follows : (AIR p. 268, para 29)
"29. The result then is that there are two provisions of equal
authority, neither of them being subject to the other. The question is
how the apparent conflict between them is to be resolved. The rule
of construction is well settled that when there are in an enactment
two provisions which cannot be reconciled with each other, they
should be so interpreted that, if possible, effect could be given to
both. This is what is known as the rule of harmonious construction.
Applying this rule, if the contention of the appellants is to be
accepted, then Article 25(2)(b) will become wholly nugatory in its
application to denominational temples, though, as stated above, the
language of that Article includes them. On the other hand, if the
contention of the respondents is accepted, then full effect can be
given to Article 26(b) in all matters of religion, subject only to this
that as regards one aspect of them, entry into a temple for worship,
the rights declared under Article 25(2)(b) will prevail. While, in the
former case, Article 25(2)(b) will be put wholly out of operation, in
the latter, effect can be given to both that provision and Article 26
(b). We must accordingly hold that Article 26(b) must be read
subject to Article 25(2)(b)."
121. In a later judgment reported as Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji
Maharaj V. State of Rajasthan61, the validity of the Nathdwara Temple
Act, 1959 was the subject-matter of consideration. It was held that the
protection under Article 25 is not absolute and the Court may have to
enquire whether the practice in question is religious in character and if
it is, whether it can be regarded as an integral or essential part of the
religion. It was held as under : (AIR pp. 1660-61, paras 56 & 58)
"56. Articles 25 and 26 constitute the fundamental rights to
freedom of religion guaranteed to the citizens of this country. Article
25(1) protects the citizen's fundamental right to freedom of
conscience and his right freely to profess, practise and propagate
religion. The protection given to this right is, however, not absolute.
It is subject to public order, morality and health as Article 25(1)
itself denotes. It is also subject to the laws, existing or future, which
are specified in Article 25(2).
*
*
*
58. In deciding the question as to whether a given religious
practice is an integral part of the religion or not, the test always
would be whether it is regarded as such by the community following
the religion or not. This formula may in some cases present
difficulties in its operation. Take the case of a practice in relation to
food or dress.
This question will always have to be decided by the
Court and in doing so, the Court may have to enquire whether the
practice in question is religious in character and if it is, whether it
can be regarded as an integral or essential part of the religion, and
the finding of the Court on such an issue will always depend upon
the evidence adduced before it as to the conscience of the
community and the tenets of its religion. It is in the light of this
possible complication which may arise in some cases that this Court
struck a note of caution in Durgah Committee, Ajmer V. Hussain
Ali59, SCR at p. 411 and observed that in order that the practices in
question should be treated as a part of religion they must be
regarded by the said religion as its essential and integral part;
otherwise even purely secular practices which are not an essential or
an integral part of religion are apt to be clothed with a religious form
and may make a claim for being treated as religious practices within
the meaning of Article 26."
(emphasis supplied)
122. In Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta V. Commr. of Police62
the question was whether performance of Tandava dance is a religious
rite or practice essential to the tenets of the religious faith of the
followers of Ananda Marga. Such argument was not accepted, when this
"14.
Even conceding that Tandava dance has been prescribed
as a religious rite for every follower of the Ananda Marga it does not
follow as a necessary corollary that Tandava dance to be performed
in the public is a matter of religious rite."
123. Later, in a judgment reported as Acharya Jagadishwarananda
Avadhuta (2)47, it was held that the protection guaranteed under
Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution is not confined to matters of
doctrine or belief but extends to acts done in pursuance of religion and,
therefore, contains a guarantee for rituals, observances, ceremonies
and modes of worship which are essential or integral part of religion.
What constitutes an integral or essential part of religion has to be
determined with reference to its doctrines, practices, tenets, historical
782-83, para 9)
"9.
What is meant by "an essential part or practices of a
religion" is now the matter for elucidation. Essential part of a religion
means the core beliefs upon which a religion is founded. Essential
practice means those practices that are fundamental to follow a
religious belief. It is upon
the cornerstone of essential parts or practices that the superstructure of
a religion is built, without which a religion will be no religion. Test to
determine whether a part or practice is essential to a religion is to find
out whether the nature of the religion will be changed without that part
or practice. If the taking away of that part or practice could result in a
fundamental change in the character of that religion or in its belief,
then such part could be treated as an essential or integral part. There
cannot be additions or subtractions to such part because it is the very
essence of that religion and alterations will change its fundamental
character. It is such permanent essential parts which are protected by
the Constitution. Nobody can say that an essential part or practice of
one's religion has changed from a particular date or by an event. Such
alterable parts or practices are definitely not the "core" of religion
whereupon the belief is based and religion is founded upon. They could
only be treated as mere embellishments to the non-essential (sic
essential) part or practices."
124. In the Constitution Bench judgment reported as Indian Young
Lawyers Assn. (Sabarimala Temple-5 J.) V. State of Kerala63, 63 it was
"208*. In clause (1), Article 25 protects the equal entitlement of
all persons to a freedom of conscience and to freely profess, protect
and propagate religion. By conferring this right on all persons, the
Constitution emphasises the universal nature of the right. By all
persons, the Constitution means exactly what it says : every
individual in society without distinction of any kind whatsoever is
entitled to the right. By speaking of an equal entitlement, the
Constitution places every individual on an even platform. Having
guaranteed equality before the law and the equal protection of laws
in Article 14, the draftspersons specifically continued the theme of
an equal entitlement as an intrinsic element of the freedom of
conscience and of the right to profess, practise and propagate
religion. There are three defining features of clause (1) of Article 25
first, the entitlement of all persons without exception, second, the
recognition of an equal entitlement; and third, the recognition both
of the freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise
and propagate religion. The right under Article 25(1) is evidently an
individual right for, it is in the individual that a conscience inheres.
Moreover, it is the individual who professes, practises and
propagates religion. Freedom of religion in Article 25(1) is a right
which the Constitution recognises as dwelling in each individual or
natural person.
209. Yet, the right to the freedom of religion is not absolute. For
the Constitution has expressly made it subject to public order,
morality and health on one hand and to the other provisions of Part
III, on the other. The subjection of the individual right to the
freedom of religion to the other provisions of the Part is a nuanced
departure from the position occupied by the other rights to freedom
recognised in Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21.
While guaranteeing equality and the equal protection of laws in Article
14 and its emanation, in Article 15, which prohibits discrimination on
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth, the Constitution
does not condition these basic norms of equality to the other provisions
of Part III. Similar is the case with the freedoms guaranteed by Article
19(1) or the right to life under Article 21. The subjection of the
individual right to the freedom of religion under Article 25(1) to the
other provisions of Part III was not a matter without substantive
content. Evidently, in the constitutional order of priorities, the
individual right to the freedom of religion was not intended to prevail
over but was subject to the overriding constitutional postulates of
equality, liberty and personal freedoms recognised in the other
provisions of Part III.
210. Clause (2) of Article 25 protects laws which existed at the
adoption of the Constitution and the power of the State to enact laws
in future, dealing with two categories. The first of those categories
consists of laws regulating or restricting economic, financial, political
or other secular activities which may be associated with religious
practices. Thus, in sub-clause (a) of Article 25(2), the Constitution
has segregated matters of religious practice from secular activities,
including those of an economic, financial or political nature. The
expression "other secular activity" which follows upon the expression
"economic, financial, political" indicates that matters of a secular
nature may be regulated or restricted by law. The fact that these
secular activities are associated with or, in other words, carried out
in conjunction with religious practice, would not put them beyond
the pale of legislative regulation. The second category consists of
laws providing for (i) social welfare and reform; or (ii) throwing open
of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and
sections of Hindus. The expression "social welfare and reform" is not
confined to matters only of the Hindu religion."
(emphasis in original and supplied)
p. 626, para 18)
"18.
Article 25 is an article of faith in the Constitution,
incorporated in recognition of the principle that the real test of a true
democracy is the ability of even an insignificant minority to find its
identity under the country's Constitution. This has to be borne in
mind in interpreting Article 25."
This Court upheld the right of the students belonging to Jehovah's
Witnesses not to sing National Anthem in the school prayer though the
students stood at the time of singing of the National Anthem. In the
said case, the Circular of the State Government dated 18-2-1970 was
in question mandating that all schools in the State shall have morning
assembly and that the whole school shall sing National Anthem in the
assembly. The circular was not restricted to secular schools only but to
all schools. The said judgment is of no help to the arguments raised as
it does not deal with secular schools only.
126. Thus, to sum up, the essential religious practice doctrine was
developed when the State interfered with certain practices qua religious
places or religious festivities or performance of religious rituals in public
or where such practices curtailed fundamental rights such as:
126.1. In Sri Shirur Mutt³ , the statute interfered with the
management of the Mutt.
126.2. In Ratilal Panachand Gandhi5 58 a notification issued under
the Bombay Public Trusts Act was under challenge which covered the
temples and mutt entitling the Government to control them through
the Charity Commissioner.
126.3. In Durgah Committee59, the challenge was to the
constitutional validity of the Dargah Khwaja Saheb Act, 1955 on the
ground that it interferes with the right of management of the Durgah.
126.4. In Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj61, the validity of the
Nathdwara Temple Act, 1959 was challenged on the ground that all the
properties of the Nathdwara Temple are the private properties of the
appellant and that the State Legislature was not competent to enact
the Act. It was the argument that even if Nathdwara Temple was held
to be a public temple, the appellant as a Mahant or a Shebait had a
beneficial interest in the office of the high priest as well as the
properties of the Temple as the rights of the appellant under Articles
14, 19(1)(f) and 31(2) of the Constitution of India have been
contravened.
126.5. In Dawoodi Bohra 65 the religious faith and tenets of Dawoodi
Bohra community conferring power of excommunication from the
community on its religious head as part of the management of the
religious affairs under Article 26(b) of the Constitution was upheld.
126.6. The Shayara Bano case 37 relating to triple talaq was in
respect of gender equality granted under Articles 14 and 15 of the
Constitution of India.
127. The essential religious practice in the abovementioned cases
related to : (i) right of management of places of worship, (ii) right of
individual qua places of worship and (iii) curtailment of fundamental
rights of individuals through religious practices. The claim of the
appellants is not to perform a religious activity in a religious institution
but to wear headscarf in public place as a matter of social conduct
expected from the believers of the faith. But in the present, the
students want to subjugate their freedom of choice of dress to be
regulated by religion than by the State while they are in fact students
of a
State school. The equality before law is to treat all citizens equally,
irrespective of caste, creed, sex or place of birth. Such equality cannot
be breached by the State on the basis of religious faith.
128. The Constitution has negatively worded Article 25(2). Article 25
(2)(a) gives primacy to laws made by competent legislature for
regulation of secular aspects and Article 25(2)(b) gives primacy to
"social welfare" and "reform". In other words, if the State seeks to
regulate the economic, political, financial or other secular aspects
connected with religion, the State law is to have primacy over the
proposed right. Similarly, if a particular practice/belief/part of any
religion is in existence and is found to be subjected to either "social
welfare" and "reform", such right will have to give way to "social
welfare" and "reform".
129. It is reiterated that Article 25(2) being negatively couched is
clearly an enabling provision which provides the power to the State in
the matters mentioned therein. The said provision does not curtail or
restrict the otherwise positive right under Article 25(1) in the absence
of any intervention by the State in the nature of legislative or executive
power.
130. H.R. Khanna, J. had quoted the statement of K. Santhanam in
Kesavananda Bharati4 in respect of social revolution to get India out of
the medievalism based on factors like birth, religion, custom, and
community and reconstruct her social structure on modern foundations
of law, individual merit, and secular education. I find that religion is not
to be understood in a narrow sectarian sense but by encompassing our
ethos that all should be treated alike. Secular State means rising above
all differences of religions, and attempting to secure the good of all its
citizens irrespective of their religious beliefs and practices. The faith or
belief of a person is immaterial from the point of view of the State. For
the State, all are equal and all are entitled to be treated equally. The
constitutional promises of social justice, liberty of belief, faith or
worship and equality of status and of opportunity cannot be attained
unless the State eschews the religion, faith or belief of a person from its
consideration altogether while dealing with him. Secularism is thus
more than a passive attitude of religious tolerance. It is a positive
concept of equal treatment of all religions. Therefore, the object of the
State is to bridge the gap between different sections of the society and
to harmonise the relationship between the citizens to ensure growth of
community in all spheres i.e. social, economic and political.
131. The appellants have also made a comparison with the rights of
the followers of the Sikh faith by arguing that since kirpan is allowed in
terms of Explanation I to Article 25, therefore, the students who want
to wear headscarf should be equally protected as in the case of the
followers of the Sikh students. The Full Bench of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court in Gurleen Kaur V. State of Punjab66 held that the
essential religious practice of the followers of Sikh faith includes
retaining hair unshorn, which is one of the most important and
fundamental tenets of the Sikh religion. The Full Bench of the High
"128.
A perusal of Explanation I under Article 25 of the
Constitution of India reveals, that wearing and carrying a "kirpan" by
Sikhs is deemed to be included in the profession of the Sikh religion.
During the course of examining historical facts, legislation on the
"Sikh religion", the "Sikh rehatmaryada". The "Sikh ardas" and the
views of authors and scholars of the Sikh religion, we arrived at the
conclusion that wearing and carrying of "kirpans" though an
important and significant aspect of the Sikh religion, is nowhere
close to the importance and significance of maintaining hair unshorn.
If the Constitution of India itself recognises wearing and carrying of
"kirpans" as a part of the profession of the Sikh religion, we have no
hesitation, whatsoever, to conclude that wearing hair unshorn must
essentially be accepted as a fundamental requirement in the
profession of the Sikh religion. For the present controversy, we
hereby, accordingly, hold that retaining hair unshorn is one of the
most important and fundamental tenets of the Sikh religion. In fact,
it is undoubtedly a part of the religious consciousness of the Sikh
faith."
132. It appears that no appeal has been filed against the judgment
of the Full Bench in Gurleen Kaur66 Thus, the said judgment is final as
on today. The issue in the present appeals is not the essential religious
practices of the people following Sikh faith. It would not be proper to
discuss the essential religious practices of the followers of the said faith
without hearing them. The practices of each of the faith have to be
examined on the basis of the tenets of that religion alone. The essential
religious practices of the followers of Sikh faith cannot be made basis of
wearing of hijab/headscarf by the believers of Islamic faith.
133. Mr Mohd. Nizamuddin Pasha relied upon a Constitution Bench
judgment of this Court reported as M. Siddiq (Ram Janmabhumi
Temple-5 J.) V. Suresh Das67 wherein this Court held that courts should
not enter into an area of theology and attempt to interpret religious
"90. During the course of the submissions, it has emerged that
the extreme and even absolute view of Islam sought to be portrayed
by Mr P.N. Mishra does not emerge as the only available
interpretation of Islamic law on a matter of theology. Hence, in the
given set of facts and circumstances, it is inappropriate for this Court
to enter upon an area of theology and to assume the role of an
interpreter of the Hadees. The true test is whether those who believe
and worship have faith in the religious efficacy of the place where
they pray. The belief and faith of the worshipper in offering namaz at
a place which is for the worshipper a mosque cannot be challenged.
It would be preposterous for this Court to question it on the ground
that a true Muslim would not offer prayer in a place which does not
meet an extreme interpretation of doctrine selectively advanced by
Mr Mishra. This Court, as a secular institution, set up under a
constitutional regime must steer clear from choosing one among
many
possible interpretations of theological doctrine and must defer to the
safer course of accepting the faith and belief of the worshipper.
91. Above all, the practise of religion, Islam being no exception,
varies according to the culture and social context. That indeed is the
strength of our plural society. Cultural assimilation is a significant
factor which shapes the manner in which religion is practised. In the
plural diversity of religious beliefs as they are practised in India,
cultural assimilation cannot be construed as a feature destructive of
religious doctrine. On the contrary, this process strengthens and
reinforces the true character of a country which has been able to
preserve its unity by accommodating, tolerating and respecting a
diversity of religious faiths and ideas. There can be no hesitation in
rejecting the submission made by Mr Mishra. Our Court is founded
on and owes its existence to a constitutional order. We must firmly
reject any attempt to lead the Court to interpret religious doctrine in
an absolute and extreme form and question the faith of worshippers.
Nothing would be as destructive of the values underlying Article 25
of the Constitution."
134. There is no dispute about the proposition canvassed. The
practice of wearing of hijab may be a "religious practice" or an
"essential religious practice" or it may be social conduct for the women
of Islamic faith. The interpretations by the believers of the faith about
wearing of headscarf is the belief or faith of an individual. The religious
belief cannot be carried to a secular school maintained out of State
funds. It is open to the students to carry their faith in a school which
permits them to wear hijab or any other mark, may be tilak, which can
be identified to a person holding a particular religious belief but the
State is within its jurisdiction to direct that the apparent symbols of
religious beliefs cannot be carried to a school maintained by the State
from the State funds. Thus, the practice of wearing hijab could be
restricted by the State in terms of the Government Order.
Question (v) - Whether fundamental rights of freedom of
expression under Article 19(1)(a) and right of privacy under
Article 21 are mutually exclusive or are they complementary to
each other; and whether the Government Order does not meet
the injunction of reasonableness for the purposes of Article 21
and Article 14?
135. It is argued that a citizen is entitled to express oneself by not
just wearing a dress of her choice, but also in the context of her cultural
traditions, and that such dress which allows others to identify that she
belongs to a particular community, embraces a particular culture, and
represents the values of that culture.
136. It is submitted that there cannot be any law which prohibits
such expression as long as it does not disturb the public order or
violates the accepted norms of decency and morality as prescribed by
law. It is contended that it is the responsibility of the State to protect
the composite culture of India, but the same has been intervened
through the Government Order, contrary to the
rights enshrined in the Constitution. The argument is also as to
whether, this right to express herself by wearing a hijab, stops at the
school gate and that beyond the school gate, she has no right to
express herself to convey to others that she embraces a certain culture
and she wishes to identify herself with that culture. Such expression, at
the time when the notification was issued, neither had the tendency to,
nor was there any evidence to show that it, in any way, disturbed
public order, or was violative of decency or morality. The rights and
duties conferred under the aforementioned provisions transcend the
boundaries of the school gate. A citizen or student does not forego her
fundamental rights and protections guaranteed under the Constitution,
which includes the freedom to express her culture, the moment she
steps into the school premises. It is also submitted that wearing an
article of clothing, reflecting the distinct culture of a citizen, is
consistent with the fundamental right of a citizen to conserve her
culture under Article 29(1) and it is the fundamental duty of citizens to
preserve and protect that culture which is part of the rich heritage of
India.
137. The argument of the appellants is based upon the preamble of
the Government Order dated 5-2-2022 wherein it was recited that
prohibition of a headscarf or a garment covering the head is not
violative of Article 25 of the Constitution, apart from the fact that it is
in terms of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. It is also argued
that the State Government has not mentioned the role of Popular Front
of India in the order passed, therefore, the State Government is not
justified to refer to Popular Front of India during the course of
arguments. In other words, the State cannot supplement the reasons
than what is mentioned in the order.
138. It is averred that the preamble refers to the three judgments of
the High Courts as discussed above and a judgment of this Court
reported as Asha Ranjan V. State of Bihar11. The contention is that the
judgment in Fathima Thasneem V. State of Kerala¹0 of the Kerala High
Court does not support the stand of the State Government, whereas,
the judgment in Asha Ranjan¹1 is not in respect of wearing of a
headscarf, therefore, to rely upon the said judgment to convey that
wearing of headscarf is not in violation of Article 25 shows complete
non-application of mind. The State cannot thus supplement the reasons
in support of the prohibition to use headscarf before the High Court or
before this Court.
139. Reliance has been placed upon Mohinder Singh Gill V. Chief
Election Commr.00, , wherein it was held that when a statutory
functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must
be judged by the reasons so mentioned and it cannot be supplemented
by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise, an
order bad in the beginning, may, by the time it comes to court on
account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later
brought out.
140. In Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India69 this Court held that even
if a right is not specifically named in Article 19(1), it may still be a
fundamental
right covered by some clause of that article, if it is an integral part of a
"96.
Be that as it may, the law is now settled, as I apprehend
it, that no article in Part III is an island but part of a continent, and
the conspectus of the whole part gives the direction and correction
needed for interpretation of these basic provisions. Man is not
dissectible into separate limbs and, likewise, cardinal rights in an
organic constitution, which make man human have a synthesis. The
proposition is indubitable that Article 21 does not, in a given
situation, exclude Article 19 if both rights are breached."
(emphasis in original)
141. In National Legal Services Authority39, this Court held that
Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution states that all citizens shall have
the right to freedom of speech and expression, which includes one's
right to expression of his self-identified gender. It was held as under :
"69. Article 19(1) of the Constitution guarantees certain
fundamental rights, subject to the power of the State to impose
restrictions from (sic on) exercise of those rights. The rights
conferred by Article 19 are not available to any person who is not a
citizen of India. Article 19(1) guarantees those great basic rights
which are recognised and guaranteed as the natural rights inherent
in the status of the citizen of a free country. Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution states that all citizens shall have the right to freedom of
speech and expression, which includes one's right to expression of
his self-identified gender. The self-identified gender can be
expressed through dress, words, action or behaviour or any other
form. No restriction can be placed on one's personal appearance or
choice of dressing, subject to the restrictions contained in Article 19
(2) of the Constitution."
142. In Devidas Ramachandra Tuljapurkar V. State of Maharashtra-
"93. Having stated about the test that is applicable to determine
obscenity we are required to dwell upon the right to freedom of
speech and expression. The words, "freedom of speech and
expression" find place in the association words "liberty of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship", which form a part of the
Preamble of the Constitution. The Preamble has its own sanctity and
the said concepts have been enshrined in the Preamble.
*
*
*
99. Interpreting Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution, the test is
always to see the said article in aid of the Preambular objectives
which form a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Article
19(1)(a) is intrinsically linked with the Preambular objectives and it
is the duty of the Court to
progressively realise the values of the Constitution. In Maneka Gandhi
5.
It is indeed difficult to see on what principle we can refuse
to give its plain natural meaning to the expression "personal liberty"
as used in Article 21 and read it in a narrow and restricted sense so
as to exclude those attributes of personal liberty which are
specifically dealt with in Article 19. We do not think that this would
be a correct way of interpreting the provisions of the Constitution
conferring fundamental rights. The attempt of the Court should be to
expand the reach and ambit of the fundamental rights rather than
attenuate their meaning and content by a process of judicial
construction. The wavelength for comprehending the scope and
ambit of the fundamental rights has been set by this Court in R.C.
Cooper case71 and
that each freedom has different dimensions and
there may be overlapping between different fundamental rights and
therefore it is not a valid argument to say that the expression
"personal liberty" in Article 21 must be so interpreted as to avoid
overlapping between that article and Article 19(1). The expression
"personal liberty" in Article 21 is of the widest amplitude and it
covers a variety of rights which go to constitute the personal liberty
of man and some of them have
143. In St. Stephen's College V. University of Delhi72 , this Court held
that it is essential that there should be proper mix of students of
different communities in all educational institutions. It has been held as
"81. Even in practice, such claims are likely to be met with
considerable hostility. It may not be conducive to have a relatively
homogeneous society. It may lead to religious bigotry which is the
bane of mankind. In the nation building with secular character
sectarian schools or colleges, segregated faculties or universities for
imparting general secular education are undesirable and they may
undermine secular democracy. They would be inconsistent with the
central concept of secularism and equality embedded in the
Constitution. Every educational institution irrespective of community
to which it belongs is a "melting pot" in our national life. The
students and teachers are the critical ingredients. It is there they
develop respect for, and tolerance of, the cultures and beliefs of
others. It is essential therefore, that there should be proper mix of
students of different communities in all educational institutions."
144. In Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of India 73, the freedom of
expression was referred to observe that the transgender persons have a
right to express their self-identified gender by way of speech,
mannerism, behaviour, presentation and clothing, etc. The said
judgment was relied upon to submit that the right
to wear a particular clothing emerges from the right to dignity
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution. It was held as under :
"641.2. In National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India ³9
this Court noted that gender identity is an important aspect of
personal identity and is inherent to a person. It was held that
transgender persons have the right to express their self-identified
gender by way of speech, mannerism, behaviour, presentation and
clothing, etc.74 The Court also noted that like gender identity, sexual
orientation is integral to one's personality, and is a basic aspect of
75
self-determination, dignity and freedom.
The proposition that
sexual orientation is integral to one's personality and identity was
affirmed by the Constitution Bench in K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 J.)
145. The object of the Act is to maintain discipline and control over
the educational institutions in the State with a view to foster the
harmonious development of the mental and physical faculties of the
students. Therefore, discipline and control are with regard to
educational institutions, and not with regard to students. In terms of
Section 5 of the Act, the State Government's endeavour is to promote
the education of the handicapped, backward classes and the weaker
sections of the society including the economically weaker sections,
whereas curricula under Section 7 includes promotion of national
integration and inculcation of the sense of the duties of the citizens,
enshrined under Article 51 of the Constitution. It is also pointed out
that the State provides uniform to all the students from Class I to Class
X as a part of its social obligations and to maintain parity with all
students studying in the government schools without any distinction of
caste, creed, sex or religion.
146. Sections 15(b) and 39(1)(b) & (c) of the Act delineate the
circumstances for the reasonable excuse for non-attendance of the child
at an approved school. One of the accepted excuses is when religious
instructions not approved by his parents are made compulsory.
Sections 39(1)(b) and (c) deal with withdrawal of recognition to such
schools which deny admission to any citizen on grounds of religion,
race, caste, language or where there is direct or indirect encouragement
in the educational institution of any propaganda or practice wounding
the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India.
147. Rule 11 of the Rules has mandated the recognised educational
institutions including private institutions to prescribe uniforms. Once
the uniform is fixed, it is provided that it shall not be changed for the
period of next five years and when it is intended to be changed, notice
for the same shall be given to the parents at least one year in advance.
It is thus argued that specifications regarding disallowance of hijab
were applied abruptly at the end of the academic section and also
applied retrospectively when the girls had been
stopped from entering school on or about 31-12-2021, though the
Government Order was notified on 5-2-2022.
148. I do not find any merit in the above arguments raised by the
appellants. The Government Order is in exercise of the executive
powers of the State. The reasons for an enactment of a statute, rules
and statutory order are not required to be part of it. It is only when the
issue of constitutionality is raised, the executive is required to satisfy
the court about the legality of action taken. The right under Article 19
(a) as a right of expression to dress as per one's own will, however,
is also subject to reasonable restrictions under clause (2) of Article 19.
The State has not put a restriction on the exercise of right conferred
under Article 19(1)(a) but has regulated the same in a manner that
during the school hours on working days and in the class, the students
shall wear the uniform as prescribed. Since it is a regulatory provision
for wearing of uniform, hence, the decision of the State Government
mandating the College Development Committee to ensure the students
wear the uniform as prescribed does not violate the freedom
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a), rather reinforces the right to
equality under Article 14. The College Development Committee is
constituted in terms of the statutory provisions and, therefore, the
direction of the State that the College Development Committee shall
ensure that the students wear the dress as prescribed cannot be said to
be violative of Part III of the Constitution.
149. The test of invasion of Article 19(1)(a) is required to be
examined by the test of doctrine of pith and substance in view of the
judgment of this Court reported as Bachan Singh V. State of Punjab76
"60. From a survey of the cases noticed above, a comprehensive
test which can be formulated, may be restated as under:
Does the impugned law, in its pith and substance, whatever may
be its form and object, deal with any of the fundamental rights
conferred by Article 19(1)? If it does, does it abridge or abrogate any
of those rights? And even if it does not, in its pith and substance,
deal with any of the fundamental rights conferred by Article 19(1), is
the direct and inevitable effect of the impugned law such as to
abridge or abrogate any of those rights?
The mere fact that the impugned law incidentally, remotely or collaterally has the
effect of abridging or abrogating those rights, will not satisfy the test. If the answer
to the above queries be in the affirmative, the impugned law in order to be valid,
must pass the test of reasonableness under Article 19. But if the impact of the law
on any of the rights under clause (1) of Article 19 is merely incidental, indirect,
remote or collateral and is dependent upon factors which may or may not come
into play, the anvil of Article 19 will not be available for judging its validity."
(emphasis supplied)
150. It is to be observed that the Act, Rules and the orders issued
under the said Act were enacted to provide for better organisation,
development, discipline and control of the educational institutions in
the State. The primary object was encouraging holistic development
through education and its various facets. The prescribing of uniform is
only an incidental action in furtherance of the core object of the Act.
Therefore, keeping in view Bachan Singh 76, some incidental effect on
the right under Article 19(1)(a) cannot be said to be an unreasonable
restriction, also being mindful of the fact that it is not an absolute right.
151. The freedom of expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution means right to express one's opinions by word of mouth,
printing, picture, or in any other manner. It includes the freedom of
communication and the right to propagate or publish one's opinion. The
communication of ideas could be made through any medium,
newspaper, magazine or movie. Such right is though subject to
reasonable restrictions on grounds set out under Article 19(2) of the
Constitution
152. Further, the right to privacy as crystallised in the Constitution
Bench judgment of K.S. Puttaswamy18 has to be read in the context of
other provisions of the Constitution in the present appeals. This Court
526 and 639)
"298.
The freedoms under Article 19 can be fulfilled where the
individual is entitled to decide upon his or her preferences. Read in
conjunction with Article 21, liberty enables the individual to have a
choice of preferences on various facets of life including what and how
one will eat, the way one will dress, the faith one will espouse and a
myriad other matters on which autonomy and self-determination
require a choice to be made within the privacy of the mind. The
constitutional right to the freedom of religion under Article 25 has
implicit within it the ability to choose a faith and the freedom to
express or not express those choices to the world. These are some
illustrations of the manner in which privacy facilitates freedom and is
intrinsic to the exercise of liberty. The Constitution does not contain
a separate article telling us that privacy has been declared to be a
fundamental right. Nor have we tagged the provisions of Part III
with an alpha-suffixed right to privacy : this is not an act of judicial
redrafting. Dignity cannot exist without privacy. Both reside within
the inalienable values of life, liberty and freedom which the
Constitution has recognised. Privacy is the ultimate expression of the
sanctity of the individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles
across the spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for the
individual a zone of choice and self-determination.
*
*
*
377. It goes without saying that no legal right can be absolute.
Every right has limitations. This aspect of the matter is conceded at
the Bar. Therefore, even a fundamental right to privacy has limitations.
The limitations are to be identified on case-to-case basis depending
upon the nature of the privacy interest claimed. There are different
standards of review to test infractions of fundamental rights. While the
concept of reasonableness overarches Part III, it operates differently
across Articles (even if only slightly differently across some of them).
Having emphatically interpreted the Constitution's liberty guarantee to
contain a fundamental right to privacy, it is necessary for me to outline
the manner in which such a right to privacy can be limited. I only do
this to indicate the direction of the debate as the nature of limitation is
not at issue here.
*
*
*
526. But this is not to say that such a right is absolute. This right
is subject to reasonable regulations made by the State to protect
legitimate State interests or public interest. However, when it comes
to restrictions on this right, the drill of various articles to which the
right relates must be scrupulously followed. For example, if the
restraint on privacy is over fundamental personal choices that an
individual is to make, State action can be restrained under Article 21
read with Article 14 if it is arbitrary and unreasonable; and under
Article 21 read with Article 19(1)(a) only if it relates to the subjects
mentioned in Article 19(2) and the tests laid down by this Court for
such legislation or subordinate legislation to pass muster under the
said article. Each of the tests evolved by this Court, qua legislation
or executive action, under Article 21 read with Article 14; or Article
21 read with Article 19(1)(a) in the aforesaid examples must be met
in order that State action pass muster. In the ultimate analysis, the
balancing act that is to be carried out between individual, societal
and State interests must be left to the training and expertise of the
judicial mind.
*
*
*
639. The right to privacy as already observed is not absolute. The
right to privacy as falling in Part III of the Constitution may,
depending on its variable facts, vest in one part or the other, and
would thus be subject to the restrictions of exercise of that particular
fundamental right. National security would thus be an obvious
restriction, so would the provisos to different fundamental rights,
dependent on where the right to privacy would arise. The public
interest element would be another aspect."
153. In a Constitution Bench judgment reported as I.R. Coelho V.
State of T.N. 78 , this Court held that it can no longer be stated that
protection provided by fundamental rights comes in isolated pools. On
the contrary, these rights together provide a comprehensive guarantee
against excesses
"60. It is evident that it can no longer be contended that
protection provided by fundamental rights comes in isolated pools.
On the contrary, these rights together provide a comprehensive
guarantee against excesses by State authorities. Thus post-Maneka
Gandhi case69 it is clear that the development of fundamental rights
has been such that it no longer involves the interpretation of rights
as isolated protections which directly arise but they collectively form
a comprehensive test against the arbitrary exercise of State power in
any area that occurs as an inevitable consequence. The protection of
fundamental rights has, therefore, been considerably widened."
154. Thus, the rights of citizens of this country cannot be
compartmentalised into one right or the other. The rights of citizens
have to be read together so as to provide a purposeful meaning to Part
III of the Constitution. Thus, all the fundamental rights under Part III
of the Constitution are to be read in aid of each other. They constitute a
bouquet of rights which cannot be read in isolation and have to be read
together as a whole.
155. However, it is to be noted that none of the fundamental rights
is absolute. The curtailment of the right is permissible by following due
procedure which can withstand the test of reasonableness. The intent
and object of the Government Order is only to maintain uniformity
amongst the students by adherence to the prescribed uniform. It is
reasonable as the same has the effect of regulation of the right
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a). Thus, the right of freedom of
expression under Article 19(1)(a) and of privacy under Article 21 are
complementary to each other and not mutually exclusive and does
meet the injunction of reasonableness for the purposes of Article 21
and Article 14.
Question (vi) - Whether the Government Order impinges upon
constitutional promise of fraternity and dignity under the
Preamble as well as fundamental duties enumerated under
Article 51-A clauses (e) and (f)?
156. Mr Ahmadi has argued that the impugned Government Order
dated 5-2-2002 impinges upon the constitutional promise of
"Fraternity" as mentioned in the Preamble as well as in the
fundamental duties enumerated in Articles 51-A(e) and (f). It is argued
that liberty, equality and fraternity is the trinity of the constitutional
values to invoke horizontal and social sensitivity towards inequalities. It
is contended that liberty is of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship; equality is of status and opportunity; and fraternity assures
dignity of the individual.
157. In Indra Sawhney36, Hon'ble P.B. Sawant, J. in his order said
"412. Inequality ill-favours fraternity, and unity remains a dream
without fraternity. The goal enumerated in the Preamble of the
Constitution, of fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and
the unity and integrity of the nation must, therefore, remain
unattainable so long as the equality of opportunity is not ensured to
all."
158. This Court in a judgment reported as Subramanian Swamy V.
Union of India 79 had the occasion to interpret the term "fraternity" (
as the constitutional value which is to be cultivated by the people
themselves as part of their social behaviour. It is to be understood in
the breed of homogeneity in a positive sense and not to trample dissent
153, 156-57 & 161)
"153. The term "fraternity" has a significant place in the history of
constitutional law. It has, in fact, come into prominence after the
French Revolution. The motto of Republican France echoes:"Liberté,
égalité, fraternité", or "Liberty, equality, fraternity". The term
"fraternity" has an animating effect in the constitutional spectrum.
The Preamble states that it is a constitutional duty to promote
fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual. Be it stated that
fraternity is a Preambulatory promise.
*
*
*
156. Fraternity as a concept is characteristically different from the
other constitutional goals. It, as a constitutional concept, has a keen
bond of sorority with other concepts. And hence, it must be
understood in the breed of homogeneity in a positive sense and not
to trample dissent and diversity. It is neither isolated nor lonely. The
idea of fraternity is recognised as a constitutional norm and a
precept. It is a constitutional virtue that is required to be sustained
and nourished.
157. It is a constitutional value which is to be cultivated by the
people themselves as a part of their social behaviour. There are two
Schools of Thought; one canvassing individual liberalisation and the
other advocating for protection of an individual as a member of the
collective. The individual should have all the rights under the
Constitution but simultaneously he has the responsibility to live up
to the constitutional values like essential brotherhood-the
fraternity-that strengthens the societal interest. Fraternity means
brotherhood and common interest. Right to censure and criticise
does not conflict with the constitutional objective to promote
fraternity. Brotherliness does not abrogate and rescind the concept
of criticism. In fact, brothers can and should be critical. Fault-finding
and disagreement is required even when it leads to an individual
disquiet or group disquietude. Enemies Enigmas Oneginese on the
part of some does not create a dent in the idea of fraternity but, a
significant one, liberty to have a discordant note does not confer a
right to defame the others. The dignity of an individual is extremely
important.
*
*
*
161. The concept of fraternity under the Constitution expects
every citizen to respect the dignity of the other. Mutual respect is the
fulcrum of fraternity that assures dignity. It does not mean that
there cannot be dissent or difference or discordance or a different
voice. It does not convey that all should join the chorus or sing the
same song. Indubitably not. One has a right to freedom of speech
and expression. One is also required to maintain
the constitutional value which is embedded in the idea of fraternity that
assures the dignity of the individual. One is obliged under the
Constitution to promote the idea of fraternity. It is a constitutional
obligation."
159. Reference is also made to another three-Judge Bench judgment
of this Court in Prathvi Raj Chauhan V. Union of India wherein it is
observed that there is a Preambular assurance that the republic would
be one which guarantees to its people liberty, dignity, equality of status
and opportunity and fraternity. It is fraternity, poignantly embedded
through the provisions of Part III, which assures true equality, where
the State treats all alike, assures the benefits of growth and prosperity
to all, with equal liberties to all, and what is more, which guarantees
that every citizen treats every other citizen alike. This Court held as
"15.
That is why the Preambular assurance that the republic
would be one which guarantees to its people liberties, dignity,
equality of status and opportunity and fraternity.
*
*
*
17. The making of this provision-and others, in my view, is
impelled by the trinity of the Preambular vision that the Constitution
-Makers gave to this country.
In my opinion, all the three-Liberty,
Equality and Fraternity, are intimately linked. The right to equality,
sans liberty or fraternity, would be chimerical-as the concept
presently known would be reduced to equality among equals, in
every manner-a mere husk of the grand vision of the Constitution.
Likewise, liberty without equality or fraternity, can well result in the
perpetuation of existing inequalities and worse, result in licence to
indulge in society's basest practices. It is fraternity, poignantly
embedded through the provisions of Part III, which assures true
equality, where the State treats all alike, assures the benefits of
growth and prosperity to all, with equal liberties to all, and what is
more, which guarantees that every citizen treats every other citizen
alike.
*
*
*
34.
It is to address problems of a segmented society, that
express provisions of the Constitution which give effect to the idea of
fraternity,
or bandhutva () referred to in the Preamble, and
statutes like the Act, have been framed. These underline the social
-
rather collective resolve - of ensuring that all humans are treated
as humans, that their innate genius is allowed outlets through equal
opportunities and each of them is fearless in the pursuit of her or his
dreams. The question which each of us has to address, in everyday
life, is can the prevailing situation of exclusion based on caste
identity be allowed to persist in a democracy which is committed to
equality and the rule of law? If so, till when? And, most importantly,
what each one of us can do to foster this feeling of fraternity
amongst all sections of the community without reducing the concept
(of fraternity) to
a ritualistic formality, a tacit acknowledgment, of the "otherness" of
each one's identity."
(emphasis in original)
160. The impugned Government Order was said to be an anti-thesis
of diversity, though based upon misunderstood fraternal behaviour
when it is asserted that all the school students studying in the State of
Karnataka should behave in a fraternal manner, transcend their group
identity and develop an orientation towards social justice. It is argued
that the Government Order suggests that the ethic of fraternity is best
served by complete erasure of all differences. It does not mean
"flattening out of differences", or forced assimilation.
161. Reference was made to a judgment of this Court reported as
Tehseen S. Poonawalla V. Union of India81 wherein it was held that the
aim of our Constitution is unity in diversity and to impede any
fissiparous tendencies for enriching the unity amongst Indians by
assimilating the diversities. It was also argued that the Government
Order uses the words "unity" and "uniformity" interchangeably and that
uniformity is not a constitutional or statutory mandate, and has no
nexus with unity. It is argued that plurality of voices celebrates the
constitutionalist idea of a liberal democracy and the same ought not to
26, 28 & 31)
"21. Freedom of speech and expression in different forms is the
élan vital of sustenance of all other rights and is the very seed for
germinating the growth of democratic views. Plurality of voices
celebrates the constitutionalist idea of a liberal democracy and ought
not to be suppressed. That is the idea and essence of our nation
which cannot be, to borrow a line from Rabindranath Tagore, "broken
up into fragments by narrow domestic walls" of caste, creed, race,
class or religion. Pluralism and tolerance are essential virtues and
constitute the building blocks of a truly free and democratic society.
It must be emphatically stated that a dynamic contemporary
constitutional democracy imbibes the essential feature of
accommodating pluralism in thought and approach so as to preserve
cohesiveness and unity. Intolerance arising out of a dogmatic
mindset sows the seeds of upheaval and has a chilling effect on
freedom of thought and expression. Hence, tolerance has to be
fostered and practised and not allowed to be diluted in any manner.
*
*
*
26. In the obtaining situation, the need to preserve and maintain
unity amongst the fellow citizens of our country, who represent
different castes, creed and races, follow different religions and use
multiple languages, ought to be discussed and accentuated. It is
requisite to state that our country must sustain, exalt and celebrate
the feeling of solidarity and harmony so that the spirit of oneness is
entrenched in the collective character. Sans such harmony and
understanding, we may unwittingly pave the path of disaster.
*
*
28. "Unity" in the context of a nation means unity amongst the
fellow citizens. It implies integration of the citizens whereby the
citizens embrace a feeling of "We" with a sense of bonding with
fellow citizens which would definitely go a long way in holding the
Indian society together. Emile Durkheim, French sociologist, has said
that when unity is based on heterogeneity and diversity, it can very
well be described as organic solidarity. Durkheim's view would be
acceptable in the context of the Indian society as it exhibits a
completely organic social solidarity.
*
*
*
31. Unity in Diversity must be recognised as the most potent
weapon in India's armoury which binds different and varied kinds of
people in the solemn thread of humanity. This diversity is the
strength of our nation and for realising this strength, it is sine qua
non that we sustain it and shun schismatic tendencies. It has to be
remembered that the unique feature of "Unity in Diversity"
inculcates in the citizens the virtue of respecting the opinions and
choices of others. Such respect imbibes the feeling of acceptance of
plurality and elevates the idea of tolerance by promoting social
cohesion and infusing a sense of fraternity and comity."
162. Reliance is also placed upon the judgments of this Court
reported as St. Stephen's College72, Sri Adi Visheshwara of Kashi
Vishwanath Temple4 46 and State of Karnataka V. Praveen Bhai
Thogadia82 wherein the concept of unity in diversity was held to be the
constitutional aim. It was submitted that unity in diversity is the most
potent weapon in India's armoury which binds different and varied
kinds of people in the solemn thread of humanity. Unity in diversity
inculcates in the citizens the virtue of respecting the opinions and
choices of others. Such respect imbibes the feeling of acceptance of
plurality and elevates the idea of tolerance by promoting social
cohesion and infusing a sense of fraternity and comity.
1 Referring to National Education Policy, 2020, it is argued that
the schools are spaces of diversity and critical thinking. It is fraternal
free thinking public places as the needs and expectations are different.
The policy does not mention "uniform" or "discipline". The fundamental
principles which will guide the Indian Education System as well as
individual institutions are as under:
"2. Full equity and inclusion as the cornerstone of all educational
decisions to ensure that all students are able to thrive in the
education system;
Ethics and human and constitutional values like empathy, respect
for others, cleanliness, courtesy, democratic spirit, spirit of service,
respect for public property, scientific temper, liberty, responsibility,
pluralism, equality, and justice;
*
*
*
6.12. Students will be sensitised through this new school culture,
brought in by teachers, trained social workers and counsellors as well
as through corresponding changes to bring in an inclusive school
curriculum. The school curriculum will include, early on, material on
human values such as respect for all persons, empathy, tolerance,
human rights, gender equality, non-violence, global citizenship,
inclusion, and equity. It would also include more detailed knowledge
of various cultures, religions, languages, gender identities, etc. to
sensitise and develop respect for diversity. Any biases and
stereotypes in school curriculum will be removed and more material
will be included that is relevant and relatable to all communities.
*
*
*
3.4. Once infrastructure and participation are in place, ensuring
quality will be the key in retention of students, so that they
(particularly, girls and students from other socio-economically
disadvantaged groups) do not lose interest in attending school. This
will require a system of incentives for deploying teachers with
knowledge of the local language to areas with high dropout rates, as
well as overhauling the curriculum to make it more engaging and
useful."
164. In K.S. Puttaswamy18, the distinction between private and
public spaces was drawn and it was stated that both must be free to
the extent that there should be freedom to think, without any direct or
indirect pressures on thought and belief. Thus, the schools must give
students the privacy and the freedom to think about their choices.
Therefore, the Government Order creates an arbitrary barrier to
education and to fraternal spaces.
165. Not disputing with the above observations, it is important to
interpret the expressions "fraternity" and "dignity" in view of the
objective behind the Government Order. The concepts of fraternity and
dignity do not stand alone but have to be inferred from the context,
circumstances and the purpose sought to be achieved. There is no
dispute, as asserted in the written submissions, that the purpose of
introducing fraternity as a constitutional value is to invoke horizontal or
social sensitivity towards inequalities, in addition to the vertical, or top-
down political prescriptions towards inequalities. Fraternity is in fact
social sensitivity. The students herein are in the age group of 15 to 18
years. The seed of education should germinate equally amongst all
students. Therefore, the Preambular goal of justice, liberty, equality or
fraternity would be better served by removing any religious differences,
inequalities and treating students alike before they attain the age of
adulthood.
166. The students have been given a uniform platform to grow and
take quantum leap in their further pursuits. The homogeneity amongst
the students in the matter of uniform would prepare them to grow
without any distinction on the basis of religious symbols, if not worn
during the classroom studies in a pre-university college.
167. Still further, the Hindi word of fraternity is () that is
brotherhood. Brotherhood is amongst all the citizens of the country and
not of a particular community. Fraternity is the antithesis of a
segmented society wherein all humans are treated equally and their
innate genius is allowed an outlet by exposing them to equal
opportunities.
168. The argument is that the appellants seek equal access to public
education where they would have the opportunity to fraternise across
religious, class and gender boundaries, an opportunity which would not
be available to them if they were to transfer to religious schools. Hence,
the Government Order has created an arbitrary barrier to education and
to fraternal spaces.
169. I do not find any merit in the argument raised. Fraternity is a
noble goal but cannot be seen from the prism of one community alone.
It is a goal for all citizens of the country irrespective of caste, creed, sex
and religion. The abstract idea of fraternity, as discussed in the
judgments referred to by the learned counsel for the appellants, has to
be applied to the ground realities wherein some students wearing
headscarf in a secular school run by the State Government would stand
out and overtly appear differently. The concept of fraternity will stand
fragmented as the apparent distinction of some of the students wearing
headscarf would not form a homogeneous group of students in a school
where education is to be imparted homogeneously and equally,
irrespective of any religious identification mark. The constitutional goal
of fraternity would be defeated if the students are permitted to carry
their apparent religious symbols with them to the classroom. None of
the judgments referred to by the learned counsel for the appellants
deal with an issue of fraternity in respect of a section of the citizens
who wish to carry their religious symbols to a classroom. The
constitutional goal as emanating from the Preamble would not be
achieved if fraternity is given a narrow meaning in respect of the
students identifying themselves with the religious symbols in the
classroom.
170. I do not find any merit in the argument raised that the use of
the phrase "behave in a fraternal manner by transcending their group
identity as the young students" in the impugned order can be said to
be violative of any law. Before a student goes for higher studies in
colleges, she should not grow with a specific identity, but under the
umbrella of equality quaranteed under Article 14 transcending the
group identity. Religion, which is a private affair, has no meaning in a
secular school run by the State. The students are free to profess their
religion and carry out their religious activities other than when they are
attending a classroom where religious identities should be left behind.
171. Accordingly, I do not find that the Government Order impinges
on the constitutional promise of fraternity and dignity. Instead, it
promotes an equal environment where such fraternal values can be
imbibed and nurtured without any hindrance of any kind.
172. Though, it is argued that wearing of a piece of cloth on the
head does not violate or contravene the uniform prescribed. The
dictionary meaning of the word "uniform" is as under:
172.1. Black's Law Dictionary, 6th Edn., p. 1530 (Uniform,
adjective)
Conforming to one rule, mode, or unvarying standard; not
different at different times or places; applicable to all places or
divisions of a country.
172.2. Cambridge English Dictionary (Uniform, noun)
A particular set of clothes that has to be worn by the members of
the same organisation or group of people. A type of clothes that is
connected with a particular group of people.
172.3. Merriam-Webster Dictionary
(Uniform, noun) Dress of a distinctive design or fashion worn by
members of a particular group and serving as a means of
identification.
(Adjective) Having always the same form, manner or degree : not
varying or variable. Of the same form with others-conforming to one
rule or more. Presenting an unvaried appearance of surface, pattern
or color. (e.g.-uniform procedures, uniform red brick houses)
173. The issue as to whether a person professing Islam can sport a
beard as a member of the Indian Air Force came up for consideration
before the Single Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Ansari
Aaftab Ahmed V. Union of India83 The Single Bench referred to the
principles of Islam by Maulana Wahiduddin Khan from his book Islam
the Voice of Human Nature and the rules applicable to the airmen to
hold that growing of beard violates the norms of uniform. Accordingly,
the writ petitions were dismissed. An intra-court appeal was also
dismissed The matter came up for hearing before this Court in a
judgment reported as Mohd. Zubair V. Union of India85 This Court
dismissed the appeal finding no reason to take a view of the matter at
variance with the view taken by the High Court. It was noticed that
there are varying interpretations, one of which is that it is desirable to
maintain a beard. Therefore, in respect of an airman employed by the
Indian Air Force, beard was not found permissible in terms of the Rules
framed.
174. The uniform prescribed would lose its meaning if the student is
permitted to add or subtract any part of uniform. The schools are
nurseries for training the citizen for future endeavours. If, the norms of
the uniform in the school are permitted to be breached, then what kind
of discipline is sought to be imparted to the students. The freedom of
expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) does not extend to the
wearing of headscarf. Once the uniform is prescribed, all students are
bound to follow the uniform so prescribed. The uniform is to assimilate
the students without any distinction of rich or poor, irrespective of
caste, creed or faith and for the harmonious development of the mental
and physical faculties of the students and to cultivate a secular outlook.
The wearing of hijab is not permitted only during the school time,
therefore, the students can wear it everywhere else except in schools.
The wearing of
anything other than the uniform is not expected in schools run by the
State as secular institutions. In a secular school maintained at the cost
of the State, the State is competent to not permit anything other than
the uniform.
175. The argument that the wearing of a headscarf provides dignity
to the girl students is also not tenable. The students are attending an
all-girls' college. The students are at liberty to carry their religious
symbols outside the schools but in pre-university college, the students
should look alike, feel alike, think alike and study together in a cohesive
cordial atmosphere. That is the objective behind a uniform, so as to
bring about uniformity in appearances.
Question (vii) - Whether, if the wearing of hijab is considered as
an essential religious practice, the student can seek right to
wear headscarf to a secular school as a matter of right?
176. The argument is that hijab is an additional cloth worn on the
head, and that it does not cause any harm to any other person. The
argument is based upon Conscience and Religion (Article 25), Culture
[Articles 29 and 51-A(f)], Identity (Articles 19 and 21 - Autonomy,
Dignity, Choice) and Secularism (Articles 19 and 21 - Autonomy,
Dignity, Choice), therefore, the students have been wrongly denied
admission to an educational institution on the basis of religion. The
contention of the students is that by denying the right to wear
headscarf, they have also been denied to attend the classes which
stand foul with the mandate of clause (2) of Article 29.
177. I do not find any merit in the said argument. The schools run
by the State are open for admission irrespective of any religion, race,
caste, language or any of them. Even the Act mandates that the
students would be admitted without any restriction on such grounds.
However, the students are required to follow the discipline of the school
in the matter of uniform. They have no right to be in the school in
violation of the mandate of the uniform prescribed under the statute
and the Rules.
86
178. In M. Ajmal Khan V. Election Commission of India , the
challenge was to the electoral roll with photographs particularly of
Muslim Gosha Women in the eligible voters' list. The argument was that
wearing of purdah by Muslim women is one of the principles laid down
in Holy Quran and it has to be strictly followed by Muslim women.
Therefore, any interference with such religious practice would amount
to interfering with the fundamental right of the Muslim women, which is
guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution of India. The Madras
High Court dismissed such writ petition holding that such direction of
the Election Commission is not violative of Article 25 of the
"18.
The decision of the Election Commission of putting the
photographs in the electoral roll was taken with a view to improving
the fidelity of the electoral rolls and to check impersonation and
eradicate bogus voting. Hence, the argument of the learned counsel
that the decision violates the right to privacy is required to be
rejected."
The said judgment though is in the context of elections but the ratio
thereof is applicable to the present matters, the education to a school
by the State is constitutional mandate to be carried out in a non-
discriminatory manner irrespective of caste, sex and religion.
179. The State has not denied admission to the students from
attending classes. If they choose not to attend classes due to the
uniform that has been prescribed, it is a voluntary act of such students
and cannot be said to be in violation of Article 29 by the State. It is not
a denial of rights by the State but instead a voluntary act of the
students. It would thus not amount to denial of right to education if a
student, by choice, does not attend the school. A student, thus, cannot
claim the right to wear a headscarf to a secular school as a matter of
right.
Question (viii) - Whether a student-citizen in the constitutional
scheme is expected to surrender her fundamental rights under
Articles 19, 21 and 25 as a precondition for accessing education
in a State institution?
180. Mr Shoeb Alam argued that in the constitutional scheme, there
cannot be any barter of fundamental rights for the enjoyment of a
privilege or a right. It is argued that the State cannot attach a condition
of barter for the grant of access to school/education available to a
student under Article 21 and, in return, ask for a girl child to cede her
right to wear the hijab inside the school, which is her fundamental right
to privacy, dignity and autonomy.
181. Reliance was placed upon a judgment of this Court reported as
Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In re 87 dealing with the issue of the Kerala
Education Bill. The provision authorised the State to take over the
management of the educational institution as a precondition for
recognition and aid to the educational institution. This Court said to the
following effect : (AIR p. 983, para 31)
"31.
Therefore, the conditions imposed by the said Bill on aided
institutions established and administered by minority communities,
like the Christians, including the Anglo-Indian community, will lead
to the closing down of all these aided schools unless they are
agreeable to surrender their fundamental right of management. No
educational institution can in actual practice be carried on without
aid from the State and if they will not get it unless they surrender
their rights they will, by compulsion of financial necessities, be
compelled to give up their rights under Article 30(1). The legislative
powers conferred on the legislature of the States by Articles 245 and
246 are subject to the other provisions of the Constitution and
certainly to the provisions of Part III which confers fundamental
rights which are, therefore, binding on the State Legislature. The
State Legislature cannot, it is clear, disregard or override those
provisions merely by employing indirect methods of achieving
exactly the same result. Even the legislature cannot do indirectly
what it certainly cannot do directly."
182. In Nar Singh Pal V. Union of India88 it was held that the casual
labour does not mean that he had surrendered all his constitutional
rights in favour of the respondents. It was thus submitted that
fundamental rights under the Constitution cannot be bartered. They
cannot be compromised, nor can there be any estoppel against the
exercise of fundamental rights available under the Constitution.
183. Reliance was also placed upon a nine-Judge Bench judgment in
Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society42 wherein the said Act was
declared as unconstitutional which warranted educational institutions to
surrender their management to the State in order to get affiliation. This
Court held that in this situation, the condition which involves surrender
is as effective a deterrent to the exercise of the right under Article 30
(1) as a direct prohibition would be. Thus considered, it is apparent
that the religious minority does not voluntarily waive its right - it has
been coerced because of the basic importance of the privilege involved,
"161. It is doubtful whether the fundamental right under Article
30(1) can be bartered away or surrendered by any voluntary act or
that it can be waived. The reason is that the fundamental right is
vested in a plurality of persons as a unit or if we may say so, in a
community of persons necessarily fluctuating. Can the present
members of a minority community barter away or surrender the right
under the article so as to bind its future members as a unit? The
fundamental right is for the living generation. By a voluntary act of
affiliation of an educational institution established and administered
by a religious minority the past members of the community cannot
surrender the right of the future members of that community. The
future members of the community do not derive the right under
Article 30(1) by succession or inheritance."
184. The view of Hon'ble D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in K.S. Puttaswamy18
was referred where "decisional autonomy" has been discussed to
comprehend intimate personal choices such as those governing
reproduction as well as choices expressed in public such as faith or
& 297)
"248. Privacy has distinct connotations including (i) spatial
control; (ii) decisional autonomy; and (iii) informational control.89
Spatial control denotes the creation of private spaces. Decisional
autonomy comprehends intimate personal choices such as those
governing reproduction as well as choices expressed in public such
as faith or modes of dress.
*
*
*
297.
Privacy enables each individual to take crucial decisions
which find expression in the human personality. It enables
individuals to preserve their beliefs, thoughts, expressions, ideas,
ideologies, preferences and choices against societal demands of
homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic recognition of heterogeneity, of
the right of the individual to be different and to stand against the
tide of conformity in creating a zone of solitude. Privacy protects the
individual from the searching glare of publicity in matters which are
personal to his or her life. Privacy attaches to the person and not to
the place where it is associated. Privacy constitutes the foundation of
all liberty because it is in privacy that the individual can decide how
liberty is best exercised. Individual dignity and privacy are
inextricably linked in a pattern woven out of a thread of diversity into
the fabric of a plural culture."
185. Furthermore, Hon'ble Chelameswar, J. in K.S. Puttaswamy
"372.
Insofar as religious beliefs are concerned, a good deal of
the misery our species suffer owes its existence to and centres
around competing claims of the right to propagate religion.
Constitution of India protects the liberty of all subjects
guaranteeing90 the freedom of conscience and right to freely profess,
practise and propagate religion. While the right to freely "profess,
practise and propagate religion" may be a facet of free speech
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a), the freedom of the belief or faith
in any religion is a matter of conscience falling within the zone of
purely private thought process and is an aspect of liberty.
373.
The choice of appearance and apparel are also aspects of
the right to privacy. The freedom of certain groups of subjects to
determine their appearance and apparel (such as keeping long hair
and wearing a turban) are protected not as a part of the right to
privacy but as a part of their religious belief. Such a freedom need
not necessarily be based on religious beliefs falling under Article 25."
186. I do not find that the Government Order takes away any right
of a student available to her under Article 21 of the Constitution, or that
it contemplates any barter of fundamental rights. The right to education
under Article 21 continues to be available but it is the choice of the
student to avail such right or not. The student is not expected to put a
condition, that unless she is permitted to come to a secular school
wearing a headscarf, she would not attend the school. The decision is of
the student and not of school when the student opts not to adhere to
the uniform rules.
Question (ix) - Whether in the constitutional scheme, the State
is obligated to ensure "reasonable accommodation" to its
citizens?
187. The argument is that the school should reasonably
accommodate the students for wearing headscarf as it does not
interfere with any of the rights of the fellow students.
188. The learned counsel for the appellants have referred to the
judgments of this Court reported as Jeeja Ghosh V. Union of India
Vikash Kumar V. UPSC92 and Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal V. Union of
India 93
189. This Court in Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal9 held that the
reasonable accommodation principle is a component of the right of
equality and the right against discrimination. The concept of reasonable
accommodation arose in the context of accommodating a differently-
abled candidate, a member of the Central Railway Police Force to
provide him an alternative suitable post.
190. In Jeeja Ghosh91, , this Court was considering the rights of a
differently-abled person in using the facility of a flight. This Court found
that Civil Aviation Requirements issued by Directorate General of Civil
Aviation that no airline shall refuse to carry persons with disability or
persons with reduced mobility and their assistive aids/devices, escorts
and guide dogs including their presence in the cabin should be made
available to the passengers at the time of check-in. There was a
violation of such directive by the airline when this Court held that
equality not only implies preventing discrimination, but goes beyond in
remedying discrimination in the society. In concrete terms, it means
embracing the notion of positive rights, affirmative action and
para 40)
"40.
In concrete terms, it means embracing the notion of
positive rights, affirmative action and reasonable accommodation."
para 62)
"62.
if disability as a social construct has to be remedied,
conditions have to be affirmatively created for facilitating the
development of the disabled. Reasonable accommodation is founded
in the norm of inclusion. Exclusion results in the negation of
individual dignity and worth or they can choose the route of
reasonable accommodation, where each individuals' dignity and
worth is respected."
192. The argument of the appellants is however that they are
seeking reasonable accommodation by the school authorities to permit
them to attend school wearing matching headscarf/hijab in addition to
the prescribed uniform which would be in conformity with the
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 25 and 21 of the
Constitution.
193. The concept of reasonable accommodation came to be
introduced in respect of a special child or person. In Bijoe Emmanuel64,
it has been held that the real test of a true democracy is the ability of
even an insignificant minority to find its identity under the Constitution.
In the aforesaid case, students, believer of Jehovah, expressed their
inability to sing National Anthem though they were extending all
respect when the National Anthem was to be played. In the case of the
appellants, democracy is not in test but the question is whether the
school, having prescribed the uniform, has a right to insist that all
students wear the same uniform so as not to have inequality or
disparity in the matter of wearing of uniform. Rule 11 of the 1995 Rules
in fact shows that any change in uniform can be affected only after
serving notice to the parents and once uniform is prescribed, it cannot
be changed in five years, meaning thereby that there is a continuity of
the uniform and the period for which uniform is prescribed is to be
followed.
194. The argument that the Kendriya Vidyalaya across the country
permit wearing of headscarf/hijab for Muslim girls, therefore, the same
should be followed in the State as well. Kendriya Vidyalaya is an
autonomous body under the Ministry of Education, Government of
India. The purpose of the same is to meet the educational needs of
children of transferable Central Government employees, including
Defence and Paramilitary personnel by providing a common programme
of education. The two institutions, one under the State and other under
the Central Government have independent organisations and scope of
work. It may be that some State may permit headscarf and others do
not. It is a decision taken by the State which cannot be said to be
arbitrary on that ground alone.
195. The parties have referred to some foreign judgments in support
of their respective arguments including judgments on the question of
reasonable accommodation. Ours is a unique country having people
from different faiths and religions professing different practices.
Therefore, the judgments of other countries having different social
structure and polity would not provide a
reasonable basis to determine the question of religious practices in
such a wide and varied country like ours.
196. Thus, though the principle of reasonable accommodation has
been adopted by the courts in our country, such contention does not
arise in the present case. Constitutional goals such as secularism,
fraternity, dignity mean equality for all, preference to none. The
accommodation sought is contrary to spirit of Article 14 as it would
result in different treatment of students in secular schools who may be
following varied religious beliefs.
Question (x) - Whether the Government Order is contrary to the
legitimate State interest of promoting literacy and education as
mandated under Articles 21, 21-A, 39(f), 41, 46 and 51-A of the
Constitution?
197. It has been argued that the Government Order is contrary to
the legitimate State interest of promoting literacy and education as
mandated under Articles 21 and 21-A as well as the directive principles
contained in Articles 39(f), 41, 46 and fundamental duties as
mentioned in Article 51-A. It was said to have the effect of restricting
education for women.
198. It is also submitted that the Government Order is not in the
"best interest of the child", especially the child's identity, social well-
being and physical, emotional and intellectual development in terms of
Section 2(9) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015.
199. Reference is also made to the Commission for Protection of
Child Rights Act, 2005 enacted in view of the international treaty,
Convention on the Rights of the Child, acceded by India on 11-12-
1992. The Act was enacted to give effect to the policies adopted by the
Government in this regard and the standards prescribed in the
Convention. As per Article 1 of the Convention, child means every
human being below the age of 18 years unless under the law applicable
to the child, majority is attained earlier. Article 14 of the Convention
states that the State parties shall respect the right of children to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion and that freedom to
manifest one's religion or beliefs may be subject only to such
limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public
safety, order, health or morals, or the fundamental rights and freedoms
of others. It is thus contended that in terms of the Convention to which
India is a signatory, the child has a freedom of thought, conscience and
religion and to manifest one's religion or belief, subject only to the
limitations prescribed thereunder. Therefore, the restriction to use
headscarf violates not only the fundamental rights guaranteed under
the Constitution but also the International Convention.
200. The Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005,
enacted in pursuance of Convention on the Rights of Child, has been
referred to contemplate that the right of freedom of thought,
conscience and religion are to be subservient to the rights provided
under the Constitution of India. However, such rights cannot be larger
than the rights available to the citizens under the Constitution.
Therefore, freedom of religion in the Convention or the Act are not
independent rights but have to be read along with the constitutional
provisions.
201. The pre-university college is open to all students of all castes
and religions. The doors of such institutions are not closed to any
student of any community. The object of the State is to provide an
opportunity for the students to study in the secular schools. It is for the
students to avail such a facility. If a particular student feels that she
cannot compromise with the wearing of headscarf or of any other
student to wear any outwardly religious symbol, the school would be
justified not to allow such student, in the larger interest of treating all
the students alike as a part of mandate of Article 14, which is central to
the theme of Part III of the Constitution. The headscarf is not permitted
in the school for the students who are studying in Class 10+1 or 10+2.
The students have many years ahead of them where they can carry on
their religious faith but the Government Order mandating wearing of
uniform cannot be faulted with since the object is in tune with the
principles of the Constitution.
202. The judgment of this Court reported as Society for Unaided
Private Schools of Rajasthan V. Union of India94 held that the right of
education has been read into right to life in Article 21. The argument is
that a child who is denied right to access education is not only deprived
of his right to live with dignity, he is also deprived of his right to
freedom of speech and expression enshrined in Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution. The right to education is thus a part of Article 21. The
State has not put any restriction to avail such right of education. The
right of education is available to every student. The State has only
regulated the right in a manner that students come to the school to
attend classes only in the prescribed uniform, and the same has been
done to achieve the statutory and constitutional goals. The students
cannot assert that they have a right to education but they would avail
such right as per their own wish and in the manner which they consider
appropriate. Schools are to prepare the students for their future
endeavours in life. Discipline is one of the attributes which the students
learn in schools. Defiance to rules of the school would in fact be
antithesis of discipline which cannot be accepted from the students who
are yet to attain adulthood. Therefore, they should grow in an
atmosphere of brotherhood and fraternity and not in the environment of
rebel or defiance. The argument that the school is insisting on
surrendering or curtailing the right to wear a headscarf as a
precondition to access the education is not tenable as the right to
education is available but only condition is that the students should
attend the classes in prescribed uniform.
203. The Government Order cannot be said to be contrary to the
legitimate State goal of promoting literacy and education. Article 21-A
is not applicable as all the students are over 14 years of age. The
students have a right to education under Article 21, but not of insisting
on wearing something additional to the uniform, in a secular school, as
a part of their religion.
204. In fact, the Act itself contemplates providing of opportunities
and facilities in a healthy manner and maintaining the dignity of
childhood and youth so that there is no moral or material
abandonment. The uniform for the students has been prescribed so that
there is no distinction between the students
coming from diverse background and that each student grows in an
environment of equality, fairness and equal opportunities. The uniform
is an equaliser of inequalities. Therefore, prescribing uniform for
children at an impressionable age is not only important but has a
salutary effect on the mental development of the child to grow in the
environment of oneness. The said object is in tune with Article 39(f) of
the Constitution of India which reads as thus:
"39. (f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and
dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against
exploitation and against moral and material abandonment."
205. Hence, the Government Order cannot be said to be contrary to
the State goal of promoting literacy and education as mandated under
the Constitution. The Government Order only ensures that the uniform
prescribed is adhered to by the students and it cannot be said that the
State is restricting the access to education to the girl students through
such an order.
Question (xi) - Whether the Government Order neither achieves
any equitable access to education, nor serves the ethic of
secularism, nor is true to the objective of the Karnataka
Education Act?
206. The argument is that the State is under a positive obligation to
create an environment conducive for the exercise of fundamental rights.
Conversely, it means that the subjects have no responsibility to create
a conducive environment in a non-discriminatory manner. If the
students of one faith insist on a particular dress, there is no stopping
for the others to carry their faiths and beliefs to the schools. It would
not be conducive to the pious atmosphere of the school where the
students seek admission for education. In fact, uniform fosters a sense
of "equality" amongst students - instils a sense of oneness, diminishes
individual differences, helps focus on learning as students would not be
bothered about their social status, improves discipline, fewer conflicts
in school, promotes school spirit - generates a sense of belonging,
pride, loyalty towards the school, relieves economic pressure on the
parents, ensures equality before the educational institution, serves the
need of a diverse community and promotes a positive sense of
communal identity and does not lead to the growth of disparities of
wealth and style. School is the time to learn and lay foundation for the
future pursuits in life. The students are expected to maintain discipline
and the school is responsible to lay a strong foundation so as to nurture
the students as responsible citizens of the country.
207. In Indibly Creative (P) Ltd. V. State of W.B. 95 the release of a
movie in the State of West Bengal was not permitted on account of
threatened breach of peace. It was in these circumstances, this Court
held that the State is duty-bound to ensure the prevalence of
conditions in which the constitutional freedoms can be exercised. This
"50. The freedoms which are guaranteed by Article 19 are
universal. Article 19(1) stipulates that all citizens shall have the
freedoms which it
recognises. Political freedoms impose a restraining influence on the
State by carving out an area in which the State shall not interfere.
Hence, these freedoms are perceived to impose obligations of restraint
on the State. But, apart from imposing "negative" restraints on the
State these freedoms impose a positive mandate as well. In its capacity
as a public authority enforcing the rule of law, the State must ensure
that conditions in which these freedoms flourish are maintained. In the
space reserved for the free exercise of speech and expression, the State
cannot look askance when organised interests threaten the existence of
freedom. The State is duty-bound to ensure the prevalence of
conditions in which of those freedoms can be exercised. The
instruments of the State must be utilised to effectuate the exercise of
freedom. When organised interests threaten the properties of theatre
owners or the viewing audience with reprisals, it is the plain duty of the
State to ensure that speech is not silenced by the fear of the mob.
Unless we were to read a positive obligation on the State to create and
maintain conditions in which the freedoms guaranteed by the
Constitution can be exercised, there is a real danger that art and
literature would become victims of intolerance. In the present case, we
are of the view that there has been an unconstitutional attempt to
invade the fundamental rights of the producers, the actors and the
audience. Worse still, by making an example out of them, there has
been an attempt to silence criticism and critique. Others who embark
upon a similar venture would be subject to the chilling effect of "similar
misadventures". This cannot be countenanced in a free society.
Freedom is not a supplicant to power."
208. As discussed above, secularism is applicable to all citizens,
therefore, permitting one religious community to wear their religious
symbols would be antithesis to secularism. Thus, the Government Order
cannot be said to be against the ethic of secularism or to the objective
of the Karnataka Education Act, 1983.
209. In view of the discussions above, I dismiss all appeals and the
writ petitions, though on different grounds than what prevailed before
the High Court. No costs.
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J. (disagreeing)- In the long hearing of this
case, which went on for several days, I had the privilege of listening to
the erudite submissions of the learned counsel from both sides. On
behalf of the petitioners we have heard, Mr Kapil Sibal, Mr Rajeev
Dhawan, Mr Dushyant Dave, Mr Salman Khurshid, Mr Colin Gonsalves,
Mr Yusuf Hatim Muchhala, Mr Huzefa Ahmadi, Ms Meenakshi Arora, Mr
Aditya Sondhi, Mr Sanjay R. Hegde, Mr Devadatt Kamat, Ms Jayna
Kothari, Mr A.M. Dar, learned Senior Advocates and Mr Prashant
Bhushan, Mr Shoeb Alam, Mr Nizam Pasha, Ms Kirti Singh and Mr
Thulasi K. Raj learned Advocates. The arguments on behalf of the State
were made by Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India, Mr K.M.
Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General of India and Mr Prabhuling
Navadgi, Advocate General for Karnataka, learned Senior Advocates. Mr
R. Venkataramani, Ms V. Mohana and Mr Dama Seshadri Naidu, learned
Senior Advocates have appeared on behalf of the teachers.
211. I had the advantage of going through the judgment of Hemant
Gupta, J. Gupta, J. has recorded each argument which was raised at the
Bar before us in the long hearing of the case and he has given his
findings on each of the issues. It is a very well-composed judgment.
I
am, however, unable to agree with the decision of Gupta, J. I am
therefore giving a separate opinion, on this important matter.
212. While I do so, I am conscious that as far as possible, a
constitutional court must speak in one voice. Split verdicts and
discordant notes do not resolve a dispute. Finality is not reached. But
then to borrow the words of Lord Atkin (which he said though in an
entirely different context), finality is a good thing, but justice is
better. ",96
213. The judgment impugned before this Court was pronounced by
the Karnataka High Court on 15-3-20221. This was challenged before
this Court in several SLPs. Apart from the SLP we also had before us
two writ petitions filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. The
Karnataka High Court was dealing with seven petitions where the lead
matter was WP (C) No. 2347 of 2022. All the same while we deal with
the facts of the present case, we would be referring to Aishat Shifa who
was there in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 5236 of 2022, and was
one of the two petitioners before the Karnataka High Court, in Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 2880 of 2022. We have heard this as the lead
matter. On 22-9-202297 leave was granted by this Court, and judgment
was reserved.
214. In the District of Udupi in Karnataka there is a small town
called Kundapura. Aishat Shifa and Tehrina Begum were the two second
-year students of Government Pre-University College in Kundapura.
They both follow Islam religion and wear hijab. According to them they
have been wearing hijab, inside their classrooms, ever since they joined
the college, more than a year back. They say that in the past they had
never faced any objection from anyone, including the college
administration and their wearing of hijab inside their classroom was
never an issue.
215. On 3-2-2022, these two girl students were stopped at the gate
of their college. They were told that they will have to take off their hijab
before entering the college. Since they refused to take off their hijab,
they were denied entry in the college, by the college administration.
216. The next day, that is 4-2-2022, both made a representation
before the Deputy Commissioner, Udupi, praying that direction be given
to the college authorities to let them enter their college and complete
their studies. No effective orders were passed by the Deputy
Commissioner, but instead the Government came up with an Order on
5-2-2022. This G.O. has a preamble,
which refers to the Karnataka Education Act, 1983 and the Rules
framed therein, from where it draws its powers and then cites three
judgments of different High Courts to conclude that prohibiting hijab
does not amount to a violation of Article 25 of the Constitution. It then
mandates that the government schools must have a school uniform and
the colleges which come under the jurisdiction of the Pre-University
Education Department the uniform which is prescribed by the College
Development Committees (in government colleges), and Board of
Management (in private schools), should be worn. There was, however,
a caveat, which said that in the event the Board of Management did not
mandate any uniform then students should wear clothes that are "in
the interest of unity, equality and public order".
217. Since the entire G.O. has been reproduced by Hemant Gupta, J.
in his judgment I need not reproduce the entire G.O., but the relevant
portions of the G.O. are as under:
"In the backdrop of the issues highlighted in the proposal, using
the powers granted by the Karnataka Education Act, Section 133(2),
all the government schools in the State are mandated to abide by
the official uniform. Private schools should mandate a uniform
decided upon by their Board of Management.
In colleges that come under the Pre-University Education
Department's jurisdiction the uniforms mandated by the College
Development Committee, or the Board of Management, should be
worn. In the event that the management does [sic does not]
mandate a uniform, students should wear clothes that are in the
interests of unity, equality and public order.
By the orders of the Governor of Karnataka."
218. Since hijab was not made a part of the "uniform", and wearing
it was not "in the interest of unity, equality and public order", as the
G.O. mandated, the petitioners were denied entry in their school. This
Court has been informed at the Bar, that similar restriction was
imposed on other school-going girls in different parts in Karnataka.
219. The two girls, who were the students were then constrained to
file writ petitions before the Karnataka High Court. Initially, the case
went before a learned Single Judge of the High Court, who in turn,
considering the importance of the matter, referred98 it to the Chief
Justice for constituting a larger Bench. A three-Judge Bench was
constituted by the Chief Justice, which has heard the matter at length
and then passed its orders on 15-3-20221, dismissing the writ
petitions, an order which is presently impugned before this Court.
220. Before the Karnataka High Court as well as before this Court
the main argument of the petitioners was that the G.O. dated 5-2-
2022, and the restrictions imposed by the school authorities in not
permitting the petitioners to wear hijab inside their classrooms
amounts to a violation of their fundamental rights given to them under
Article 19(1)(a) and Article 25(1) of the Constitution
of India as well as under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. Some
of the petitioners also raised a claim that wearing of hijab is a part of
their essential religious practice.
221. The argument of the State on the other hand would be that the
G.O. only directs the school authorities of respective schools to
prescribe a school uniform. It is an innocuous order, which is religion
neutral. As to the argument on fundamental rights, the reply was that
fundamental rights are not absolute and they are always subject to
reasonable restrictions. Prohibiting hijab inside a classroom is a
reasonable restriction. Wearing of hijab was also said to be not an
essential religious practice.
222. The Karnataka High Court had formulated 1 four questions for
its consideration. These questions are as follows:
222.1. (a) Whether wearing hijab/headscarf is a part of essential
religious practice in Islamic faith protected under Article 25 of the
Constitution.
222.2. (b) Whether prescription of school uniform is not legally
permissible, as being violative of petitioners' fundamental rights inter
alia guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(a), (i.e. freedom of expression)
and 21 (i.e. privacy) of the Constitution.
222.3. (c) Whether the Government Order dated 5-2-2022 apart
from being incompetent is issued without application of mind and
further is manifestly arbitrary and therefore violates Articles 14 and 15
of the Constitution?
222.4. (d) Whether any case is made out in Writ Petition No. 2146
of 2022 for issuance of a direction for initiating disciplinary enquiry
against Respondents 6 to 14 and for issuance of a writ of quo warranto
against Respondents 15 and 16?
223. As far as the first question is concerned the High Court has
given a finding that wearing of hijab by Muslim women does not form a
part of essential religious practice in Islamic faith. On the second
question it was held that prescription of school uniform places only a
reasonable restriction which is constitutionally permissible and cannot
be objected by the students. As regards the third i.e. the G.O. of 5-2-
2022 it was again held that the Government has powers to issue such
an order and no case is made out for its invalidation. The fourth point
was also given in the negative.
224. One of the grounds raised by the petitioners in their challenge
to the validity of the G.O. dated 5-2-2022 is that it is merely an
executive order. But it has far-reaching consequences as far as
curtailment of fundamental rights of the petitioner is concerned given
to her under Articles 19(1)(a) and 25(1) of the Constitution. It was
submitted that the settled position of law is that restrictions on
fundamental rights can only be imposed by a statutory law and not by
executive order. The decision of this Court in Kharak Singh V. State of
U.P. was relied upon.
225. This submission, however, is not correct and therefore declined.
The reasons being, that under Section 133 100 of the Karnataka
Education Act, 1983 the Government has powers to give directions.
Section 145 of the 1983 Act gives the State Government powers to
make Rules, which have been made and are called the Karnataka
Educational Institutions (Classification, Regulation and Prescription of
Curricula, etc.) Rules, 1995. Rule 11(1), 101 of the above Rules states
that the recognised educational institutions can prescribe uniform.
Therefore, the State Government in any case has powers to prescribe a
uniform/dress code. Therefore, the submissions that the G.O. is not a
valid law is not correct. The G.O. draws its source from the statute and
the statutory rules. Therefore, it has the force of law. Nevertheless, the
fact remains that it still has to pass muster the provisions of Articles 19
and 25 of the Constitution.
226. Out of the four questions formulated by the Karnataka High
Court the first question is in fact the crucial one. Everything depended
on the determination on this question. But then the Court had set a
very tall order for the petitioners to prove their case. The petitioners
had to prove that wearing of hijab forms a core belief in the religion of
Islam. ERP also meant that such a practice should be fundamental to
follow as a religious belief or practice as ERP was held to be the
foundation, on which the superstructure of the religion was erected.
Essential religious practice would mean a practice without which
religion would not remain the same religion. Also, the petitioners had to
prove that the practice of wearing hijab is a practice which is being
followed since the very beginning of their religion. This was the task set
up for the petitioners to prove their case. But this was not enough, this
was only the threshold requirement.
227. The petitioners also had to prove that the ERP does not militate
against any of the constitutional values. This perhaps was right,
because an ERP which is an invasion on the fundamental rights of
others will not be given the protection. The Court held as follows1
:
"31. XII. (i)
There is absolutely no material placed on record to
prima facie show that wearing of hijab is a part of an essential
religious practice in Islam and that the petitioners have been
wearing hijab from the beginning. This apart, it can hardly be argued
that hijab being a matter of attire, can be justifiably treated as
fundamental to Islamic faith. It is not that if the alleged practice of
wearing hijab is not adhered to, those not wearing hijab become the
sinners, Islam loses its glory and it ceases to be a religion.
Petitioners have miserably failed to meet the threshold requirement
of pleadings and proof as to wearing hijab is an inviolable religious
practice in Islam and much less a part of "essential religious
practice"."
228. As the petitioners did not meet the threshold requirement, the
High Court did not feel it necessary to touch on the aspect of
OnLine Kar para 14)
"14.
VII.
(ii)
It hardly needs to be stated that if essential
religious practice as a threshold requirement is not satisfied then the
case would by extension not travel to the merits surrounding the
domain of those constitutional values."
(emphasis in original)
229. The judgment then upholds the validity of the G.O. dated 5-2-
2022 and holds that the authorities have power to prescribe uniform in
schools.
230. In my opinion, the question of essential religious practices,
which we have also referred in this judgment as ERP, was not at all
relevant in the determination of the dispute before the Court. I say this
because when protection is sought under Article 25(1) of the
Constitution of India, as is being done in the present case, it is not
required for an individual to establish that what he or she asserts is an
ERP. It may simply be any religious practice, a matter of faith or
conscience! Yes, what is asserted as a right should not go against
"public order, morality and health", and of course, it is subject to other
provisions of Part III of the Constitution.
231. Partly, the petitioners had to be blamed for the course taken by
the Court as it was indeed the petitioners or some of the petitioners
who had claimed that wearing of hijab is an essential practice in Islam.
Before us, however, when arguments were raised at the Bar, some of
the counsel did admit that ERP was not the core issue in the matter,
but the petitioners before the Karnataka High Court had no choice as
they were, inter alia, attacking the Government Order dated 5-2-2022,
which clearly stated that prohibiting hijab in schools will not be
violative of Article 25 of the Constitution of India. Be
that as it may, the fact remains that the point was raised. It was made
the core issue by the Court, and it went against the petitioners.
232. The approach of the High Court could have been different.
Instead of straightaway taking the ERP route, as a threshold
requirement, the Court could have first examined whether the
restriction imposed by the school or the G.O. on wearing a hijab, were
valid restrictions? Or whether these restrictions are hit by the Doctrine
of Proportionality.
233. In Bijoe Emmanuel V. State of Kerala 64 this is what the Court
"19.
Therefore, whenever the fundamental right to freedom of
conscience and to profess, practise and propagate religion is
invoked, the act complained of as offending the fundamental right
must be examined to discover whether such act is to protect public
order, morality and health, whether it is to give effect to the other
provisions of Part III of the Constitution or whether it is authorised
by a law made to regulate or restrict any economic, financial,
political or secular activity which may be associated with religious
practice or to provide for social welfare and reform. It is the duty and
function of the court so to do."
234. Be that as it may, let us examine as to how and what the entire
concept of essential religious practice has been defined by this Court.
235. The test of ERP has been laid down by this Court in the past to
resolve disputes of a particular nature, which we shall discuss in a
while. By and large these were the cases where a challenge was made
to the State interference on what was claimed to be an "essential
religious practice". What was raised was the protection of Article 25 as
well as Article 26 of the Constitution of India. In other words, these
were the cases where both Articles 25(1) and (2) and Article 26 were in
play. Essentially, these were the cases where the rituals and practices
of a denomination or a sect of a particular religion sought protection
against the State intervention.
236. Even when rights of an individual were raised, as we may say
in Shayara Bano V. Union of India 37 which is the Triple Talaq case or the
case of Indian Young Lawyers Assn. (Sabarimala Temple-5 J.) V. State
of Kerala63 which is commonly known as the Sabarimala case, these
were cases where an individual right was asserted against a religious
practice or where there was an assertion, primarily on a religious
identity. In the case at hand, the question is not merely of religious
practice or identity but also of "freedom of expression", given to a
citizen under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India, and this
&
makes this case different.
237. The expression "essential religious practices" it seems was
taken from the Constituent Assembly Debates. In response to a query,
Dr Ambedkar categorically said that what is protected under Article 25
of the Constitution is not every religious practice but only such
practices which are essentially
religious. The relevant passage of the Constituent Assembly Debates,
Vol. VII, p. 781 is reproduced hereunder:
"
There is nothing extraordinary in saying that we ought to strive
hereafter to limit the definition of religion in such a manner that we
shall not extend it beyond beliefs and such rituals as may be
connected with ceremonials which are essentially religious."
238. The first case, all the same, in this regard which came up for
consideration before the Supreme Court was Commr., Hindu Religious
Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt³8
which is famously known as the Shirur Mutt case. The facts of this case
were that the Mathadhipati of Shirur Math at Udupi had preferred a
challenge to the powers of the Commissioner under the Madras Hindu
Religious Endowments Act (Act 2 of 1927) who was exercising control
over the affairs of Shirur Math. The writ petition was allowed102 by the
Madras High Court and a writ of prohibition was granted in favour of the
Mathadhipati. This order was challenged before the Supreme Court by
the Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras.
239. Inter alia, therefore before the Supreme Court was the question
of whether the provisions of the Act were an invasion on the exercise of
fundamental rights of the Mathadhipati and the Management of the
Temple, given to them under Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution.
This Court then proceeded to elaborate on the meaning of religion and
how it has to be understood in the context of the Constitution.
240. While delivering the concurring opinion on behalf of the seven-
Judge Constitution Bench, B.K. Mukherjea, J. held as follows : (Shirur
Mutt case38 , AIR p. 290, para 17)
"17.
Religion is certainly a matter of faith with individuals or
communities and it is not necessarily theistic. There are well known
religions in India like Buddhism and Jainism which do not believe in
God or in any Intelligent First Cause. A religion undoubtedly has its
basis in a system of beliefs or doctrines which are regarded by those
who profess that religion as conducive to their spiritual well being,
but it would not be correct to say that religion is nothing else but a
doctrine of belief. A religion may not only lay down a code of ethical
rules for its followers to accept, it might prescribe rituals and
observances, ceremonies and models of worship which are regarded
as integral parts of religion, and these forms and observances might
extend even to matters of food and dress."
241. The Court held that the guarantee under the Constitution not
only protects the freedom of religious opinion but it protects also, acts
done in pursuance of a religion and this is made clear using the
expression "practice of religion", in Article 25. This Court rejected the
submissions of the learned
Attorney General of India, as he then was, that the State must be
allowed to regulate the secular activities which are associated with a
religion which do not constitute the essential part of it. The
observations falling from the Court in the Shirur Mutt case38 38 in this
regard were as follows : (AIR p. 290, paras 18-19)
"18. The learned Attorney General lays stress upon clause (2)(a)
of the article and his contention is that all secular activities, which
may be associated with religion but do not really constitute an
essential part of it, are amenable to State regulation.
19. The contention formulated in such broad terms cannot, we
think, be supported. In the first place, what constitutes the essential
part of a religion is primarily to be ascertained with reference to the
doctrines of that religion itself. If the tenets of any religious sect of
the Hindus prescribe that offerings of food should be given to the
idol at particular hours of the day, that periodical ceremonies should
be performed in a certain way at certain periods of the year or that
there should be daily recital of sacred texts or oblations to the sacred
fire, all these would be regarded as parts of religion and mere fact
that they involve expenditure of money or employment of priests
and servants or the use of marketable commodities would not make
them secular activities partaking of a commercial or economic
character; all of them are religious practices and should be regarded
as matters of religion within the meaning of Article 26(b)."
(emphasis supplied)
Thereafter though the concept like ERP had come, but what constitutes
essential religious practices was left to the doctrine of that religion
itself.
242. The next case which came up for consideration of this Court
was in Ratilal Panachand Gandhi V. State of Bombay58 wherein the
petitioners had challenged the constitutional validity of the Act known
as the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, inter alia, on grounds that the
provisions in the Act were an invasion of their fundamental rights,
given to them under Article 25 as well as Article 26 of the Constitution.
Basically, it followed the same line of thought as laid down in the Shirur
Mutt case38 The observations of the Court are : (Ratilal Panachand
"15. The free exercise of religion by which is meant the
performance of outward acts in pursuance of religious belief, is, as
stated above, subject to State regulation imposed to secure order,
public health and morals of the people. What sub-clause (a) of
clause (2) of Article 25 contemplates is not State regulation of the
religious practices as such which are protected unless they run
counter to public health or morality but of activities which are really
of an economic, commercial or political character though they are
associated with religious practices."
243. We now come to the decision of the Supreme Court in Durgah
Committee, Ajmer V. Syed Hussain Ali59 In this case the "khadims" of
the Hazrat Haji Moinuddin Chishti had challenged the constitutional
validity of the Dargah Hazrat Khwaja Saheb Act, 1955 before the
Rajasthan High Court. The "khadims" of the Durgah of Khwaja Moin-ud-
din Chishti (also known as the Durgah Khwaja Saheb, Ajmer), claimed
to be the followers of a Sufi sect or Silsila called Chishti and they
claimed they were doing service in the Dargah of Sufi Saint Hazrat Haji
Moinuddin Chishti. Their case was that the interference of the Dargah
Committee amounts to an invasion of the fundamental rights, inter alia,
guaranteed to them under Article 25(1) of the Constitution of India.
The Rajasthan High Court had substantially allowed103 their claim and
against the said order the Dargah Committee was before the Supreme
Court.
244. The questions which fell for consideration before this Court in
Durgah Committee case59 were whether any person as a Sunni Muslim
could manage the affairs of the Durgah or whether this could only be
done by the followers of Chishti Silsila. There were some other
questions as well, which would not be relevant for discussion in the
context of this decision. The Supreme Court had allowed the appeal of
the Durgah Committee by setting aside the order of the Rajasthan High
Court, holding, inter alia that khadims could not claim the right under
Article 25(1) of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court in this
case, went on to determine as to what would be an ERP and how the
Court would determine the same. All the same this was done again as
there was an interplay of Article 25 and Article 26 of the Constitution,
and what was being asserted were the rights of a sect or a
denomination against the State intervention.
245. The judgments of this Court in Acharya Jagdishwaranand
Avadhuta V. Commr. of Police62 and Commr. of Police V. Acharya
Jagadishwarananda Avadhuta (2)47 both relate to the performance of
tandav dance in a public place by the followers of the faith of "Anand
Margis". Kolkata Police had banned such performance of tandav dance
in public places under Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. The matter ultimately came up before this Court in 1983 and it
was held that performing tandav dance in public places is not an
essential part of the "Anand Margi" faith. The matter again reached
before this Court in 2004 and a three-Judge Bench of this Court
reached the same conclusion by relying upon the earlier judgment 62 of
1983.
246. Therefore, what can be clearly distinguished here is that while
dealing with the concept of essential religious practices or whether a
particular practice can be termed as an ERP, this Court was dealing
with questions related to both Article 25 as well as Article 26 of the
Constitution. These were the cases which were either concerned with
the management of an activity related to a religious shrine or
institution or where the State had met some kind of resistance or
challenge by the citizens, who claimed rights both under Articles 25
and 26 of the Constitution of India. These were also the cases where a
community, sect or a religious denomination of a religion was against
the State action. This, however, is not presently the case before this
Court.
247. We have before us a case of assertion of individual right as
different from what would be a community right. We are concerned only
with Article 25(1) and not with Article 25(2) or Article 26 of the
Constitution of India. Whereas clause (1) of Article 25 deals with
individual rights, Article 25(2) and Article 26 of the Constitution of
India, deal by and large with community-based rights. In that sense
what has been decided by this Court earlier as ERP would not be of
much help to us. For this reason, the entire exercise done by the
Karnataka High Court, in evaluating the rights of the petitioners only on
the touchstone of ERP, was incorrect.
248. In the more recent case of Shayara Bano 37 the majority opinion
of 3 : 2 held that Triple Talaq constitutes an irregular and not an
essential practice amongst Sunni Muslims. It was stated as follows :
"54. Applying the aforesaid tests, it is clear that Triple Talaq is
only a form of talaq which is permissible in law, but at the same
time, stated to be sinful by the very Hanafi School which tolerates it.
According to Javed57, therefore, this would not form part of any
essential religious practice. Applying the test stated in Acharya
Jagadishwarananda4 it is equally clear that the fundamental nature
of the Islamic religion, as seen through an Indian Sunni Muslim's
eyes, will not change without this practice."
249. In the Sabarimala Temple case63 the question before the
Constitution Bench was whether women devotees between the ages of
10-50 years had the right to enter the temple of Lord Ayyappa located
in Sabarimala, Kerala. Subsequently, this right was denied to them by
the temple authorities, on the basis of customary practice and tradition.
Allowing the writ petition by 4 : 1 majority, the Bench held in favour of
women devotees and struck down the restrictions placed upon them to
be violative of their fundamental rights under the Constitution of India.
250. In both the cases 37, 63 cited above again the essential
determination before the Court was of religion and religious practice.
Freedom of expression given to a citizen under Article 19(1)(a) was not
an issue, and if at all it was, it was on the periphery. In other words,
not the central issue.
251. We are presently concerned with an entirely different set of
facts. We must deal with only Article 25(1), and not with Article 25(2),
or even with Article 26 of the Constitution of India. Article 25(1) deals
with the rights of an individual, whereas Article 25(2), and Article 26
deal with the rights
of communities or religious denominations, as referred above.
Additionally, we must deal with the fundamental rights given to an
individual under Article 19(1)(a) and its interplay with Article 25(1) of
the Constitution.
252. Article 25 gives a citizen the "freedom of conscience and free
profession, practise and propagation of religion". It does not speak of
essential religious practice. This concept comes in only when we are
dealing with Article 25(2) or Article 26, and where there is an interplay
of these two articles.
253. We have before us two children, two girl students, asserting
their identity by wearing hijab, and claim protection under Article 19
and Article 25 of the Constitution of India. Whether wearing hijab is an
ERP in Islam or not is not essential for the determination of this
dispute. If the belief is sincere, and it harms no one else, there can be
no justifiable reasons for banning hijab in a classroom.
254. The Karnataka High Court, however, has made a detailed study
as to what is ERP and whether wearing a hijab constitutes a part of ERP
in Islam. Suras and verses from the Holy Quran have been referred and
explained, and then taking assistance of a commentary on the Holy
Book, the High Court concludes that wearing of hijab is not an essential
religious practice in Islam and at best it is directory in nature, not
mandatory. The decisions of the Supreme Court which we have referred
above, and some other decisions as well have been considered while
dealing as to what constitutes an ERP, and then a determination has
been made that what is being claimed as a right is not an essential
religious practice at all!
255. Apart from the fact that ERP was not essential to the
determination of the dispute, which we have already said above, there
is another aspect which is even more important, which would explain as
to why the Courts should be slow in the matters of determining as to
what is an ERP. In my humble opinion Courts are not the forums to
solve theological questions. Courts are not well equipped to do that for
various reasons, but most importantly because there will always be
more than one viewpoint on a particular religious matter, and therefore
nothing gives the authority to the Court to pick one over the other. The
Courts, however, must interfere when the boundaries set by the
Constitution are broken, or where unjustified restrictions are imposed.
256. In M. Siddiq (Ram Janmabhumi Temple-5 J.) V. Suresh Das67
popularly known as the Ram Janmabhoomi case this Court had
cautioned not to venture into areas of theology with which the courts
are not well equipped. There may be diversity of views within a religion
and to choose one over others, may not be correct. Courts should steer
clear from interpreting religious scriptures. It was observed by the
"90. During the course of the submissions, it has emerged that
the extreme and even absolute view of Islam sought to be portrayed
by Mr P.N. Mishra does not emerge as the only available
interpretation of Islamic law on a matter of theology. Hence, in the
given set of facts
and circumstances, it is inappropriate for this Court to enter upon an
area of theology and to assume the role of an interpreter of the Hadees.
The true test is whether those who believe and worship have faith in
the religious efficacy of the place where they pray. The belief and faith
of the worshipper in offering namaz at a place which is for the
worshipper a mosque cannot be challenged. It would be preposterous
for this Court to question it on the ground that a true Muslim would not
offer prayer in a place which does not meet an extreme interpretation of
doctrine selectively advanced by Mr Mishra. This Court, as a secular
institution, set up under a constitutional regime must steer clear from
choosing one among many possible interpretations of theological
doctrine and must defer to the safer course of accepting the faith and
belief of the worshipper.
91. Above all, the practise of religion, Islam being no exception,
varies according to the culture and social context. That indeed is the
strength of our plural society. Cultural assimilation is a significant
factor which shapes the manner in which religion is practised. In the
plural diversity of religious beliefs as they are practised in India,
cultural assimilation cannot be construed as a feature destructive of
religious doctrine. On the contrary, this process strengthens and
reinforces the true character of a country which has been able to
preserve its unity by accommodating, tolerating and respecting
a
diversity of religious faiths and ideas. There can be no hesitation in
rejecting the submission made by Mr Mishra. Our Court is founded
on and owes its existence to a constitutional order. We must firmly
reject any attempt to lead the Court to interpret religious doctrine in
an absolute and extreme form and question the faith of worshippers.
Nothing would be as destructive of the values underlying Article 25
of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
257. In any case as to what constitutes an essential religious
practice, in all its complexities, is a matter which is pending
consideration before a nine-Judge Constitution Bench of this Court104
and therefore in any case it may not be proper for me to go any further
into this aspect.
258. The decision which is of essential importance in this case for
our purposes is the decision given by this Court in Bijoe Emmanuel54 It
is necessary to refer to this case in some detail, as in my opinion this
case is the guiding star which will show us the path laid down by the
well-established principles of our constitutional values, the path of
understanding and tolerance, which we may also call as "reasonable
accommodation", as explained by some of the lawyers before this
Court. The Karnataka High Court, all the same, chose not to rely on this
seminal judgment for reasons that "Bijoe Emmanuel64 is not the best
vehicle for drawing a proposition essentially founded on the freedom of
conscience¹". But this is not correct. This decision of the Supreme Court
is most relevant in the present case, both on the facts as well as on
law.
259. Let us now look into the facts of Bijoe Emmanuel case64 : Three
girl children in Kerala who belonged to a faith called Jehovah's
Witnesses, were attending a government school. Every morning when
the National Anthem was sung in the school these three students used
to respectfully stand up for the National Anthem, like other children in
the school; but they did not sing the National Anthem. They did so as
their faith forbid them to sing for anyone else but Jehovah. Initially this
was not noticed but then someone complained before the highest
authority in the State, which led to the expulsion of these three
children from their school, by orders passed by the Deputy Inspector of
Schools and then the Headmistress of the school.
260. The children filed their writ petition before the Kerala High
Court which was dismissed by the learned Single Judge as also their
appeal by a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court. They finally
approached the Supreme Court of India and filed their special leave
petition before this Court. Their case was simple : they do not show
disrespect to the National Flag or the National Anthem. They stand
respectfully when the National Anthem is sung, they only do not
participate in singing as they sincerely believe their faith forbids them
to sing for anyone but Jehovah.
261. The petition of these three girl children was dismissed by the
Kerala High Court as the Kerala High Court did not find any word or
thought in the Indian National Anthem which could offend anyone's
religious susceptibilities. Hence the Kerala High Court concluded that
there was absolutely no reason for the children not to sing the national
anthem! While examining their case O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. who wrote
this judgment for the Court rejected the approach of the High Court
and said that the High Court had actually misdirected itself in doing so
and it went off at a tangent. The objection of the petitioners was not to
the language of the National Anthem, but they simply refused to sing
any National Anthem, irrespective of any country as they sincerely
believe that this is what their religion prescribes them to do.
262. The Supreme Court in Bijoe Emmanuel64 then cites two
judgments of the United States Supreme Court, which we must refer
here as well, since they relate to schools and the "discipline" imposed
by the schools. The first is Minersville School Dist. V. Gobitis105
and
the
second is West Virginia State Board of Education V. Barnette106 While
referring to the two judgment(s) my source shall remain the judgment
of Bijoe Emmanuel64.
2 In Minersville105 the question was whether compulsory saluting
of the National Flag infringed upon the liberties guaranteed by the
Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of
America. The majority opinion delivered by Frankfurter, J. upheld the
requirement on grounds that such decisions are to be left to the School
28)
"28. History teaches us that there have been but few
infringements of personal liberty by the State which have not been
justified, as they are here, in the name of righteousness and the
public good, and few which have not been directed, as they are now,
at politically helpless minorities."
In short, the US Supreme Court did not interfere in the compulsory
saluting of the National Flag in a public school. The reference of this
case, is however, important here as very soon this decision was
overruled by the Supreme Court in Barnette106 which is the second
case.
264. The second case is the one which only a few years later,
overruled
Gobitis105
Jackson, J. the author of the judgment in
Barnette106 referred to the famous dilemma of Abraham Lincoln which
was "Must a government of necessity be too strong for the liberties of
its people, or too weak to maintain its own existence?" Jackson, J. then
"20. It may be doubted whether Mr Lincoln would have thought
that the strength of Government to maintain itself would be
impressively vindicated by our confirming power of the State to
expel a handful of children from school."
265. While going into the logic of Frankfurter, J. of non-interference
with the School Authorities, as that would make the Court a School
SC paras 25 & 29)
"25.
There are village tyrants as well as village Hampdens, but
none who acts under color of law is beyond reach of the Constitution.
*
*
*
29.
We cannot, because of modest estimates of our competence
in such specialities as public education, withhold the judgment that
history authenticates as the function of this Court when liberty is
infringed."
35-36)
"35. If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it
is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox
in politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force
citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein. If there are any
circumstances which permit an exception, they do not now occur to
us.
36. We think the action of the local authorities in compelling the
flag salute and pledge transcends constitutional limitations on their
power and invades the sphere of intellect and spirit which it is the
purpose of the First Amendment to our Constitution to reserve from
all official control."
266. O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in his judgment has traced the
struggles and the difficulties faced by the faithful of Jehovah in
different countries where
they had met similar restrictions. The Court then invokes Article 19(1)
(a) and Article 25(1), in favour of the petitioners. It says : (Bijoe
"9. Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution guarantees to all citizens
freedom of speech and expression, but Article 19(2) provides that
nothing in Article 19(1)(a) shall prevent a State from making any
law, insofar as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the
exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or
morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or
incitement to an offence. Article 25(1) guarantees to all persons
freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and
propagate religion, subject to order, morality and health and to the
other provisions of Part III of the Constitution."
267. It was then held in Bijoe Emmanuel54 that it is not
disrespectful to the National Anthem if the girls respectfully stand when
the National Anthem was sung, but may not have joined in the singing.
Their expulsion from school was therefore held to be in violation of their
fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression given to them
under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. The Government
Circular which directed that the entire school should sing National
Anthem was not "law" as given in clause (2) of Article 19 of the
Constitution. The law i.e. the statutory law was "the Prevention of
Insults to National Honour Act, 1971". A person who respectfully stands
when the National Anthem is sung but does not participate in the
singing does not commit an offence under the Act. Offence is only
committed when a person prevents another from singing National
Anthem. The Court thus impliedly also meant that the freedom to sing
would also mean freedom to remain silent.
268. Article 25 of the Constitution, was described as an article of
626, para 18)
"18.
Article 25 is an article of faith in the Constitution,
incorporated in recognition of the principle that the real test of a true
democracy is the ability of even an insignificant minority to find its
identity under the country's Constitution. This has to be borne in
mind in interpreting Article 25."
269. The girls before us today face the same predicament as the
Jehovah's Witnesses in the above case. The present petitioners too
wear hijab as an article of their faith. They too believe that it is a part of
their religion and social practice. In my considered opinion therefore,
this case is squarely covered by the case of Bijoe Emmanuel64 and the
ratio laid down therein.
270. Coming back to the order of the Karnataka High Court there is
another finding which is difficult to accept. This is where the High Court
determines that the petitioners cannot assert their fundamental rights
inside a classroom which the Court terms as "qualified public places"
and the rights inside a school are only "derivative right". The Court
"38.
(iv)
It hardly needs to be stated that schools are
"qualified public places" that are structured predominantly for
imparting educational instructions to the students. Such "qualified
spaces" by their very nature repel the assertion of individual rights
to the detriment of their general discipline and decorum. Even the
substantive rights themselves metamorphose into a kind of
derivative rights in such places.' "1
(emphasis in original)
271. The Hight Court rejects the case of the petitioners on
"reasonable accommodation", and also the argument that schools are a
showroom for diversity of culture, for reason that the schools being
"qualified public places" schoolgirls have to follow the dress code, which
38)
"38.
(iv)
It hardly needs to be stated that the content and
scope of a right, in terms of its exercise are circumstantially
dependent. Ordinarily, liberties of persons stand curtailed inter alia
by his position, placement and the like. The extent of autonomy is
enormous at home, since ordinarily residence of a person is treated
as his inviolable castle. However, in "qualified public places" like
schools, courts, war rooms, defence camps, etc. the freedom of
individuals as of necessity, is curtailed consistent with the discipline
and decorum and function and purpose¹."
272. Comparison of a school with a war room or defence camp,
seems odd, to say the least. Schools are not required to have the
discipline and regimentation of a military camp. Nevertheless, in my
understanding, what the High Court wanted to convey was that all
public places have a certain degree of discipline and limitations and the
degree of enjoyment of a right by an individual inside his house or
anywhere outside a public space is different to what he or she would
enjoy once they are inside a public space. As a general principle, one
can have no quarrel with this proposition. But then let us come to the
facts of the case. Laying down a principle is one thing, justifying that to
the facts of a case is quite another. We must be a judge of fact as well
as a judge of law. Do the facts of the case justify the restrictions inside
a classroom, which is admittedly a public place? In my opinion there is
no justification for this.
273. School is a public place, yet drawing a parallel between a
school and a jail or a military camp, is not correct. Again, if the point
which was being made by the High Court was regarding discipline in a
school, then that must be
accepted. It is necessary to have discipline in schools. But discipline
not at the cost of freedom, not at the cost of dignity. Asking a pre-
university schoolgirl to take off her hijab at her school gate, is an
invasion on her privacy and dignity. It is clearly violative of the
fundamental right given to her under Articles 19(1)(a) and 21 of the
Constitution of India. This right to her dignity69 and her privacy18 she
carries in her person, even inside her school gate or when she is in her
classroom. It is still her fundamental right, not a "derivative right" as
has been described by the High Court.
274. In Puttaswamy18 judgment, D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in para 298
"298. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity.
Dignity has both an intrinsic and instrumental value. As an intrinsic
value, human dignity is an entitlement or a constitutionally
protected interest in itself. In its instrumental facet, dignity and
freedom are inseparably intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to
achieve the other. The ability of the individual to protect a zone of
privacy enables the realisation of the full value of life and liberty.
Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is a subset. All
liberties may not be exercised in privacy. Yet others can be fulfilled
only within a private space. Privacy enables the individual to retain
the autonomy of the body and mind. The autonomy of the individual
is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life.
Privacy has not been couched as an independent fundamental right.
But that does not detract from the constitutional protection afforded
to it, once the true nature of privacy and its relationship with those
fundamental rights which are expressly protected is understood.
Privacy lies across the spectrum of protected freedoms. The
guarantee of equality is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. It
prevents the State from discriminating between individuals. The
destruction by the State of a sanctified personal space whether of
the body or of the mind is violative of the guarantee against arbitrary
State action. Privacy of the body entitles an individual to the
integrity of the physical aspects of personhood. The intersection
between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to
freedom of thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and the
freedom of self-determination. When these guarantees intersect with
gender, they create a private space which protects all those
elements which are crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of
the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an
inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be exercised. An
individual may perceive that the best form of expression is to remain
silent. Silence postulates a realm of privacy. An artist finds reflection
of the soul in a creative endeavour. A writer expresses the outcome
of a process of thought. A musician contemplates upon notes
which musically lead to silence. The silence, which lies within, reflects
on the ability to choose how to convey thoughts and ideas or interact
with others. These are crucial aspects of personhood. The freedoms
under Article 19 can be fulfilled where the individual is entitled to
decide upon his or her preferences. Read in conjunction with Article 21,
liberty enables the individual to have a choice of preferences on various
facets of life including what and how one will eat, the way one will
dress, the faith one will espouse and a myriad other matters on which
autonomy and self-determination require a choice to be made within
the privacy of the mind. The constitutional right to the freedom of
religion under Article 25 has implicit within it the ability to choose a
faith and the freedom to express or not express those choices to the
world. These are some illustrations of the manner in which privacy
facilitates freedom and is intrinsic to the exercise of liberty. The
Constitution does not contain a separate article telling us that privacy
has been declared to be a fundamental right. Nor have we tagged the
provisions of Part III with an alpha-suffixed right to privacy : this is not
an act of judicial redrafting. Dignity cannot exist without privacy. Both
reside within the inalienable values of life, liberty and freedom which
the Constitution has recognised. Privacy is the ultimate expression of
the sanctity of the individual. It is a constitutional value which
straddles across the spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for
the individual a zone of choice and self-determination."
275. The counsel representing the State before this Court had
underlined the importance of the G.O. dated 5-2-2022 which was to
enforce discipline in schools, including in pre-university classes, and
apply a dress code. The object of the act therefore was the betterment
of education and to inculcate a sense of discipline among school-going
children.
276. The learned Advocate General of Karnataka submitted that the
law in the present case which is the G.O. dated 5-2-2022, is primarily
for the enforcement of dress code in schools including pre-university
classes. It may only incidentally be giving an impact on the rights
which the petitioners claim under Articles 19 and 25 of the Constitution
of India. What has to be seen is the pith and substance of the law
which is the enforcement of uniforms in schools, which in turn is to
maintain discipline in schools.
277. For this submission the learned Advocate General has relied
60)
"60. From a survey of the cases noticed above, a comprehensive
test which can be formulated, may be restated as under:
'Does the impugned law, in its pith and substance, whatever may
be its form and object, deal with any of the fundamental rights
conferred by Article 19(1)? If it does, does it abridge or abrogate any
of those rights? And even if it does not, in its pith and substance,
deal with any of the fundamental rights conferred by Article 19(1), is
the direct and
inevitable effect of the impugned law such as to abridge or abrogate
any of those rights?'
The mere fact that the impugned law incidentally, remotely or collaterally has the
effect of abridging or abrogating those rights, will not satisfy the test. If the answer
to the above queries be in the affirmative, the impugned law in order to be valid,
must pass the test of reasonableness under Article 19. But if the impact of the law
on any of the rights under clause (1) of Article 19 is merely incidental, indirect,
remote or collateral and is dependent upon factors which may or may not come
into play, the anvil of Article 19 will not be available for judging its validity."
278. All the same, I do not see the applicability of the above
submission in the facts of the controversy before this Court. The G.O.
specifically seeks to address the question of hijab, which is evident
from the preamble of the G.O. Moreover, the above submission of the
learned Advocate General is not correct in view of the Puttaswamy18
"24. The decisions in M.P. Sharma¹07 and Kharak Singh99 adopted
a doctrinal position on the relationship between Articles 19 and 21,
based on the view of the majority in Gopalan3³. This view stands
abrogated particularly by the judgment in Cooper and the
subsequent statement of doctrine in Maneka69. The decision in
Maneka69 in fact, expressly recognised that it is the dissenting
judgment of Subba Rao, J. in Kharak Singh99 which represents the
exposition of the correct constitutional principle. The jurisprudential
foundation which held the field sixty-three years ago in M.P.
Sharma¹0. and fifty-five years ago in Kharak Singh99 has given way
to what is now a settled position in constitutional law. Firstly, the
fundamental rights emanate from basic notions of liberty and dignity
and the enumeration of some facets of liberty as distinctly protected
rights under Article 19 does not denude Article 21 of its expansive
ambit. Secondly, the validity of a law which infringes the
fundamental rights has to be tested not with reference to the object
of State action but on the basis of its effect on the guarantees of
freedom. Thirdly, the requirement of Article 14 that State action
must not be arbitrary and must fulfil the requirement of
reasonableness, imparts meaning to the constitutional guarantees in
Part III."
279. We would now be examining some decisions of foreign courts
as in order to appreciate the assertion of religious and cultural rights in
our school premises, it would be worthwhile to refer to some of the
similar
controversies which had come up before the courts of other countries
which have a constitutional democracy. There are two cases which I
would like to refer here. The first case is Nose-stud case
108
of
the
constitutional court of South Africa and the second one is a decision109
of the House of Lords in England.
280. The South African case though has to be seen in the
background of the Constitutional Law of South Africa where dignity is a
right given to its citizens under its Constitution. Equality Courts have
also been established in South Africa to hear the disputes relating to
cases of discrimination. But nevertheless, the basic principle and the
law remains the same.
281. Sunali was a student of Class 10 in Durban Girls High School
(DGHS). The Code of Conduct of the school prohibited wearing jewellery
in school. When Sunali was in Class 10, her mother gave her a nose
stud to wear, which was not a fashion statement, but a part of Sunali's
Hindu-Tamil culture. The school objected to the nose stud and Sunali
was asked to remove it. When Sunali refused to remove the nose stud
her mother was called. Her mother reasoned with the authorities that
this is a part of her Hindu-Tamil culture and it cannot be removed.
Ultimately, Sunali through her mother had to file a petition before the
Equality Court, where such matters of discrimination are heard since
Sunali had alleged discrimination by her school. The Equality Court held
that though a prima facie case for discrimination had been made out, it
could not be termed as "unfair"108 thus dismissing her case.
Thereafter, the matter was taken in appeal before the High Court which
allowed her appeal and held that asking Sunali to remove her nose stud
amounts to discrimination which is wrong. Both the school and the
administration went to the constitutional court which heard the matter
and again decided in favour of Sunali.
282. As to the argument of the school that nose stud was not central
to Sunali's religion or culture and it is only an optional practice, this is
what was said by the constitutional court, the Highest Court of South
"86. The School further argued that the nose stud is not central to
Sunali's religion or culture, but it is only an optional practice. I agree
that the centrality of a practice or a belief must play a role in
determining how far another party must go to accommodate that
belief. The essence of reasonable accommodation is an exercise of
proportionality. Persons who merely appear to adhere to a religious
and/or cultural practice, but who are willing to forego it if necessary,
can hardly demand the same adjustment from others as those whose
identity will be seriously undermined if they do not follow their
belief. The difficult question is how to determine centrality. Should
we enquire into the centrality of the practice or belief to the
community, or to the individual?
87. While it is tempting to consider the objective importance or
centrality of a belief to a particular religion or culture in determining
whether the discrimination is fair, that approach raises many
difficulties. In my view, courts should not involve themselves in
determining the objective centrality of practices, as this would require
them to substitute their judgment of the meaning of a practice for that
of the person before them and often to take sides in bitter internal
disputes. This is true both for religious and cultural practices. If Sunali
states that the nose stud is central to her as a South Indian Tamil
Hindu, it is not for the Court to tell her that she is wrong because
others do not relate to that religion or culture in the same way."
283. What was also pleaded on behalf of the school was that the
nose stud after all is a cultural and not a religious issue and therefore
the infringement of any right, if at all, is much less. This issue was
paras 91-92)
"91. The next string of the School's centrality bow was that the
infringement of Sunali's right to equality is less severe because the
nose stud is a cultural rather than a religious adornment. This was
also the basis originally relied upon by the School for refusing the
exemption and why it could recognise the stud's cultural significance
without granting Sunali an exemption. To my mind the argument is
flawed. As stated above, religious and cultural practices can be
equally important to a person's identity. What is relevant is not
whether a practice is characterised as religious or cultural but its
meaning to the person involved.
92. The School also argued that if Sunali did not like the Code,
she could simply go to another school that would allow her to wear
the nose stud. I cannot agree. In my view the effect of this would be
to marginalise religions and cultures, something that is completely
inconsistent with the values of our Constitution. As already noted,
our Constitution does not tolerate diversity as a necessary evil, but
affirms it as one of the primary treasures of our nation110
There
may, however, be occasions where the specific factual circumstances
make the availability of another school a relevant consideration in
searching for a reasonable accommodation. However, there are no
such circumstances in this case and the availability of another school
is therefore not a relevant consideration."
284. Ultimately what was held is given below as follows
:
"112. The discrimination has had a serious impact on Sunali and,
although the evidence shows that uniforms serve an important
purpose, it does not show that the purpose is significantly furthered
by refusing Sunali her exemption. Allowing the stud would not have
imposed an undue burden on the School. A reasonable
accommodation would have been achieved by
allowing Sunali to wear the nose stud. I would therefore confirm the
High Court's finding of unfair discrimination."
285. The other case, which was also relied on by the Karnataka High
Court is R (SB) V. Governors of Denbigh High School109. Primarily the
controversy was that the school, allowed wearing of hijab, but what was
further insisted was wearing of jilbab (which is more or less a burqa).
Jilbab was denied and this led to the litigation where the restriction of
the school on jilbab was upheld. In this background we must appreciate
the observations of the Court, it was said : (AC p. 134, para 97)
"97. But schools are different. Their task is to educate the young
from all the many and diverse families and communities in this
country in accordance with the national curriculum. Their task is to
help all of their pupils achieve their full potential. This includes
growing up to play whatever part they choose in the society in which
they are living. The school's task is also to promote the ability of
people of diverse races, religions and cultures to live together in
harmony. Fostering a sense of community and cohesion within the
school is an important part of that. A uniform dress code can play its
role in smoothing over ethnic, religious and social divisions. But it
does more than that. Like it or not, this is a society committed, in
principle and in law, to equal freedom for men and women to choose
how they will lead their lives within the law. Young girls from ethnic,
cultural or religious minorities growing up here face particularly
difficult choices : how far to adopt or to distance themselves from
the dominant culture. A good school will enable and support them.
This particular school is a good school : that, it appears, is one
reason why Shabina Begum wanted to stay there. It is also a mixed
school. That was what led to the difficulty. It would not have arisen
in a girls' school with an all-female staff."
286. When a decision has to be made between school discipline and
cultural and religious rights of minorities a balance has to be
maintained. That is what was held. Baroness Hale of Richmond while
elaborating on this issue referred to "Culture, Religion and
Gender" (2003) by Professor Frances Raday the exact paragraph quoted
in Governors of Denbigh High School109 at AC para 98, which reads like
this:
"Genuine individual consent to a discriminatory practice or dissent
from it may not be feasible where these girls are not yet adult. The
question is whether patriarchal family control should be allowed to
result in girls being socialised according to the implications of veiling
while still attending public educational institutions A mandatory
policy that rejects veiling in State educational institutions may
provide a crucial opportunity for girls to choose the feminist freedom
of State education over the patriarchal dominance of their families.
Also, for the families, such a policy may send a clear message that
the benefits of State education are
tied to the obligation to respect women's and girl's right to equality and
freedom
On the other hand, a prohibition of veiling risks violating the
liberal principle of respect for individual autonomy and cultural diversity
for parents as well as students. It may also result in traditionalist
families not sending their children to the State educational institutions.
In this educational context, implementation of the right to equality is a
complex matter, and the determination of the way it should be
achieved depends upon the balance between these two conflicting
policy priorities in a specific social environment."
(emphasis supplied)
287. The Karnataka High Court has placed reliance upon two US
judgments passed by the District Courts there, that is Miller V. Gillis111
and Christmas V. El Reno Board of Education112. All the same the facts
of these cases are different and in none of the two cases the action of
the school authorities debarred students from attending their classes.
There is another judgment relied upon by the Karnataka High Court
which is Employment Division Deptt. of Human Resources of Oregon V.
L. Smith113 This is a US Supreme Court judgment.
288. The facts of the case were quite different. The issue being
examined was whether the State of Oregon was justified in denying
unemployment benefits to persons who had been dismissed from their
jobs owing to their consumption of "peyote", which had been classified
as a "controlled substance" (under the Controlled Substances Act,
1970), when it was being consumed as a part of religious beliefs. The
consumption of peyote was admittedly a criminal offence. It was
contended by the respondents that as it was only being consumed in
pursuance of their religious belief and they would not be liable to be
subjected to the applicable criminal law. This argument was rejected
and it was held that if certain conduct (such as consumption of peyote),
which is prohibited by law, then there would be no federal right to
engage in such conduct. It was in this particular context of the
applicability of the criminal law on an individual for a conduct already
prohibited that such law was said to be "facially neutral". On this note,
13)
"13.
We have never held that an individual's religious beliefs
excuse him from compliance with an otherwise valid law prohibiting
conduct that the State is free to regulate. On the contrary, the record
of more than a century of our free exercise jurisprudence contradicts
that proposition. As described succinctly by Frankfurter, J. in Gobitis
1012-13:
'Conscientious scruples have not, in the course of the long
struggle for religious toleration, relieved the individual from
obedience to a general law not aimed at the promotion or restriction
of religious beliefs. The mere possession of religious convictions
which contradict the relevant concerns of a political society does not
relieve the citizen from the discharge of political responsibilities.'"
289. Another question which the School Administration and the
State must answer in the present case is as to what is more important
to them : Education of a girl child or Enforcement of a Dress Code! We
have been informed at the Bar by many of the Senior Counsel
appearing for the petitioners, that the unfortunate fallout of the
enforcement of hijab ban in schools in Karnataka has been that some of
the girl students have not been able to appear in their Board
examinations, and many others were forced to seek transfer to other
schools, most likely madrasas, where they may not get the same
standard of education. This is for a girl child, for whom it was never
easy, in the first place, to reach her school gate.
290. One of the best sights in India today, is of a girl child leaving
for her school in the morning, with her school bag on her back. She is
our hope, our future. But it is also a fact, that it is much more difficult
for a girl child to get education, as compared to her brother. In villages
and semi-urban areas in India, it is commonplace for a girl child to help
her mother in her daily chores of cleaning and washing, before she can
grab her school bag. The hurdles and hardships a girl child undergoes
in gaining education are many times more than a male child. This case
therefore has also to be seen in the perspective of the challenges
already faced by a girl child in reaching her school. The question this
Court would therefore put before itself is also whether we are making
the life of a girl child any better by denying her education, merely
because she wears a hijab!
291. All the petitioners want is to wear a hijab! Is it too much to ask
in a democracy? How is it against public order, morality or health? or
even decency or against any other provision of Part III of the
Constitution. These questions have not been sufficiently answered in
the Karnataka High Court judgment. The State has not given any
plausible reasons either in the Government Order dated 5-2-2022, or in
the counter-affidavit before the High Court. It does not appeal to my
logic or reason as to how a girl child who is wearing a hijab in a
classroom is a public order problem or even a law-and-order problem.
To the contrary reasonable accommodation in this case would be a sign
of a mature society which has learnt to live and adjust with its
differences.
292. In his famous dissent delivered in United States V.
OnLine US SC para 22)
"22.
if there is any principle of the Constitution that more
imperatively calls for attachment than any other it is the principle of
free
thought - not free thought for those who agree with us but freedom for
the thought that we hate."
293. A girl child has the right to wear hijab in her house or outside
her house, and that right does not stop at her school gate. The child
carries her dignity and her privacy even when she is inside the school
gates, in her classroom. She retains her fundamental rights. To say that
these rights become derivative rights inside a classroom, is wholly
incorrect.
294. We live in a Democracy and under the Rule of Law, and the
Laws which govern us must pass muster the Constitution of India.
Amongst many facets of our Constitution, one is Trust. Our Constitution
is also a document of Trust. It is the trust the minorities have reposed
upon the majority. Commenting on the Report of the Advisory
Committee on Minorities, Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel made a statement
before the Constituent Assembly on 24-5-1949, which should be
referred here. He said : (CAD Vol. VIII, p. 272)
" It is not our intention to commit the minorities to a particular
position in a hurry. If they really have to come honestly to the
conclusion that in the changed conditions of this country, it is in the
interest of all to lay down real and genuine foundations of a secular
State, then nothing is better for the minorities than to trust the good
sense and sense of fairness of the majority, and to place confidence
in them. So also, it is for us who happen to be in a majority to think
about what the minorities feel, and how we in their position would
feel if we were treated in the manner in which they are treated.
115"
295. The question of diversity, raised by the petitioners before the
Karnataka High Court, was not considered by the Court since it was
thought to be a "hollow rhetoric", and the submissions made by the
lawyers on "unity and diversity", were dismissed as an "oft-quoted
38)
"38.
(v) Petitioners' contention that a `classroom should be a
place for recognition and reflection of diversity of society, a mirror
image of the society (socially and ethically)' in its deeper analysis is
only a hollow rhetoric, "unity in diversity" being the oft-quoted
platitude "
(emphasis in original)
296. The question of diversity and our rich plural culture is,
however, important in the context of our present case. Our schools, in
particular our pre-university colleges are the perfect institutions where
our children, who are now at an impressionable age, and are just
waking up to the rich diversity of this nation, need to be counselled and
guided, so that they imbibe our constitutional values of tolerance and
accommodation, towards those who
may speak a different language, eat different food, or even wear
different clothes or apparels! This is the time to foster in them
sensitivity, empathy and understanding towards different religions,
languages and cultures. This is the time when they should learn not to
be alarmed by our diversity but to rejoice and celebrate this diversity.
This is the time when they must realise that in diversity is our strength.
297. The National Education Policy 2020, of the Government of India
underlines the need for inculcating the values of tolerance and
understanding in education and making the children aware of the rich
diversity of this country. The principles of the Policy state that:
"It aims at producing engaged, productive, and contributing
citizens for building an equitable, inclusive, and plural society as
envisaged by our Constitution."
298. In Aruna Roy V. Union of India this Court had elaborated on
the constitutional values of religious tolerance and diversity of culture
and its need in our education system. It was observed as follows by
385, para 25)
"25.
These need to be inculcated at appropriate stages in
education right from the primary years. Students have to be given
the awareness that the essence of every religion is common, only the
practices differ
"
(emphasis in original)
299. At another place in their judgment the Court has said as
"86. The complete neutrality towards religion and apathy for all
kinds of religious teachings in institutions of the State have not
helped in removing mutual misunderstanding and intolerance inter
se between sections of the people of different religions, faiths and
beliefs. "Secularism", therefore, is susceptible to a positive meaning
that is developing and understanding and respect towards different
religions."
300. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Navtej Singh Johar V.
Union of India 73 while speaking on diversity, dissent, liberty and
accommodation spoke the following while delivering concurring
"375. The Constitution brought about a transfer of political power.
But it reflects above all, a vision of a society governed by justice.
Individual liberty is its soul. The constitutional vision of justice
accommodates differences of culture, ideology and orientation. The
stability of its foundation lies in its effort to protect diversity in all its
facets; in the beliefs, ideas and ways of living of her citizens.
Democratic as it is, our Constitution does not demand conformity.
Nor does it contemplate the mainstreaming
of culture. It nurtures dissent as the safety valve for societal conflict.
Our ability to recognise others who are different is a sign of our own
evolution. We miss the symbols of a compassionate and humane
society only at our peril- 116 "
301. In St. Stephen's College V. University of Delhi72
while
delivering the majority opinion on behalf of the Bench, K. Jagannatha
"81. Even in practice, such claims are likely to be met with
considerable hostility. It may not be conducive to have a relatively
homogeneous society. It may lead to religious bigotry which is the
bane of mankind. In the nation building with secular character
sectarian schools or colleges segregated faculties or universities for
imparting general secular education are undesirable and they may
undermine secular democracy. They would be inconsistent with the
central concept of secularism and equality embedded in the
Constitution. Every educational institution irrespective of the
community to which it belongs is a "melting pot" in our national life.
The students and teachers are the critical ingredients. It is there
they develop respect for, and tolerance of, the cultures and beliefs of
others. It is essential therefore, that there should be proper mix of
students of different communities in all educational institutions."
302. It is the fundamental duty of every citizen, under Part IV-A of
the Constitution of India to "value and preserve the rich heritage of our
composite culture". 117
303. Adverting to the statutory provisions applicable in this case,
namely, the Karnataka Education Act, 1983 which is the source of the
G.O. dated 5-2-2022 speaks inter alia that the curriculum in schools
and colleges must promote the rich and composite culture of our
country. Section 7 of the above Act prescribes that one of the
curriculum in the school can be "moral and ethical education" and it
further says that the school should also "promote harmony and the
spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India
transcending religious, linguistic, and regional or sectional diversities to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women".
304. The Preamble to the Constitution secures to all its citizens
"LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship". It is the
Preamble again which seeks to promote among them all, "FRATERNITY
assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the
Nation."
305. The Government Order dated 5-2-2022, and the restrictions on
the wearing of hijab, also goes against our constitutional value of
fraternity and human dignity.
306. Liberty, equality, fraternity, the triptych of the French
Revolution is also a part of our Preamble. It is true that whereas liberty
and equality are well-established, properly understood, and recognised
concepts in politics and law, fraternity for some reasons has largely
remained incognito. The Framers of our Constitution though had a
different vision. Fraternity had a different, and in many ways a much
larger meaning with the main architect of our Constitution, Dr
Ambedkar. In his own words:
"My social philosophy may be said to be enshrined in these
words : liberty, equality and fraternity. Let no one, however, say that
I have borrowed my philosophy from the French Revolution. I have
not. My philosophy has roots in religion and not in political science. I
have derived them from my Master, the Buddha."118
307. Dr Ambedkar gave the highest place to fraternity as it was the
only real safeguard against the denial of liberty or equality : (CAD Vol.
XI, p. 979)
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be
treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in
the sense that to diverse one from the other is to defeat the very
purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced from equality;
equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality
be divorced from fraternity. Without equality, liberty would produce
the supremacy of the few over the many. Equality without liberty
would kill individual initiative. Without fraternity, liberty and equality
could not become a natural course of things.
308. Fraternity, which is our constitutional value, would therefore
require us to be tolerant, and as some of the learned counsel would
argue to be, reasonably accommodating, towards the belief and
religious practices of others. We should remember the appeal made by
"Our tradition teaches tolerance; our philosophy preaches tolerance;
our Constitution practises tolerance; let us not dilute it."
309. Under our constitutional scheme, wearing a hijab should be
simply a matter of choice. It may or may not be a matter of essential
religious practice, but it still is, a matter of conscience, belief, and
expression. If she wants to wear hijab, even inside her classroom, she
cannot be stopped, if it is worn as a matter
of her choice, as it may be the only way her conservative family will
permit her to go to school, and in those cases, her hijab is her ticket to
education.
310. The unfortunate fallout of the hijab restriction would be that we
would have denied education to a girl child. A girl child for whom it is
still not easy to reach her school gate. This case here, therefore, has
also to be seen in the perspective of the challenges already faced by a
girl child in reaching her school. The question this Court would put
before itself is also whether we are making the life of a girl child any
better by denying her education merely because she wears a hijab!
311. Our Constitution has visualised a just society and it is for this
reason that the first virtue that it secures for the citizens is "Justice"
which is the first of our Preambular promises. Rawls in his A Theory of
Justice writes:
"
Justice is the first virtue of social institutions, as truth is of
system of thoughts
"
Therefore in a just society the liberties of equal citizenship
are taken as settled, the rights secured by justice are not subject
"120
to political bargaining or to the calculus of social interest
312. By asking the girls to take off their hijab before they enter the
school gates, is first an invasion on their privacy, then it is an attack on
their dignity, and then ultimately it is a denial to them of secular
education. These are clearly violative of Article 19(1)(a), Article 21 and
Article 25(1) of the Constitution of India.
313. Consequently, I allow all the appeals as well as the writ
petitions, but only to the extent as ordered below:
313.1. The order of the Karnataka High Court dated 15-3-2022 is
hereby set aside.
313.2. The G.O. dated 5-2-2022 is hereby quashed.
313.3. There shall be no restriction on the wearing of hijab
anywhere in schools and colleges in Karnataka.
ORDER OF THE COURT
314. In view of the divergent views expressed by the Bench, the
matter be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India for
constitution of an appropriate Bench.
+
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5236 of 2022. Arising from the Judgment and Order in Aishat Shifa
V. State of Karnataka, WP No. 2880 of 2022, dt 15-3-2022) sub nom Resham V. State of
Karnataka (Karnataka High Court, WP No. 2347 of 2022, dt. 15-3-2022), (2022) 1 HCC (Kar)
43 [Matter referred to larger Bench]
+1 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 7794 of 2022
+2 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9217 of 2022
+3
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17648 of 2022 (Diary No. 21273 of 2022)
+4 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 11396 of 2022
+5 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15403 of 2022
+6 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15405 of 2022
+7 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15418 of 2022
+8 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15419 of 2022
+9 Arising out of SLPs (C) Nos. 15407-412 of 2022
+10 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15402 of 2022
+11 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15416 of 2022
+12 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15400 of 2022
+13 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15413 of 2022
+14 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15414 of 2022
+15 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15417 of 2022
+16 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15401 of 2022
+17 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15399 of 2022
+18 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15404 of 2022
+19
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17653 of 2022 (Diary No. 25867 of 2022)
+20 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5690 of 2022
+21
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17656 of 2022 (Diary No. 9117 of 2022)
+22 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17663 of 2022 (Diary No. 11577 of 2022)
+23 Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17647 of 2022 (Diary No. 21272 of 2022). Arising from the
OnLine Kar 1589 (Karnataka High Court, WP No. 3821 of 2022, dt. 24-2-2022)
#
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
*
Ed. : Hemant Gupta, J. and Sudhanshu Dhulia, J. both delivered disagreeing opinions, and
referred the matter to a larger Bench.
1
Resham V. State of Karnataka, (2022) 1 HCC (Kar) 43 : AIR 2022 Kar 81
2
Bench)
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
*
Substituted by the Corrigendum/Addendum dated 5-2-2022
**
Inserted by the Corrigendum/Addendum dated 5-2-2022
10
11
12
2003 Bom 75
13 V. Kamalam V. MGR Medical University, WP No. 5981 of 2009, order dated 30-6-2009
(Mad)
OnLine Mad 97
14a Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn. and
Others RP (C) No. 3358 of 2018 in WP (C) No. 373 of 2006 (Pending, SC)
15
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Sabarimala Temple Review-5 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn.,
16
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn., (2020) 3
17
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) (2) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn., (2020)
18
19 State of M.P. V. Bharat Singh, AIR 1967 SC 1170
20
21
22
OnLine SC 1224
23 Ram Jawaya Kapur V. State of Punjab, AIR 1955 SC 549
24
25
Dwarka Nath Tewari V. State of Bihar, AIR 1959 SC 249
26
Sant Ram Sharma V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 SC 1910
27
31
32
Joint Action Committee of Air Line Pilots' Assn. of India V. DG of Civil Aviation, (2011) 5
34
35
IA 107
37
38
Commr., Hindu Religious Endowments V. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur
Mutt, 1954 SCR 1005 : AIR 1954 SC 282
39
40 Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. V. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA)
41
42
125
43
428
44
45
47
49 Mulla's Mohammedan Law, 5th Edn., 2019, p. 14.
50
Mulla's Mohammedan Law, 5th Edn., 2019, p. 19.
51 Id, p. 106.
of
53 Mohd. Hanif Quareshi V. State of Bihar, AIR 1958 SC 731; Valia Peedikakkandi Katheessa
Umma V. Pathakkalan Narayanath Kunhamu, AIR 1964 SC 275; N.K. Mohd. Sulaiman Sahib V.
54 Mohd. Hanif Quareshi V. State of Bihar, AIR 1958 SC 731
55
56
58
SCR 1055
59
Durgah Committee, Ajmer V. Syed Hussain Ali, (1962) 1 SCR 383 : AIR 1961 SC 1402
60
Venkataramana Devaru V. State of Mysore, AIR 1958 SC 255
61
Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1638
62
(Cri) 1
63
Ed. : Para 208 corrected vide Official Corrigendum No. F.3/Ed.B.J./104/2018 dated 19-2-
2019.
66
67
68
72
73
74 Ibid, paras 69-72.
75 Ibid, para 22.
77
79
80
82
83
84 Ansari Aaftab Ahmed V. Union of India, LPA No. 196 of 2008, order dated 31-7-2008 (P&H)
86
121
87 Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In re, 1959 SCR 995 : AIR 1958 SC 956
88
89
Bhairav Acharya, "The Four Parts of Privacy in India", Economic & Political Weekly (2015),
Vol. 50, Issue 22 at p. 32.
90
Per Jasti Chelameswar, J. - K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 ].) V. Union of India, (2017) 10
"25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of
religion.-(1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of
this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to
profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the
State from making any law-
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity
which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious
institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Explanation .-The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be included in
the profession of the Sikh religion.
Explanation II.-In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus shall be
construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist
religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be construed accordingly."
91
SCEC 453
96
97
Aishat Shifa V. State of Karnataka SLP (C) No. 5236 of 2022, order dated 22-9-2022 (SC)
99 Kharak Singh V. State of U.P., (1964) 1 SCR 332 : AIR 1963 SC 1295
100
"133. Powers of Government to give directions.-(1) The State Government may,
subject to other provisions of this Act, by order, direct the Commissioner of Public Instruction
or the Director or any other officer not below the rank of the District Educational Officer to
make an enquiry or to take appropriate proceedings under this Act in respect of any matter
specified in the said order and the Director or the other officer, as the case may be, shall
report to the State Government in due course the result of the enquiry made or the
proceedings taken by him.
(2) The State Government may give such directions to any educational institution or tutorial
institution as in its opinion are necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this
Act or to give effect to any of the provisions contained therein or of any rules or orders
made thereunder and the Governing Council or the owner, as the case may be, of such
institution shall comply with every such direction.
(3) The State Government may also give such directions to the officers or authorities under
its control as in its opinion are necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this
Act, and it shall be the duty of such officer or authority to comply with such directions."
101
"11. Provision of uniform, clothing, textbooks, etc.-(1) Every recognised educational
institution may specify its own set of uniform. Such uniform once specified shall not be
changed within the period of next five years."
1 Resham V. State of Karnataka, (2022) 1 HCC (Kar) 43 : AIR 2022 Kar 81
102 Sri Lakshmindra Theertha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt V. Commr., Hindu Religious
103
104 Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) V. Indian Young Lawyers Assn. and
Others RP (C) No. 3358 of 2018 in WP (C) No. 373 of 2006 (Pending, SC)
1
Resham V. State of Karnataka, (2022) 1 HCC (Kar) 43, para 30.
105
1010 : 310 US 586 (1940)
106
Ed 1628 : 319 US 624 (1943)
69
107
109 R (SB) V. Governors of Denbight High School, (2007) 1 AC 100 (HL)
108
para 14 : (2008) 1 SA 474 (CC)
110
(2006) 1 SA 524, para 60 (CC)
111
Miller V. Gillis, 315 F Supp 94 (ND Ill 1969)
112
Christmas V. El Reno Board of Education, 313 F Supp 618 (WD Okla 1970)
US SC 54 : 108 L Ed 2d 876 : 494 US 872 (1990)
114
para 22 (1929)
115 25-5-1949 : Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VIII.
116
Para 375, concurring opinion by Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, J. [Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of
117 Article 51-A(f) of the Constitution of India.
118
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India, Dr Babasaheb
Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches, 2020 (Vol. XVII, Part III); Preface. Accessed at
https://www.mea.gov.in/Images/CPV/Volume17_Part_III.pdf.
119
Speech of Dr Ambedkar on 25-11-1949 : Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. XI.
120
Rawls, John (1921) : A Theory of Justice, Rev. Ed.; The Belknap Press of the Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.