(2022) 8 Supreme Court Cases 559 : (2022) 3 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE N.V. RAMANA, C.J. AND KRISHNA MURARI AND HIMA KOHLI, JJ.)
DEEPAK YADAV
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND ANOTHER
Respondents.
Criminal Appeal No. 861 of 2022 ¹, decided on May 20, 2022
A. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - Ss. 439 and 437 - Bail - Grant or
denial of - Principles summarised
Held :
The issue of bail is one of liberty, justice, public safety and burden of the public
treasury, all of which insist that a developed jurisprudence of bail is integral to a
socially sensitised judicial process.
(Para 19)
Section 439 CrPC is the guiding principle for adjudicating a regular bail application
wherein court takes into consideration several aspects. The jurisdiction to grant bail
has to be exercised cautiously on the basis of well-settled principles having regard
to the facts and circumstances of each case.
(Paras 20 and 21)
674, affirmed
It is well-settled that the factors to be borne in mind while considering an
application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to believe that the
accused had committed the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced; and
(viii) danger of justice being thwarted by grant of bail.
(paras 22 to 24)
affirmed
For grant or denial of bail, the "nature of crime" has a huge relevancy.
(Para 25)
(Cri) 1977, affirmed
There is certainly no straitjacket formula which exists for courts to assess an
application for grant or rejection of bail but the determination of whether a case is
fit for the grant of bail involves balancing of numerous factors, among which the
nature of the offence, the severity of the punishment and a prima facie view of the
involvement of the accused are important. The Supreme Court does not, normally
interfere with an order passed by the High Court granting or rejecting bail to the
accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon the High Court to exercise its
discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly in compliance with the basic principles
laid down in a catena of judgments by the Supreme Court.
(Para 39)
B. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - Ss. 439 and 437 - Bail - Recording
of reasons for grant or denial of bail by High Court or Sessions Court -
Importance of - Principles summarised
Held :
The importance of assigning reasoning for grant or denial of bail can never be
undermined. There is prima facie need to indicate reasons particularly in cases of
grant or denial of bail where the accused is charged with a serious offence. The
sound reasoning in a particular case is a reassurance that discretion has been
exercised by the decision-maker after considering all the relevant grounds and by
disregarding extraneous considerations.
(Para 27)
The duty to record reasons is a significant safeguard which ensures that the
discretion which is entrusted to the court, is exercised in a judicious manner.
(Paras 28 to 30)
:
C. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - Ss. 439 and 437 -
Bail
-
Cancellation of - Grounds for - Principles summarised
Held :
The Supreme Court has reiterated in several instances that bail once granted,
should not be cancelled in a mechanical manner without considering whether any
supervening circumstances have rendered it no longer conducive to a fair trial to
allow the accused to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of bail during
trial. Having said that, in case of cancellation of bail, very cogent and overwhelming
circumstances are necessary for an order directing cancellation of bail (which was
already granted).
(Para 31)
The grounds for cancellation of bail are:
(i) interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of administration
of justice;
(ii) evasion or attempt to evade the due course of justice;
(iii) abuse of the concession granted to the accused in any manner;
(iv) possibility of the accused absconding;
(v) likelihood of/actual misuse of bail; and
(vi) likelihood of the accused tampering with the evidence or threatening
witnesses.
(para 32)
It is no doubt true that cancellation of bail cannot be limited to the occurrence of
supervening circumstances. The Supreme Court certainly has the inherent powers
and discretion to cancel the bail of an accused even in the absence of supervening
circumstances. Following are the illustrative circumstances where the bail can be
cancelled:
(1) where the court granting bail takes into account irrelevant material of
substantial nature and not trivial nature while ignorina relevant material on
record;
(2) where the court granting bail overlooks the influential position of the
accused in comparison to the victim of abuse or the witnesses especially when
there is prima facie misuse of position and power over the victim;
(3) where the past criminal record and conduct of the accused is completely
ignored while granting bail;
(4) where bail has been granted on untenable grounds;
(5) where serious discrepancies are found in the order granting bail thereby
causing prejudice to justice;
(6) where the grant of bail was not appropriate in the first place given the
very serious nature of the charges against the accused which disentitles him for
bail and thus cannot be justified; and
(7) when the order granting bail is apparently whimsical, capricious and
perverse in the facts of the given case.
(paras 33 to 36)
(Cri) 848, affirmed
D. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 439 - Bail - Murder case -
Grant of bail - Whether proper - Case of R-2 himself shooting deceased,
resulting in victim's death in hospital - Previous enmity between him and
deceased with regard to some land, being cause of - Charge-sheet was
filed against R-2 and co-accused under Ss. 302 and 34 IPC - However,
grant of bail to R-2 only on basis of parity (co-accused was granted bail by
High Court), held, shows that impugned order passed by High Court suffers
from vice of non-application of mind rendering it unsustainable - High Court
has not taken into consideration criminal history of R-2, nature of crime,
material evidence available, involvement of R-2 in said crime and recovery
of weapon from his possession - In such facts and circumstances of
present case, bail granted to R-2 cancelled
- Penal Code, 1860, Ss. 302 and 34
(Paras 18 to 43)
Appeal allowed
Y-D/68895/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case :
Awanish Sinha (Advocate-on-Record), Advocate, for the Appellant;
Vinod Diwakar, Additional Advocate General, Siddharth Dave, Senior
Advocate [Divyanshu Sahay, Adarsh Upadhyay (Advocate-on-Record),
Pranjal Sharma, Satish Pandey (Advocate-on-Record), Akbar Ali, Man
Mohan Sharma and Harendra Kr. Sharma, Advocates], for the
Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
State of Rajasthan
567e-f
Ramesh Bhavan Rathod V. Vishanbhai Hirabhai
Makwana
565f-g, 569e-f
Rajasthan
567f-g
State of U.P.
564b
of U.P. (reversed)
563a, 564b-c, 564c
Mahipal V. Rajesh Kumar
568a, 571a, 573a
of Rajasthan
571a-b
of Orissa V. Mahimananda Mishra
567e-f
Dataram Singh V. State of U.P.
564d, 566b-c
Virupakshappa Gouda V. State of Karnataka
567e-f
Neeru Yadav V. State of U.P.
567e-f, 572d-e
State of U.P.
572e
Ranjit Singh V. State of M.P.
567e-f
Mohammad V. Shiv Raj Singh
567e
Prakash Kadam V. Ramprasad Vishwanath Gupta
573b-c
Prasanta Kumar Sarkar V. Ashis Chatterjee
567c, 567e
Chandra Sarkar V. Rajesh Ranjan
565g, 569a
Govind Upadhyay V. Sudarshan Singh
568d-e, 570e
Singh Bhati V. State (NCT of Delhi)
566f-g
Ram V. State of Haryana
571f
Singh V. State of U.P.
566b-c
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA MURARI, J. - Leave granted. The present appeal is directed
against the judgment and order dated 22-10-2021 1 passed by the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench (hereinafter referred
to as "the High Court") in Bail No. 11848 of 2021 filed by Respondent 2
accused with a prayer to release him on bail in Case Crime No. 16 of
2021 registered at PS Para, Lucknow under Sections 302 and 34 of the
Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as "IPC") during pendency of
trial. By the said judgment, the High Court granted bail to Respondent
2/accused on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the
like amount to the satisfaction of the trial court subject to certain
conditions.
2. Briefly, the facts relevant for the purpose of this appeal are that
the appellant informant Deepak Yadav lodged an FIR being Crime Case
No. 16 of 2021 on 9-1-2021 at PS Para, Lucknow under Section 307 IPC
against Respondent 2/accused Harjeet Yadav, co-accused Sushil Kumar
Yadav and two unknown persons. The allegations against the said
accused persons were that on the night of 8-1-2021, at around 8.30
p.m., the appellant's father Mr Virendera Yadav (deceased) was on way
to his home from the lawn located near Jaipuria School and at the same
time, the accused persons took position on Kulhad Katta Bridge and
fired at him with the common intention to kill the deceased. The bullet
shot hit his right cheek and made its exit through the other side leaving
him severely injured. In view of his serious condition, the people
present on the spot informed the local police station and admitted him
at the Trauma Centre, Medical College, Lucknow.
3. The appellant informant, on receiving the information about his
injured father rushed to the Trauma Centre with his mother Smt Sunita
Yadav and elder sister Ms Jyoti Yadav. The appellant's mother asked her
husband about the incident to which he replied that he was shot by
Respondent 2/accused Harjeet Yadav and one, Sushil Yadav and that
they were accompanied by two other persons as well. The statement
given by the deceased was noted down by Shri Mahesh Kumar
Chaurasia, DSP/ACP, Chowk, Lucknow and Shri Ashok Kumar Singh,
SI/First Investigating Officer.
4. Respondent 2/accused was arrested by the police on 13-1-2021
and one countrymade pistol with two live cartridges were recovered
from him. The appellant informant's father passed away on 14-1-2021
on account of which the case was converted to one under Section 302
IPC. The co-accused, Sushil Kumar Yadav surrendered before the
Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow on 16-1-2021.
5. After completion of the investigation and upon finding sufficient
evidence, charge-sheet was filed before the trial court on 6-4-2021
against Respondent 2/accused and co-accused Sushil Kumar Yadav
under Sections 302 and 34 IPC. Furthermore, the investigation against
two unknown accused persons is pending.
6. Respondent 2/accused filed Bail Application No. 3340 of 2021
before the Sessions Judge, Lucknow and the same was rejected vide
order dated 28-6-2021 on the ground that he has been named on the
basis of the information provided by the deceased himself and that the
same has been clarified after the perusal of the documents/forms that
the bullet was shot by Respondent 2/accused himself.
7. Respondent 2/accused then moved the High Court for grant of
regular bail vide Bail No. 11848 of 2021 wherein the counsel for
Respondent 2/accused contended that the co-accused, Sushil Kumar
Yadav has been granted bail by the High Court on 18-10-2021 in Sushil
Kumar Yadav V. State of U.P. and that the case of Respondent 2 stands
on identical footing making him entitled for bail on the ground of parity.
The said bail application was allowed vide impugned judgment/order
dated 22-10-2021-Superscript(1).
8. The operative portion of the judgment reads as under : (Harjeet
"5. Keeping in view the nature of the offence, arguments
advanced on behalf of the parties, evidence on record regarding
complicity of the accused, larger mandate of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India and the dictum of the Supreme Court in
Dataram Singh V. State of U.P.³ and without expressing any opinion
on the merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant
has made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
6. Let the applicant be released on bail on his furnishing a
personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
1. The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution evidence
by
intimidating/pressurising the witnesses, during the
investigation or trial;
2. The applicant shall cooperate in the trial sincerely without
seeking any adjournment;
3. The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity or
commission of any crime after being released on bail;
4. That the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts
to the Court or to any police officer;
5. The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he
shall not seek any adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence
and the witnesses are present in court. In case of default of this
condition, it
shall be open for the trial court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and
pass orders in accordance with law to ensure presence of the applicant;
6. The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the
trial court on the dates fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii)
framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement under Section
313 CrPC. If in the opinion of the trial court, default of this
condition is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be
open for the trial court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of
his bail and proceed against him in accordance with law;
7. The party shall file computer generated copy of such order
downloaded from the official website of the High Court, Allahabad;
8. The court/authority/official concerned shall verify the
authenticity of such computerised copy of the order from the
official website of the High Court, Allahabad and shall make a
declaration of such verification in writing.
7. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a
ground for cancellation of bail."
9. We have heard Mr Awanish Sinha, learned counsel appearing for
the appellant and Mr Siddharth Dave, learned Senior Counsel appearing
for Respondent 2.
10. Mr Awanish Sinha, learned counsel appearing for the appellant
vehemently submitted that the High Court has granted bail to
Respondent 2/accused, who is a known criminal with criminal
antecedents in a very casual manner only on the ground of parity
without any focus on the role of the accused. It was further submitted
that the arrest of Respondent 2/accused was made on the statement of
the deceased made to his wife in the presence of IO. It was further
pointed out that Respondent 2/accused has been named in the FIR as
the person who had fired at the deceased leading to his untimely death
and on commission of such a heinous crime, bail cannot be granted.
11. It was further submitted that the High Court has erred in
granting bail to Respondent 2/accused on the very first day of being
listed without granting any opportunity to the appellant informant or
the State to respond and that the State was not even given any
opportunity to file a counter or even the present status of the case.
12. Heavy reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in
Ramesh Bhavan Rathod V. Vishanbhai Hirabhai Makwana4 and Kalyan
Chandra Sarkar V. Rajesh Ranjan5.
13. Mr Siddharth Dave, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf
of Respondent 2/accused submitted that Respondent 2/accused was a
young student, pursuing the course of DPharma from Himalayan
Garhwal University, Uttarakhand having no criminal antecedents and
the case registered against him
under Sections 3 and 25 of the Arms Act, 1959 is an offshoot of the
instant case and has been lodged on the basis of erroneous recovery in
the instant case.
14. It was further submitted that no particular role has been
attributed to Respondent 2/accused, nor has he been expressly
mentioned by the deceased in his statement, which simply states that
Ratilal's younger son shot the deceased. Furthermore, granting bail on
the first day of hearing does not violate any established legal concept,
statutory requirement or precedent.
15. It was further submitted that while granting bail to Respondent
2/accused, the High Court has weighed all relevant factors, including
the nature of the charge, the gravity of the offence and penalty, the
nature of evidence and the criminal history of the accused.
16. Heavy reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in Babu
Singh V. State of U.P. 6 and Dataram Singh V. State of U.P.³
17. We have carefully considered the submissions made at the Bar
and perused the materials placed on record.
18. The main issue arising in this appeal for our consideration is
whether the High Court was justified in exercising jurisdiction under
Section 439(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code (for short "CrPC") for
grant of regular bail in the facts of the present case.
19. Before adverting to the facts of the case, it is important to
understand the extent of the power of the High Court to grant bail and
the factors determining nature and gravity of the crime in order to
grant bail to accused concerned. As rightly stated by V.R. Krishna Iyer,
J. "the issue of bail is one of liberty, justice, public safety and burden of
the public treasury, all of which insist that a developed jurisprudence of
bail is integral to a socially sensitised judicial process".
Analysis
A. Principles governing grant of bail
20. Section 439 CrPC is the guiding principle for adjudicating a
regular bail application wherein court takes into consideration several
aspects. The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised cautiously on
the basis of well-settled principles having regard to the facts and
circumstances of each case.
21. In Prahlad Singh Bhati V. State (NCT of Delhi) a two-Judge
Bench of this Court stated the principles which are to be considered
"8, The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised on the basis
of well-settled principles having regard to the circumstances of each
case and not in an arbitrary manner. While granting the bail, the
court has to keep in mind the nature of accusations, the nature of
evidence in support thereof, the severity of the punishment which
conviction will entail, the character,
behaviour, means and standing of the accused, circumstances which
are peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the
presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the
witnesses being tampered with, the larger interests of the public or
State and similar other considerations. It has also to be kept in mind
that for the purposes of granting the bail the legislature has used the
words "reasonable grounds for believing" instead of "the evidence"
which means the court dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy it
(sic itself) as to whether there is a genuine case against the accused
and that the prosecution will be able to produce prima facie evidence in
support of the charge. It is not expected, at this stage, to have the
evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
doubt."
22. As reiterated by the two-Judge Bench of this Court in Prasanta
Kumar Sarkar V. Ashis Chatterjee8, it is well-settled that the factors to
be borne in mind while considering an application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to
believe that the accused had committed the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if released on
bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the
accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced;
and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant of bail.
23. The decision in Prasanta8 has been consistently followed by this
Court in Ash Mohammad V. Shiv Raj Singh2, Ranjit Singh V. State of
M.P.
10 , Neeru Yadav V. State of U.P. 11 , Virupakshappa Gouda V. State of
Karnataka ¹2 and State of Orissa V. Mahimananda Mishra ¹³.
24. In a recent pronouncement of this Court in Y V. State of
Rajasthan14 authored by one of us (Hon'ble N.V. Ramana, C.J.), it has
"24. The impugned order15 passed by the High Court is cryptic,
and does not suggest any application of mind. There is a recent
trend of passing such orders granting or refusing to grant bail, where
the courts make a general observation that "the facts and the
circumstances" have
been considered. No specific reasons are indicated which precipitated
the passing of the order by the Court.
25. Such a situation continues despite various judgments of this
Court wherein this Court has disapproved of such a practice. In
25)
`25. Merely recording "having perused the record" and "on the
facts and circumstances of the case" does not subserve the
purpose of a reasoned judicial order. It is a fundamental premise
of open justice, to which our judicial system is committed, that
factors which have weighed in the mind of the Judge in the
rejection or the grant of bail are recorded in the order passed.
Open justice is premised on the notion that justice should not
only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to
be done. The duty of Judges to give reasoned decisions lies at the
heart of this commitment. Questions of the grant of bail concern
both liberty of individuals undergoing criminal prosecution as well
as the interests of the criminal justice system in ensuring that
those who commit crimes are not afforded the opportunity to
obstruct justice. Judges are duty-bound to explain the basis on
which they have arrived at a conclusion."
"
(emphasis in original)
25. For grant or denial of bail, the "nature of crime" has a huge
relevancy. The key considerations which govern the grant of bail were
elucidated in the judgment of this Court in Ram Govind Upadhyay V.
602, para 4)
"4. Apart from the above, certain other which may be attributed
to be relevant considerations may also be noticed at this juncture,
though however, the same are only illustrative and not exhaustive,
neither there can be any. The considerations being:
(a) While granting bail the court has to keep in mind not only
the nature of the accusations, but the severity of the punishment,
if the accusation entails a conviction and the nature of evidence in
support of the accusations.
(b) Reasonable apprehensions of the witnesses being tampered
with or the apprehension of there being a threat for the
complainant should also weigh with the court in the matter of
grant of bail.
(c) While it is not expected to have the entire evidence
establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt but
there ought always to be a prima facie satisfaction of the court in
support of the charge.
(d) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it
is only the element of genuineness that shall have to be
considered in the matter of grant of bail, and in the event of there
being some doubt as
to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal course of events,
the accused is entitled to an order of bail."
26. Similarly, the parameters to be taken into consideration for grant
of bail by the courts have been described in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar V.
"11. The law in regard to grant or refusal of bail is very well
settled. The court granting bail should exercise its discretion in a
judicious manner and not as a matter of course. Though at the stage
of granting bail a detailed examination of evidence and elaborate
documentation of the merit of the case need not be undertaken,
there is a need to indicate in such orders reasons for prima facie
concluding why bail was being granted particularly where the
accused is charged of having committed a serious offence. Any order
devoid of such reasons would suffer from non-application of mind. It
is also necessary for the court granting bail to consider among other
circumstances, the following factors also before granting bail; they
are:
(a) The nature of accusation and the severity of punishment in
case of conviction and the nature of supporting evidence.
(b) Reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witness or
apprehension of threat to the complainant.
(c) Prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of the
charge."
B. Recording of reasons for grant of bail by the High Court or the
Sessions Court
27. The importance of assigning reasoning for grant or denial of bail
can never be undermined. There is prima facie need to indicate reasons
particularly in cases of grant or denial of bail where the accused is
charged with a serious offence. The sound reasoning in a particular case
is a reassurance that discretion has been exercised by the decision-
maker after considering all the relevant grounds and by disregarding
extraneous considerations.
28. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Ramesh Bhavan Rathod4 held
that the duty to record reasons is a significant safeguard which ensures
that the discretion which is entrusted to the court, is exercised in a
judicious manner. The operative portion of the judgment reads as
"38.
We disapprove of the observations of the High Court in a
succession of orders in the present case recording that the counsel
for the parties "do not press for a further reasoned order". The grant
of bail is a matter which implicates the liberty of the accused, the
interest of the State and the victims of crime in the proper
administration of criminal justice. It is a well-settled principle that in
determining as to whether bail should be granted, the High Court, or
for that matter, the Sessions Court deciding
an application under Section 439 CrPC would not launch upon a
detailed evaluation of the facts on merits since a criminal trial is still to
take place. These observations while adjudicating upon bail would also
not be binding on the outcome of the trial. But the court granting bail
cannot obviate its duty to apply a judicial mind and to record reasons,
brief as they may be, for the purpose of deciding whether or not to
grant bail. The consent of parties cannot obviate the duty of the High
Court to indicate its reasons why it has either granted or refused bail.
This is for the reason that the outcome of the application has a
significant bearing on the liberty of the accused on one hand as well as
the public interest in the due enforcement of criminal justice on the
other. The rights of the victims and their families are at stake as well.
These are not matters involving the private rights of two individual
parties, as in a civil proceeding. The proper enforcement of criminal law
is a matter of public interest. We must, therefore, disapprove of the
manner in which a succession of orders in the present batch of cases
has recorded that the counsel for the 'respective parties do not press
for further reasoned order' If this is a euphemism for not recording
adequate reasons, this kind of a formula cannot shield the order from
judicial scrutiny.
39. Grant of bail under Section 439 CrPC is a matter involving the
exercise of judicial discretion. Judicial discretion in granting or
refusing bail-as in the case of any other discretion which is vested
in a court as a judicial institution-is not unstructured. The duty to
record reasons is a significant safeguard which ensures that the
discretion which is entrusted to the court is exercised in a judicious
manner. The recording of reasons in a judicial order ensures that the
thought process underlying the order is subject to scrutiny and that
it meets objective standards of reason and justice."
(emphasis supplied)
29. Similarly, this Court in Ram Govind Upadhyay17, observed that :
"3. Grant of bail though being a discretionary order-but,
however, calls for exercise of such a discretion in a judicious manner
and not as a matter of course. Order for bail bereft of any cogent
reason cannot be sustained. Needless to record, however, that the
grant of bail is dependent upon the contextual facts of the matter
being dealt with by the court and facts however do always vary from
case to case. While placement of the accused in the society, though
may be considered but that by itself cannot be a guiding factor in
the matter of grant of bail and the same should and ought always to
be coupled with other circumstances warranting the grant of bail.
The nature of the offence is one of the basic considerations for the
grant of bail-more heinous is the crime, the greater is the chance of
rejection of the bail, though, however, dependent on the factual
matrix of the matter."
(emphasis supplied)
30. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Mahipal V. Rajesh Kumar16
"14. The provision for an accused to be released on bail touches
upon the liberty of an individual. It is for this reason that this Court
does not ordinarily interfere with an order1 of the High Court
granting bail. However, where the discretion of the High Court to
grant bail has been exercised without the due application of mind or
in contravention of the directions of this Court, such an order
granting bail is liable to be set aside. The Court is required to factor,
amongst other things, a prima facie view that the accused had
committed the offence, the nature and gravity of the offence and the
likelihood of the accused obstructing the proceedings of the trial in
any manner or evading the course of justice. The provision for being
released on bail draws an appropriate balance between public
interest in the administration of justice and the protection of
individual liberty pending adjudication of the case. However, the
grant of bail is to be secured within the bounds of the law and in
compliance with the conditions laid down by this Court. It is for this
reason that a court must balance numerous factors that guide the
exercise of the discretionary power to grant bail on a case-by-case
basis. Inherent in this determination is whether, on an analysis of
the record, it appears that there is a prima facie or reasonable cause
to believe that the accused had committed the crime. It is not
relevant at this stage for the court to examine in detail the evidence
on record to come to a conclusive finding."
C. Cancellation of bail
31. This Court has reiterated in several instances that bail once
granted, should not be cancelled in a mechanical manner without
considering whether any supervening circumstances have rendered it
no longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused to retain his
freedom by enjoying the concession of bail during trial. Having said
that, in case of cancellation of bail, very cogent and overwhelming
circumstances are necessary for an order directing cancellation of bail
(which was already granted).
32. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Dolat Ram V. State of
Haryana 19 laid down the grounds for cancellation of bail which are:
(i) interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of
administration of justice;
(ii) evasion or attempt to evade the due course of justice;
(iii) abuse of the concession granted to the accused in any
manner;
(iv) possibility of the accused absconding;
(v) likelihood of/actual misuse of bail;
(vi) likelihood of the accused tampering with the evidence or
threatening witnesses.
33. It is no doubt true that cancellation of bail cannot be limited to
the occurrence of supervening circumstances. This Court certainly has
the inherent powers and discretion to cancel the bail of an accused
even in the absence of supervening circumstances. Following are the
illustrative circumstances where the bail can be cancelled:
33.1. Where the court granting bail takes into account irrelevant
material of substantial nature and not trivial nature while ignoring
relevant material on record.
33.2. Where the court granting bail overlooks the influential position
of the accused in comparison to the victim of abuse or the witnesses
especially when there is prima facie misuse of position and power over
the victim.
33.3. Where the past criminal record and conduct of the accused is
completely ignored while granting bail.
33.4. Where bail has been granted on untenable grounds.
33.5. Where serious discrepancies are found in the order granting
bail thereby causing prejudice to justice.
33.6. Where the grant of bail was not appropriate in the first place
given the very serious nature of the charges against the accused which
disentitles him for bail and thus cannot be justified.
33.7. When the order granting bail is apparently whimsical,
capricious and perverse in the facts of the given case.
34. In Neeru Yadav V. State of U.P. 11 the accused was granted bail
by the High Court. In an appeal against the order20 of the High Court, a
two-Judge Bench of this Court examined the precedents on the
para 12)
"12.
It is well settled in law that cancellation of bail after it is
granted because the accused has misconducted himself or of some
supervening circumstances warranting such cancellation have
occurred is in a different compartment altogether than an order
granting bail which is unjustified, illegal and perverse. If in a case,
the relevant factors which should have been taken into consideration
while dealing with the application for bail have not been taken note
of or it is founded on irrelevant considerations, indisputably the
superior court can set aside the order of such a grant of bail. Such a
case belongs to a different category and is in a separate realm. While
dealing with a case of second nature, the court does not dwell upon
the violation of conditions by the accused or the supervening
circumstances that have happened subsequently. It, on the contrary,
delves into the justifiability and the soundness of the order passed
by the court."
(emphasis supplied)
"17. Where a court considering an application for bail fails to
consider relevant factors, an appellate court may justifiably set aside
the order granting bail. An appellate court is thus required to
consider whether the order granting bail suffers from a non-
application of mind or is not borne out from a prima facie view of the
evidence on record. It is thus necessary for this Court to assess
whether, on the basis of the evidentiary record, there existed a
prima facie or reasonable ground to believe that the accused had
committed the crime, also taking into account the seriousness of the
crime and the severity of the punishment."
36. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Prakash Kadam V.
"18. In considering whether to cancel the bail, the court has also
to consider the gravity and nature of the offence, prima facie case
against the accused, the position and standing of the accused, etc. If
there are very serious allegations against the accused, his bail may
be cancelled even if he has not misused the bail granted to him.
19. In our opinion, there is no absolute rule that once bail is
granted to the accused then it can only be cancelled if there is
likelihood of misuse of bail. That factor, though no doubt important,
is not the only factor. There are several other factors also which may
be seen while deciding to cancel the bail."
37. Coming to the present case at hand, Respondent 2/accused was
arrested on 13-1-2021 subsequent to which, he had applied for regular
bail before the Sessions Court which was rejected on the ground that
he is named in the FIR on the basis of the information provided by the
deceased himself and that the same has been clarified after perusal of
the documents/forms that the bullet was shot by Respondent
2/accused himself. Being aggrieved by the same, Respondent
2/accused filed an application under Section 439 CrPC before the High
Court seeking regular bail. The High Court vide its impugned order
granted bail to Respondent 2/accused without considering the relevant
facts and circumstances.
38. A bare perusal of the impugned order reveals that the High
Court has failed to take into consideration the following:
38.1. Respondent 2/accused has been named in the FIR bearing
Crime Case No. 16 of 2021 lodged under Sections 302 and 34 IPC and
was the main assailant who had a weapon in his hand.
38.2. The main role of Respondent 2/accused was that he opened
fire at the deceased due to which the bullet hit his right cheek and
made its exit through the other side.
38.3. The deceased succumbed to his injuries on 14-1-2021.
38.4. Respondent /accused had the intention to murder the
deceased as there was previous enmity between him and the deceased
with regard to some land which Respondent 2 threatened to grab.
38.5. On being asked about the incident by the appellant
informant's mother, the deceased replied "Ratipal ka dusra number ka
ladka aur Ram Asre ka putra Sushil Yadav ne pull par gaadi rukwakar
goli maar di hai or unke sath 2 ladke aur the". On reclarifying, the
deceased replied "Ratipal ka dusra number ka ladka matlab Harjeet
Yadav".
38.6. Respondent 2/accused has clearly been named by the
deceased and he was actively involved in opening fire which caused the
death of the deceased.
38.7. Respondent 2/accused's statement was recorded by the then
IO under Section 161 CrPC in which he admitted to having committed
the offence.
38.8. Respondent 2 has a criminal history and several criminal
matters have been lodged against him:
(1) Case Crime No. 016 of 2021 under Sections 302/34 IPC
(2) Case Crime No. 020 of 2021 under Section 25 of the Arms Act
(3) Proceedings of 110G on 5-11-2021
(4) Beat Information (GD No. 33) dated 18-12-2021
(5) Beat Information (GD No. 44) dated 19-12-2021
39. There is certainly no straitjacket formula which exists for courts
to assess an application for grant or rejection of bail but the
determination of whether a case is fit for the grant of bail involves
balancing of numerous factors, among which the nature of the offence,
the severity of the punishment and a prima facie view of the
involvement of the accused are important. This Court does not,
normally interfere with an order passed by the High Court granting or
rejecting bail to the accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon the
High Court to exercise its discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly
in compliance with the basic principles laid down in a catena of
judgments by this Court.
40. However having said that, in the case at hand, it is manifestly
incorrect on the part of the High Court to have granted bail to
Respondent 2/accused without taking into consideration the relevant
facts and circumstances and appropriate evidence which prove that
Respondent 2/accused has been charged with a serious offence.
41. Grant of bail to Respondent 2/accused only on the basis of parity
shows that the impugned order passed by the High Court suffers from
the vice of non-application of mind rendering it unsustainable. The High
Court has not taken into consideration the criminal history of
Respondent 2/accused, nature of crime, material evidence available,
involvement of Respondent 2/accused in the said crime and recovery of
weapon from his possession.
42. Having considered the aforesaid facts of the present case in
juxtaposition with the judgments referred to above, we are of the
opinion that the impugned order passed by the High Court is not liable
to be sustained and
is hereby set aside. The bail bonds of Respondent 2/accused stand
cancelled and he is hereby directed to surrender within one week from
the date of passing of this order, failing which, the police authorities
concerned shall take him into custody.
43. It is however clarified that observations made hereinabove are
limited to our consideration of the issue of cancellation of bail, as raised
by the appellant. They shall not come in the way of final adjudication
before the trial court. At the cost of repetition, it is stated that the trial
court is to consider the matter pending before it, uninfluenced by any
of the observations made, strictly on the basis of evidence that shall be
brought on record. This order shall also not preclude Respondent
2/accused from applying afresh for bail at a later stage, if any, new
circumstances are brought to light.
44. As a result, the appeal stands allowed.
+
Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9655 of 2021. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
Lucknow Bench, Bail No. 11848 of 2021, dt. 22-10-2021) [Reversed]
1
2
3
4
(Cri) 722
6
7
9
11
12
14
17
18
19
21
848