In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE L. NAGESWARA RAO, B.R. GAVAI AND ANIRUDDHA BOSE, JJ.)
(In the Matter of)
T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD, IN RE
Petitioner;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Respondents.
IA No. 1000 of 2003 with IAs Nos. 982-84 of 2003, 1026-28,
1123-24, 1197-99, 1210-11, 1250-51 of 2004, 1412 of 2005,
1512 of 2006, 1992 of 2007, 3880 of 2015, 96949, 117831 of
2019, 65571 of 2021 and Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995*,
decided on June 3, 2022
A. Environment Law - Forests, Wildlife and Zoos - Wildlife Sanctuaries
and National Parks
-
(A) Prescription and Determination of eco-sensitive zones (ESZ) or
extended buffer zones, surrounding wildlife sanctuaries and national parks, and
the activities prohibited and permitted in such ESZ/buffer zone;
- (B) Prohibition of mining within national parks and wildlife sanctuaries; and
- (C) Compensation and other rehabilitatory measures for carrying on of
prohibited mining activities in and around Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary in
Rajasthan
- Detailed directions issued
-
Eco-Sensitive Zones Declaration around National Parks and Wildlife
Sanctuaries Guidelines, 2011 - Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - S. 3(v) -
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, Rr. 5(viii) and (x)
(Paras 5 to 14 and 51 to 56)
B. Environment Law - Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 - Ss. 18 to 26 and
26-A (as ins. w.e.f. 2-10-1991 by Act 44 of 1991) - Declaration of wildlife
sanctuary - Requirements of - Challenge made as to declaration of Jamua
Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary in the State of Rajasthan on ground of violation
of S. 26-A - Held, not tenable
- Settlement of rights found completed by the District Collector, Jaipur under
Ss. 19 to 26 - S. 26-A dealing with declaration of area as sanctuary found
incorporated in the statute with effect from 2-10-1991, but the declaration found
to be made by State of Rajasthan in 1982 - Held, there was no flaw in such
declaration and the subsequent amended provisions in this respect, held, not
applicable to Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary - Hence, the plea taken that it did
not have the status of a sanctuary because no declaration was there under S. 26-
A, held, without any basis
(Paras 46 to 50)
Held :
Necessary directions are issued as under:
(a) Each protected forest, that is, national park or wildlife sanctuary must
have an eco-sensitive zone ("ESZ") of minimum one kilometre measured from
the demarcated boundary of such protected forest in which the activities
proscribed and prescribed in the Guidelines for Declaration of Eco-Sensitive
Zones Around National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries, dated 9-2-2011 issued by
MoEF&CC shall be strictly adhered to. For Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary, it
shall be 500 m so far as subsisting activities are concerned.
(b) In the event, however, the ESZ is already prescribed as per law that goes
beyond one kilometre buffer zone, the wider margin as ESZ shall prevail. If such
wider buffer zone beyond one kilometre is proposed under any statutory
instrument for a particular national park or wildlife sanctuary awaiting final
decision in that regard, then till such final decision is taken, the ESZ covering the
area beyond one kilometre as proposed shall be maintained.
(c) The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests as also the Home Secretary of
each State and Union Territory shall remain responsible for proper compliance of
the said Guidelines as regards nature of use within the ESZ of all national parks
and sanctuaries within a particular State or Union Territory. The Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests for each State and Union Territory shall also arrange to
make a list of subsisting structures and other relevant details within the
respective ESZs forthwith and a report shall be furnished before the Supreme
Court by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of each State and Union
Territory within a period of three months. For this purpose, such authority shall
be entitled to take assistance of any governmental agency for satellite imaging
or photography using drones.
(d) Mining within the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries shall not be
permitted.
(e) In the event any activity is already being undertaken within the one
kilometre or extended buffer zone (ESZ), as the case may be, of any wildlife
sanctuary or national park which does not come within the ambit of prohibited
activities as per the 9-2-2011 Guidelines, such activities may continue with
permission of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of each State or Union
Territory and the person responsible for such activities in such a situation shall
obtain necessary permission within a period of six months. Such permission shall
be given once the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests is satisfied that the
activities concerned do not come within the prohibited list and were continuing
prior to passing of this order in a legitimate manner. No new permanent
structure shall be permitted to come up for whatsoever purpose within the ESZ.
(f) The minimum width of the ESZ may be diluted in overwhelming public
interest but for that purpose the State or Union Territory concerned shall
approach CEC and MoEF&CC and both these bodies shall give their respective
opinions/recommendations before the Supreme Court. On that basis, the
Supreme Court shall pass appropriate order.
(g) In the event CEC, MoEF&CC, the Standing Committee of National Board
for Wildlife or any other body of persons or individual having special interest in
environmental issues consider it necessary for maintaining a wider
or larger ESZ in respect of any national park or wildlife sanctuary, such body or
individual shall approach CEC. In such a situation CEC shall be at liberty to examine
the need of a wider ESZ in respect of any national park or wildlife sanctuary in
consultation with all the stakeholders including the State or Union Territory
concerned, MoEF&CC as also the Standing Committee of National Board for Wildlife
and then approach the Supreme Court with its recommendations.
(h) In respect of sanctuaries or national parks for which the proposal of a
State or Union Territory has not been given, the 10 km buffer zone as ESZ, as
indicated in the order passed by the Supreme Court on 4-12-2006 in Goa
2011 shall be implemented. Within that area, the entire set of restrictions
concerning an ESZ shall operate till a final decision in that regard is arrived at.
(i) The application of the State of Rajasthan registered as IA No. 3880 of
2015 relates to clarification of an order passed in Goa Foundation case [WP (C)
No. 460 of 2004]. Let this application be placed before the Bench taking up the
case of Goa Foundation.
(j) IA No. 96949 of 2019 and IA No. 65571 of 2021 are disposed of with
directions that the MoEF&CC as also CEC shall proceed to take a decision in
regard to the draft proposal for ESZ made by the State of Maharashtra to the
extent of 0-3.89 km and the MoEF&CC shall take final decision on that basis
within a period of three months, if the said decision has not already been taken.
(k) CEC shall quantify the compensation to be recovered from each miner
indulging in mining activities within Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary in violation of any
statutory provision or order of the Supreme Court. Specific recommendations
for compensatory afforestation, reclamation, clearing overburden dumping as
also compensation in monetary units for degradation of forest resources shall
also be made. A further set of recommendations concerning confiscation of
earth moving equipments and other machineries lying within or in the periphery
of the said sanctuary shall be made by CEC. Recommendations shall be made
within a period of four months before the Supreme Court in the form of an
application. The Supreme Court shall consider passing appropriate order upon
going through such application. The exercise concerning such reparation,
including quantifying compensation shall be undertaken upon giving the mining
operator, State and MoEF&CC opportunity of hearing.
(1) In the event there is any subsisting order of any High Court or any court
subordinate to such High Court covering any of the issues dealt with by the
Supreme Court in this order, this order shall prevail over any such order which
may be contrary to these directions.
(para 56)
C. Constitution of India - Arts. 32 and 226 - Public interest litigation
(PIL) assuming in rem character - Desirability of procedure under Or. 8 R.
1 being followed by the Court - Emphasised - Impleadment of certain
individuals/firms not arrayed as parties - When becomes necessary -
Impact of the litigation on rights of such parties
- Interlocutory applications arising out of the PIL, raised two issues i.e. first
relating to mining activities in and around Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary in
Rajasthan and, second involving prescribing eco-sensitive zones (ESZ) surrounding
the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks - Subject of mining and other
commercial activities within the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks (protected
forests) also dealt with by Supreme Court - Impleadment sought by certain firms
and individuals who were found having some kind of permission for carrying on
mining activities in Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary - Considering impact of orders
passed in litigation of this nature, impleadment as claimed by the applicants, allowed
- Civil Procedure Code, 1908 - Or. 8 R. 1 - Public interest litigation assuming
in rem character - Desirability of procedure under Or. 8 R. 1 being followed by the
Court - Emphasised - Environment Law - Forests, Wildlife and Zoos - Wildlife
Sanctuaries and National Parks - Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 - Ss. 18, 26-A
and 35 - Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - S. 3(v) - Environment
(Protection) Rules, 1986, Rr. 5(viii) and (x)
Held :
The interlocutory applications which the Court is dealing with arise out of a public
interest litigation and there is no doubt that orders passed in litigation of this nature
could affect a large body of persons who may not be included in the array of parties
at the time of institution of the proceeding. To an extent, litigations of this nature
assume an in rem character. Ideally, for such a public interest litigation, the
procedure contemplated in Rule 8 of Order 1 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908
could be followed to the extent of issue of public notice or general intimation to
public in such mode as the Court may consider fit and proper, having regard to the
nature and scope of the proceeding. But in cases where such a course has not been
taken, persons affected or likely to be affected by any order passed in the litigation
would be entitled to join or participate in the proceeding. Thus, the impleadment
prayers in IAs Nos. 984 of 2003, 1026, 1123, 1197 and 1251 of 2004 are
allowed.
(Para 42)
D. Environment Law - General Principles of Environmental Law -
Precautionary Principle/Sustainable Development/Inter-Generational Equity
Principle - Balancing of economic activities with protection of natural
resources - Duties of State Government and the Court that arise from
doctrines of "public trust", "sustainable development" and "precautionary
principle" - Principles clarified
- Held, a situation may arise where there may be irreparable damage to
environment after an activity is allowed to go ahead and if it is stopped,
there may be irreparable damage to economic interest - Thus, in case of a
doubt, protection of environment would have precedence over economic
interest
Held :
Public trust doctrine is part of the law of land and it primarily rests on the
principle that certain resources like air, sea, waters and the forests have such a
great importance to the people as a whole that it would be wholly unjustified to
make them a subject of private ownership. The said resources being a gift of
nature, they should be made freely available to everyone irrespective of the status
in life. The doctrine enjoins upon the Government to protect the resources for the
enjoyment of the general public rather than to permit their use for private
ownership or commercial purposes.
(Para 34)
Three types of restrictions on governmental authority are often thought to be
imposed by the public trust : first, the property subject to the trust must not only
be used for a public purpose, but it must be held available for use by the general
public; second, the property may not be sold, even for a fair cash equivalent; and
third the property must be maintained for particular types of uses.
(Para 34)
It is the duty of the State under our Constitution to devise and implement a
coherent and coordinated programme to meet its obligation of sustainable
development based on inter-generational equity. While economic development
should not be allowed to take place at the cost of ecology or by causing
widespread environment destruction and violation; at the same time, the necessity
to preserve ecology and environment should not hamper economic and other
developments. Both development and environment must go hand in hand, in other
words, there should not be development at the cost of environment and vice versa,
but there should be development while taking due care and ensuring the protection
of environment.
(Para 43)
The "precautionary principle" is an essential feature of the principle of
"sustainable development". The precautionary principle can be explained in the
following terms:
(i) Environmental measures - by the State Government and the statutory
authorities - must anticipate, prevent and attack the causes of environmental
degradation.
(ii) Where there are threats of serious and irreversible damage, lack of
scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to
prevent environmental degradation.
(iii) The "onus of proof" is on the actor or the developer/industrialist to show
that his action is environmentally benign.
(para 43)
The principle of precaution involves the anticipation of environmental harm and
taking measures to avoid it or to choose the least environmentally harmful activity.
It is based on scientific uncertainty. Environmental protection should not only aim at
protecting health, property and economic interest but also protect the environment
for its own sake. Precautionary duties must not only be triggered by the suspicion
of concrete danger but also by justified concern or risk potential.
(Para 43)
A situation may arise where there may be irreparable damage to the
environment after an activity is allowed to go ahead and if it is stopped, there may
be irreparable damage to economic interest. The Supreme Court has held that in
case of a doubt, protection of environment would have precedence over the
economic interest. It has further held that precautionary principle requires
anticipatory action to be taken to prevent harm and that harm can be prevented
even on a reasonable suspicion : it has been emphasised that it is not always
necessary that there should be direct evidence of harm to the environment.
(Para 43)
E. Constitution of India - Arts. 32 and 226 - Public interest litigation -
Impleadment of legal representatives of petitioner after his death - When
not necessary - Writ petition filed in nature of a public interest litigation for
protection of forest lands of certain State and natural resources throughout
the country - After death of original writ petitioner, petition being a public
interest litigation, held, there was no requirement for bringing on record the
legal representatives of the deceased petitioner
(Para 2)
Monitoring Committee V. Mussoorie Dehradun Development Authority, WP (C)
No. 749 of 1996, order dated 29-11-1996 (SC); State of Bihar V. Banshi Ram
SK-D/68989/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Balbir Singh, Additional Solicitor General, Saurabh Mishra and Nikhil
Goel, Additional Advocates General (State of Madhya Pradesh), A.D.N.
Rao (Amicus Curiae), Ms Aparajita Singh (Amicus Curiae), Nalin Kohli,
Dr Manish Singhvi, Siddharth Bhatnagar and V.K. Shukla, Senior
Advocates [Rahul Mishra, Amit P. Sahi, D. Shiva Shankar, Ms Ananya
Khandhelwal, Agrimaa Singh, Siddhartha Chowdhury (Amicus Curiae),
M.R. Chanchal Kr. Ganguli (Advocate-on-Record), Syed Mehdi Imam
(Advocate-on-Record), T. Harish Kumar (Advocate-on-Record) (for M/s
Mitter & Mitter Co.) (Advocate-on-Record), M/s Lawyer S. Knit & Co.
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Anil Katiyar (Advocate-on-Record),
Shuvodeep Roy (Advocate-on-Record), Ankit Roy, Ishaan Borthakur, Ms
Nimisha Menon, Gaichangpou Gangmei (Advocate-on-Record), Raj
Kishor Choudhary (Advocate-on-Record), Umesh Bhagwat (Advocate-on
-Record), E.C. Agrawala (Advocate-on-Record), Ranjan Mukherjee
(Advocate-on-Record), Gopal Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Jitendra
Mohan Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), Ms C.K. Sucharita (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms B. Sunita Rao (Advocate-on-Record), Ejaz Maqbool
(Advocate-on-Record), M/s Corporate Law Group (Advocate-on-Record),
Himanshu Shekhar (Advocate-on-Record), P.N. Gupta (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms K. Enatoli Sema (Advocate-on-Record), Amit Kr. Singh, Ms
Chubalemla Chong, Raghvendra Kumar, Anand Kr. Dubey, Ms
Rajlakshmi Singh, Nishant Verma, Rajiv Kr. Sinha, Simanta Kumar,
Sunil Saraogi, Narendra Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), Mahfooz A. Nazki
(Advocate-on-Record), Polanki Gowtham, Shaik Mohamad Haneef, T.
Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy, K.V. Girish Chowdary, Ms Rajeswari Mukherjee,
Ms Aruna Gupta, Ms Sumita Hazarika (Advocate-on-Record),
Abhimanyu Tewari (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Eliza Bar, Suhaan Mukerji,
Nikhil Parikshith, Vishal Prasad, Abhishek Manchanda, Sayandeep
Pahari, Tanmay Sinha, PLR Chambers & Co. (Advocate-on-Record),
Avijit Mani Tripathi (Advocate-on-Record), T.K. Nayak, Upendra Mishra,
P.S. Negi, S.R. Kochhar, Ms Jyoti Mendiratta (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Madhu
Moolchandani (Advocate-on-Record), Mohd. Irshad Hanif (Advocate-on-
Record), Naresh K. Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), Jai Prakash Pandey
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Manik Karanjawala (Advocate-on-Record),
C.L. Sahu (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Abha R. Sharma (Advocate-on-
Record), S.R. Setia (Advocate-on-Record), Rajat Joseph (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Nandini Gore (Advocate-on-Record), M/s M.V. Kini &
Associates (Advocate-on-Record), Pradeep Kr. Bakshi (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Divya Roy (Advocate-on-Record), Radha Shyam Jena
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Charu Mathur (Advocate-on-Record), T.V.
George (Advocate-on-Record), Neeraj Shekhar (Advocate-on-Record),
E.M.S. Anam (Advocate-on-Record), Ms S. Janani (Advocate-on-
Record), Surya Kant (Advocate-on-Record), Amit Anand Tiwari
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Bina Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), M/s K.J.
John and Co. (Advocate-on-Record), S.C. Birla (Advocate-on-Record),
Ms K.V. Bharathi Upadhyaya (Advocate-on-Record), Punit Dutt Tyagi
(Advocate-on-Record), Ratan Kr. Choudhuri (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Binu Tamta (Advocate-on-Record), Tejaswi Kr. Pradhan (Advocate-on-
Record), Pawan Kr. Sharma, Dharmendra Kr. Sinha (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Sujata Kurdukar (Advocate-on-Record), Shibashish Misra
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms M. Qamaruddin (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Baby Krishnan (Advocate-on-Record), B.V. Deepak (Advocate-on-
Record), Sudhir Kr. Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), Irshad Ahmad
(Advocate-on-Record), Rauf Rahim (Advocate-on-Record), Rajeev
Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Ramesh Babu M.R. (Advocate-on-Record),
Shiva Pujan Singh (Advocate-on-Record), K.V. Vijayakumar (Advocate-
on-Record), Sarad Kr. Singhania (Advocate-on-Record), Hitesh Kr.
Sharma, S.K. Rajora, Akhileshwar Jha, Vivek Sharma, Ms Meenakshi
Kamble, Kuldip Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Rekha Pandey
(Advocate-on-Record), Avijit Bhattacharjee (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Malini Poduval (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Anjani Aiyagari (Advocate-on-
Record), Kamal Mohan Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), Rajesh (Advocate-
on-Record), Lakshmi Raman Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Ashok
Mathur (Advocate-on-Record), Gopal Prasad (Advocate-on-Record), S.
Udaya Kr. Sagar (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Hemantika Wahi (Advocate-
on-Record), P.V. Yogeswaran (Advocate-on-Record), Ms A. Sumathi
(Advocate-on-Record), Ajit Pudussery (Advocate-on-Record), M.C.
Dhingra (Advocate-on-Record), Abhishek Chaudhary (Advocate-on-
Record), T. Mahipal (Advocate-on-Record), M/s Arputham Aruna and
Co. (Advocate-on-Record), Raj Kr. Mehta (Advocate-on-Record), K.L.
Janjani (Advocate-on-Record), Tarun Johri (Advocate-on-Record), Ram
Swarup Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), A. Venayagam Balan (Advocate
-on-Record), Krishnanand Pandeya (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Asha
Gopalan Nair (Advocate-on-Record), Rakesh K. Sharma (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Kanchan Kaur Dhodi (Advocate-on-Record), E.C. Vidya
Sagar (Advocate-on-Record), Ish Karan Singh Chhabra, Shiv Singh
Yadav, Ms Saifali Mitra, Ms Rani Chhabra (Advocate-on-Record), V.
Balachandran (Advocate-on-Record), P.R. Ramasesh (Advocate-on-
Record), Rajiv Mehta (Advocate-on-Record), Rathin Das (Advocate-on-
Record), Sudhir Kulshreshtha (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Pratibha Jain
(Advocate-on-Record), Prashant Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), P.
Parmeswaran (Advocate-on-Record), E.R. Kumar, Lalit Chauhan,
Abhiram Naik, Ms Nitika Pandey (for M/s Parekh and Co.) (Advocate-on-
Record), H.S. Parihar (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Bina Madhavan
(Advocate-on-Record), T.N. Singh (Advocate-on-Record), A.N. Arora
(Advocate-on-Record), G. Prakash (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Sharmila
Upadhyay (Advocate-on-Record), Sudarsh Menon (Advocate-on-
Record), Vikrant Singh Bais (Advocate-on-Record), Rajesh Singh
(Advocate-on-Record), M. Yogesh Kanna (Advocate-on-Record),
Somesh Chandra Jha (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Adarsh Nain (Advocate
-on-Record), Ms Ruchira Goel (Advocate-on-Record), Mrinal Gopal Elker
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Samridhi Jain, Sunny Choudhury (Advocate-
on-Record), Ms Seita Vaidyalingam (Advocate-on-Record), Siddhartha
Jha (Advocate-on-Record), V.N. Raghupathy (Advocate-on-Record),
P.K. Manohar (Advocate-on-Record), Nishanth Patil (Advocate-on-
Record), Vinod Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), Arpit Parkash, Sandeep
Kr. Jha (Advocate-on-Record), D.L. Chidananda, Ms Suhasini Sen, Ms
Archana Pathak Dave, Salvador Santosh Rebello, Shyam Gopal,
Sughosh Subramanyam, Neeraj K. Sharma, Harsh Singhal, Ms Priyanka
Sharma, Manish
Tiwari, Prahil Sharma, Ms Manjula Chaurasia, Harender Singh, Mukesh
Verma, Indira Bhakar, G.S. Makker (Advocate-on-Record), Sandeep
Dubey, Ambuj Saraswat, James P. Thomas (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Vanshaja Shukla (Advocate-on-Record), Dr Joseph Aristotle S.
(Advocate-on-Record), Sarojanand Jha, Karan Sharma, Ms Precheta
Kar, Aditya Sidhra, Nadeem Afroz, M.R. Shamshad (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Shalini Kaul (Advocate-on-Record), Rajeev Kr. Dubey,
Ashiwan Mishra, Kamlendra Mishra (Advocate-on-Record), S.
Gowthaman (Advocate-on-Record), Guntur Pramod Kumar (Advocate-
on-Record), Shubhranshu Padhi (Advocate-on-Record), P.S. Sudheer
(Advocate-on-Record), D.K. Garg (Advocate-on-Record), Dinesh K.
Garg, Dhananjay Garg, Abhishek Garg, Abhinav Mukerji (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Pragya Baghel (Advocate-on-Record), Dr Monika Gusain
(Advocate-on-Record), Harim Om Yaduvanshi, Nishe Rajen Shonker
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Anu K. Joy, Alim Anvar, Anando Mukherjee
(Advocate-on-Record), Gopal Balwant Sathe (Advocate-on-Record),
Naveen Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Deepanwita Priyanka
(Advocate-on-Record), P. Venkat Reddy, Prashant Tyagi, P. Srinivas
Reddy, M/s Venkat Palwai Law Associates (Advocate-on-Record),
Kaushik Choudhury (Advocate-on-Record), Sachin Patil (Advocate-on-
Record), Rahul Chitnis, Aaditya A. Pande, Geo Joseph, Ms Shwetal
Shepal, Ms Nupur Sharma, Shobhit Dwivedi, Sanjeev Kr. Mahara, B.K.
Pal (Advocate-on-Record), Saket Singh, Ms Sangeeta Singh, Ms
Somyashree, Ms Niranjana Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Chirag M.
Shroff (Advocate-on-Record), Amandeep Mehta, Abhishek Atrey
(Advocate-on-Record), Ajay Marwah (Advocate-on-Record), Sarvam
Ritam Khare (Advocate-on-Record), Narendra Kumar (Advocate-on-
Record), M/s Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Mayuri Raghuvanshi (Advocate-on-Record), Aravindh S. (Advocate-on
Record) and Ms C. Rubavathi, Advocates], for the appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
1.
(2022)
10
589,
T.N.
Godavarman
564c, 564c-d, 564f-g,
Thirumulpad, In re V. Union of India
565a-b, 565c, 565d
Thirumulpad V. Union of India
552c-d
V. Union of India
572a-b, 572b
India
569f-g, 570b, 570b-c
(50) V. Union of India
552d-e
Thirumulpad V. Union of India
563f, 563g-h, 564a
V. Union of India
569e
India
576d
554g-h, 571e, 576b-c,
India
578d-e, 578f-g
Thirumulpad V. Union of India
569f-g, 575g-h, 577a
Thirumulpad (61) V. Union of India
567b-c
12.
(2008)
2
222,
T.N.
Godavarman
Thirumulpad (104) V. Union of India
572c-d
V. Union of India
567b-c
(87) V. Union of India
569d-e
573b-c
Thirumulpad V. Union of India
567b-c
Thirumulpad V. Union of India
569d-e
M.V. Nayudu
572c-d, 573b
Thirumulpad V. Union of India
566c-d
569a
Forum V. Union of India
572e
Legal Action V. Union of India
572e
23. WP (C) No. 749 of 1996, order dated 29-11-1996
(SC), Supreme Court Monitoring Committee V.
Mussoorie Dehradun Development Authority
566g
Entitlement Kendra V. State of U.P.
566f-g
State of Gujarat
566f-g
Modi
566g
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.- These proceedings originate from the writ
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India registered as WP
(Civil) No. 202 of 1995 (T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad V. Union of
India), which is in the nature of a public interest litigation. It was
instituted for protection of forest lands in the Nilgiris District of the
State of Tamil Nadu. Subsequently, the scope of that writ petition was
enlarged so as to protect such natural resources throughout the
country.
2. The original writ petitioner has since passed away (on 1-6-2016)
but in an order passed on 3-2-2017 ¹, this Court opined that being a
public interest litigation, there was no requirement for bringing on
record the legal representatives of the deceased petitioner. The writ
petition, in substance, continued with the cause-title T.N. Godavarman
Thirumulpad, In re V. Union of India. Various orders have been passed
from time to time in this writ petition to ensure preservation of forest
resources of this country in balance with economic activities. By an
order of this Court dated 9-5-2002², a Central Empowered Committee
("CEC") was directed to be formed primarily for monitoring
implementation of this Court's orders and to place the incidents of non-
compliance before us. Subsequently, by Notification issued on 17-9-
2002 by the Ministry of Environment and Forests in exercise of power
under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, this
Committee was constituted under statutory provisions. CEC has been
bringing to the notice of this Court the steps taken for removal of
encroachment, implementation of working plans, compensatory
afforestation, plantation and other conservation issues.
3. In this order, we shall be mainly dealing with two sets of issues.
The first set relates to mining activities in and around a wildlife
sanctuary in the State of Rajasthan, known as "Jamua Ramgarh" (also
spelt as Jamwa Ramgarh). The second set of issues is wider in scope,
and involves prescribing eco-sensitive zones ("ESZ") surrounding the
wildlife sanctuaries and national parks. The subject of mining and other
commercial activities within the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks
(protected forests) shall also be dealt with by us in this order.
4. The applications before us require examination in the perspective
of a set of recommendations made by CEC and we have been urged by
a set of applicants to make certain modifications of this Court's earlier
directions
concerning steps to be taken for protection of forest resources. The
applicants seeking modifications of our earlier orders include a set of
miners, and, in some cases, the State Governments asking for opening
up of the protected forest areas and their buffer zones, on which
restrictions have been placed in by our earlier orders, for commercial
exploitation. There is dispute as to what would constitute the buffer
zones on ESZ in respect of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries, as
there are divergence of views among the various stakeholders.
5. The present set of applications arise out of a report of CEC dated
20-11-2003. This report specifically pertains to Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife
Sanctuary. This Sanctuary covers an area of about 300 sq km. The said
report gives a horrific picture of ravaging of a protected forest mainly
by private miners mostly with temporary working permits obtained
from the governmental agencies. The following recommendations were
made in this report:
"17
(i) all mining leases which wholly or partly fall within the
forest area inside Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary and also within the
safety zone, should be immediately cancelled. The mining activity
can be allowed to be resumed only after the new/amended mining
leases, after excluding the forest area and the safety zone are
sanctioned by the competent authority and the conditions mentioned
herein under are fully complied with;
(ii) presently a safety zone of 25 m has been fixed for Jamua
Ramgarh Sanctuary and other sanctuaries in Rajasthan as against
500 m for Ranthambhore National Park in Rajasthan itself. In
Madhya Pradesh safety zone of 250 m for all the 20 forest area has
been fixed. CEC is of the view that minimum 500 m safety zone
around national parks and sanctuaries is necessary where no mining,
construction and other projects should be allowed. Without a
reasonable safety zone the habitat and wildlife in the national parks
and sanctuaries are adversely affected. Although stringent conditions
are imposed at the time of the sanction of the mining leases, none
are practically complied with due to weak enforcement of the laws.
The mining causes heavy disturbance in the area due to blasting,
removal of overburden, chiselling, transportation, flying debris and
movement of a large number of labourers and other persons. The
safety zone of 25 m presently prescribed by the Rajasthan Forest
Department is totally inadequate as the rocks torn apart during
blasting can travel much beyond the present safety zone. However,
increasing the safety zone to the desired level of 500 m will result in
closure of large number of mines. Taking a holistic overall view of the
situation, CEC recommends that for the Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife
Sanctuary, for the "existing" mines the safety zone may be fixed as
100 m wherein no mining should be permitted. "For new" mining
leases the safety zone may be fixed as 500 m.
(iii) reclamation and rehabilitation of the area mined inside the
sanctuary should be carried out in a time-bound manner at the cost
of the user agency for which a detailed reclamation and rehabilitation
plan along with various items of work, cost involved and time-frame
should be prepared and implemented on priority basis. The plan
presently prepared
by the State Government is totally inadequate. It does not provide for
reclamation and rehabilitation of the mining pits at all. No provision for
removal of stones and rocks scattered in the sanctuary has been made.
Intensive plantations and protection has not been provided. The revised
plan should incorporate the above and other necessary measures to
provide a congenial habitat for wildlife. In the event adequate funds for
this purpose cannot be recovered from the erstwhile mine lease owners,
the same should be made available by the State Government;
(iv) mining around the sanctuary should be allowed to restart only
after a foolproof mechanism is put in place to ensure recovery of
funds for implementation of reclamation and rehabilitation plan by
the State Government;
(v) exemplary compensation equivalent to the present market
value of the entire mineral removed by the respective mine owners
by mining inside the sanctuary in violation of the FC Act and/or the
WP Act should be recovered from them on the basis of the recorded
production or the estimated figures mentioned in the FC Act
applications. The money so recovered should be used for protection
and development of the sanctuary to its full potential;
(vi) the leftover minerals scattered inside the sanctuary should be
directed to be removed immediately.
(vii) the leftover mining equipments such as cranes, etc. should
be confiscated and removed outside the sanctuary at the cost of the
erstwhile mine leaseholders;
(viii) no mining should be permitted adjoining the sanctuary till
the boundary of the sanctuary is demarcated on the ground and the
boundary pillars are verified with the fixed reference points;
(ix) disciplinary action should be taken in a time-bound manner
against the erring officials in the Mines and the Forest Departments
of the State of Rajasthan and the MoEF for allowing mining in
violation of the Forest (Conservation) Act, the Wildlife (Protection)
Act and/or this Hon'ble Court's order;"
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
6. This Court had converted this report with its set of
recommendations into an interlocutory application and was allocated
registration number IA No. 1000 of 2003.
7. On 20-9-2012, a second report was submitted by CEC. The
recommendations made in the second report went beyond Jamua
Ramgarh Sanctuary and dealt with creation of identification and
declaration of safety zones around protected forests all across the
country. The question of having ESZ around the protected forests was
examined by this Court earlier in another writ petition [WP (Civil) No.
460 of 2004] in Goa Foundation V. Union of India. In the said writ
petition, the following order was passed on 4-12-2006 [reported in Goa
"4. The Ministry is directed to give a final opportunity to all
States/Union Territories to respond to its letter dated 27-5-2005.
The State of Goa also is permitted to give appropriate proposal in
addition to what is said to have already been sent to the Central
Government. The communication sent to the States/Union Territories
shall make it clear that if the proposals are not sent even now within
a period of four weeks of receipt of the communication from the
Ministry, this Court may have to consider passing orders for
implementation of the decision that was taken on 21-1-2002,
namely, notification of the areas within 10 km of the boundaries of
the sanctuaries and national parks as eco-sensitive areas with a view
to conserve the forest, wildlife and environment, and having regard
to the precautionary principles. If the States/Union Territories now
fail to respond, they would do so at their own risk and peril."
8. Two writ petitions have been instituted titled as Goa Foundation V.
Union of India [WP (Civil) No. 460 of 2004] and Goa Foundation V.
Union of India [WP (Civil) No. 435 of 2012], in relation to enforcement
of various circulars issued for enforcement of environmental laws and to
prevent illegal mining in different States including the State of Goa.
There are certain overlapping issues involved in the present writ
petition and the cases of Goa Foundation. The directions which we
propose to issue in this judgment/order shall take into account the
orders passed in the cases of Goa Foundation and such directions shall
be supplemental to the orders passed in any of the aforesaid two writ
petitions if our directions passed in this order relate to areas or subjects
covered by any mandate passed in the said two writ petitions.
9. A set of Guidelines for Declaration of Eco-Sensitive Zones Around
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries had been formulated by the
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change ("MoEF&CC") of
the Government of India on 9-2-2011 [F. No. 1-9/2007 WL - I (pt)].
These Guidelines deal with the process and procedures to be adopted
for declaring eco-sensitive zones ("ESZ"). In Clauses 3 and 4 of these
Guidelines, it has been stipulated:
"3. Purpose for declaring eco-sensitive zones.-
The purpose of declaring eco-sensitive zones around national
parks and sanctuaries is to create some kind of "Shock Absorber" for
the protected areas. They would also act as a transition zone from
areas of high protection to areas involving lesser protection. As has
been decided by the National Board for Wildlife, the activities in the
eco-sensitive zones would be of a regulatory nature rather than
prohibitive nature, unless and otherwise so required.
4. Extent of eco-sensitive zones.-
4.1. Many of the existing protected areas have already undergone
tremendous development in close vicinity to their boundaries. Some
of the protected areas actually lying in the urban setup (e.g. Guindy
National Park, Tamil Nadu; Sanjay Gandhi National Park,
Maharashtra, etc). Therefore, defining the extent of eco-sensitive
zones around protected areas will have to be kept flexible and
protected area specific. The width of the eco-sensitive
zone and type of regulations will differ from protected area to protected
area. However, as a general principle the width of the eco-sensitive
zone could go up to 10 km around a protected area as provided in the
Wildlife Conservation Strategy-2002.
4.2. In case where sensitive corridors, connectivity and
ecologically important patches, crucial for landscape linkage, are
even beyond 10 km width, these should be included in the eco-
sensitive zone.
4.3. Further, even in context of a particular protected area, the
distribution of an area of eco-sensitive zone and the extent of
regulation may not be uniform all around and it could be of variable
width and extent."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
10. In Clauses 6 and 7 of the said Guidelines, it has been specified:
"6. The procedure to be adopted.-
6.1. As has been indicated in the foregoing paragraphs, the basic
aim is to regulate certain activities around National Park and Wildlife
Sanctuary so as to minimise the negative impacts of such activities
on the fragile ecosystem encompassing the protected area. As a first
step towards achieving this goal, it is a prerequisite that an
inventory of the different land use patterns and the different types of
activities, types and number of industries operating around each of
the protected area (National Parks, Sanctuaries) as well as important
corridors be made. The inventory could be done by the Range
Officers concerned, who can take a stock of activities within 10 km of
his range.
6.2. For the above purpose, a small committee comprising the
Wildlife Warden concerned, an ecologist, an official from the Local
Self Government and an official of the Revenue Department of the
area concerned, could be formed. The said committee could suggest
the:
(i) Extent of eco-sensitive zones for the protected area being
considered.
(ii) The requirement of such a zone to act as a shock absorber.
(iii) To suggest the best methods for management of the eco-
sensitive zones, so suggested.
(iv) To suggest broad based thematic activities to be included
in the Master Plan for the region.
6.3. Based on the above, the Chief Wildlife Warden could group
the activities under the following categories (an indicative list of
such activities is attached as Annexure 1):
(i) Prohibited.
(ii) Restricted with safeguards.
(iii) Permissible.
6.4. Once the proposal for Eco-sensitive zones has been finalised,
the same may be forwarded to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests for further processing and notification. Here, it may be noted
that, the State/Union
Territory Forest Department could forward the proposals to the
respective authority in the State Government with copy to the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, as and when the proposals (even if it is for
single protected area) are complete. An indicative list of details that
need to be submitted along with the proposals is at Annexure 2.
6.5. It is to mention here that in cases where the boundary of a
protected area abuts the boundary of another State/Union Territory
where it does not form part of any protected area, it shall be the
endeavour of both the State/Union Territory Governments to have a
mutual consultation and decide upon the width of the eco-sensitive
zone around the protected area in question.
6.6. The State Government should endeavour to convey a very
strong message to the public that ESZ are not meant to hamper
their day-to-day activities, but instead, is meant to protect the
precious forests/protected areas in their locality from any negative
impact, and also to refine the environment around the protected
areas. A copy of the notification of the Sultanpur Eco-sensitive Zone
issued by the Ministry is attached herewith at Annexure 3 for
reference and guidance.
7. These guidelines are indicative in nature and the State/Union
Territory Governments may use these as basic framework to develop
specific guidelines applicable in the context of their National Parks,
Wildlife Sanctuaries, important corridors, etc. with a view to
minimising and preferably eliminating any negative impact on
protected areas."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
11. As per the said Guidelines, commercial mining, setting up of
sawmills and industries causing pollution, commercial use of firewood,
establishment of major hydroelectric projects, use of production of any
hazardous substances, undertaking activities related to tourism like
overflying the national park area by any aircraft, hot-air balloons,
discharge of effluents and solid waste in natural water bodies or
terrestrial areas have been proposed to be made prohibited activities.
Certain other activities having lesser environment damaging potential
have been proposed to be regulated.
12. By an order passed on 4-8-20064, this Court had, inter alia,
restrained grant of temporary working permits for mining within safety
zones around any national park/wildlife sanctuary declared under
Sections 18, 26-A or 35 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. As an
interim measure, direction was issued to maintain one kilometre safety
zone, which was subject to the orders that may be made in the present
IA (IA No. 1000 of 2003).
13. The second report of the CEC dated 20-9-2012 makes the
following recommendations as regards identification and declaration of
ESZ. This report entitled "Note regarding Safety Zones (Eco-
Sensitive Zones) Around National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries"
makes the following recommendations:
"10. After considering that during the last ten years no significant
progress has been made regarding identification and declaration of
safety zones around
protected areas and considering the matter in its totality, an
implementable scheme has been prepared by CEC and which has been
dealt with in subsequent paragraphs.
11. For the purpose of identification and declaration of the safety
zones around National Parks/Wildlife Sanctuaries (hereinafter
referred to as protected areas), the protected areas based on their
areas, are classified into four categories:
(i) CATEGORY A - The protected areas having an area of 500 sq
km or more. The total number of such protected areas is 73 and
their total area is about 1,01,389 sq km (44 % of total area of
protected areas);
(ii) CATEGORY B - The protected areas having an area between
200 sq km to 500 sq km. The total number of such protected
areas is 115 and their total area is about 38,942 sq km (24.37 %
of total area of protected areas);
(iii) CATEGORY C - The protected areas having an area between
100 sq km to 200 sq km. The total number of such protected
areas is 85 and their total area is about 12,066 sq km (about 7.55
% of total area of protected areas); and
(iv) CATEGORY D - The protected areas having an area up to
100 sq km. The total number of such protected areas is 344 and
their total area is about 7422 sq km (about 4.65 % of total area of
all protected areas).
12. Wherever two or more protected areas are contiguous to each
other, such protected areas will be placed in the appropriate
category based on the sum total of their areas (and not on the basis
of area of individual protected area). The details of some of the
contiguous protected areas are given below:
(i) Corbett National Park (520 sq km) and Sonanadi Sanctuary
(301 km)-total area is 821 sq km and therefore both will fall
in Category A;
(ii) Gir National Park (258 sq km) and Gir Sanctuary (1153 sq
km)-total area is 1411 sq km and therefore both will fall in
Category A;
(iii) Periyar National Park (350 sq km) and Periyar Sanctuary
(427 sq km)-total area is 777 sq km and therefore both will fall
in Category A;
(iv) Satpura National Park (585 sq km), Bori Sanctuary (485 sq
km) and Pachmarhi Sanctuary (417 sq km)-total area is 1488 sq
km and therefore all three will fall in Category A;
(v) Valmiki National Park (335 sq km) and Valmiki Sanctuary
(545 sq km)-total area is 880 sq km and therefore both will fall
in Category A;
(vi) Tadoba National Park (116 sq km) and Andhari Wildlife
Sanctuary (509 sq km)-total area is 625 sq km and therefore
both will fall in Category A; and
(vii) Sariska National Park (273 sq km) and Sariska Sanctuary
(219 sq km)-total area is 492 sq km and therefore both will fall
in Category B;
13. The safety zone, in respect of protected areas falling in
Category A and Category B, may comprise of all the areas including
non-forest areas falling within a distance of two kilometres and one
kilometre respectively from the boundaries of the protected area.
Such distances, in respect of protected areas
falling within Category C and Category D, may be kept at 500 m and
100 m respectively.
14. The grant/renewal of mining leases (excluding for collection of
boulders, gravel and sand from river beds), setting up of hazardous
industries, brick kilns, wood-based industries (except MDF/Particle
Boards Plants) will be treated as prohibited activities within the
safety zone (eco-sensitive zones). The activities such as setting up of
industries (other than those included in the list of prohibited
activities), hotels and restaurants including resorts, commercial
helicopter services, hydel projects, irrigation projects, canals, laying
of transmission lines and distribution lines above 33 kV, roads of
more than five metre width and collection of boulders, gravel and
sand from the river beds will be treated as regulated activities and
which will be permissible only after obtaining environment clearance
and clearance of the Standing Committee, National Board for
Wildlife. All other activities which are not prescribed as prohibited
activities or regulated activities will be treated as permissible
activities.
15. The State/UT concerned will be at liberty to shift a protected
area from a lower category to higher category (say from Category C
to Category B) after considering the importance of the protected area
on account of:
(i) presence of flagship species/endangered species such as
Tiger, Lion, Elephant, Rhino, Snow Leopard, Red Panda, Hangul,
Musk deer, Great Indian Bustard, Lion Tailed Macaque, floricans;
(ii) fragile ecosystem such as Western Ghats, North Eastern
States, areas having high altitude flora and fauna, rainforest,
mangroves, marine ecosystem;
(iii) World Heritage sites; and
(iv) Wetland ecosystems.
16. The State/UT Governments concerned may after detailed
examination of the status of habitation, existing industries and other
activities and other relevant factors, and, if found desirable and in
public interest forward the proposal(s) for shifting a protected area
from a higher category to a lower category. They may also forward
the proposal(s) for exclusion of the areas of cities falling within the
safety zone. The MoEF thereafter will examine such proposals and
place such proposals before the Standing Committee of the National
Board for Wildlife for its consideration. The proposals cleared by the
Standing Committee of the NBWL will be placed before this Hon'ble
Court for seeking its permission. It is only after obtaining the
permission of this Hon'ble Court that a protected area may be shifted
from a higher category to a lower category.
17. The safety zones (eco-sensitive zones) around national parks
and wildlife sanctuaries will be in addition to the following eco-
sensitive zones notified by the MoEF (and by other notifications, if
any):
(i) S.O. 20(E), (6-1-1989) - Prohibiting industries on Murud-
Janijira, District Raigadh, Maharashtra;
(ii) S.O. 102(E), (1-2-1989) - Restricting location of
industries, mining and other activities in Doon Valley (U.P.);
(iii) S.O. 416(E), (20-6-1991) - Dahanu Taluka, District Thane
(Maharashtra) to declare as Ecologically Fragile Area, amended
1999;
(iv) S.O. 319(E), (7-5-1992) - Restricting certain activities
causing environmental degradation at Aravalli Range;
(v) S.O. 481(E), (5-7-1996) - No Development Zone at
Numaligarh, East of Kaziranga;
(vi) S.O. 884(E), (19-12-1996) - Dahanu Taluka Environment
Protection Authority, 1996, amended 2001;
(vii) S.O. 350(E), (13-5-1998) - Order constituting the Taj
Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevent and Control) Authority;
(viii) S.O. 825(E), (17-9-1998) - Pachmarhi Region as an eco-
sensitive zone;
(ix) S.O. 52(E), (17-1-2001) Mahabaleshwar Panchgani Region
as an eco-sensitive zone;
(x) S.O. 133(E), (4-2-2003) - Matheran and surrounding
region as an eco-sensitive zone
1. S.O. 83 (E), (16-1-2004) - Amendments to S.O. 133(E) dated
4-2-2003;
(xi) S.O. 1545(E), (25-6-2009), Mount Abu as eco-sensitive
zone; and
(xii) S.O. 1260(E), (31-5-2012) - Girnar Reserve Forest as eco
-sensitive zone.
18. It is respectfully submitted that the above proposals are
submitted in the backdrop of inordinate delay that has taken place in
the identification and declaration of safety zones around National
Parks/Wildlife Sanctuaries and so as to ensure that the process of
such declarations do not remain pending indefinitely."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
14. To the said report, another supplementary note dated 18-1-2013
has been submitted. This report is also in connection with notifying the
ESZ around protected forests. The following passage from this report is
relevant:
"4. After considering the inordinate delay which has already taken
place in notifying the safety zone around National Parks/Wildlife
Sanctuaries and considering the ground situation as it exists, CEC is
of the considered view that it may be appropriate that an early
decision is taken regarding the safety zones around National
Park/Sanctuaries. The proposal submitted by CEC while ensuring
that effective restrictions and regulations are put in place
immediately and implemented in an objective manner also, after
detailed examination, provides for adequate flexibility to modify the
areas of the safety zones."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
15. In connection with IA No. 1000 of 2003, several other
applications have been filed, mainly by miners concerning the Jamua
Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary. The order passed on 4-8-2006 by this
Court [reported in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad V. Union of India in
relation to grant of
temporary working permits was made subjecting them to compliance of
743-44, para 19)
"19. (i) TWPs can only be granted for the renewal of mining
leases, and not where the lease is being granted for the first time to
the applicant user agency;
(ii) The mine is not located inside any national park/sanctuary
notified under Sections 18, 26-A or 35 of the Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972;
(iii) The grant of TWP would not result in any mining activity
within the safety zone around such areas referred to in Precondition
(ii) above (as an interim measure, one kilometre safety zone shall be
maintained subject to the orders that may be made in IA No. 1000
regarding Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary);
(iv) The user agency who has broken up the area of the mine (in
respect of which TWP is being sought) has or had the requisite
environmental clearances and at no time prior to the grant of the
TWP was any mining being carried on by the user agency in relation
to the mine in question, in violation of the provisions of the Forest
(Conservation) Act (for short "the FC Act"). In cases involving
violation of the FC Act, a formal decision on merit should be taken
under the FC Act after considering the gravity of the violation.
However, the grant of a TWP may be considered where past
violations have been regularised by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests (for short "MoEF") by the grant of an approval under the FC
Act with retrospective effect;
(v) The conditions attached to the approval under the FC Act for
the grant of the mining lease (or the renewal of the mining lease)
have been fulfilled, particularly those in respect of (but not limited
to) compensatory afforestation, reclamation plan and overburden
dumping on the specified site;
(vi) The user agency has, within the stipulated time, already filed
a proposal in conformity with the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 1980
for seeking an approval under the FC Act along with the complete
details as are required to be furnished. An application for the grant
of TWP in favour of the user agencies, who have either not filed a
proper proposal and/or have not provided complete information,
particularly in respect of (but not limited to) compensatory
afforestation, phased reclamation plan, felling of trees, details of
minerals extracted in the past, etc. should not be entertained;
(vii) A TWP shall be granted only limited to working in the area
broken up legally and during the validity of the lease. No TWP can be
granted in respect of, or extending to either unbroken area or the
areas which have been broken after the expiry of the mining lease or
have been broken in violation of the FC Act or any other law for the
time being in force;
(viii) In no circumstances can the duration of a TWP extend
beyond the period of one year. Where an application for the grant of
permission under
the FC Act is not disposed of during the currency of TWP, the applicant,
on the strength of the same TWP, may continue to operate for a period
not exceeding three months unless specific orders are obtained from
this Court; and
(ix) A valid lease under the MMRD Act exists [including by way of
a deemed extension in terms of Rule 24-A(6) of the Mineral
Concession Rules] in respect of the area of the TWP."
16. We shall now briefly refer to the individual IAs filed in
connection with IA No. 1000 of 2003:
16.1. The applicants in IAs Nos. 982-84 of 2003, 1026-28 of 2004,
1123-24 of 2004, 1197-99 of 2004, 1210-11 of 2004, 1250-51 of 2004
and 1512 of 2006 are firms who claim to be mining leaseholders or
their representative bodies seeking impleadment in IA No. 1000 of
2003 as also other reliefs. All these applicants (barring the applicant in
IA No. 1512 i.e. Andhi Marbles) seek impleadment in the present
proceeding. All of them also seek certain direction that might allow
them to carry on mining activities. Among them, Jaipur Mineral
Development Syndicate Pvt. Ltd. (IAs Nos. 1123-24 of 2004) has taken
a plea that Section 66(4) of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 was not
applicable to it and in that regard a pending writ petition instituted by
them in the High Court of Rajasthan (Writ Petition No. 570 of 2002) has
been cited. In the said application permission has been sought for
restarting the mining activities in non-forest area. Directions have also
been asked to prevent initiation of penal proceedings against the
applicant under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
16.2. The applicant in IAs Nos. 982-84 of 2003 is one Smt Magan
Devi Meena. Her case is that she was allotted mining area which is
outside the reserve forest/sanctuary in Thali Village and falls outside
Pillar No. 407 (the demarcation point of forest/sanctuary area). She
essentially questions legality of the letter dated 30-5-2003 issued by
the Mining Engineer, Jaipur, Office of Mining Engineer & Geology
Department, Jaipur, Rajasthan stopping mining operation in the
disputed area of Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary and pending
completion of demarcation.
16.3. In IAs Nos. 1210-11 of 2004, the applicant is Madhu Agarwal.
Her prayer is for fresh demarcation of Pillar No. 1 to Pillar No. 428
around the said sanctuary and she has also sought directions on the
State Government to release the excess land from the reserve forest
area after fresh demarcation. The applicant in this case has been
involved in mining of dolomite in Jamua Ramgarh Tehsil in the area
known as Rayanwala of Digota Forest Block 61.
16.4. IAs Nos. 1250-51 of 2004 have been taken out by Bhushan
Sharma, successor-in-interest of one Sharda Devi, who was the original
allottee of mining around Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary. It is the
case of the applicant that his operations have been stopped by letter
dated 30-5-2003 issued by the Mining Engineer, Jaipur, office of Mining
Engineer & Geology Department, Jaipur, Rajasthan in the disputed area
of Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary. Survey had revealed that mining
activities were being carried on
inside the wildlife sanctuary. The report of CEC dated 27-5-2003 found
number of mines operating around or in two villages, Sankotda and
Thali, which were within the sanctuary and CEC also found that the
earlier finding of a committee could not be taken as conclusive proof
that the area involved was a non-forest land and fell outside the
sanctuary. The State of Rajasthan, however, has taken a stand in their
affidavit affirmed on 15-4-2004 that delineation and demarcation of the
boundaries have already been done.
16.5. In IA No. 1512 of 2006, M/s Andhi Marbles Pvt. Ltd. are the
applicants. They have prayed for permission to resume mining
operations excluding the land to the extent of 100 m from the
forest/sanctuary.
16.6. In IA No. 3880 of 2015, the applicant is the State of
Rajasthan. Prayer has been made in this application for appropriate
direction for issuing the ESZ of wildlife sanctuaries and national parks
and to keep in abeyance a letter issued by CEC on 21-10-2014 by
which one kilometre distance has been required to be maintained in
respect of mining activities from the boundaries of the national parks
and wildlife sanctuaries. Certain other clarifications have also been
sought as regards the order of this Court passed on 4-8-2006 4 and we
shall deal with the said issues later in this judgment. The State of
Rajasthan has filed several other affidavits and the common theme of
these affidavits is for lifting the restrictions and permit mining activities
in and around the protected forests to energise the economy of the
State. The State seeks permission for subsisting mining activities to
operate outside the protected forests and ESZ. It is also their stand
that most of the mining areas in Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary were
sanctioned prior to coming into operation of the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980 and declaration of the said sanctuary on 31-5-1982.
17. Apart from mining activities in the Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary,
applications have also been taken out in relation to the CEC reports as
the said reports deal with protected forests all across the country and
contemplate uniform ESZ norms for their protection. On 14-7-2003, the
recommendations of CEC dated 27-12-2002 were accepted by this
Court in IA No. 887 of 2003. The said application related to wood-based
industries in the State of Maharashtra, and, inter alia, 64 sawmills
concerned. That application was disposed of with a direction for
consideration of their cases within a period of two months and if they
were found eligible, their applications were directed to be sent to CEC.
The latter was to submit a report and the State of Maharashtra was
directed to abide by the aforesaid recommendations.
17.1. In IA No. 1412 of 2005, the applicants are Maharashtra Timber
Laghu Udyog Mahasangha along with Poona Timber Merchant (owners
of sawmills in the State of Maharashtra). They want clarification of the
order of this Court passed in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad V. Union of
India5 for consideration of the cases of 64 sawmill owners for grant of
licence as per
Notification dated 16-7-1981 issued by the State of Maharashtra
amending the Bombay Forest Rules, 1942. This Court had directed in
the aforesaid order (of 14-7-20035) that the cases of the applicants
may be examined by the State Government within a period of two
months and if they are found eligible, their applications could be sent
to CEC who might submit a report to this Court. In the present
application the applicants want grant of licence considering Condition
No. 3 of the Government's Notification dated 16-7-1981.
17.2. The applicants in IA No. 117831 of 2019 are Maharashtra
Timber Laghu Udyog Mahasangha along with Poona Timber Merchant
(64 sawmills owners) in connection with grant of licences for operating
sawmills. In the present order, we are confining our examination of
proceedings arising out of IA No. 1000 of 2003. As such, the aforesaid
applications ought to be listed independently before the appropriate
Bench.
18. The applicant in IA No. 96949 of 2019 is the State of
Maharashtra. On 11-12-20186, this Court had passed an order in
respect of 21 national parks and wildlife sanctuaries, which included
Thane Creek Flamingo Sanctuary. This order, inter alia, records and
10)
"7. It is submitted by the learned Amicus that this issue has been
pending since sometime in December 2006. 12 years have gone by
but no effective steps have been taken by the State Governments in
respect of the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries mentioned
above.
8. Under the circumstances, we direct that an area of 10 km
around these 21 national parks and wildlife sanctuaries be declared
as eco-sensitive zone by the MoEF. The declaration be made by the
MoEF at the earliest.
9. Liberty is granted to the State Governments to move an
application for modification of this order along with proposal only two
weeks after submission of the proposals to the MoEF.
10. List the matters at the end of February 2019. In the
meanwhile, interim order to continue."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
19. The prayer of the State of Maharashtra in this application is to
the following effect:
"(A) This Hon'ble Court be pleased to modify its order dated 11-
12-2018° directing that an area of 10 km around Thane Creek
Flamingo Sanctuary situated in the State of Maharashtra be declared
as eco-sensitive zone by the Ministry of Environment and Forests;
and
(B) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to direct that the area of 0-
3.5 km as proposed in the proposal submitted by the State
Government on 22-5-2019 to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests be declared as eco-sensitive zone in respect of Thane Creek
Flamingo Sanctuary; and
(C) Pass any other order and or directions as this Hon'ble Court
may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
present case."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
20. The other applications in respect of the same sanctuary is by an
association of real estate developers, CREDAI-MCHI registered as IA No.
65571 of 2021. The main prayer in IA No. 65571 of 2021 is:
"(a) Modify the order dated 11-12-2018 passed by this Hon'ble
Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad, In re V. Union of India6
inasmuch as it relates to Thane Creek Flamingo Sanctuary and direct
that the eco-sensitive zone around the said Sanctuary shall be in
terms of the proposal dated 10-3-2021 submitted by the State
Government and the draft Notification dated 8-4-2021 published by
the Ministry of Environment & Forests, Government of India; and/or
(b) Pass such other order(s) as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit
and proper in the circumstances of the case."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
21. The order on 11-12-2018 was passed by this Court as the
proposals in respect of 21 national parks and wildlife sanctuaries had
not yet been received by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change. Recommendations of CEC as regards maintaining ESZ
were made in relation to wildlife sanctuaries and national parks on 20-9
-2012. As per the order passed on 11-12-20186, the proposal of the
State Government was to be made before the MoEF&CC and it appears
that a draft Notification dated 8-4-2021 concerning Thane Creek
Flamingo Sanctuary has already been published by the MoEF&CC. Let
the MoEF&CC take final decision in relation to such draft notification as
per the provisions of law. Such decision, if already taken, may be
placed before this Court one week after reopening of the Court on
conclusion of the summer vacation. If such decision is not taken, then
the decision may be taken as per law within a period of six weeks and
be placed before us within the same time-frame. This Court shall
consider passing appropriate direction thereafter, upon going through
such decision.
22. In IA No. 1992 of 2007, the M.P. State Mining Corporation Ltd.
has applied for the following reliefs:
"(i) grant permission to file present application for clarification;
(ii) clarify that the directions as contained in interim order dated 4
-8-2006 of this Hon'ble Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad V.
Union
of India4. Pertains only to mining activity in Temporary
Working Permission (TWP) cases requiring approval under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 and that the said directions do not apply to
the regular quarry lease on a revenue land particularly when such
quarry lease is granted to the State-owned Mining Corporation by
the State Government itself."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
23. So far as this application is concerned, we repeat that in this
order, we are dealing with the issues arising out of IA No. 1000 of
2003. The scope of this application relates to mining and other
activities within the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries and
maintaining ESZ around individual protected forests. The reliefs asked
for by the M.P. State Mining Corporation Ltd. in IA No. 1992 of 2007 do
not come within the ambit of the subject we are addressing in this
judgment/order. This application of the Mining Corporation/company is
in connection with temporary working permits in non-forest areas. This
application will also have to be addressed separately.
24. There are two affidavits of M/s Andhi Marbles Pvt. Ltd. affirmed
on 19-2-2004 and 29-7-2004 pertaining to Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary.
Complaint against said M/s Andhi Marbles is in relation to mining leases
granted and operated by them. In the CEC report which has been
transformed into IA No. 1000 of 2003, it has been recorded that they
were granted mining leases in violation of the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980 as well as the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. They had
continued working on the temporary permits after the order of this
Court dated 12-12-1996
25. In the order of this Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad V.
4)
"4. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted with a view
to check further deforestation which ultimately results in ecological
imbalance; and therefore, the provisions made therein for the
conservation of forests and for matters connected therewith, must
apply to all forests irrespective of the nature of ownership or
classification thereof. The word "forest" must be understood
according to its dictionary meaning. This description covers all
statutorily recognised forests, whether designated as reserved,
protected or otherwise for the purpose of Section 2(i) of the Forest
(Conservation) Act. The term "forest land", occurring in Section 2,
will not only include "forest" as understood in the dictionary sense,
but also any area recorded as forest in the government record
irrespective of the ownership. This is how it has to be understood for
the purpose of Section 2 of the Act. The provisions enacted in the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for the conservation of forests and
the matters connected therewith must apply clearly to all forests so
understood irrespective of the ownership or classification thereof.
This aspect has been made abundantly clear in the decisions of this
Court in Ambica Quarry Works V. State of Gujarat Rural Litigation &
Entitlement Kendra V. State of U.P. 9 and recently in the order dated
29-11-1996 (Supreme Court Monitoring Committee V. Mussoorie
Dehradun Development Authority10. The earlier decision of this
Court in State of Bihar V. Banshi Ram Modi¹ has, therefore, to be
understood in the light of these subsequent decisions. We consider it
necessary to reiterate
this settled position emerging from the decisions of this Court to dispel
the doubt, if any, in the perception of any State Government or
authority. This has become necessary also because of the stand taken
on behalf of the State of Rajasthan, even at this late stage, relating to
permissions granted for mining in such area which is clearly contrary to
the decisions of this Court. It is reasonable to assume that any State
Government which has failed to appreciate the correct position in law so
far, will forthwith correct its stance and take the necessary remedial
measures without any further delay."
26. CEC's observation in IA No. 1000 of 2003 is that no mining
activity was permissible inside the sanctuary as per this Court's order
dated 14-2-200012 and the temporary working permits were granted in
violation of the applicable statutory provisions and guidelines as the
area involved fell inside the sanctuary. Andhi Marbles Pvt. Ltd. have
taken a defence that their mining activities were in terms of the
temporary working permit issued and in compliance with the specified
conditions laid down by the MoEF&CC. A point has also been taken that
the limits of the sanctuary were not notified and no notification under
Section 26-A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 was issued to
declare the said area as sanctuary. They have also taken a point that
the mining lease covering forest has been deleted from the lease
document and they seek to operate two quarries, on non-forest land
beyond the safety zone of 25 m, which has been specified as part of the
Mineral Policy, 1994 of the State of Rajasthan. They also, in effect, seek
resumption of mining activities in the area beyond 25 m from the forest
boundary.
27. As regards the Guidelines of 9-2-2011, which have been referred
to in the affidavit of MoEF&CC affirmed/verified by Dr Subrata Bose,
Scientist 'F' Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change,
Government of India, stand of Andhi Marbles Pvt. Ltd. is that no
consensus has been reached as regards notifying the areas within 10
km of the boundaries of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries as ESZ.
28. In the affidavit filed on behalf of MoEF&CC, which we have
referred to in the preceding paragraph, it has been stated that the
Guidelines for Declaration of ESZ have been notified by the Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Government of India. For
the purpose of formulation of ESZ in relation to individual protected
forest area, Para 6 of the said Guidelines has been brought to our
notice. A detailed hierarchy has been prescribed for declaration of ESZ.
Referring to Goa Foundation [WP (C) No. 435 of 2012], it has been
stated in this affidavit that mining activity is prohibited within a
distance of 1 km or the specified ESZ, whichever is higher.
29. On the pleas of Andhi Marbles Pvt. Ltd. and another leaseholder,
Munni Devi, in subsequent affidavit verified on 29-4-2004 the MoEF&CC
had justified granting of working permit to the said firms.
30. The next affidavit of MoEF&CC was verified on 14-9-2005 and
this affidavit deals with fixing of buffer zones for activities outside
sanctuaries/forests. In this affidavit, it has been admitted that with
respect to the details given in the earlier affidavit dated 29-4-2004 the
decision taken by the Ministry at that point of time while granting
temporary working permission on already broken up area in Jamua
Ramgarh could not incorporate all factual details and thus might not
have been strictly compatible with the principles of environmental
conservation. It has further been stated in this affidavit that the
Ministry directed the State Government to ensure phased closure of
mines.
31. Altogether seven affidavits dated 15-4-2004, 17-9-2004, 9-12-
2004, 13-10-2006, 10-5-2007, 12-8-2008 and 1-11-2012 filed by the
State of Rajasthan are on record before us. The stand of the State of
Rajasthan as reflected in these affidavits is primarily in relation to the
creation of ESZ.
31.1. It is their case that the decision of 25 m safety zone in relation
to Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary has been conceived by the State and the
State Government has also taken a decision that in the vicinity of
sanctuaries, national parks and reserve forests, mining activities should
not be undertaken within 25 m.
31.2. As regards other forest areas, their position is that mining
ought to be undertaken in the immediate vicinity of the forest areas.
They have expressed difficulties over taking over or acquisition of land
around any sanctuary or other protected forest and their ESZ without
proper proceeding.
31.3. As regards mining operations within sanctuary area of Jamua
Ramgarh, it has been stated that all mining activities within the
sanctuary have been stopped. In their affidavit dated 12-8-2008, it has
been disclosed by the State that mining activities in non-forest areas
within 100 m of the Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary has been closed. Their
plea is for allowing mining activity in non-forest areas within protected
forests and beyond the ESZ of 100 m for economic activities, in the
interest of local population as also the State's economy.
32. It has also been highlighted by the State that 25 sanctuaries, 2
national parks have been declared by the State comprising of a total
area of 9,07,070 hectares and an area of 23,29,659 hectares of area as
forest area or deemed forest is already existing as eco-sensitive/eco-
fragile/buffer/safety zones in that State within which no non-forest
activities is allowed without proper permission under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980. The State of Rajasthan has opposed the
proposal for declaring 10 km beyond the boundary of sanctuaries and
national parks being declared as ESZ.
33. The role of the State cannot be confined to that of a facilitator or
generator of economic activities for immediate upliftment of the
fortunes of the State. The State also has to act as a trustee for the
benefit of the general public in relation to the natural resources so that
sustainable development can be achieved in the long term. Such role of
the State is more relevant today, than, possibly, at any point of time in
history with the threat of climate catastrophe resulting from global
warming looming large.
34. This Court has highlighted the public trust doctrine in M.C.
Mehta V. Kamal Nath13 and opined that the public trust doctrine is part
of the law of land. In para 25 of the said judgment, as reported, this
doctrine has been explained with reference to writings of Joseph L. Sax,
Professor of Law, University of Michigan, the proponent of Modern Public
"25. The public trust doctrine primarily rests on the principle that
certain resources like air, sea, waters and the forests have such a
great importance to the people as a whole that it would be wholly
unjustified to make them a subject of private ownership. The said
resources being a gift of nature, they should be made freely available
to everyone irrespective of the status in life. The doctrine enjoins
upon the Government to protect the resources for the enjoyment of
the general public rather than to permit their use for private
ownership or commercial purposes. According to Professor Sax, the
public trust doctrine imposes the following restrictions on
governmental authority:
'Three types of restrictions on governmental authority are often
thought to be imposed by the public trust : first, the property
subject to the trust must not only be used for a public purpose, but
it must be held available for use by the general public; second, the
property may not be sold, even for a fair cash equivalent; and third
the property must be maintained for particular types of uses.' "
35. Reliance has been placed on the said doctrine in earlier orders of
this Court in this very writ petition, passed on 30-10-2002 14 , 26-9-
2005 15 and 13-2-201216. So far as the views of the State of Rajasthan
are concerned, as reflected in their affidavits and written notes, their
consideration for justifying mining in Jamua Ramgarh and its periphery
primarily stems from the prospect of immediate economic gains and
their role as a trustee of natural resources of the land has been largely
overlooked.
36. The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
("MoEF&CC") is against having a uniform ESZ for all national parks and
reserved forests. Their view is that the ESZ area ought to be site-
specific. Our attention has been drawn to the comprehensive Guidelines
formulated, to which we have referred earlier in this order. In Goa
Foundation V. Union of India¹7, the order passed in this proceeding [IA
No. 1000 of 2003] on 4-8-2006 has also been referred to and relied
upon. Affidavits have been filed by the State of Goa affirmed on 19-9-
2012 and 31-10-2012. Main concern of the State of Goa is over creation
of ESZ of 10 km from the boundaries of protected forests as buffer zone
and it is also contended on their behalf that such buffer zones should
be site-specific. It is highlighted that in the State of
Goa vegetative aerial cover of Goa is more than 59.99% (as per the
Indian State Forest Report of 2011) and protected forest areas
constitute over 20% of the total geographic area. On this basis, they
seek appropriate directions. It has also been brought to our notice that
notifications have been issued in respect of several sanctuaries
stipulating the ESZ boundaries. Written submissions have also been
filed by Goa Foundation [the petitioners in WP (C) No. 460 of 2004]
and WP (C) No. 435 of 2012 in which it has been urged that minimum
extent of ESZ ought to be as per CEC recommendations incorporating
therein the modifications/suggestions by the learned Amicus Curiae. So
far as the State of Goa is concerned, the scope of mining activities is
being dealt with in Goa Foundation17. In the present IA, we would not
address issues specific to the said case. But the directives we shall
make, as we have already indicated, which are not covered by the
issues involved in Goa Foundation shall apply to the protected forest
and adjacent areas.
37. On the point of buffer zone for activities outside the
sanctuaries/national parks, the National Board for Wildlife in its 21st
meeting held on 21-1-2002 adopted National Wildlife Conservation
Strategy. Para 9 of the Strategy document concerns the buffer areas
around the national parks and sanctuaries. It has been recorded
therein:
"Lands falling within 10 km of the boundaries of national parks
and sanctuaries should be notified as eco-fragile zones under Section
3(v) of the Environment (Protection) Act and Rule 5, sub-rules 5(viii)
and (x) of the Environment (Protection) Rules."
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
But it does not appear from the said affidavit that the said proposal of
notifying 10 km as boundaries of the national parks and sanctuaries as
eco-fragile zone was finalised.
38. The MoEF&CC essentially has argued in favour of having ESZ to
be site-specific and for that purpose they have invited proposals from
individual State Government in the aforesaid Guidelines. In cases
where such proposals have not come, they want 10 km periphery of
protected forests to be preserved as ESZ. As regards activities
permissible within the buffer zone, certain works have been proposed to
be regulated and certain activities to be permitted within the ESZ. This
has been stipulated in Annexure I to the Guidelines. We have already
referred to the prohibited activities.
39. Among the regulated activities, as per these Guidelines are:
(i) Felling of trees with permission from appropriate authority.
(ii) Establishment of hotels and resort as per approved master
plan, which takes care of habitats allowing no restriction on
movement of wild animals.
(iii) Drastic change in agricultural systems.
(iv) Commercial use of natural water resources including ground
water harvesting as per approved master plan, which takes care of
habitats allowing no restriction on movement of wild animals.
(v) Erection of electrical cables with stress on promoting
underground cabling.
(vi) Fencing of premises of hotels and lodges.
(vii) Use of polythene bags by shopkeepers.
(viii) Widening of roads with proper environmental impact
assessment.
(ix) Movement of vehicular traffic at night for commercial
purposes.
(x) Introduction of exotic species.
(xi) Protection of hill slopes and river banks.
(xii) Regulation of any form of air and vehicular pollution.
(xiii) Putting up of sign boards and hoardinas.
40. Within permissible activities fall:
(i) Ongoing agricultural and horticulture practices by local
communities.
(ii) Rain water harvesting.
(iii) Organic farming.
(iv) Use of renewable energy sources.
(v) Adoption of green technology for all activities.
41. In the affidavit of the Standing Committee of the National Board
for Wildlife, the views of the non-official members of the Standing
Committee have been placed on record, which essentially contemplates
continuation of the 10 km buffer zone. The order passed by this Court
on 4-12-2006 in Goa Foundation3 [WP (C) No. 460 of 2004] proposes
following such a course if there is delay in site-specific preparation of
ESZ for individual States/Union Territories. On the aspect of having site
-specific ESZ under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the view of
the National Board for Wildlife, appears to be unanimous. It is their
opinion that some protected areas, because of their smaller size, may
require larger safety zone around it.
42. We shall deal first with the question of impleadment of firms and
individuals who had some kind of permission for carrying on mining
activities in Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary. The interlocutory applications
which we are dealing with arise out of a public interest litigation and
there is no doubt that orders passed in litigation of this nature could
affect a large body of persons who may not be included in the array of
parties at the time of institution of the proceeding. To an extent,
litigations of this nature assume an in rem character. Ideally, for such a
public interest litigation, the procedure contemplated in Rule 8 of Order
1 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 could be followed to the extent of
issue of public notice or general intimation to public in such mode as
the Court may consider fit and proper, having regard to the nature and
scope of
the proceeding. But in cases where such a course has not been taken,
persons affected or likely to be affected by any order passed in the
litigation would be entitled to join or participate in the proceeding.
Thus, the impleadment prayers in IAs Nos. 984 of 2003, 1026, 1123,
1197 and 1251 of 2004 are allowed.
43. The approach of the Court in dealing with complaints of
environmental degradation has been laid down by this very Bench in
this writ petition itself in an order passed on 9-5-202218 in connection
with another set of applications. In this order, it has been observed and
16-19)
"16. Adherence to the principle of sustainable development is a
constitutional requirement. While applying the principle of
sustainable development one must bear in mind that development
which meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of the future generations to meet their own needs. Therefore,
courts are required to balance development needs with the
protection of the environment and ecology19. It is the duty of the
State under our Constitution to devise and implement a coherent
and coordinated programme to meet its obligation of sustainable
development based on inter-generational equity20. While economic
development should not be allowed to take place at the cost of
ecology or by causing widespread environment destruction and
violation; at the same time, the necessity to preserve ecology and
environment should not hamper economic and other developments.
Both development and environment must go hand in hand, in other
words, there should not be development at the cost of environment
and vice versa, but there should be development while taking due
care and ensuring the protection of environment ²¹.
17. In Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum V. Union of India² 22 , this
Court held that the "precautionary principle" is an essential feature
of the principle of "sustainable development". It went on to explain
para 11)
`11.
(i) Environmental measures - by the State Government
and the statutory authorities - must anticipate, prevent and
attack the causes of environmental degradation.
(ii) Where there are threats of serious and irreversible damage,
lack of scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for
postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation.
(iii) The "onus of proof" is on the actor or the
developer/industrialist to show that his action is environmentally
benign."
18. The principle of precaution involves the anticipation of
environmental harm and taking measures to avoid it or to choose the
least environmentally harmful activity. It is based on scientific
uncertainty. Environmental protection should not only aim at
protecting health, property and economic interest but also protect
the environment for its own sake. Precautionary duties must not only
be triggered by the suspicion of concrete danger but also by justified
concern or risk potential ²0.
19. A situation may arise where there may be irreparable damage
to the environment after an activity is allowed to go ahead and if it is
stopped, there may be irreparable damage to economic interest²³.
This Court held that in case of a doubt, protection of environment
would have precedence over the economic interest. It was further
held that precautionary principle requires anticipatory action to be
taken to prevent harm and that harm can be prevented even on a
reasonable suspicion. Further, this Court emphasises in the said
judgment that it is not always necessary that there should be direct
evidence of harm to the environment."
While dealing with the applications in the present set of proceedings,
we shall follow the same principles.
44. We shall now examine the prayers of the applicants for
continuing their mining activities within the sanctuary. This relief has
been asked for by Smt Magan Devi Meena (IAs Nos. 982-84 of 2003),
Agarwal Marbles Centre Pvt. Ltd. and others (IAs Nos. 1026-28 of
2004), Jaipur Mineral Development Syndicate Pvt. Ltd. (IAs Nos. 1123-
24 of 2004), Federation of Mining Associations of Rajasthan (IAs Nos.
1197-99 of 2004), Bhushan Sharma (IAs Nos. 1250-51 of 2004) and
Andhi Marbles Pvt. Ltd. (IA No. 1512 of 2006).
45. We must point out here that in the affidavit of the State of
Rajasthan, it has been stated that they had formulated a policy of
maintaining a distance of 25 m from the vicinity of important forest
areas like game sanctuary, reserved forest, mining activities to be
prohibited. In other forest areas, mining could be undertaken in the
immediate vicinity of the forest area as per the policy. This has been
stated in the affidavit of the State of Rajasthan filed on 9-12-2004 and
such a stand appears to have had been taken from the Mineral Policy of
1994. It, however, appears that a new Mineral Policy had been adopted
by the State of Rajasthan in 2015.
46. There are also pleas for permitting some of the miners to
continue mining activities within 25 m zone conceived by the State of
Rajasthan as buffer zone. In three applications, IAs Nos. 1123-24 of
2004, IAs Nos. 1197-99 of 2004 and IAs Nos. 1210-11 of 2004, Jaipur
Mineral Development Syndicate Pvt. Ltd., Federation of Mining
Association of Rajasthan and Smt Madhu Agarwal have taken a point
that there was improper declaration of Jamua
Ramgarh as a sanctuary. The Notification made under Section 18 of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 bearing No. F.11(19) Raj.-8/81 Jaipur
dated 31-5-1982 has been annexed to IAs Nos. 982-84 of 2003 the
applicant therein, being Magan Devi Meena. Initially, there was
declaration of the said sanctuary as reserved forest under the Rajasthan
Forest Act, 1953. Thereafter, the Notification of 31-5-1982 came into
operation under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
47. In IA No. 1000 of 2003, it has been disclosed that the
settlement of rights were completed by the District Collector, Jaipur
under Sections 19 to 26 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. So far
as Section 26-A is concerned, which deals with declaration of area as
sanctuary the said provision was incorporated in the statute with effect
from 2-10-1991. That amendment came by way of Act 44 of 1991.
48. After amendment, Section 18 of the Act stipulates:
"18. Declaration of sanctuary.-(1) The State Government may,
by notification, declare its intention to constitute any area other than
an area comprised within any reserve forest or the territorial waters
as a sanctuary if it considers that such area is of adequate ecological,
faunal, floral, geomorphological, natural or zoological significance, for
the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wildlife or its
environment.
(2) The notification referred to in sub-section (1) shall specify, as
nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such area.
Explanation.- the purposes of this section, it shall be
sufficient to describe the area by roads, rivers, ridges or other well-
known or readily intelligible boundaries."
49. Section 26-A of the Act, which, again, was introduced by Act 44
of 1991 contemplates further declaration after compliance of certain
formalities. No other amendment has been brought to our notice.
Section 18 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 as it originally stood,
reads:
"18. Declaration of sanctuary.-(1) The State Government may,
by notification, declare any area to be a sanctuary if it considers that
such area is of adequate ecological, faunal, floral, geomorphological,
natural or zoological significance, for the purpose of protecting,
propagating or developing wildlife or its environment.
(2) The notification referred to in sub-section (1) shall specify, as
nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such area.
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, it shall be
sufficient to describe the area by roads, rivers, ridges or other well-
known or readily intelligible boundaries."
50. The declaration was made by the State of Rajasthan in 1982 and
we do not find any flaw in such declaration. The amended provisions,
thus, could not apply to the Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary. The
plea taken that it did not have the status of a sanctuary because no
declaration was there under
Section 26-A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 is without any
basis. We shall proceed in this order on the basis that Jamua Ramgarh
is a subsisting sanctuary.
51. We have already indicated that CEC in IA No. 1000 of 2003 has
given a dreadful account of the condition of the sanctuary, ravaged by
mining activities. CEC in the same document has also outlined the
importance of the said sanctuary. These would appear from Paras 4 and
5 of the said IA which read:
"4. In stark contrast to the above during the site visits to the
Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary CEC came across a horrible and
unbelievable picture of devastated ecosystem due to indiscriminate
mining activity in blatant violation of the Forest (Conservation) Act,
the Wild Life (Protection) Act and even this Hon'bl Court's orders.
The sanctuary is littered with hundreds of deep mining pits,
randomly scattered "overburdens", scores of cranes and mined
boulders and stones scattered all over the place. It is rare to see
such a destruction even in a non-forest area, least of all inside a
sanctuary. It is a horror story that has to be seen to be believed.
This is a site where all the laws and conventions that govern the
natural world have been violated for commercial gains. Instead of
being managed as a wildlife sanctuary, it appears to have been
managed as a mining sanctuary. In the present form it may be more
appropriate to rename the area as "Jamua Ramgarh Wild Life
Graveyard". A photographic report is appended hereto at Annexure A
graphically showing the ground situation.
5. The forest of Jamua Ramgarh forms the critical catchment area
of the lake which is the main source of water supply to the city of
Jaipur. Notwithstanding this 69 mining leases were sanctioned from
time to time in Jamua Ramgarh after enactment of the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 i.e. 25-10-1980. Each and every mine was
sanctioned in violation of the provisions of the FC Act as well as the
Wild Life (Protection) Act. No perceptible attempt was made to
regulate the mines as per the provisions of the Forest (Conservation)
Act and the Wild Life (Protection) Act. No valid and satisfactory
explanation was given by the State Government for allowing the
mining leases to operate for years together except that it was a
common practice to allow mining leases in the forest area/sanctuary
without obtaining specific approvals under the Forest (Conservation)
Act or the Wild Life (Protection) Act. The details of these mines are
given in Annexure B.
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
52. In their affidavits, the State of Rajasthan had referred to the
Mining Policy of 1994 which stipulated 25 m to be safety zone around
the periphery of Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary but subsequent
thereto the Mining Policy of 2015 for the State of Rajasthan has come
and they do not seem to have any specified safety zone. Moreover, in
view of the order of this Court passed on 4-8-20064, 1 km safety zone
has been directed to be maintained as regards Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife
Sanctuary. Beyond Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife
Sanctuary, CEC itself has given its view on eco-sensitive zone in their
report dated 20-9-2012. The recommendations have been quoted in
the earlier part of this order. In the affidavit of the Standing Committee
of the National Board for Wildlife filed on 26-11-2012, the views of the
said Committee were expressed and the Committee was of unanimous
opinion that each State ought to delineate the outer limits of ESZ on a
site-specific, case-by-case basis, keeping in view the ecological
imperatives and the ground realities of the protected area. It was also
the view of the said Committee that expert opinion and scientific inputs
ought to be obtained from individuals and institutions in that regard. In
substance the view of the Committee is that there should not be
uniform ESZ.
53. We have also referred to the Guidelines dated 9-2-2011 which
give a detailed procedure for evolving ESZ and identification of
activities that could be carried on in such zones. The order of this Court
in Goa Foundation3 [WP (C) No. 460 of 2004] passed on 4-12-2006
also contemplated issue of direction for maintaining a 10 km wide
safety zone from the boundaries in respect of sanctuaries and national
parks as there was lack of response from the States and Union
Territories in relation to queries on various aspects in respect of wildlife
conservation. The proposal for having an ESZ of 10 km from the
boundaries of the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries was originally
mooted on 21-1-2002 in the meeting of the Indian Board for Wildlife,
as it appears from the order passed by this Court in Goa Foundation24
[WP (C) No. 460 of 2004] on 30-1-2006. We have to collate the views
of these experts' bodies including CEC, who have been assisting this
Court through the different stages of this litigation.
54. In our opinion, the Guidelines framed on 9-2-2011 appear to be
reasonable and we accept the view of the Standing Committee that
uniform guidelines may not be possible in respect of each sanctuary or
national park for maintaining ESZ. We are of the opinion, however, that
a minimum width of 1 km ESZ ought to be maintained in respect of the
protected forests, which forms part of the recommendations of CEC in
relation to Category B protected forests. This would be the standard
formula, subject to changes in special circumstances. We have
considered CEC's recommendation that the ESZ should be relatable to
the area covered by a protected forest but the Standing Committee's
view that the area of a protected forest may not always be a reasonable
criteria also merits consideration. It was argued before us that the 1 km
wide "no-development-zone" may not be feasible in all cases and
specific instances were given for Sanjay Gandhi National Park and
Guindy National Park in Mumbai and Chennai metropolis respectively
which have urban activities in very close proximity. These sanctuaries
shall form special cases.
55. Turning specifically to Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary, the first
report of the CEC proposed 100 m as ESZ. In the second report,
however, one kilometre width has been recommended for all protected
forests falling under Category
'B'. Having regard to its area, the said sanctuary comes in that
category. In the order of this Court passed on 4-8-20064, the same
margin i.e. one kilometre as buffer zone has been prescribed. In the
given facts concerning the Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary, in our opinion
the margin of 25 m as contemplated in the 1994 Mineral Policy of the
State of Rajasthan is grossly inadequate. We, however, treat Jamua
Ramgarh Sanctuary as a special case for fixing the ESZ as in the past,
the buffer zone varied from 25 m to 100 m. In our opinion, ESZ of 500
m would be a reasonable buffer zone, within which subsisting activities
which do not come within the prohibited list as per the Guidelines of 9-
2-2011 could be carried on. But for commencing of any new activity
which would be otherwise permissible, the ESZ norm of one kilometre
shall be maintained for Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary.
56. We accordingly direct:
56.1. Each protected forest, that is, national park or wildlife
sanctuary must have an ESZ of minimum one kilometre measured from
the demarcated boundary of such protected forest in which the
activities proscribed and prescribed in the Guidelines of 9-2-2011 shall
be strictly adhered to. For Jamua Ramgarh Wildlife Sanctuary, it shall
be 500 m so far as subsisting activities are concerned.
56.2. In the event, however, the ESZ is already prescribed as per
law that goes beyond one kilometre buffer zone, the wider margin as
ESZ shall prevail. If such wider buffer zone beyond one kilometre is
proposed under any statutory instrument for a particular national park
or wildlife sanctuary awaiting final decision in that regard, then till such
final decision is taken, the ESZ covering the area beyond one kilometre
as proposed shall be maintained.
56.3. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests as also the Home
Secretary of each State and Union Territory shall remain responsible for
proper compliance of the said Guidelines as regards nature of use
within the ESZ of all national parks and sanctuaries within a particular
State or Union Territory. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests for
each State and Union Territory shall also arrange to make a list of
subsisting structures and other relevant details within the respective
ESZs forthwith and a report shall be furnished before this Court by the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of each State and Union Territory
within a period of three months. For this purpose, such authority shall
be entitled to take assistance of any governmental agency for satellite
imaging or photography using drones.
56.4. Mining within the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries shall
not be permitted.
56.5. In the event any activity is already being undertaken within
the one kilometre or extended buffer zone (ESZ), as the case may be,
of any wildlife sanctuary or national park which does not come within
the ambit of prohibited activities as per the 9-2-2011 Guidelines, such
activities may continue with permission of the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests of each
State or Union Territory and the person responsible for such activities in
such a situation shall obtain necessary permission within a period of six
months. Such permission shall be given once the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests is satisfied that the activities concerned do not
come within the prohibited list and were continuing prior to passing of
this order in a legitimate manner. No new permanent structure shall be
permitted to come up for whatsoever purpose within the ESZ.
56.6. The minimum width of the ESZ may be diluted in
overwhelming public interest but for that purpose the State or Union
Territory concerned shall approach CEC and MoEF&CC and both these
bodies shall give their respective opinions/recommendations before this
Court. On that basis, this Court shall pass appropriate order.
56.7. In the event CEC, MoEF&CC, the Standing Committee of
National Board for Wildlife or any other body of persons or individual
having special interest in environmental issues consider it necessary for
maintaining a wider or larger ESZ in respect of any national park or
wildlife sanctuary, such body or individual shall approach CEC. In such
a situation CEC shall be at liberty to examine the need of a wider ESZ
in respect of any national park or wildlife sanctuary in consultation with
all the stakeholders including the State or Union Territory concerned,
MoEF&CC as also the Standing Committee of the National Board for
Wildlife and then approach this Court with its recommendations.
56.8. In respect of sanctuaries or national parks for which the
proposal of a State or Union Territory has not been given, the 10 km
buffer zone as ESZ, as indicated in the order passed by this Court on 4-
12-2006 in Goa Foundation³ and also contained in the Guidelines of 9-2
-2011 shall be implemented. Within that area, the entire set of
restrictions concerning an ESZ shall operate till a final decision in that
regard is arrived at.
56.9. IA No. 1412 of 2005 and IA No. 117831 of 2019 do not relate
to the issues involved in IA No. 1000 of 2003. These applications may
be placed before the appropriate Bench to be heard independently.
56.10. For the same reason, IA No. 1992 of 2007 shall also be dealt
with independently by the appropriate Bench and no order is being
passed concerning this application at this stage.
56.11. The application of the State of Rajasthan registered as IA No.
3880 of 2015 relates to clarification of an order passed in Goa
Foundation3 [WP (C) No. 460 of 2004]. Let this application be placed
before the Bench taking up the case of Goa Foundation.
56.12. IA No. 96949 of 2019 and IA No. 65571 of 2021 are disposed
of with directions that the MoEF&CC as also CEC shall proceed to take a
decision in regard to the draft proposal for ESZ made by the State of
Maharashtra to the extent of 0-3.89 km and the MoEF&CC shall take
final decision on that basis within a period of three months, if the said
decision has not already been taken.
56.13. Prayers for impleadment of the applicants in IAs Nos. 984 of
2003, 1026, 1123, 1197 and 1251 of 2004 are allowed. Necessary
amendments may be carried out in these regards.
56.14. For the reasons already given, however, prayers of the
applicants in IAs Nos. 982 of 2003, 1027, 1124, 1198, 1210, 1250 of
2004 and 1512 of 2006 are rejected.
56.15. CEC shall quantify the compensation to be recovered from
each miner indulging in mining activities within the Jamua Ramgarh
Sanctuary in violation of any statutory provision or order of this Court.
Specific recommendations for compensatory afforestation, reclamation,
clearing overburden dumping as also compensation in monetary units
for degradation of forest resources shall also be made. A further set of
recommendations concerning confiscation of earth-moving equipments
and other machineries lying within or in the periphery of the said
sanctuary shall be made by CEC. Recommendations shall be made
within a period of four months before this Court in the form of an
application. This Court shall consider passing appropriate order upon
going through such application. The exercise concerning such
reparation, including quantifying compensation shall be undertaken
upon giving the mining operator, State and MoEF&CC opportunity of
hearing.
56.16. In the event there is any subsisting order of any High Court
or any court subordinate to such High Court covering any of the issues
dealt with by this Court in this order, this order shall prevail over any
such order which may be contrary to these directions.
56.17. We have already observed that there are certain overlapping
issues involved in this writ petition and the cases of Goa Foundation
[Writ Petition (C) No. 460 of 2004] and [Writ Petition (C) No. 435 of
2012]. We request the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India to consider
having the present writ petition i.e. T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad, In
re V. Union of India; WP (C) No. 460 of 2004 (Goa Foundation V. Union
of India) as also WP (C) No. 435 of 2012 (Goa Foundation V. Union of
India) be heard together before the same Bench. The Registry may
place this order before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India.
57. This order disposes of IA No. 1000 of 2003 in the above terms.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
+
Recommendation of CEC dated 20-11-2003
# Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India [Allowed]
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
9
10
Supreme Court Monitoring Committee V. Mussoorie Dehradun Development Authority, WP
(C) No. 749 of 1996, order dated 29-11-1996 (SC)
12
13
14
15
16
18
20
21
22
23
24