(2022) 8 Supreme Court Cases 253 : (2022) 3 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DINESH MAHESHWARI AND KRISHNA MURARI, JJ.)
MEKALA SIVAIAH
Appellant;
Versus
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No. 2016 of 2013 decided on July 15, 2022
A. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 302 - Murder trial - Appellant-accused herein
after sprinkling chilli powder into eyes of deceased, stabbed him with knife
on his chest and abdomen, resulting in grievous injuries to him, leading to
his death in hospital - Guilt established beyond reasonable doubt -
Conviction confirmed
- Trial court convicted appellant under S. 302 and sentenced him to
imprisonment for life and fine of Rs 500 with default stipulation of SI for 3
months, which was upheld by High Court
- In instant case, prosecution discharged its duties in proving guilt of
appellant under S. 302 beyond reasonable doubt - Deceased was attacked
by appellant in broad daylight and there is direct evidence available to prove
the same and motive behind attack is also apparent considering there was
previous enmity between appellant and PW 1 (son of deceased) - There is
ample ocular evidence corroborated by medical evidence and mere non-
recovery of weapon from appellant would not materially affect case of
prosecution - Also, minor contradictions cannot be a ground to discredit
testimony of witnesses
- Upon appreciation of evidence of eyewitnesses and other material
adduced by prosecution, courts below, held, were right in convicting
appellant for offence under S. 302 - Hence, conviction of appellant stands
confirmed
(Paras 22 to 27)
B. Penal Code, 1860 - S. 302 - Non-recovery of weapon from accused
- When does not materially affect prosecution case
- Held, when there is ample ocular evidence corroborated by medical
evidence, mere non-recovery of weapon from accused (appellant herein)
would not materially affect case of prosecution - Evidence Act, 1872, S. 27
(Para 26.2)
C. Criminal Trial - Appreciation of Evidence Contradictions,
inconsistencies, exaggerations or embellishments - Minor contradictions or
omission in testimony of witnesses - Not a ground to discredit such
testimony
- Held, testimony of witness in criminal trial cannot be discarded merely
because of minor contradictions or omission - Only contradictions in
material particulars and not minor contradictions can be a ground to
discredit testimony of witnesses
(Paras 23 to 25)
(Cri) 493, followed
D. Constitution of India - Art. 136 - Extraordinary jurisdiction under Art.
136 - When exercisable by Supreme Court - Principles summarised
(Paras 14 and 15)
E. Constitution of India - Art. 136 - Criminal matters - Questions of
fact/Reappreciation of evidence - Concurrent findings of fact whether
based on proper appreciation of evidence - Interference with by Supreme
Court - When warranted - Principles summarised
(Paras 16 to 19)
Appeal dismissed
Y-D/69010/CR
Advocates who appeared in this case :
Ravindra S. Garia (Advocate-on-Record) (SCLSC), Ms Sakshi
Raghuvanshi and Shashank Singh, Advocates, for the Appellant;
Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki (Advocate-on-Record), Polanki Gowtham, Shaik
Mohamad Haneef, T. Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy, K.V. Girish Chowdary and
Ms Rajeswari Mukherjee, Advocates, for the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Pappu V. State of U.P.
258c-d
State of A.P.
254e-f, 255f
of M.P. V. Ramesh
260a
Chetanram Chaudhary V. State of Maharashtra
259d-e, 259e-f
Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai V. State of Gujarat
257b-c
Kaur V. State of Punjab
257g
V. State of U.P.
257a
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA MURARI, J. The appellant has filed the present appeal
against the judgment and order dated 22-6-20121 passed by the High
Court of Judicature of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad (hereinafter
referred to as "the High Court") in Criminal Appeal No. 811 of 2008,
whereby the High Court has dismissed the criminal appeal and upheld
the judgment dated 4-4-2008 passed by the Court of Sessions Judge at
Guntur (hereinafter referred to as "the trial court") whereunder, the
appellant was convicted for the offence under Section 302 of the Penal
Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as "IPC") and was sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Rs 500 and in
default to suffer simple imprisonment for three months.
2. Briefly, the facts relevant for the purpose of this appeal are as
follows : on 6-9-2006, the deceased (father of PW 1) and PW 1 went to
the 14th mile centre of Lemalle Village to sell their vegetables. While
PW 1 was getting the vegetables weighed, the deceased crossed the
road and went to the shop of PW 3 to purchase tobacco leaves. PW 2
and PW 4 were also present at the place of occurrence. Having seen the
deceased, the appellant, armed with a knife, came to the shop of PW 3
and sprinkled chilli powder into the eyes of the deceased,
and stabbed him on the chest and abdomen, resulting in grievous
injuries. The appellant immediately fled from the spot after seeing PWs
1 to 4. The deceased was taken to Government Hospital Amaravathi,
where the doctors declared him dead.
3. On the basis of the aforesaid report given by PW 1, PW 7
registered the case being FIR No. 120/2006 dated 6-9-2006 at PS
Amaravathi for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.
Thereafter, PW 8 and PW 9 visited the place of occurrence, held an
inquest over the dead body of the deceased, examined the
eyewitnesses, arrested the appellant, and filed charge-sheet against
him. On 26-12-2007, charges under Section 302 IPC were framed and
the appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
4. In order to substantiate the case, the prosecution examined nine
witnesses and there was no oral or documentary evidence adduced by
the defence side:
(i) PW 1 : Madhirapalli Srinivasa Rao, son of the deceased
(ii) PW 2 : Shaik China John
(iii) PW 3 : Shaik Subhani, owner of the tobacco shop
(iv) PW 4 : Kovvuri Venkateswara Rao, belong to the same village
as the deceased.
(v) PW 5 : Dr G. Peter Paul, who conducted post-mortem on 7-9-
2006.
(vi) PW 6 : Kalapala Venkaiah, Panchayat Secretary of Endrol
Village.
(vii) PW 7 : I. Govindarajulu, Sub-Inspector of Police, District
Crime Records Bureau.
(viii) PW 8 : T. Ravindra Babu, Inspector of Police.
(ix) PW 9 : K. Jagadishwara Reddy, Circle Inspector of Police.
5. The trial court after analysing the statement made by the
prosecution witnesses, vide judgment and order dated 4-4-2008 held
the appellant guilty of offence under Section 302 IPC and sentenced
him to imprisonment for life.
6. Being aggrieved, the appellant filed Criminal Appeal No. 811 of
2008 before the High Court challenging the trial court's order of
conviction and sentencing. Vide judgment and order dated 22-6-2012 ¹,
the High Court confirmed the judgment of the trial court and observed
that there is no iota of doubt in the case of the prosecution and
therefore, the prosecution has discharged its burden in proving the
guilt of the accused for the offence under Section 302 IPC beyond a
reasonable doubt.
7. We have heard Mr Ravindra S. Garia, learned counsel appearing
for the appellant and Mr Mahfooz A. Nazki, learned counsel appearing
for the State.
8. Mr Ravindra S. Garia, learned counsel appearing for the appellant
vehemently submitted that the weapon (knife) alleged to have been
used by the appellant in the commission of the offence was not seized
by the police and non-seizure of the said weapon is fatal to the case of
the prosecution. It was further submitted that the prosecution failed to
examine the scribe of the FIR and that there was a delay in sending the
FIR to the court.
9. It was further submitted that the presence of eyewitnesses in the
place of occurrence is very doubtful and incredible in the circumstances
and becomes further incredible as none of the so-called eyewitnesses is
even able to describe the weapon of the offence, despite the
prosecution case being that the appellant was apprehended by the
crowd but still he managed to run away. It was further submitted that
the inquest report clearly shows that the alleged eyewitnesses merely
expressed their doubt with respect to the appellant that, due to
previous enmity the appellant might have killed the victim and this
shows they only had a suspicion and were not witnesses to the
incident.
10. It was further submitted that the falsity of the prosecution case
and the theory of the appellant running away in the backdrop of his
receiving treatment for such serious injury in his leg that he had
become invalid for doing labour work and was receiving treatment for
the immediately preceding last six months further makes the case
against the appellant extremely doubtful.
11. Per contra, Mr Mahfooz A. Nazki, learned counsel for the
respondent State has duly supported the conviction and sentencing of
the appellant with reference to the material on record and as regards
the conviction of the appellant, it was submitted that the judgment
passed by the trial court and the High Court after thorough appreciation
of the evidence does not suffer from any infirmity and calls for no
interference. There are no grounds made for reversal of the conviction.
12. It was further submitted that the conviction of the appellant in
the present case is based on the testimony of four eyewitnesses and
the same is absolutely consistent and reliable.
13. We have carefully considered the submissions made at the Bar
and perused the materials placed on record.
14. Before adverting to the merits of the contention raised, it is
important to reiterate that Article 136 of the Constitution of India is an
extraordinary jurisdiction which this Court exercises when it entertains
an appeal by special leave and this jurisdiction, by its very nature, is
exercisable only when this Court is satisfied that it is necessary to
interfere in order to prevent grave or serious miscarriage of justice.
15. It is well settled by judicial pronouncement that Article 136 is
worded in wide terms and powers conferred under the said Article are
not hedged by any technical hurdles. This overriding and exceptional
power is, however, to be exercised sparingly and only in furtherance of
cause of justice. Thus, when the judgment under appeal has resulted in
grave miscarriage of justice by some misapprehension or misreading of
evidence or by ignoring material evidence then this Court is not only
empowered but is well expected to interfere to promote the cause of
justice.
16. It is not the practice of this Court to reappreciate the evidence
for the purpose of examining whether the findings of fact concurrently
arrived at by the trial court and the High Court are correct or not. It is
only in rare and exceptional cases where there is some manifest
illegality or grave and serious miscarriage of justice on account of
misreading or ignoring material evidence, that this Court would
interfere with such finding of fact.
17. Reference may be made to the judgment of the two-Judge
Bench of this Court in Subedar V. State of U.P. 2 wherein this Court,
while considering the scope of interference with the concurrent findings
based on a proper appreciation of evidence, has observed as under :
"8,
This Court undoubtedly does not normally proceed to review
and reappraise for itself the evidence in criminal cases when hearing
appeals under Article 136. But when the judgment under appeal has
resulted in grave miscarriage of justice by some misapprehension or
mistake in the reading of evidence or by ignoring material evidence,
then this Court is not only empowered but is expected to interfere to
promote the cause of justice."
18. In Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai V. State of Gujarat³, a two-
Judge Bench of this Court held that this Court does not interfere with
the concurrent findings of fact unless it is established:
18.1. That the finding is based on no evidence.
18.2. That the finding is perverse, it being such as no reasonable
person could arrive at even if the evidence was taken at its face value.
18.3. The finding is based and built on inadmissible evidence which
evidence, excluded from vision would negate the prosecution case or
substantially discredit or impair it.
18.4. Some vital piece of evidence which would tilt the balance in
favour of the convict has been overlooked, disregarded or wrongly
discarded.
19. This Court does not function as a regular court of appeal in every
criminal case. Normally, the High Court is a final court of appeal and
this Court is only a court of special jurisdiction. This Court would not
therefore reappraise the evidence to determine the correctness of
findings unless there are exceptional circumstances where there is
manifest illegality or grave and serious miscarriage of justice, for
example, the forms of legal process are disregarded or principles of
natural justice are violated or substantial and grave injustice has
otherwise resulted.
20. The principles governing the interference by this Court in a
criminal appeal by way of special leave were further enumerated in
"8. (1) that this Court would not interfere with the concurrent
finding of fact based on pure appreciation of evidence even if it were
to take a different view on the evidence;
(2) that the Court will not normally enter into a reappraisement or
review of the evidence, unless the assessment of the High Court is
vitiated by an error of law or procedure or is based on error of record,
misreading of evidence or is inconsistent with the evidence, for
instance, where the ocular evidence is totally inconsistent with the
medical evidence and so on;
(3) that the Court would not enter into credibility of the evidence
with a view to substitute its own opinion for that of the High Court;
(4) that the Court would interfere where the High Court has
arrived at a finding of fact in disregard of a judicial process,
principles of natural justice or a fair hearing or has acted in violation
of a mandatory provision of law or procedure resulting in serious
prejudice or injustice to the accused;
(5) this Court might also interfere where on the proved facts
wrong inferences of law have been drawn or where the conclusions of
the High Court are manifestly perverse and based on no evidence."
21. The scope and width of appeals under Article 136 has been
elaborately articulated by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Pappu V.
State of U.P. 5 This judgment authored by one of us (Hon'ble Dinesh
Maheshwari, J.) after noticing a catena of judgments on the issue, the
"71. In summation of what has been noticed hereinabove, it is but
clear that as against any judgment/final order or sentence in a
criminal proceeding of the High Court, regular appeals to this Court
are envisaged in relation to the eventualities specified in Article 134
of the Constitution of India and Section 2 of the 1970 Act. The
present one is not a matter covered thereunder and the present
appeals are by special leave in terms of Article 136 of the
Constitution of India. In such an appeal by special leave, where the
trial court and the High Court have concurrently returned the
findings of fact after appreciation of evidence, each and every finding
of fact cannot be contested nor such an appeal could be dealt with as
if
another forum for reappreciation of evidence. Of course, if the
assessment by the trial court and the High Court could be said to be
vitiated by any error of law or procedure or misreading of evidence or
in disregard to the norms of judicial process leading to serious
prejudice or injustice, this Court may, and in appropriate cases
would, interfere in order to prevent grave or serious miscarriage of
justice but, such a course is adopted only in rare and exceptional
cases of manifest illegality. Tersely put, it is not a matter of regular
appeal. This Court would not interfere with the concurrent findings of
fact based on pure appreciation of evidence nor it is the scope of
these appeals that this Court would enter into reappreciation of
evidence so as to take a view different than that taken by the trial
court and approved by the High Court."
22. Coming to the facts of the present case at hand, the deceased
was an agriculturalist and on 14-3-2006, during a quarrel between PW
1 and the appellant, PW 1 gave a beating to the appellant with a stick.
Thereupon, the appellant gave a report against PW 1 in Amaravathi
Police Station and the same was registered as Crime No. 35 of 2006 for
the offence punishable under Sections 324 and 506 IPC. After
completion of investigation, the police filed charge-sheet against PW 1
and the same is pending. In that connection, the appellant demanded
money from PW 1 for treatment of his knee to which both the deceased
as well as PW 1 agreed for payment but on a later date, the deceased
as well as PW 1 refused to pay the appellant. Due to inability to get a
treatment, the appellant became invalid from labour work and that
resulted in the appellant developing a grudge against PW 1 and his
father (deceased). Thereafter, on seeing the deceased coming towards
the tobacco shop of PW 3 on 6-9-2006, the appellant stabbed him on
the chest and abdomen causing grievous injuries to him which
ultimately led to the death of the deceased.
23. The contentions raised by the appellant are on the weaker side
in relation to testimonies of prosecution witnesses as it has been
contended that PW 1 to PW 4 are the supporters of Telugu Desam Party
and their evidence was contradictory with respect to the nature of
injuries inflicted upon the deceased, place of occurrence, etc. The
testimony of a witness in a criminal trial cannot be discarded merely
because of minor contradictions or omission as observed by this Court
in Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary V. State of Maharashtra5, wherein
while considering the issue of contradictions in the testimony, while
appreciating the evidence in a criminal trial, it was held that only
contradictions in material particulars and not minor contradictions can
be a ground to discredit the testimony of the witnesses.
24. In para 42 of the judgment, it has been held as under :
"42. Only such omissions which amount to contradiction in
material particulars can be used to discredit the testimony of the
witness. The omission in the police statement by itself would not
necessarily render the testimony of witness unreliable. When the
version given by the witness in the court is different in material
particulars from that disclosed in his earlier statements, the case of
the prosecution becomes doubtful and not otherwise. Minor
contradictions are bound to appear in the statements of truthful
witnesses as memory sometimes plays false and the sense of
observation differs from person to person. The omissions in the
earlier statement if found to be of trivial details, as in the present
case, the same would not cause any dent in the testimony of PW 2.
Even if there is contradiction of statement of a witness on any
material point, that is no ground to reject the whole of the testimony
of such witness."
25. The same view stands reiterated in the concurring opinion
expressed by this Court in State of M.P. V. Ramesh 7.
26. The facts and evidence in the present case have been squarely
analysed by both the trial court as well as the High Court and the same
can be summarised as follows:
26.1. The prosecution has discharged its duties in proving the guilt
of the appellant for the offence under Section 302 IPC beyond
reasonable doubt.
26.2. When there is ample ocular evidence corroborated by medical
evidence, mere non-recovery of weapon from the appellant would not
materially affect the case of the prosecution.
26.3. If the testimony of an eyewitness is otherwise found
trustworthy and reliable, the same cannot be disbelieved and rejected
merely because certain insignificant, normal or natural contradictions
have appeared into his testimony.
26.4. The deceased has been attacked by the appellant in broad
daylight and there is direct evidence available to prove the same and
the motive behind the attack is also apparent considering there was
previous enmity between the appellant and PW 1.
27. Having considered the aforesaid facts of the present case in
juxtaposition with the judgments referred to above and upon
appreciation of evidence of the eyewitnesses and other material
adduced by the prosecution, the trial court as well as the High Court
were right in convicting the appellant for the offence under Section 302
IPC. Therefore, we do not find any ground warranting interference with
the findings of the trial court and the High Court. As a result, appeal
stands dismissed.
+
1286 (Andhra Pradesh High Court, Hyderabad Bench, Criminal Appeal No. 811 of 2008, dt. 22-
6-2012) [Affirmed]
1
2
3
5
6
(Cri) 1546
7