In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DINESH MAHESHWARI AND BELA M. TRIVEDI, JJ.)
Anju Garg and Another
Appellant(s)
Versus
Deepak Kumar Garg
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No. 1693 of 2022 [Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 10353 of 2018]
Decided on September 28, 2022
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 125 - Maintenance of wife and children - Duty of
Husband - Held, it is the duty of an able-bodied man to earn by legitimate means and
maintain wife and children
Impugned judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court, reversed
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.: - Leave granted.
2. The appellants herein are the wife and the son of the respondent. The present
appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 10th September 2018 passed
by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Revision No.
05/2017, whereby the High Court has dismissed the Revision application filed by the
appellants, challenging the order passed by the District Judge, Family Court-1,
Faridabad, Haryana (hereinafter referred to as the "Family Court"). The Family Court
vide order dated 09.12.2016 had dismissed the Maintenance Petition filed by the
appellants under Section 125 of Cr.P.C., qua the appellant no. 1 -wife (original
applicant no. 1) and her daughter Ms. Megha Garg (original applicant no. 2), and had
allowed the application qua the son-appellant no. 2 (original applicant no. 3) granting
him maintenance allowance of Rs. 6,000/- per month from the date of filing of
application till he attained the age of 18 years.
3. The short facts giving rise to the present Appeal are that the appellant no. 1 and
the respondent had married on 07.12.1991 as per the Hindu rites and out of the said
wedlock, two children i.e., daughter Megha Garg and son Rachit Garg were born on
10.1992 and 11.04.1999 respectively. The appellants (original applicants) filed the
Maintenance Petition under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. seeking maintenance from the
respondent alleging inter-alia that the respondent was subjecting the appellant-wife to
utmost cruelty and physical and mental torture. As a result thereof, she had to leave
her matrimonial home along with children time and again. Allegations were also made
against the respondent that he was demanding Rs. One crore as dowry from the father
of the appellant no. 1. Though, her father had given him Rs. 2,00,000/- in 2005, and
had also made payment of Rs. 4,50,000/- to one Rajdip Soan Industries, on behalf of
the respondent to pay off the loan, the respondent had continued to harass the
appellant. Ultimately, the appellant along with her children left the matrimonial home
in 2010 and started residing in a rental premises. According to the appellants-
applicants, the respondent had failed and neglected to maintain them, and they being
unable to maintain themselves, the Maintenance Petition under section 125 of Cr.P.C.
was filed.
4. The said petition was contested by the respondent by filing a reply. The
respondent while not denying the marriage with the appellant no. 1, had denied the
allegations with regard to the demand of dowry and harassment. He also denied that
he had failed and neglected to maintain the appellants. According to him, the
appellant had left her matrimonial home along with children without any reason. The
respondent while admitting that daughter Megha was born out of his wedlock with the
appellant, had alleged that the appellant no. 2 Master Rachit was not his biological
son.
5. The Family Court vide the order dated 15.07.2014 had granted Interim
Maintenance Allowance of Rs. 40,000/- per month in favour of the appellants,
however, the daughter Megha having attained majority, no interim maintenance was
granted to her. It appears that the respondent had filed an application in the Family
Court praying for the DNA test to substantiate his allegation that the son Rachit was
not his biological son, however his application was dismissed by the Family Court vide
order dated 19.02.2014. It further appears that despite issuance of conditional
warrants of arrest against the respondent by the Family Court, he had failed to appear
in the Court and to make payment of interim maintenance, and therefore his defence
was also struck off vide the order dated 16.07.2015. The respondent had challenged
all the three orders passed by the Family Court, by filing Revision Applications before
the High Court, however, in none of the said proceedings, the High Court had granted
any stay of the proceedings of the Family Court. The appellant-wife, therefore, in
support of her petition examined herself along with other 04 witnesses and adduced
documentary evidence, The Family Court after appreciating the said evidence passed
the order rejecting the application of appellant no. 1 and her daughter, and granting
maintenance allowance of Rs. 6,000/- per month to the appellant no. 2 (original
applicant no. 3). As stated earlier, being aggrieved by the same, the appellants had
preferred the revision application before the High Court, which has been dismissed
vide the impugned order.
6. This Court at the request of Id. counsel for the parties had referred the matter to
the Supreme Court Mediation Centre for exploring the possibility of settlement,
however, the same having failed, this Court had passed the following order on
17.08.2022:-
"It has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the parties that the
efforts for settlement have not fructified. Hence, we have commenced
hearing of the matter.
During the course of submissions, learned counsel for the petitioners has
made a pertinent point that the respondent-husband indeed leveled
allegation of the personal nature against the petitioner No. 1 questioning
her chastity, particularly with reference to the birth of the son and
therefore, she cannot be said to be unjustified in living separate.
We have taken note of the submissions so made and have posed the
question to the learned counsel for respondent that prima facie the
petitioner No. 1 appears to be justified in living separately and if that be so,
her entitlement to claim maintenance cannot be ignored.
Learned counsel for the respondent prays for time to complete his
instructions as also to advice the respondent appropriately.
Time, as prayed for, is allowed."
7. The Court thereafter had heard the learned counsel for the parties, as also the
respondent who was present in person in the Court on 16.09.2022.
8. The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently submitted that the High Court
had passed the impugned order in a very perfunctory manner without appreciating the
conduct of the respondent during the proceedings before the Family Court. He
submitted that the version of the appellant-wife, who had stepped into the witness
box, as also the version of the other witnesses examined by her had remained
unchallenged, as the Family Court had closed the right of the respondent to cross-
examine the witnesses and, therefore, there was no reason for the Family Court not to
believe the version of the appellant-wife which was stated by her on oath. However,
the Family Court accepted all the oral submissions of the learned counsel for the
respondent, without there being any evidence on record adduced by the respondent,
and disallowed the Maintenance application qua the appellant-wife, and the High Court
also erroneously confirmed the said order passed by the Family Court. The learned
counsel for the respondent however submitted that the appellant-wife had left the
matrimonial home along with the children without any justifiable reason and had failed
to prove that she was unable to maintain herself. He further submitted that though
the respondent has a party plot, the same having been closed, he has no source of
income. According to him, the concurrent findings of facts recorded by the two courts,
should not be interfered by this Court.
9. At the outset, it may be noted that Section 125 of Cr.P.C. was conceived to
ameliorate the agony, anguish and financial suffering of a woman who is required to
leave the matrimonial home, so that some suitable arrangements could be made to
enable her to sustain herself and the children, as observed by this Court in Bhuwan
Mohan Singh V. Meena1. This Court in the said case, after referring to the earlier
decisions, has reiterated the principle of law as to how the proceedings under Section
125 Cr.P.C have to be dealt with by the Court. It held as under:
16.
//
Proceedings under Section 125 [of the Code], it must be
remembered, are of a summary nature and are intended to enable
destitute wives and children, the latter whether they are legitimate or
illegitimate, to get maintenance in a speedy manner."
3. "Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is meant to achieve a
social purpose. The object is to prevent vagrancy and destitution. It
provides a speedy remedy for the supply of food, clothing, and shelter to
the deserted wife."
9. A two-Judge Bench in Kirtikant D. Vadodaria V. State of Gujarat (1996) 4
15.
11 While dealing with the ambit and scope of the provision
contained in Section 125 of the Code, it has to be borne in mind that the
dominant and primary object is to give social justice to the woman, child
and infirm parents, etc. and to prevent destitution and vagrancy by
compelling those who can support those who are unable to support
themselves but have a moral claim for support. The provisions in Section
125 provide a speedy remedy to those women, children and destitute
parents who are in distress. The provisions in Section 125 are intended to
achieve this special purpose. The dominant purpose behind the
benevolent provisions contained in Section 125 clearly is that the wife,
child and parents should not be left in a helpless state of distress,
destitution and starvation."
p. 320, para 6)
6.
" Section 125 CrPC is a measure of social justice and is specially
enacted to protect women and children and as noted by this Court in
reinforced by Article 39 of the Constitution of India. It is meant to
achieve a social purpose. The object is to prevent vagrancy and
destitution. It provides a speedy remedy for the supply of food, clothing
and shelter to the deserted wife. It gives effect to fundamental rights and
natural duties of a man to maintain his wife, children and parents when
they are unable to maintain themselves. The aforesaid position was
:
is a piece of social legislation which provides for a summary and speedy
relief by way of maintenance to a wife who is unable to maintain herself
and her children".
10. This Court had made the above observations as the Court felt that the Family
Court in the said case had conducted the proceedings without being alive to the
objects and reasons, and the spirit of the provisions under Section 125 of the Code.
Such an impression has also been gathered by this Court in the case on hand. The
Family Court had disregarded the basic canon of law that it is the sacrosanct duty of
the husband to provide financial support to the wife and to the minor children. The
husband is required to earn money even by physical labour, if he is an able-bodied,
and could not avoid his obligation, except on the legally permissible grounds
mentioned in the statute. In Chaturbhuj V. Sita Bar it has been held that the object
of maintenance proceedings is not to punish a person for his past neglect, but to
prevent vagrancy and destitution of a deserted wife, by providing her food, clothing,
and shelter by a speedy remedy. As settled by this Court, Section 125 Cr.P.C. is a
measure of social justice and is specially enacted to protect women and children. It
also falls within the Constitutional sweep of Article 15(3), reinforced by Article 39 of
the Constitution of India.
11. The Family Court, in the instant case had not only over-looked and disregarded
the aforesaid settled legal position, but had proceeded with the proceedings in
absolutely pervert manner. The very fact that the right of the respondent to cross-
examine the witnesses of the appellant-original applicant was closed, as he had failed
to appear before the Family Court despite the issuance of warrants, clearly established
that he had no regards for his own family nor had any regards for the Court or for the
law. The allegations made by the appellant-wife in her evidence before the Court had
remained unchallenged and, therefore, there was no reason for the Family Court to
disbelieve her version, and to believe the oral submissions made by the learned
counsel appearing for the respondent which had no basis. In absence of any evidence
on record adduced by the respondent disputing the evidence adduced by the
appellant, the Family Court could not have passed the order believing the oral
submissions of the learned counsel for the respondent. She had clearly stated as to
how she was harassed and subjected to cruelty by the respondent, which had
constrained her to leave the matrimonial home along with her children, and as to how
the respondent had failed and neglected to maintain her and her children. She had
also proved by producing the documentary evidence that her father had paid money to
the respondent from time to time to help the respondent for his business. Even if the
allegations of demand of dowry by the respondent were not believed, there was
enough evidence to believe that money was being paid to the respondent by the father
of the appellant-wife, which substantiated her allegation that the respondent was
demanding money from her father and was subjecting her to harassment. The errant
respondent had also gone to the extent of questioning her chastity alleging that Rachit
was not his biological son. There was nothing on record to substantiate his such
baseless allegations. His application for DNA test was also rejected by the Family
Court. Of course, the Family Court granted the Maintenance petition so far as the
appellant no. 2-son was concerned, nonetheless had thoroughly mis-directed itself by
not granting the maintenance to the appellant-wife.
12. Such an erroneous and perverse order of Family Court was unfortunately
confirmed by the High Court by passing a very perfunctory impugned order. The High
Court, without assigning any reasons, passed the impugned order in a very casual
manner. This Court would have remanded the matter back to the High Court for
considering it afresh, however considering the fact that the matter has been pending
before this Court since the last four years, and remanding it back would further delay
the proceedings, this Court deemed it proper to pass this order.
13. Though it was sought to be submitted by the learned counsel for the
respondent, and by the respondent himself that he has no source of income as his
party business has now been closed, the Court is neither impressed by nor is ready to
accept such submissions. The respondent being an able-bodied, he is obliged to earn
by legitimate means and maintain his wife and the minor child. Having regard to the
evidence of the appellant-wife before the Family Court, and having regard to the other
evidence on record, the Court has no hesitation in holding that though the respondent
had sufficient source of income and was able-bodied, had failed and neglected to
maintain the appellants. Considering the totality of facts and circumstances, we deem
it proper to grant maintenance allowance of Rs. 10,000/- per month to the appellant-
wife, over and above the maintenance allowance of Rs. 6,000/- granted by the Family
Court to the appellant no. 2-son.
14. It is accordingly directed that the respondent shall pay maintenance amount of
Rs. 10,000/- per month to the appellant-wife from the date of filing of her
Maintenance Petition before the Family Court. The entire amount of arrears shall be
deposited by the respondent in the Family Court within eight weeks from today, after
adjusting the amount, if any, already paid or deposited by him.
15. The appeal stands allowed accordingly.
1