(2022) 6 Supreme Court Cases 223 : (2022) 3 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE A.M. KHANWILKAR, DINESH MAHESHWARI AND KRISHNA MURARI, JJ.)
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH THROUGH SECRETARY
(EXCISE) AND OTHERS
Appellants;
Versus
MCDOWELL AND COMPANY LIMITED
Respondent.
Civil Appeals Nos. 169 of 2022 and 170 of 2022 decided on
January 5, 2022
A. Entertainment, Amusement, Leisure and Sports - Liquor - Excise
Duty - Liquor produced but destroyed in fire incident - Exigibility of, to
excise duty under the Act and Rules concerned, when cause of incident
attributable to negligence of the assessee - Short circuit of electricity in the
premises - Whether amounted to an Act of God/Inevitable incident -
Doctrine of res ipsa loquitur i.e. the accident "speaks for itself"/tells its own
story - Applicability of - Insurance coverage taken on the value of liquor
alone i.e. not covering the excise duty part - Consideration of, as itself
amounting to negligence
- Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) of different brands got destroyed
in a fire incident at the distillery of the respondent Company and
Department sought to recover the amount of excise duty lost, due to such
destruction of liquor - There had been indications that the officers had seen
burnt wires; and it was reported that the fire "possibly" took place because
of short circuit - Also, the Excise Commissioner, in his Order dt. 11-7-2006,
inferred that short circuit could have taken place in old electric wiring in the
godown and in that context, observed that the licensee had not arranged
the fireproof electric equipments of good quality, which led to the incident in
question
- Held, to accept the case of respondent Company about it being an
"inevitable accident", it is to be seen if preventing of the fire in question
would have required a degree of care from the respondent Company beyond
or exceeding the standard demanded by law - The fire had not generated
on its own and, with appropriately laid fireproof electrical installations as
also firefighting measures, the incident was an avoidable one or at least the
loss could have been minimised - Further, even if case was taken to be
that of inadvertence or of unintentional omission on the part of the
respondent Company, it would fall within the definition of "negligence" for
the purpose of R. 709 of the Excise Manual - Also, not taking of insurance
coverage of the
excise duty while taking such coverage on the value of liquor itself amounts to
negligence on the part of the respondent Company
- In the present case, held : (i) the demand raised by the appellants
against the respondent Company, of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire,
was authorised by law; (ii) the fire incident in question cannot be said to be
that of an event beyond human control i.e. negligence could be imputed on
the respondent Company; (iii) the fact that the respondent Company had
taken insurance coverage only of the value of liquor (and not that of excise
duty thereupon) and then, had received the insurance claim towards the
value of liquor also operates against the respondent Company and fortifies
the conclusion of negligence of the respondent Company
- U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (4 of 1910) - Ss. 17 to 19, 28 and 29 - U.P.
Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 - R. 7(11) - U.P. Excise Manual -
Rr. 709 and 813 - Tort Law - Negligence - Res Ipsa Loquitur - Insurance
- Fire Special Perils Insurance - Cause of fire whether attributable to
negligence of the assured
(Paras 81 to 101.3)
B. Entertainment, Amusement, Leisure and Sports - Liquor - Excise
Duty - Liquor produced but destroyed in fire incident - Exigibility of, to
excise duty under the Act and Rules concerned when cause of incident
attributable to negligence of the assessee - Control and supervision of the
Excise Department over warehouse/distillery for liquor as per the U.P.
Excise Act, U.P. Excise Manual and applicable Bottling Rules - Irrelevance
of, for alleviating/establishing negligence of the assessee
- The purpose of posting Excise Officers in the distillery is for securing
the interest of the State by collection of revenue and to put a check over
any act of theft, wastage, illegal sale as also to ensure proper
implementation of rules - Held, the applicable Rules concerned in their
conspectus provide for strict supervision and control of the Excise
Department over the working of distillery at every stage but that
supervision and control does not correspondingly absolve the distillery of its
duty and responsibility towards safe custody of the stock of spirit and
towards avoidance of wastage
- U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (4 of 1910) - Ss. 17 to 19, 28 and 29 - U.P.
Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 - R. 7(11) - U.P. Excise Manual -
Rr. 736, 709 and 813 - Tort Law - Negligence
(Paras 65 and 66)
C. Entertainment, Amusement, Leisure and Sports - Liquor
Excise
Duty - Liquor produced but destroyed in fire incident - Exigibility of, to
excise duty when cause of incident attributable to negligence - Negligence
- Requirements for establishment of - Summarised
- Held, failure to exercise that care which a reasonably prudent person
would usually exercise under similar circumstances would amount to
negligence - Further, it is not necessary that negligence would always be
advertent one where the wrongdoer is aware of unreasonable risk being
created
but it may be inadvertent or passive too, arising for want of foresight or because of
some omission
- U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (4 of 1910) - Ss. 17 to 19, 28 and 29 - U.P.
Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 - R. 7(11) - U.P. Excise Manual
Rr. 709 and 813 - Tort Law - Negligence - Words and Phrases -
"Negligence"
(Paras 67 to 71)
D. Entertainment, Amusement, Leisure and Sports - Liquor -
Excise
Duty - Liquor produced but destroyed in fire incident - Exigibility of, to
excise duty under the Act and Rules concerned when cause of incident
attributable to negligence of the assessee - Defence against negligence on
the plea of incident being an "act of God" - Non-establishment of - "Act
of
God" - When inapplicable
- The expression "act of God" signifies the operation of natural force
free from human intervention, such as lightning - Held, the present case
was not a case where anything related with the forces of nature like storm,
floods, lightning or earthquake had been in operation or caused the fire -
Further, when nothing of any external natural force had been in operation in
violent or sudden manner, the event of the fire in question could be
referable to anything but to an act of God in legal parlance
- U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (4 of 1910) - Ss. 17 to 19, 28 and 29 - U.P.
Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 - R. 7(11) - U.P. Excise Manual -
Rr. 709 and 813 - Tort Law - Negligence - Causation of harm/Causality
- "Act of God" - What is - Words and Phrases - "Act of God" - What is
(Paras 72 to 79)
E. Entertainment, Amusement, Leisure and Sports - Liquor - U.P. Excise
Act, 1910 (4 of 1910) - Ss. 17 to 19, 28 and 29 - Duty of excise on liquor
under - When becomes exigible - Event of chargeability - Consideration
of, as being distinct from the event of quantification of duty i.e. the date of
issue for sale
- Held, the liquor in question was manufactured by the respondent
Company in its distillery established under S. 18 of the 1910 Act - Thus,
the liquor that had been produced, became exigible to excise duty at the
end of the distillation process when it was received in storage/bottling
tanks or when it was issued from the distillery i.e. the taxable event was
production or manufacture of this liquor, for it being a duty upon the goods
and not upon sale or proceeds of sale of the goods - Constitution of India,
Art. 265
(Paras 54 to 57)
F. Entertainment, Amusement, Leisure and Sports - Liquor - Excise
Duty - Liquor produced but destroyed in fire incident - Exigibility of, to
excise duty under the Act and Rules concerned when cause of incident
attributable to negligence of the assessee - Applicability of R. 7(11) of the
1969 Rules even where demand is referable to R. 709 of the U.P. Excise
Manual - R. 7(11) of the 1969 Rules and R. 709 of the Excise Manual -
Relative scope
- High Court, inter alia gave the findings that R. 7(11)(a) of the 1969
Rules was not applicable in the matter because there was no wastage in
handling operations of bottling and storage of IMFL and that R. 709 of the
Excise Manual was attracted for which negligence was required to be shown
- Held, R. 7(11) of the 1969 Rules is required to be taken into account for
the legal consequences that so far as the bottled spirit is concerned, the
licensee remains responsible for payment of duty on any kind of wastage in
excess of 1% - Further, coupled with this provision, R. 709 of the Excise
Manual makes it clear that the distillery remains responsible for safe
custody of the stock of spirit and remains liable to make good any loss of
revenue caused to the Government by their negligence - U.P. Bottling of
Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 - R. 7(11) - U.P. Excise Manual - R. 709 -
Tort Law - Negligence
(Paras 2.4 and 58 to 60)
G. Doctrines and Maxims - Res Ipsa Loquitur - Principles governing -
Summarised - Tort Law - Negligence - Words and Phrases - "Res ipsa
loquitur"
(Paras 82 to 86)
A fire incident took place in a godown of the distillery of the respondent
Company on 10-4-2003. As many as 35,642 cases of Indian Made Foreign Liquor
("IMFL") of different brands got destroyed in this fire. After receiving the initial
reports that the fire possibly took place due to short circuit of electricity, the
Department proposed to recover the amount of excise duty lost, due to such
destruction of liquor, from the respondent Company. The respondent maintained
that there was no negligence on its part and, therefore, no case for recovery of the
alleged loss of excise duty was made out under Rule 7(11) of the Uttar Pradesh
Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 ("the 1969 Rules") and Rule 709 of the Uttar
Pradesh Excise Manual ("the Excise Manual").
However, the Excise Commissioner, by his Order dated 11-7-2006, rejected the
submissions of the respondent and raised a demand to the tune of Rs
6,39,32,449.44 towards loss of excise revenue on account of destruction of liquor.
Accordingly, the District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur asked the respondent to deposit
the amount within one week.
Assailing the demand and recovery steps the respondent Company preferred a
writ petition.
The writ petition so filed by the respondent Company was allowed by the High
Court in its impugned order dated 10-4-2017, essentially with findings that Rule 7
(11)(a of the 1969 Rules was not applicable in the matter because there was no
wastage in handling operations of bottling and storage of IMFL; that Rule 709 of the
Excise Manual was attracted for which negligence was required to be shown; that
the order passed by the Excise Commissioner was based on conjectures and
without any cogent evidence about negligence on the part of the writ petitioner;
and that the incident was nothing but an act of God. The High Court, accordingly,
set aside the impugned orders of demand and recovery towards the alleged loss of
excise revenue. Thereafter, for the Department having failed to refund the amount
deposited pursuant to the interim order in the writ petition, the respondent
Company moved an application before the High Court whereupon, by
the order dated 6-11-2019, the High Court directed the Excise Commissioner to
take a decision on the application for refund within four weeks.
Before the fire
On 19-9-2002, the Assistant Electricity Inspector, Government of Uttar
Pradesh, Shahjahanpur Zone, Shahjahanpur, after having conducted a periodical
inspection of the said premises of the respondent Company, inter alia made the
following observations pertaining to the electrical installations:
"Rule 35 : It is found that CAUTION place is not placed at certain prominent
places. The same should be placed/installed.
Rule 61(2) : At one point of Turbine's Distribution Board Panel, earth wiring
has been done with a thin wire. Hence the same should be removed and strip
earthing should be done."
In response to the aforesaid, the respondent Company stated, in its letter dated 23-9-2002,
that the work pointed out in the report had been completed.
The surest way t to legal research!"
Apart from the above, it appears that certain modification/upgradation work
was undertaken at the production plant in the distillery and in that regard, the Excise
Inspector, Production Section, Rosa Distillery, Shahjahanpur, in his Letter dated 26-
12-2002, advised the respondent that electrical and gas welding jobs be performed
carefully with full safety, while ensuring standard methods of fire safety and the
required firefighting devices. The said Excise Inspector cautioned the respondent
that "You will be responsible for any loss of revenue/other loss if that occurs due to
your carelessness."
On 1-3-2003, the office of Fire Brigade Officer, Shahjahanpur issued a no-
objection certificate of Fire Fighting Department for the period between 6-2-2003
to 30-9-2003 after carrying out inspection of the premises in question. In this
inspection, the Fire Brigade Officer took note of the fact that different types of fire
extinguishers and other firefighting instruments were at the right place and were in
working condition, which were refilled by the Chief Engineer of the respondent
Company. However, a direction was given with regard to the refilling and testing of
the instruments; and Foam Installation was also suggested for better firefighting
arrangements.
The fire incident and relevant reports
It has been the case of the respondent Company that the godown in question
was locked for lunch at 12 : 00 noon on 10-4-2003 under joint lock and key of the
Excise Inspector in-charge of the distillery and the company's representative and at
that time, nothing objectionable was noticed and the stocks were in safe condition.
However, at about 12.55 p.m., smoke was noticed emitting from the godown.
Thereupon, the Excise Inspector in-charge of the distillery was immediately
informed and the joint locks were opened; and it was noticed that the stocks of
IMFL were on fire. The information about this fire was given to the Police
Department and also to the Fire Department and other Excise Authorities. As per
the averments and the material on record, it appears that the firefighters could
bring the fire under control only by 5.00 a.m. on 11-4-2003.
It is borne out that upon receiving information about the incident in question, the
Deputy Excise Commissioner, Bareilly, reached the distillery at about 6.30 p.m. on
10-4-2003 and carried out spot inspection with other officers of the Department
and the Manager Personnel of the respondent Company. In his initial report drawn
on spot inspection, the said Deputy Excise Commissioner took note of the efforts
being made for controlling and dousing the fire as also damage to a substantial
quantity of liquor; and also indicated that upon enquiring about the possible reasons
of this fire, he was informed that the same took place, probably, due to short circuit
in the electricity supply. According to the appellants, even the Station House Officer
concerned opined in his investigation Report dated 11-4-2003 that the reason for
fire was short circuit of electricity.
On 13-4-2003, the Fire Brigade Officer of Uttar Pradesh Fire Service also drew
up the report about the incident and the efforts made for controlling the fire. He,
however, indicated that the reason of fire was unknown.
Another Report dated 2-8-2003 was submitted by the Assistant Excise
Commissioner, Rosa Distillery, Shahjahanpur to the Excise Commissioner, detailing
out the statements of stock of liquor saved as also the stock destroyed in fire and
his comments on the cause of fire. The relevant part of this report could be usefully
extracted as under:
"(f) Cause of Fire:
no fact or evidence came to my knowledge, which indicates that there was
any negligence either on the part of Distiller or on the part of Excise Staff
deputed in the Distillery. It also does not appear that the said incident was
deliberately done by any of them.
*
*
*
In the report of Station House Officer reason of incident is possibly due to
short circuit in electricity. I had also seen the burned cable in debris, but in my
opinion Nothing can be confirmed. It can be such an incident, in which reason is
Unknown."
The issues before the Supreme Court were:
(1) Whether demand of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire is authorised by
law and has rightly been raised as per the applicable provisions of the 1910 Act,
the Excise Manual and the 1969 Rules?
(2) Whether the fire incident in question had been an event beyond human
control and no negligence could be imputed on the respondent Company?
(3) What would be the effect of the fact that the respondent Company had
taken insurance coverage only of the value of liquor (and not that of excise duty
thereupon) and then, had received the insurance claim towards the value of
liquor?
Held :
The law relating to intoxicating liquors and intoxicating drugs in the State of Uttar
Pradesh is principally governed by the provisions contained in the U.P. Excise Act,
1910.
(Para 46)
IMFL destroyed in fire in this case undoubtedly answered to the description of
"spirit", "liquor" and "excisable article" within the meaning of clauses (8), (11) and
The surest way legal research!"
(22-a) of Section 3 of the 1910 Act, for being an intoxicating liquor containing
alcohol obtained by distillation; and the same was manufactured under a licence
granted in terms of Section 17 in the distillery of the respondent and was kept in
the warehouse established in terms of Section 18 of the 1910 Act. Thus, this liquor
(IMFL) could not have been removed from the place of storage unless excise duty
payable thereupon had been paid or a bond was executed for the payment thereof.
The duty was payable in terms of Section 28 and its rate was to be that as
applicable on the date of its issue from the warehouse in terms of Section 29. An
allowance up to 1% was admissible on the total quantity of liquor stored during a
month for actual loss in bottling and storage and else, no wastage allowance as
such was admissible thereupon.
(Para 49)
Moreover, the Government was not to be liable for any loss in the quantity of
this stored liquor for whatever reason; and on the other hand, the distillery i.e. the
respondent was to be responsible for the safe custody thereof and also liable to
make good any loss of revenue including owing to any loss during storage beyond
permissible one per cent of the total quantity. Considering that mandate, the
respondent was solely liable for payment of excise duty on wastage of stored total
quantity with allowance only up to one per cent, as specified.
(Para 50)
Whether the demand in question is authorised by law?
The main plank of submissions on behalf of the respondent Company has been
that the point of quantification and calculation of excise duty being the point of issue
from the bonded warehouse and that point/stage having not reached in relation to
the liquor destroyed in fire, the question of demand of excise duty would not arise.
It has also been submitted that Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules has no application and
only Rule 709 of the Excise Manual could apply for which, negligence on the part of
the distillery is required to be proved.
(Para 51)
On whether the demand is unauthorised for the reason that the point/stage
of quantification and calculation of duty had not reached and liquor got
destroyed while lying in warehouse:
In terms of Article 265 of the Constitution, both levy and collection of tax must
be authorised by law. It remains equally trite that by virtue of Entry 51 of List II, the
State has been authorised to impose duty of excise on alcoholic liquors for human
consumption manufactured or produced in the State. The question raised on behalf
of the respondent Company, about the authority of the appellant State to levy
excise duty on the liquor in question that was destroyed in fire and had not reached
the point of issue, could be adequately answered with reference to the principles
concerning the event and the point where entitlement of the State to levy excise
duty, and corresponding liability of the respondent to make payment thereof,
comes into existence.
(Para 53)
A duty of excise under Section 28 is primarily levied upon a manufacturer or
producer in respect of the excisable commodity manufactured or produced
irrespective of its sale. Firstly, it is a duty upon excisable goods, not upon sale or
proceeds of sale of the goods. It is related to production or manufacture of
excisable goods. The taxable event is the production or manufacture of the liquor.
Secondly, an excise duty imposed on the manufacture and production of excisable
goods does not cease to be so merely because the duty is levied at a stage
subsequent to manufacture or production.
(Para 54)
A.B. Abdulkadir V. State of Kerala, AIR 1962 SC 922; Bimal Chandra Banerjee V.
Undoubtedly, the liquor in question was manufactured by the respondent
Company in its distillery established under Section 18. Thus, the liquor that had
been produced, became exigible to excise duty at the end of the distillation process
when it was received in storage/bottling tanks or when it was issued from the
distillery. To put it differently, the taxable event was production or manufacture of
this liquor, for it being a duty upon the goods and not upon sale or proceeds of sale
of the goods.
(Para 56)
A comprehensive look at the scheme of Sections 17 to 19 and 28 and 29 of the
1910 Act and the enunciations of the Supreme Court leave nothing to doubt that in
respect of the liquor that had undergone the process of distillation, exigibility to
excise duty had occurred at the end of the distillation process or when it was issued
from the distillery. The point of quantification of this duty, even if linked in point of
time to the date of issue for sale in terms of the proviso to Section 29, does not
relate to the "event of chargeability" that had occurred as soon as the liquor was
distilled and received in the bottling tank or had been otherwise issued from
distillery. In other words, the liquor that was lying stored in the bonded warehouse
had already become subject to the excise duty, with postponement of actual
charging of the duty as per the rate applicable on the date and time of issue for sale
from the warehouse. It gets perforce reiterated that taxable event was production
or manufacture, and not sale, of the liquor. In this view of the matter, the
submission that the levy in question is not authorised by law, and is hit by Article
The surest way t to legal research!"
265 of the Constitution, remains untenable and is required to be rejected.
(Para 57)
Though the demand in question would be essentially referable to Rule 709 of the
Excise Manual, but Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules provides for an allowance up to
1% on the total quantity of spirit stored during a month towards actual loss in
bottling and storage; and the licensee is responsible for payment of duty on the
wastage in excess of 1%.
(Para 59)
A comprehensive look at the relevant provisions of law makes it clear that so far
as IMFL is concerned, no provision is made in the Excise Manual for any wastage
allowance in relation to the bottled sprit, but, in terms of Rule 7(11) of the 1969
Rules, an allowance up to 1% on the total quantity of spirit stored during a month
may be allowed for actual loss in bottling and storage. Any allowance for any
wastage or loss beyond the same remains, obviously, impermissible. The logic is
not far to seek. In respect of the liquor that had undergone the process of
distillation, exigibility to excise duty had occurred at the end of the distillation
process or when it was issued from the distillery. Thus, any loss or wastage of
the bottled spirit would be directly a loss of excise duty it had already become
exigible to. The rule-making authority has taken abundant care to ensure that there
is no pilferage of the excise revenue available to the Government on the bottled
spirit by any act of wastage, while making the licensee responsible for payment of
duty on wastage in excess of 1% on the total quantity of spirit stored during the
month. Thus, neither the submissions on behalf of the respondent Company nor
the observations of the High Court about the total inapplicability of Rule 7(11) could
be accepted. In other words, Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules is required to be taken
into account for the legal consequences that so far as the bottled spirit is
concerned, the licensee remains responsible for payment of duty on any kind of
wastage in excess of 1%. Coupled with this provision, Rule 709 of the Excise
Manual makes it clear that the distillery remains responsible for safe custody of the
stock of spirit and remains liable to make good any loss of revenue caused to the
Government by their negligence.
(Para 60)
The demand in question cannot be said to be unauthorised but, its validity would
depend on answer to the question as to whether negligence could be imputed on
the respondent Company in terms of Rule 709 of the Excise Manual.
(Para 61)
Whether respondent Company remains liable to pay excise duty on the
liquor lost in fire
Control of Department over the distillery and godown - Effect of
In the scheme of the 1910 Act, the 1969 Rules and the Excise Manual, it is
evident that the Government is not liable for destruction, loss or damage of any
spirit stored in distillery by fire or theft or any other cause (as per Rule 708 of the
Excise Manual). On the other hand, distillery is made responsible for safe custody of
the stock of spirit and is also made liable to make good any loss of revenue caused
to the Government by their negligence.
(Para 65)
The rules in their conspectus provide for strict supervision and control of the
Excise Department over the working of distillery at every stage but that supervision
and control does not correspondingly absolve the distillery of its duty and
responsibility towards safe custody of the stock of spirit and towards avoidance of
wastage. Any doubt in that regard is effectively quelled by a combined reading of
Rules 708 and 709 of the Excise Manual as also Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules.
(Para 66)
Negligence
Failure to exercise that care which a reasonably prudent person would usually
exercise under similar circumstances would amount to negligence; it is not
necessary that negligence would always be advertent one where the wrongdoer is
aware of unreasonable risk being created but it may be inadvertent or passive too,
arising for want of foresight or because of some omission. However, the question
as to whether the liability because of negligence could be fastened on the
respondent Company or not cannot be determined without dealing with the other
aspects related with exceptions and defence to the allegation of negligence.
(Para 71)
Grill V. General Iron Screw Colliery Co., (1866) LR 1 CP 600, referred to
Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th Edn., p. 349; Concise Oxford English Dictionary,
11th Edn., p. 958; Webster's Third New International Dictionary, 1976 Edn., Vol.
II, p. 1513; Black's Law Dictionary, 10th Edn., pp. 1196-1198; P. Ramanatha
Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon, 5th Edn., Vol. 3, p. 3435; Salmond on
Jurisprudence, 12th Edn., p. 380, referred to
Act of God
The expression "act of God" signifies the operation of natural force free from
human intervention, such as lightning. It may be thought to include such
unexpected occurrences of nature as severe gale, snowstorms, hurricanes,
cyclones and tidal-bures and the like. But every unexpected wind and storm does
not operate as an excuse from liability, if there is a reasonable possibility of
anticipating their happening. An act of God provides no excuse, unless it is so
unexpected that no reasonable human foresight could be presumed to anticipate
the occurrence, having regard to the conditions of time and place known to be
prevailing at.
(Para 73)
referred to
P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon, 5th Edn., p. 83; R.F.V. Heuston;
Salmond on the Law of Torts (17th Edn., 1977), p. 330, cited
The present one had not been a case where anything related with the forces of
nature like storm, floods, lightning or earthquake had been in operation or caused
the fire. When nothing of any external natural force had been in operation in violent
or sudden manner, the event of the fire in question could be referable to anything
but to an act of God in legal parlance.
(Para 79)
Inevitable accident
Accident, like mistake, is either culpable or inevitable. It is culpable when due to
negligence, but inevitable when the avoidance of it would have required a degree of
care exceeding the standard demanded by the law. Culpable accident is no defence,
save in those exceptional cases in which wrongful intent is the exclusive and
necessary ground of liability. Inevitable accident is commonly a good defence, both
in the civil and in the criminal law.
(Para 80)
Salmond, 12th Edn., p. 399, referred to
To this rule, however, there are, at least, in the civil law, important exceptions.
These are cases in which the law insists that a man shall act at his peril, and shall
take his chance of accidents happening.
(Para 80)
To accept the case of respondent Company about it being an "inevitable
accident", it is to be seen if preventing of the fire in question would have required a
degree of care from the respondent Company beyond or exceeding the standard
demanded by law. The question would thus be as to what had been the normal and
reasonable requirement for safe custody of the liquor in question and if the
respondent Company, despite having attended on all such normal and reasonable
requirements, could not have prevented the fire in question.
(Para 81)
Res ipsa loquitur
The maxim res ipsa loquitur is resorted to when an accident is shown to have
occurred and the cause of the accident is primarily within the knowledge of the
defendant. The mere fact that the cause of the accident is unknown does not
prevent the plaintiff from recovering the damages, if the proper inference to be
drawn from the circumstances which are known is that it was caused by the
negligence of the defendant. The fact of the accident may, sometimes, constitute
evidence of negligence and then the maxim res ipsa loquitur applies.
(Para 83)
Scott V. London & St. Katherine Docks Co., (1865) 3 H&C 596 : 159 ER 665;
Barkway V. South Wales Transport Co. Ltd., (1950) 1 All ER 392, 399 (HL), relied
on
The general purport of the words res ipsa loquitur is that the accident "speaks
for itself" or tells its own story. There are cases in which the accident speaks for
itself so that it is sufficient for the plaintiff to prove the accident and nothing more.
It will then be for the defendant to establish that the accident happened due to
some other cause than his own negligence.
(Para 86)
Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi V. Ranjit Ginning & Pressing Co. (P) Ltd., (1977) 2
The respondent Company remains liable
In this case, the warehouse in question indeed got engulfed in fire and that led to
destruction of the liquor stored therein. Here, the respondent Company could be
held liable to pay the excise duty on the liquor destroyed in fire only if it could be
held negligent in not ensuring safe custody of the stored liquor.
(Para 87)
One of the basic factors to be noticed is that the goods in question were not
ordinary goods but had been containing alcohol which, by its very nature, is highly
inflammable. Therefore, a particular nature of care which might be sufficient as
regards ordinary goods may not be adequate or sufficient for the goods in question.
(Para 88.1)
From the material placed on record, it is not forthcoming if strip earthing had
indeed been carried out, though the respondent Company generally stated in its
letter dated 23-9-2002 that what was pointed out by the Assistant Electricity
Inspector had been carried out. As to when strip earthing was done and in what
manner is not forthcoming. Further. it is also not forthcoming if Foam Installations
were provided, as suggested by the Fire Brigade Officer. In view of extra care
required of the highly inflammable material, significance of none of these aspects
could be gainsaid.
(Para 88.3)
Though it is true that as per the suggestions made in the reports relating to the
fire incident in question, exact cause of fire could not be ascertained but there had
been indications that the officers, including the Excise Officer and Station House
Officer had seen burnt wires; and it was reported that the fire "possibly" took place
because of short circuit. Taking note of these facts as also the other facts that
godown was an old one and the roof of the godown was made of asbestos sheets,
the Excise Commissioner, in his Order dated 11-7-2006, inferred that short circuit
could have taken place in old electric wiring in the godown and in that context,
observed that the licensee had not arranged the fireproof electric equipments of
good quality, which led to the incident in question.
(Para 88.4)
In the present case, even when the exact cause of fire could not be ascertained,
the indications in the reports like that of Assistant Excise Commissioner dated 2-8-
2003 that burnt cables were seen in the debris and possibility had been of short
circuit, the only inference could be about some fault or shortcoming in electric
installations (equipments and/or wiring) which led to the abnormal flow of current
and thereby, to the fire incident in question.
(Para 89.3)
Obviously, the fire had not generated on its own and, with appropriately laid
fireproof electrical installations as also firefighting measures, the incident was an
avoidable one or at least the loss could have been minimised.
(Para 90)
Even if the present case is taken to be that of inadvertence or of unintentional
omission on the part of the respondent Company, it would fall within the definition
of "negligence" for the purpose of Rule 709 of the Excise Manual.
(Para 91)
Dictionary of Technical Terms, 11th Edn., p. 369; McGrow-Hill Encyclopedia of
Science and Technology, 6th Edn., Vol. 16, p 387, referred to
Insurance coverage only of the value of liquor - Effect of
Admittedly, the respondent Company had taken insurance coverage of the value
of liquor and indeed received such value of liquor from the insurer. However, the
respondent Company did not take insurance coverage of the excise duty payable
over such value of liquor.
(Para 95)
The liability of the respondent Company in this matter is rather fortified from the
facts that it had taken insurance coverage of the value of liquor and indeed received
such claim from the insurer. Further, failure to insure the risk of excise duty liability
cannot extricate the respondent from that liability.
(Para 96)
When duty of excise is upon the goods and the taxable event is the production
or manufacture of the liquor, the liability to pay excise duty had arisen as soon as
the liquor was manufactured. Thereafter, when the liquor got destroyed in fire but
its value was recovered from the insurer, these events shall answer to the broad
expression "issue of an excisable article for sale from a warehouse" for the purpose
of proviso to Section 29(e) of the 1910 Act. Putting it differently, receiving of
insurance claim over the value of goods by the respondent related back to the date
of fire and the respondent became liable to pay excise duty at the rate which was in
force on the date of fire, which would be deemed to be the date of "issue" from the
warehouse.
(Para 97)
291, distinguished
Not taking of insurance coverage of the excise duty while taking such coverage
on the value of liquor itself amounts to negligence on the part of the respondent
Company.
(Para 99)
McDowell & Co. Ltd. V. State of U.P., Misc. Bench No. 4493 of 2006, order dated
1436, referred to
VN-D/68489/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Ms Aishwarya Bhati, Additional Solicitor General [Samar Vijay Singh
(Advocate-on-Record). Celeste Agarwal, Prabjot Kaur, Vipin Singh
Bansal and Amit Ojha, Advocates], for the Appellants;
Niraj Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), Advocate, for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
236c-d, 238b-c, 238c,
State of U.P. (reversed)
247b, 249c, 281f
State of U.P. (reversed)
238c, 247a-b, 247b,
247b-c, 247e-f, 249e,
281f
Sadikbhai Rajakbhai V. State of Gujarat
e
Breweries Ltd.
252a, 263e, 264a-b
Rajakbhai V. State of Gujarat
273a
V. State of U.P.
237g-h, 247a
7. Misc. Bench No. 4493 of 2006, order dated 25-7-237b, 237f, 238b, 246g-h,
2006 (All), McDowell & Co. Ltd. V. State of U.P.
247a, 249c-d
291, Dharampal Satyapal Ltd. V. CCE
252g, 280d
Karnataka SRTC V. Mahadeva Shetty
250a, 272a-b
V. State of U.P.
255a, 262b-c
Yamaha Ltd.
250a-b, 273g
251h
of Maharashtra V. Kanchanmala Vijaysing Shirke
270f
State of Karnataka
245f-g
Mills
262d, 263e-f
V. Ranjit Ginning & Pressing Co. (P) Ltd.
276a
Taxation Commr.
245e-f, 251d-e
Rajasthan
275b-c, 275e, 275f-g
& Co.
263b
State of M.P.
263a-b
21. AIR 1962 SC 922, A.B. Abdulkadir V. State of
Kerala
262g-h
22. (1950) 1 All ER 392 (HL), Barkway V. South
Wales Transport Co. Ltd.
276a
23. (1866) LR 1 CP 600, Grill V. General Iron Screw
Colliery Co.
270a-b
24. (1865) 3 H&C 596 : 159 ER 665, Scott V. London
& St. Katherine Docks Co.
275e
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DINESH MAHESHWARI, J.-
CONTENTS
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
1.
Preliminary and brief outline
237
2.
Relevant factual aspects and background : The fire
238
incident and demand of excise duty on the liquor
destroyed
(i)
Before the fire
239
(ii)
The fire incident and relevant reports
240
(iii)
Demand of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire
242
3.
Writ petition in the High Court and interim order
246
therein
4.
Impugned orders dated 10-4-2017¹ and 6-11-2019 :
247
High Court allowed the writ petition and passed
consequential orders
5.
Rival submissions
249
6.
Questions for determination
255
7.
Relevant statutory provisions
256
8.
Whether the demand in question is authorised by law?
261
9.
Whether respondent Company remains liable to pay
266
excise duty on the liquor lost in fire?
(i)
Control of Department over the distillery and
266
godown : effect of
(ii)
Negligence
267
(iii)
Act of God
271
(iv)
Inevitable accident
274
(v)
Res ipsa loquitur
275
(vi)
The respondent Company remains liable
276
10.
Insurance coverage only of the value of liquor : effect
279
of
11.
Summation
281
12.
Conclusion
281
Preliminary and brief outline
1. Leave granted. By way of these appeals, the State of Uttar
Pradesh and its officers related with the Excise Department as also the
District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur have essentially questioned the order
dated 10-4-2017 in McDowell & Co. Ltd. V. State of U.P.¹, whereby the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, Lucknow
(hereinafter also referred to as "the High Court") quashed the demand
raised against the writ petitioner company (respondent herein) towards
loss of excise revenue because of destruction of liquor in fire. The
appellants have also questioned the order dated 6-11-2019 in CM
Application No. 90936 of 2019, whereby the High Court directed
Appellant 2, the Excise Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter also
referred to as "the Excise Commissioner"), to expeditiously take a final
decision on the application for refund of the amount that was deposited
by the writ petitioner pursuant to the interim order 3 passed in the said
writ petition.
2. Before dilating on the issues raised in this case, we may draw a
brief outline of the matter to indicate the contours of forthcoming
discussion.
2.1. The genesis of the present litigation had been in a fire incident
that took place in a godown of the distillery of the respondent Company
on 10-4-2003. As many as 35,642 cases of Indian Made Foreign Liquor
("IMFL" for short) of different brands got destroyed in this fire. After
receiving the initial reports that the fire possibly took place due to short
circuit of electricity, the Department proposed to recover the amount of
excise duty lost, due to such destruction of liquor, from the respondent
Company. The respondent maintained that there was no negligence on
its part and, therefore, no case for recovery of the alleged loss of excise
duty was made out under Rule 7(11) of the Uttar Pradesh Bottling of
Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 (hereinafter also referred to as "the 1969
Rules") and Rule 709 of the Uttar Pradesh Excise Manual (hereinafter
also referred to as "the Excise Manual").
2.2. However, the Excise Commissioner, by his Order dated 11-7-
2006, rejected the submissions of the respondent and raised a demand
to the tune of Rs 6,39,32,449.44 towards loss of excise revenue on
account of destruction of liquor. Accordingly, the District Magistrate,
Shahjahanpur asked the respondent to deposit the amount within one
week.
2.3. Assailing the demand and recovery steps aforesaid, the
respondent Company preferred a writ petition4 wherein, the High Court,
by way of an interim order dated 25-7-2006 ², stayed the recovery
proceedings, subject to the respondent Company (writ petitioner)
depositing an amount of Rs 3 crores. A petition seeking special leave to
appeal against this interim order was rejected by this Court on 14-8-
20065. Thereafter, on 21-8-2006, the respondent
Company deposited the said amount of Rs 3 crores with the District
Magistrate, Shahjahanpur.
2.4. The writ petition so filed by the respondent Company was
allowed by the High Court in its impugned order dated 10-4-2017 ¹,
essentially with findings that Rule (11)(a) of the 1969 Rules was not
applicable in the matter because there was no wastage in handling
operations of bottling and storage of IMFL; that Rule 709 of the Excise
Manual was attracted for which negligence was required to be shown;
that the order passed by the Excise Commissioner was based on
conjectures and without any cogent evidence about negligence on the
part of the writ petitioner; and that the incident was nothing but an act
of God. The High Court, accordingly, set aside the impugned orders of
demand and recovery towards the alleged loss of excise revenue.
Thereafter, for the Department having failed to refund the amount
deposited pursuant to the interim order³ in the writ petition, the
respondent Company moved an application before the High Court
whereupon, by the order dated 6-11-2019², the High Court directed the
Excise Commissioner to take a decision on the application for refund
within four weeks.
2.5. As noticed, the aforesaid orders dated 10-4-2017 and 6-11-
2019 2 passed by the High Court are questioned in these appeals. The
appellants maintain that the High Court was not justified in its findings
that the incident in question was an act of God and not that of
negligence on the part of the respondent. The appellants rely upon Rule
7(11)(a) of the 1969 Rules and Rules 708 and 709 of the Excise Manual
to contend that the respondent Company is absolutely liable to pay the
excise duty payable on the stock of IMFL destroyed in fire. An ancillary
aspect relating to the effect of insurance coverage, only of the value of
liquor, and receiving of insurance claim by the respondent Company
have also been raised. Per contra, it submitted that the claim of excise
duty in the present case cannot be enforced, for being not authorised
by law; and that the respondent is not liable to pay excise duty on the
IMFL destroyed in fire, particularly when there was no negligence on its
part.
3. The foregoing outline would indicate that the focal point in this
case is, as to whether the appellants are entitled to levy, and
correspondingly, the respondent is liable to pay, the excise duty on the
liquor destroyed in fire? As regards this focal point, three principal
questions would require determination, as noticed infra.
Relevant factual aspects and background : The fire incident and
demand of excise duty on the liquor destroyed
4. Having regard to the questions involved, we may briefly take note
of the relevant factual and background aspects, particularly those
relating to the functioning of the respondent Company and setup of the
distillery and godown
in question as also the fire incident and the demand of excise duty,
leading to the present litigation.
Before the fire
5. The respondent Company had been engaged in the business of
distillation, bottling and vending of different brands of IMFL. For the
purpose of these activities, the respondent was granted licence in Form
PD-2 to establish and run a distillery for distillation and manufacture of
potable alcohol at Distillery Unit Rosa, Shahjahanpur; and was also
granted licence for wholesale vend of IMFL in Forms FL-3 and FL-3A
under the 1969 Rules. The respondent Company had been functioning
at the licensed premises since the year 1994.
6. We need not elaborate on various features of the processes of
distillation, bottling and storage but, a few facts placed on record by
the parties, relating to the electrical installations and firefighting
measures in the premises in question could be usefully noticed.
6.1. On 19-9-2002, the Assistant Electricity Inspector, Government
of Uttar Pradesh, Shahjahanpur Zone, Shahjahanpur, after having
conducted a periodical inspection of the said premises of the
respondent Company, made the following observations pertaining to
the electrical installations:
"(a) Except the endorsement made herein the relevant rules of
Electricity Rules, 1956 were being complied with.
(b) The details mentioned in the subsequent page are not
according to Electricity Rules, 1956
Hence, in the interest of safety, you are requested that you should
rectify the deficiency by engaging any of the authorised electrician
and send a report within one month after compliance in accordance
with the Electricity Rules, 1956.
*
*
*
Rule 35 : It is found that CAUTION place is not placed at certain
prominent places. The same should be placed/installed.
*
*
*
Rule 61(2) : At one point of Turbine's Distribution Board Panel,
earth wiring has been done with a thin wire. Hence the same should
be removed and strip earthing should be done."
(emphasis supplied)
In response to the aforesaid, the respondent Company stated, in its
letter dated 23-9-2002, that the work pointed out in the report had
been completed.
6.2. Apart from the above, it appears that certain
modification/upgradation work was undertaken at the production plant
in the distillery and in that regard, the Excise Inspector, Production
Section, Rosa Distillery, Shahjahanpur, in his Letter dated 26-12-2002,
advised the respondent that electrical and gas welding jobs be
performed carefully with full safety, while ensuring standard methods of
fire safety and the required firefighting devices. The said Excise
Inspector
cautioned the respondent that "You will be responsible for any loss of
revenue/other loss if that occurs due to your carelessness."
6.3. On 1-3-2003, the office of Fire Brigade Officer, Shahjahanpur
issued a no-objection certificate of Fire Fighting Department for the
period between 6-2-2003 to 30-9-2003 after carrying out inspection of
the premises in question. In this inspection, the Fire Brigade Officer
took note of the fact that different types of fire extinguishers and other
firefighting instruments were at the right place and were in working
condition, which were refilled by the Chief Engineer of the respondent
Company. However, a direction was given with regard to the refilling
and testing of the instruments; and Foam Installation was also
suggested for better firefighting arrangements in the following terms:
"You are directed that, in future Fire Fighting Instruments (Fire
Extinguisher) should be tested in Fire Station Shahjahanpur before
refilling. It is also suggested that, for better management of fire
fighting arrangements, Foam Installation should be done in
Distillation Plant. With this suggestion, no-objection certificate of
Fire Fighting Department is granted for a period between 6-2-2003
to 30-9-2003, because the said firm has deposited the Testing Fee
to the Fire Brigade Department on 6-2-2003."
The fire incident and relevant reports
7. The aforesaid had been the position of record in relation to the
electrical installations and firefighting measures in the premises in
question. However, on 10-4-2003, a fire incident did take place in a
godown of the respondent Company, which resulted in 35,642 cases of
manufactured IMFL getting destroyed.
8. It has been the case of the respondent Company that the godown
in question was locked for lunch at 12 : 00 noon on 10-4-2003 under
joint lock and key of the Excise Inspector in-charge of the distillery and
the company's representative and at that time, nothing objectionable
was noticed and the stocks were in safe condition. However, at about
12.55 p.m., smoke was noticed emitting from the godown. Thereupon,
the Excise Inspector in-charge of the distillery was immediately
informed and the joint locks were opened; and it was noticed that the
stocks of IMFL were on fire. The information about this fire was given to
the Police Department and also to the Fire Department and other Excise
Authorities. As per the averments and the material on record, it
appears that the firefighters could bring the fire under control only by
5.00 a.m. on 11-4-2003.
9. It is borne out that upon receiving information about the incident
in question, the Deputy Excise Commissioner, Bareilly, reached the
distillery at about 6.30 p.m. on 10-4-2003 and carried out spot
inspection with other officers of the Department and the Manager
Personnel of the respondent Company. In his initial report drawn on
spot inspection, the said Deputy Excise Commissioner took note of the
efforts being made for controlling and dousing the fire as also damage
to a substantial quantity of liquor; and also indicated that upon
enquiring about the possible reasons of this fire, he was informed
that the same took place, probably, due to short circuit in the electricity
supply. According to the appellants, even the Station House Officer
concerned opined in his investigation Report dated 11-4-2003 that the
reason for fire was short circuit of electricity.
10. On 13-4-2003, the Fire Brigade Officer of Uttar Pradesh Fire
Service also drew up the report about the incident and the efforts made
for controlling the fire. He, however, indicated that the reason of fire
was unknown. The relevant part of this report, counter-signed by the
Deputy Superintendent of Police, as placed on record by the
respondent, reads as under:
"On receiving information about fire, Fire Service Unit rushed to
the place of incident. On arriving, it was seen that the front part of
godown of Indian Made Foreign Liquor was burning in fire badly,
which is situated in Rosa Kothi, M/s McDowell Company Ltd. Thana-
R.
, District-Shahjahanpur, and fire was in a horrible, which was
being doused by the staff of M/s McDowell & Company Ltd. with the
help of available instrument but the fire was out of control for them.
After seeing the horrible condition of fire, immediately started the
work to control fire by laying two lines in one motor fire engine,
immediately thereafter second motor fire engine was brought from
Kasba-Tilhar. In dousing the fire other unit Oswal Chemical Fertilizer
and OCF also helped, and after enough hard work, process of
dousing was started and after putting the life at risk and after
several
hours,
fire
was
doused/controlled.
On
investigation/inspection of fire, it was found that, due to fire, liquor
kept in godown was destroyed. Hence, in this fire after adding
building and liquor, in total, according to Station Officer,
approximately a damage worth Rs 2 crores has been assessed and
Rs 1 crore value of property was saved. Reason of fire was unknown.
Therefore, after finishing the entire work, the Fire Service unit
returned to the Fire Station after giving instructions that in case
again the fire shows up again, the Fire Station should be informed
immediately. We came back to the Fire Station."
(emphasis supplied)
11. Another Report dated 2-8-2003 was submitted by the Assistant
Excise Commissioner, Rosa Distillery, Shahjahanpur to the Excise
Commissioner, detailing out the statements of stock of liquor saved as
also the stock destroyed in fire and his comments on the cause of fire.
The relevant part of this report could be usefully extracted as under:
"(f) Cause of Fire : A detailed enquiry and investigation was
done by me in the distillery after the fire incident. All the Officers
mentioned in para (d) have also made inquiries and investigated the
matter in detail. All the investigating officers have also reached to
the conclusion that undisputedly the cause of fire was unknown.
During my investigation and calculation work also, no fact or
evidence came to my knowledge, which indicates that there was any
negligence either on the part of Distiller or on the part of Excise Staff
deputed in the Distillery. It also does not appear that the said
incident was deliberately done by any of them. In fact, the Distiller and
the Excise Staff have worked jointly with great efficiency and hard work
during and after the fire Incident. Thereby - stock was saved from the
damaged stock.
This fact was confirmed by, Joint Excise Commissioner
Investigation dated 30-4-2003, Deputy Excise Commissioner,
Bareilly Incharge, Bareilly, investigation dated 10-4-2003, Fire
Brigade Officer, Investigation Report dated 13-4-2003 and Station
House Officer's Final Report dated 11-4-2003, also with copies
annexed. In the report of Station House Officer reason of incident is
possibly due to short circuit in Electricity. I had also seen the burned
cable in debris, but in my opinion Nothing can be confirmed. It can
be such an incident, in which reason is Unknown.
On the Distiller level, in the month of December, instrument
according to Fire safety standard, were installed and safety orders
were ordered in respect of Letter No. 39/dated 26-12-2002 by the
distillery Fire Brigade Officer, Shahjahanpur; Letter No.
Memo/F.S./date 1-3-2003, and received the certificate regarding the
instrument in good condition. The Distillery also produced certificate
by
U.P. Electricity Department, regarding electricity cable
establishment.
In accordance with letter sent by me dated 14-4-2003 and 21-4-
2003 in view of the aforementioned points before the Fire incident,
during the Fire incident and after that, the calculation of the
damaged stock and possible reason of Fire incident was discussed."
(emphasis supplied)
Demand of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire
12. In view of the fact that a substantial quantity of the stored liquor
got destroyed in the fire and that had the consequence, inter alia, of
loss of excise revenue, the Excise Department proposed to recover this
loss from the respondent Company.
12.1. In the first place, on 24-9-2003, a Show-cause Notice No.
463/CAA/Rosa Distillery/Shahjahanpur was issued by Assistant Excise
Commissioner, Rosa Distillery to the respondent Company seeking
explanation regarding the recovery of excise duty in view of Rule 7(11)
of the 1969 Rules, as the respondent allegedly failed in its
responsibility to keep the stock of liquor safe and secure. In its
response letter dated 1-10-2003, the respondent Company stated that
there was no negligence on its part in regard to the said fire incident;
that Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules was of no application; and that Rule
709 of the Excise Manual would apply only in case of negligence, which
was not proved.
12.2. The Excise Commissioner, however, proposed to recover excise
duty from the respondent Company and sent a letter dated 27-11-2003
to the Principal Secretary to the Government seeking directions. The
said Principal Secretary, in his response letter dated 17-2-2004, stated
that the provision regarding imposition of excise duty on the stock of
IMFL destroyed in fire was laid down in Rule 709 of the Excise Manual
and on the basis thereof, the Excise
Commissioner was competent enough to proceed. The Principal
Secretary, inter alia, stated as under:
"Please refer to your Letter No. G-43/9-alcohol/Rosa-Fire incident
dated 27-11-2003 regarding directions to be given to the District
Magistrate, Shahjahanpur with regard to imposition of excise duty on
the stock of IMFL destroyed in fire incident dated 10-4-2003 at M/s
McDowell & Co. Ltd., Rosa, Shahjahanpur.
1. In this connection I have been advised to ask you that the
provision regarding imposition of excise duty involved in the stock
of IMFL destroyed in the above fire incident at McDowell & Co.
Ltd., Rosa, Shahjahanpur on 10-4-2003 is laid down in Rule 709
of Excise Manual, on the basis of which you are competent enough
to proceed in the matter.
2. Your proposal regarding levy of excise duty on the stock of
IMFL destroyed in the above fire incident is in order. Please take
necessary steps at the earliest and inform the same to the
Government within 15 days."
12.3. Proceeding on the letter so received from the Principal
Secretary, the Excise Commissioner, on 23-2-2004, asked the District
Magistrate to quantify the excise duty leviable under Rule 7(11) of the
1969 Rules. Having noticed such steps on the part of the authorities,
the respondent Company remonstrated in its letter dated 8-6-2004
addressed to the Excise Commissioner and requested that the
competent authority must first determine as to whether excise duty
could at all be levied on IMFL destroyed due to fire before the point of
issue of liquor for sale was reached. It was also submitted that the
directions may be given only to proceed in terms of Rule 709 of the
Excise Manual and not Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules. The Excise
Commissioner, in his letter dated 12-5-2005, sought a point-wise reply
from the respondent Company and this letter was replied on 16-5-
2005, wherein the respondent Company maintained that fire incident
was due to the reasons beyond human control and there was no
negligence on the part of the company.
12.4. Yet further, the respondent Company stated in its letter dated
5-6-2005 that they had a certificate issued by Fire Department, valid
up to 3-9-2003; that appropriate fire protection equipments were
installed; that electricity safety certificate was also given on 19-9-
2002; that MCBs were installed; that there was no material to show
that it was an accident due to negligence on part of the company; and
that there was no compulsion to get insurance with respect to excise
duty. The aforesaid reply was forwarded by the Excise Commissioner to
the Principal Secretary, Excise with his letter dated 29-6-2005.
Thereafter, the State Government, in its letter dated 27-12-2005,
observed that excise duty on the rates prevailing should be imposed on
the respondent Company in the interest of revenue.
13. The aforesaid exchange of communications culminated in the
impugned Order dated 11-7-2006 by the Excise Commissioner, seeking
to recover a sum of Rs 6,39,32,449.44 from the respondent Company
towards the loss of excise revenue. The Excise Commissioner, inter alia,
relied upon the inspection reports and held that the respondent was
responsible for the safety of the alcohol but failed to ensure such
safety; had been careless in not providing fireproof electric equipments
of good quality; and had taken insurance of liquor but not of excise
duty.
14. This Order dated 11-7-2006, being the bone of contention in the
present matter, could be reproduced in extenso as under:
"OFFICE OF EXCISE COMMISSIONER, UTTAR PRADESH, ALLAHABAD
No. 7244/9-Alcohol/131/Rosa/Fire Incident Allahabad
Dated - 11-7-2006
ORDER
M/s McDowell & Company Ltd., Rosa, District Shahjhanpur is a PD
-2 Licensed distillery. The abovementioned distillery has been
granted FL-3 and FL 3A licence under the Uttar Pradesh Bottling of
Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 and has been doing the bottling of Indian
Made Foreign Liquor of their brand and brand of Harbartsons Ltd.
respectivelv. On 10-4-2003. due to fire incident in the FL-3 and FL-
3A godown of the distillery, 35,642 (Thirty-five thousand six
hundred forty-two) cases of Indian Made Foreign Liquor of different
brands got destroyed. During investigation, it is revealed that
McDowell and Company Ltd. had taken the insurance of the Indian
Made Foreign Liquor kept in the sealed godown. The distillery has
also received the claim for that. A Show-cause Notice No.
463/CAA/Rosa Distillery/Shahjahanpur dated 24-9-2003 was given
to M/s McDowell and Company Ltd. in relation to the burning of the
alcohol kept in the sealed godown. It has been stated by M/s
McDowell and Company Ltd. in its Explanation dated 1-10-2003 to
the abovementioned show-cause notice that the fire incident is an
act of God and they have no control over this. On 10-4-2003, during
the spot inspection conducted by Deputy Excise Commissioner,
Bareilly, Manager Personnel Shri Anurag Dhawan who was present
has stated that possibly fire took place due to short circuit in the
electricity supply. The Station Officer Shri Ram Chandra Mishan,
District Shahjahanpur has stated in his investigation Report dated 11
-4-2003 that the reason for fire is the short circuit of electricity. The
inspection of M/s McDowell and Company Ltd. was conducted by
Joint Excise Commissioner (Task Force) and Deputy Excise
Commissioner (Law). It has been found in the inspection that the
godown is very old and its repair has also not been done. It is also
necessary to mention that M/s McDowell and Company Ltd. in the
distillery from the time of British period and the distillery & sealed
godown has been running in the old building. The roof of the godown
was made of asbestos sheet. The short circuit can take place due to
old electric wiring in the godown.
In this relation District Officer, Shahjahanpur vide his Letter No.
689/OSD/Camp/2004 dated 1-4-2004 has requested for
guidance/instruction on the incident. The Excise Commissioner, Uttar
Pradesh, vide his Letter No. G-43/9-alcohol/Rosa fire incident dated
17-11-2003 has referred this incident to the Government in which
the Government vide Letter No. 3763 E-2/13-03 dated 17-2-2004
has directed that the excise duty may be charged on the class of
alcohol prevalent at that time on the class of alcohol destroyed and it
was also directed that Excise Commissioner is capable to act in this
incident.
In perspective to the direction made by the Government, the case
is that M/s McDowell and Company Ltd., Rosa, Shahjhanpur had
taken licence of FL-3 and FL-3A under the U.P. Bottling of Foreign
Liquor Rules, 1969. According to Rule 7(11)(a) of the
abovementioned rules, the licensee is liable to pay excise duty on
the wastage of more than 1%. It was responsibility of the licence-
holder to take remedy/precautions for the safety of the alcohol kept
in the godown but proper safety of the alcohol kept in the godown
was not taken up. The licensee had taken the insurance of the price
of alcohol, bottle, label, etc. but insurance of the excise duty
imposed on the alcohol was not done. In this way, the licensee has
secured his value of alcohol. The licensee has not suffered any loss in
this incident and whatever loss has taken place has been recovered
from the insurance. Therefore, perhaps the licensee was careless
regarding the electric equipments. The licensee was aware about the
terms and conditions while taking licence that he is to pay the excise
duty on the wastage of stocked alcohol greater than 1% of the
quantity. In spite of having knowledge, the licensee has not
arranged the fireproof electric equipments of good quality due to
which questioned incident has taken place. The carelessness taken
by the distiller in the safety of the stock of alcohol cannot be
considered as Act of God. The licence is granted to him under the
U.P. Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969. There is provision of
charging excise duty on the wastage more than 1% under Rule 7
(11)(a) of those Rules. The Licensee cannot deny the conditions of
the licence. It has been clearly stated by the Constitution Bench of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in judgment in Har Shankar V. Excise &
Taxation Commr. 6 that the licensee has taken the licence after
carefully reading the questioned rules of 1969 and now he cannot
wriggle out from the conditions of the licence. The licensee has
received the licence after reading the Uttar Pradesh Bottling of
Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969 with open eyes, therefore he cannot
wriggle out to follow the Rules.
It has been mentioned in Khoday Distilleries Ltd. V. State of
of selling the licences for trade or business with a view to maximise
its revenue so long as the method adopted is not discriminatory".
It is clear from the Rule 7(11)(a) of the U.P. Bottling of Foreign
Liquor Rules, 1969 are made to secure the revenue. The State has
special privilege on manufacturing of liquor, custody, transport,
import-export. The State in public interest to increase the revenue
strictly monitor the business of alcohol so that
neither it can be misused and nor it can cause loss of revenue to be
received from it. In respect to the abovementioned according to Rule 7
(11)(a) of the U.P. Bottling of Foreign Liquor Rules, 1969, the excise
duty of Rs 6,39,32,449.44 (Rupees six crore thirty-nine lakh thirty-two
thousand four hundred forty-nine and forty-four paise only) is leviable
on M/s McDowell and Company Ltd., Rosa, District Shahjahanpur as per
prevalent rate at the time of incident for year 2003-2004 on different
brands of alcohol.
Gejendra Pal
Excise Commissioner
Uttar Pradesh."
(emphasis supplied)
15. Pursuant to the order so passed by the Excise Commissioner,
District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur commenced recovery proceedings
and directed the respondent Company to deposit the aforesaid sum of
Rs 6,39,32,449.44 within one week.
Writ petition in the High Court and interim order therein
16. Aggrieved by the demand so raised by the Excise Commissioner
and the recovery proceedings so adopted by the District Magistrate, the
respondent Company filed the writ petition, being Misc. Bench No. 4493
of 2006, before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow
Bench, Lucknow, with the following prayers:
"(i) Issue, a writ, order, or direction in the nature of certiorari
calling for the records and quashing the impugned Order dated 11-7
-2006 passed by the Excise Commissioner, U.P. and letter dated 17-
7-2006 of the District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur, U.P. demanding Rs
6,39,32,449.44
(ii) Issue, a writ order, or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding the respondents not to recover any amount from the
petitioner towards the alleged demand with regard to the quantity of
Indian Made Foreign Liquor destroyed due to fire accident at
Shahjahanpur on 10-4-2003.
(iii) Issue a writ/order or directions in the nature of mandamus
declaring Rule 7(11) of the U.P. Bottling of Indian Made Foreign
Liquor Rules, 1969 as null and void and ultra vires of the U.P. Excise
Act.
(iv) Issue a writ/order or directions in the nature of certiorari
calling for the records and quashing the impugned order of the State
Government which was conveyed through letter dated 17-2-2004 of
the Principal Secretary (Excise), Government of U.P. to Excise
Commissioner."
17. In the said writ petition, an interim order was passed by the
High
Court
on
25-7-2006 3 staying the recovery proceedings subject to
the respondent Company depositing an amount of Rs 3 crores with the
Excise Commissioner. The respondent Company attempted to challenge
this interim
order dated 25-7-2006 3 by way of SLP (C) No. 12902 of 2006 but, this
Court declined to interfere with the interim order and the special leave
petition was dismissed on 14-8-2006 5 Thereafter, the respondent
Company deposited the said sum of Rs 3 crores with the District
Magistrate, Shahjahanpur on 21-8-2006. The appellants filed their
counter-affidavit in the writ petition on 8-9-2006 and the writ petition
was finally heard and decided by the High Court by its impugned
judgment dated 10-4-2017
Impugned orders dated 10-4-2017 and 6-11-20192 : High Court
allowed the writ petition and passed consequential orders
18. The High Court, in its impugned order dated 10-4-2017-, after
taking note of the aforesaid background aspects as also the 1969 Rules
and the Excise Manual, in the first place noted the fact that though the
validity of Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules was questioned in the writ
petition but while arguing the matter, the learned counsel for the
company confined his challenge to the impugned orders of recovery of
excise duty essentially on the grounds that the company could have
been held guilty only if there was any negligence on its part in causing
loss of excise revenue but, in the present case, there was no negligence
on the part of the company; and that it was an act of God and,
therefore, no liability could be imposed on the company.
19. The High Court observed that Rule 7(11)(a) of the 1969 Rules,
dealing with wastage, in the operation of bottling and storage of IMFL
was of no application because in the present case, there was no
wastage in handling operations of bottling and storage but there was
loss of spirit due to fire. The High Court pointed out that Rule 709 of
the Excise Manual would apply and in that regard, if the company was
shown to have caused loss to excise duty on account of any negligence,
it would be liable to make good the loss.
20. The High Court, inter alia, observed as under : (McDowell case1,
"26. Rule 7(11)(a) of Rules, 1969 talks of wastage which occurred
in the operation of bottling & storage of IMFL, but here is not a case
where there is any wastage in handling operations of bottling &
storage of IMFL but there is total loss of spirit due to fire and this in
turn has caused loss to excise duty.
27. In our view, it is Rule 709 of U.P. Excise Manual which applies
and if petitioner can be shown to have caused loss to excise duty on
account of any negligence, it is liable to make good the said loss.
The condition precedent, therefore, is the factum of "negligence" on
the part of petitioner. We have no manner of doubt that in the
present case Rule 7(11)(a) of Rules, 1969 has no application and it
is Rule 709 of U.P. Excise Manual which is attracted."
21. The High Court, thereafter, proceeded to analyse the impugned
Order dated 11-7-2006 and observed that the inferences drawn therein
were lacking in material foundation and were only of conjectures and
surmises. The High Court found that there was no apparent negligence
on the part of the company and also recorded its conclusion that the
incident was nothing but an act of God. The High Court further
observed that negligence being the condition precedent for the fiscal
liability in question, no such liability could be fixed unless negligence
was found on the basis of some material; and held that in the absence
of any material to show that the loss was caused on account of any
negligence on the part of the company, the demand in question was
wholly illegal and unsustainable.
22. The High Court proceeded to set aside the demand in question
OnLine All paras 29-32)
"29. In order to hold petitioner guilty of negligence, ECUP vide
impugned Order dated 11-7-2006 while admitting that police
officials as well as joint inspection report, possible reason has been
given as "short circuit" from electrical supply, but having said so, it
has further said that (i) godown is very old and has not been
properly repaired; (ii) Distillery is of British period, Distillery and
Warehouse both are running in old buildings; (iii) roof of godown is
made of asbestos sheets and there is possibility of short circuit due
to old electrical wire in the godown; (iv) Insurance of excise duty
was not obtained, though spirit was insured; (v) licensee was
probably negligent in maintenance of electrical equipments; (vi)
licensee did not insure electrical equipments; (vii) fire proof of
electrical equipments were not of good quality, and this resulted in
the incident. Therefore, it is not an act of God. When we asked from
learned counsel for respondents as to wherefrom respondents got
information that fire equipments were not of good quality and have
caused incident or that Distillery was negligent in maintenance of
electrical equipments, he could not point out any material on record,
wherefrom the aforesaid inference drawn by ECUP could have been
substantiated or to be justified. In fact, the aforesaid inference is
nothing but conjectures and surmises on part of ECUP without
having any material foundation.
30. On the contrary, various authorities from time to time, who
have visited site, have clearly reported that there was no apparent
negligence on the part of petitioner. The incident was nothing but an
act of God. When a fiscal liability is founded on certain condition
precedent i.e. "negligent" on the part of the person whom we have
to hold responsible, then no responsibility can be fixed unless such
negligence is shown to be founded on the basis of some material.
Factum that building was old or the wirings were old have pointed
out to be dangerous or prone to fire either by Electricity
Department or Fire Department or even by Excise Authorities, who were
in charge of bonded Distillery, storage and godown.
31. Further, electrical equipments installed at the Distillery were
not of good quality is also conjectures and surmises as no material
was shown to fortify the same. In absence of any material to show
that loss was caused on account of any negligence on the part of
petitioner, we find that demand made in this writ petition is wholly
illegal and cannot sustain.
32. The writ petition is accordingly allowed. Impugned orders
dated 11-7-2006 and 17-7-2006 are hereby set aside. No costs."
(emphasis supplied)
23. After the decision aforesaid, the respondent Company sought
directions for refund/adjustment of the sum of Rs 3 crores deposited in
compliance of the interim order. The said application, being CM No.
90936 of 2019, was considered and allowed by the High Court by its
order dated 6-11-2019² requiring the Excise Commissioner to decide
the application moved by the company while keeping in view the fact
that the money was deposited pursuant to the interim order3 and
subsequently, the writ petition was allowed1.
Rival submissions
24. While assailing the orders passed by the High Court, the learned
counsel for the appellants has advanced essentially twofold
contentions : one, that it had been clearly a case of negligence on the
part of the respondent Company where the fire incident cannot be
termed as an act of God; and second, that as per the applicable
provisions of the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (hereinafter also referred to as
"the 1910 Act"), the Excise Manual and the 1969 Rules, the demand of
excise duty on the liquor lost in fire has rightly been raised. The learned
counsel has also addressed the Court on another facet of the case, as
regards the effect of insurance claim received by the respondent
Company towards the cost of IMFL destroyed in fire.
25. The learned counsel has submitted that an act of God is an
inevitable, unpredictable and unreasonably severe event caused by
natural forces without any human interference, such as earthquake,
lightning, flood, etc.; it is a natural hazard outside the human control
for which, no person could be held responsible. It is submitted that for
the fire in distillery to be an act of God, there must have been some
such incident like earthquake or lightning but no such natural forces
were in operation at the time of the incident; and this incident cannot
be attributed to any such force of nature but only to some human fault.
The learned counsel would submit that when operation of natural forces
is ruled out and the incident had, in fact, taken place, it would
obviously be referred to the elements of negligence on the part of the
respondent Company. The learned counsel has elaborated on the
submissions that negligence is a specific tort and
essentially refers to a failure to exercise that care which circumstances
demand. To support the contentions that the present one has not been
an act of God, learned counsel has referred to and relied upon the
decisions in Karnataka SRTC V. Mahadeva Shetty, Vohra Sadikbhai
Rajakbhai V. State of Gujarat 9 and Patel Roadways Ltd. V. Birla Yamaha
Ltd. 10
26. The learned counsel for the appellants would submit that the
incident of fire in the present case, on account of short-circuit in the
godown storing large quantity of highly inflammable IMFL, was clearly
an incident which was avoidable, if proper and necessary care was
taken by the respondent Company. It is submitted that distilleries are
even otherwise susceptible to fire due to large amount of alcoholic
vapour being in the air and the respondent Company was required to
take all care and precautions to avoid any such incident. With reference
to the inspection reports, the learned counsel has contended that even
before the incident in question, the defects and deficiencies in electrical
installations and wiring had been indicated and when the incident of
fire took place due to short-circuit, the company cannot avoid its
liability by merely suggesting that they had followed all preventive
measures or had taken a certificate from the Fire Department.
27. As regards the entitlement of appellants to demand and recover
the excise duty on IMFL lost in fire and corresponding liability of the
respondent Company to make such payment, the learned counsel for
the appellants has made elaborate reference to the relevant statutory
provisions and has submitted that the demand in question has been
squarely in conformity with law and deserves to be upheld.
28. With reference to Entries 8 and 51 of List II of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution of India, the learned counsel would submit
that the entire field of legislation on the subject relating to intoxicating
liquors as also the matters concerning duties of excise and
countervailing duties is in the domain of the State Legislature; and for
the present purpose, the matter is governed by the provisions
contained in the 1910 Act, the Excise Manual and the 1969 Rules. With
reference to Sections 17, 18, 19, 28, 29 and 30 of the 1910 Act the
learned counsel has submitted that no intoxicant can be manufactured
and no liquor can be bottled for sale except under the authority and
subject to the terms and conditions of a licence granted in that behalf
(Section 17); and, as per Section 18, the Excise Commissioner may
grant a licence for establishment of distillery and warehouse in which
spirit may be manufactured under a licence granted under Section 17.
Further, as per Section 19, no intoxicant can be removed from any
distillery, brewery, warehouse or the place of storage, unless duty has
been paid or a bond has been executed for payment thereof. It is thus
submitted that the condition precedent for removal of any intoxicant is
actual payment of the duty payable or execution of bond for such
payment. The
learned counsel has referred to the bond executed in favour of the
Governor of Uttar Pradesh by the respondent for bottling of IMFL and
has submitted that the licensee has been under obligation to observe
all the provisions of the 1910 Act and the Rules made thereunder.
29. The learned counsel would submit that the distillery having been
established under PD-2 licence, the respondent was under obligation to
follow the terms and conditions of the licence and correspondingly, has
always been under obligation to deposit the duty demanded under the
provisions of the 1910 Act, particularly when all the operations,
including that of transfer of the liquor from PD-2 licensed area to the
bottling hall and to the godown and then, dispatch are covered by the
terms of licence and the bond executed by the distiller. Yet further, the
learned counsel would submit that in terms of Rule 7(11)(a) of the
1969 Rules, the respondent Company was responsible for payment of
duty on wastage in excess of 1% and cannot avoid this obligation.
30. With reference to Rule 813 of the Excise Manual, the learned
counsel has submitted that in terms thereof, free wastage allowance for
different kinds of spirits stored in a distillery is provided but with the
specific exclusion of bottled spirit; and it is clear that once the spirit is
bottled and stored, the licensee remains liable to make payment of
excise duty in case of wastage of bottled spirit in terms of Rule 7(11)
(a) of the 1969 Rules read with Rule 709 of Excise Manual. With
reference to the decision of this Court in Har Shankar V. Excise &
Taxation Commr. 6 the learned counsel would submit that when the
licensee has taken the licence after carefully reading the 1969 Rules, it
cannot wriggle out of the conditions of licence.
31. On the question as to when IMFL became exigible to excise duty,
the learned counsel has contended that in the scheme of the 1910 Act
and the Rules thereunder, excise duty is leviable right from the point of
entry of spirit into the distillery for manufacturing of alcohol and on
every point including the points of blending, manufacturing and
bottling; and thereafter on the bottled spirit. It is thus contended that
the respondent Company is incorrect in its assertion that the goods
having been destroyed in the godown, excise duty did not become
leviable. It is submitted that the moment spirit has been stored in the
bottle, excise duty is leviable on the bottle, even if the same is not
taken out of the warehouse.
32. With reference to Sections 28 and 29 of the 1910 Act, the
learned counsel would submit that these provisions, respectively
empowering the State to impose excise duty and providing for the
manner in which the duty is to be levied, clearly show that the excise
duty, which in real terms is price of exclusive privilege of the State,
may be imposed on the liquor manufactured in the distillery and it is
wrong to contend that excise duty cannot be levied on bottled spirits or
is liable to be quantified and collected only at the point of issuance of
liquor from godown. The learned counsel has particularly referred
to the decision of this Court in State of U.P. V. Modi Distillery11, as
regards various features of the demand of excise duty at different
stages and different events. The learned counsel has also referred to
the decision in State of U.P. V. Mohan Meakin Breweries Ltd.
12
33. As regards another facet of the stand of the respondent that
there being regular deployment of the staff of Excise Department at the
distillery; the entire operation being under the control and supervision
of the Excise Department; the bonded warehouse being always under
the joint lock of Excise Department and the respondent; and liquor
being issued only upon the Excise Inspector opening the Department's
lock, the learned counsel would submit that such deployment of Excise
Officers is necessary to ensure the implementation of the rules and to
safeguard the revenue interests of the State but for the matter, the
safety and security of the distillery and prevention of any mishap by
proper maintenance of the building and installations cannot be shifted
on the Excise Department; and such safety and security had been the
sole responsibility of the licensee. Thus, according to the learned
counsel, for the fire incident in question, which could only be attributed
to want of proper maintenance and upkeep of installations and/or
equipment, the respondent Company alone remains liable and
responsible.
34. In another limb of submissions, the learned counsel has referred
to the fact that the respondent Company had taken insurance coverage
of the value of liquor and hence, was compensated by the insurer. The
learned counsel has contended that when the respondent Company got
reimbursement of value of liquor from the insurance company, the
event was akin to that of the sale of liquor; and on the principles of
equity and fair play, the State cannot be put to loss in the manner that
even when the distiller has received value of liquor, the corresponding
excise duty would not be made available to the State. The learned
counsel has also contended that omission on the part of the respondent
Company to take insurance coverage of the value of excise duty, while
taking insurance coverage of the value of the liquor, itself amounts to
negligence on the part of the respondent and for this reason too, the
respondent is liable to make payment of the excise duty on the value of
liquor recovered from the insurance company. In support of these
contentions, the learned counsel has referred to an order passed by the
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, Northern Bench,
New Delhi ("CESTAT" for short) in Dharampal Satyapal Ltd. V. CCE¹³
wherein remission of duty on account of damage of goods (pan masala)
in rainwater was disallowed, when it was found that the assessee had
been compensated by the insurance company with an amount which
was much more than the duty involved.
35. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent has supported
the order passed by the High Court allowing the writ petition and has
contended that there had not been any negligence on the part of the
respondent Company in relation to the incident of fire and no liability
could be fastened on it towards excise duty on the liquor destroyed in
fire. This apart, the learned counsel would contend, with reference to
Article 265 of the Constitution of India, that levy and collection of tax
must be authorised by law and in the scheme of the 1910 Act, the
Excise Manual and the 1969 Rules, the excise duty could have been
collected only at the point of issuance of IMFL from distillery and there
was no question of demand of excise duty on the stock of IMFL
destroyed due to fire in the godown. The learned counsel has also
submitted that in regard to the stock of IMFL destroyed in fire, there
was no transfer of property to anyone else and therefore, there was no
sale so as to occasion recovery of excise duty.
36. While asserting that the respondent had taken all precautions of
safe maintenance/storage of the stock of IMFL in the godown of
distillery, the learned counsel has submitted that the fire extinguishing
equipments were installed in the distillery premises and the Fire
Department issued no-objection certificate dated 1-3-2003 on being
fully satisfied with the precautions taken by the distillery in respect of
the safety against fire; that the Assistant Electrical Inspector issued the
certificate dated 19-9-2002 after inspection and on being satisfied that
the electrical wiring equipments, etc. were in accordance with the
Electricity Act, 1910; that the distillery had obtained licence to work on
6-10-1994 which was renewed annually and was valid on the date of
incident; that it was specifically stated in the report of the Assistant
Excise Commissioner dated 2-8-2003 that the cause of fire could not be
ascertained and there was nothing to show that distillery was, in any
manner, negligent or had caused the fire deliberately; that even in the
report submitted by the police Department, it was stated that the cause
of fire could not be ascertained and there was absolutely no mention of
any negligence on the part of the respondent; that in the report of the
Fire Department too, it was pointed out that the cause of fire could not
be ascertained; that the District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur, in his letter
dated 21-10-2003 to the Principal Secretary (Excise) similarly stated
that the reason of fire was unknown and there was no proof with regard
to the negligence of distillery. With these facts and factors, the learned
counsel for the respondent would submit that the fire incident due to
which IMFL got destroyed was not caused by any negligence of the
respondent and coupled with this remains the fact that complete
control and supervision of the distillery was exercised by the State
Excise Department. Thus, according to the learned counsel, there being
no negligence on the part of the respondent, no liability of excise duty
on the liquor destroyed in fire could be fastened on it.
37. While maintaining that there was no negligence on the part of
the respondent, the learned counsel has assailed the legality and
validity of the demand of duty against the respondent. In this regard,
the learned counsel has referred to Article 265 of the Constitution of
India, the provisions of the 1910
Act and the Rules thereunder as also the Excise Manual and has
submitted that Rule 708 of the Excise Manual absolves the State
Government from the responsibility for the destruction, loss or damage
of any spirit stored in distillery by fire or theft or by gauging or proof or
by any other cause, for the reason that the entire distillery (including
godown) is under the lock and key of the Excise Department. The
learned counsel has referred to Rule 709 of the Excise Manual to submit
that in the event of loss, the distilleries are made liable to make good
any loss of revenue to the Government only in the event of such loss
having been caused due to their negligence. The learned counsel has
emphatically argued that in terms of Rule 709, if a distillery has not
been negligent in safe custody of the stock of spirit, it cannot be held
liable to make payment towards loss of excise duty, if any, due to
accident or reasons beyond the control of human agency.
38. Yet further, the learned counsel has submitted that entire
bottling operations including the storage of bottled liquor are done
under the strict supervision of the Excise Inspector and the stocks are
maintained in separate rooms under joint lock and key of the
Department and the company. With reference to the 1969 Rules,
particularly Rule 7 thereof, the learned counsel would submit that the
stock so maintained under the joint lock and key is issued for the
purpose of export outside the State of U.P. or for the purpose of
wholesale vend within the State of U.P.; and it is only at the point of
issuance of liquor from the bottling rooms/godowns when the excise
duty is liable to be quantified and collected with reference to the date,
time and place of issuance. In this regard, the learned counsel has also
referred to the provisions contained in Sections 28 and 29 of the 1910
Act and has re-emphasised that in exercise of powers thereunder, the
State Government has chosen the point of issue for sale as being the
point for quantification, calculation and collection of excise duty under
its Notification dated 30-3-1962 which makes it clear that the rate of
duty is linked to the point of time to the date of issue for sale and not
to the date of manufacture.
39. The learned counsel would submit that IMFL in question having
been destroyed on account of fire before its issuance from the godown
for sale, there arises no question of collecting any excise duty on the
said destroyed stock of IMFL. The learned counsel has further submitted
that under the Excise Act though the duty is levied at the point of
manufacture but the point of collection of the duty is only at the time of
issuance for sale and hence, to cover the eventuality in between post-
manufacturing and before sale, Rule (11) of the 1969 Rules allows 1%
of wastage and mandates to charge full rate if wastage occurs beyond
1%; and in case of destruction or loss due to fire or theft, etc. the
distillery is made liable for loss of revenue only if there is negligence on
its part. Thus, according to the learned counsel, in the present case,
where the liquor had not been issued from the godown for sale and had
not been lost due to any negligence on the part of distiller, the levy of
excise duty deserves to be disapproved, for being not the one
authorised by law and being
hit by the requirements of Article 265 of the Constitution of India. The
learned counsel has referred to the decision in Somaiya Organics
(India) Ltd. V. State of U.P. 14 to submit that both the
levy
and
collection of tax must be authorised by law. According to the learned
counsel, the High Court has correctly held that Rule 709 of the Excise
Manual would be applicable and no duty could be imposed on the
respondent as there was no negligence on its part.
40. As regards the effect of insurance and reimbursement of the
value of IMFL by the insurance company, the learned counsel has
referred to the definition of "sale" in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 as also
in the U.P. Trade Tax Act, 1948, and has submitted that in the stock of
IMFL destroyed due to fire, neither there was any transfer of property
nor there was a sale; and the claim received from the insurer on
account of loss of goods in a fire cannot be termed as consideration. It
is also submitted that not taking insurance cover for the excise duty
was an irrelevant and immaterial fact because liability to pay excise
duty would have arisen only when there was negligence on the part of
the respondent Company and not otherwise. The learned counsel has
also submitted that in fact, the insurance company itself would not
have cleared the insurance claim if there was any negligence on the
part of the respondent and clearance of insurance claim itself fortifies
that there was no negligence on the part of the respondent. It is also
submitted that the respondent Company had not earned any profit in
the matter and in fact, it pays the excise duty when the same is
recovered from the ultimate consumer but in the present case, when
the respondent did not pass on and did not recover excise duty from
any consumer, the question of levying the same on the respondent
does not arise.
41. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at sufficient
length and have examined the material placed on record with reference
to the law applicable.
Questions for determination
42. In view of rival submissions, the following three major questions
arise for determination in this case:
42.1. (A) As to whether demand of excise duty on the liquor lost in
fire is authorised by law and has rightly been raised as per the
applicable provisions of the 1910 Act, the Excise Manual and the 1969
Rules?
42.2. (B) As to whether the fire incident in question had been an
event beyond human control and no negligence could be imputed on
the respondent Company?
42.3. (c) What would be the effect of the fact that the respondent
Company had taken insurance coverage only of the value of liquor (and
not that of excise duty thereupon) and then, had received the insurance
claim towards the value of liquor?
Relevant statutory provisions
43. Having regard to the questions involved, we may take note of
the Constitutional and statutory provisions, which do carry their own
relevance in the present case.
44. The fundamental constitutional mandate that no tax shall be
levied or collected except by authority of law is contained in Article 265
of the Constitution of India, which reads as under:
"265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.-No
tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law."
45. The relevant Entries 8 and 51 in List II (State List) of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India could also be usefully
reproduced as under:
"8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production,
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of
intoxicating liquors.
*
*
*
51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or
produced in the State and countervailing duties at the same or lower
rates on similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India:
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption;
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and
narcotics,
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any
substance included in sub-para (b) of this entry."
46. The law relating to intoxicating liquors and intoxicating drugs in
the State of Uttar Pradesh is principally governed by the provisions
contained in the U.P. Excise Act, 1910. A few of the relevant definitions
contained in Section 3 as also the relevant provisions, which are of
direct bearing in the present case, as contained in Sections 17, 18, 19,
28 and 29 read as under:
"3. Interpretation.-In this Act, unless there is something
repugnant in this subject or context-
(1) "excise revenue" means revenue derived or derivable from
any duty, fee, tax, fine (other than a fine imposed by a court of law),
or confiscation imposed or ordered under the provisions of this Act,
or of any other law for the time being in force relating to liquor or
intoxicating drugs;
*
*
*
(3-a) "excise duty" and "countervailing duty" means any such
excise duty or countervailing duty, as the case may be, as is
mentioned in Entry 51 of List II in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution;
*
*
*
(8) "spirit" means any liquor containing alcohol obtained by
distillation, whether it is denatured or not;
*
*
*
(11) "liquor" means intoxicating liquor and includes spirits of
wine, spirit, wine, tari, pachwai, beer and all liquid consisting of or
containing alcohol, also any substance which the State Government
may, by notification declare to be liquor for the purposes of this Act;
*
*
*
(22-a) "excisable article" means-
(a) any alcoholic liquor for human consumption; or
(b) any intoxicating drug;
*
*
*
17. Manufacture of intoxicants prohibited except under the
provisions of this Act.-(1)(a) No intoxicant shall be
manufactured;
(b) no hemp plant (cannabis sativa) shall be cultivated;
(c) no portion of the hemp plant (cannabis sativa) from which any
intoxicating drug can be manufactured shall be collected;
(d) no liquor shall be bottled for sale; and
(e) no person shall use, keep or have in his possession any
materials, still, utensil, implement or apparatus whatsoever for the
purpose of manufacturing any intoxicant other than tari.
except under the authority and subject to the terms and conditions of a licence
granted in that behalf by the Collector.
(2) No distillery or brewery or manufactory shall be constructed or
worked except under the authority and subject to the terms and
conditions of a licence granted in that behalf by the Excise
Commissioner under Section 18.
18.
Establishment or licensing of distilleries and
warehouses.-The Excise Commissioner may-
(a) establish a distillery in which spirit may be manufactured
under a licence granted under Section 17 on such conditions as
the State Government deems fit to impose;
(b) discontinue any distillery so established;
(c) licence, on such conditions as the State Government deems
fit to impose the construction and working of a distillery or
brewery or manufactory;
(d) establish or licence a warehouse wherein any intoxicant
may be deposited and kept without payment of duty; and
(e) discontinue any warehouse so established.
19. Removal of intoxicants from distillery, etc.-No intoxicant
shall be removed from any distillery, brewery, manufactory,
warehouse or other place of storage established under this Act
unless the duty (if any) payable under Chapter V has been paid or a
bond has been executed for the payment thereof.
*
*
*
28. Duty on excisable articles. - (1) An excise duty or a
countervailing duty, as the case may be, at such rate or rates as the
State Government shall
direct, may be imposed, either generally or for any specified local area,
on any excisable article-
(a) imported in accordance with the provisions of Section 12
(1); or
(b) exported in accordance with the provisions of Section 13;
or
(c) transported; or
(d) manufactured, cultivated or collected under any licence
granted under Section 17; or
(e) manufactured in any distillery established, or any distillery
or brewery licensed, under Section 18:
Provided as follows-
(i) duty shall not be so imposed on any article which has been
imported into India and was liable on such importation to duty
under the Indian Tariff Act, 1894, or the Sea Customs Act, 1887.
*
*
*
Explanation. - Duty may be imposed under this section at different
rates according to the places to which any excisable article is to be
removed for consumption, or according to the varying strength and
quality of such article.
(2) The State Government shall, in imposing an excise duty or a
countervailing duty as aforesaid and in fixing its rate, be guided by
the directive principles specified in Article 47 of the Constitution of
India.
*
*
*
29. Manner in which duty may be levied.-Subject to such
rules as the Excise Commissioner may prescribe to regulate the
time, place and manner of payment, such duty may be levied in one
or more of the following ways as the State Government may by
notification direct:
(a) in the case of excisable articles imported under Section 12
(1)-
(i) by payment either in the province of import or in the
province or territory of export; or
(ii) by payment upon issue for sale from a warehouse
established or licensed under Section 18(d);
(b) in the case of excisable articles exported under Section 13
by payment either in the province of export or in the province or
territory of import;
(c) in the case of excisable articles transported-
(i) by payment in the district from which the excisable
article is to be transported; or
(ii) by payment upon issue for sale from a warehouse
established or licensed under Section 18(d);
(d) in the case of intoxicating drugs manufactured under any
licence granted under Section 17(1)-
(i) by a rate charged upon the quantity manufactured under
a licence granted under the provisions of Section 17(1)(a), or
issued from a warehouse established or licensed under Section
18(d);
(ii) where the intoxicating drug is manufactured from hemp
plant (cannabis sativa) cultivated or collected under a licence
granted under the provisions of Sections 17(1)(b) and (c), by
an acreage rate levied on the cultivation, or by a rate charged
upon the amount collected;
(e) in the case of spirit or beer manufactured in any distillery
established or any distillery, brewery or manufactory licensed
under Section 18-
(i) by a rate charged upon the quantity produced or issued
from the distillery, brewery or manufactory, as the case may
be, or issued from a warehouse established or licensed under
Section 18(d);
(ii) by a rate charged in accordance with such scale or
equivalents, calculated on the quantity of materials used or by
the degree of attenuation of the wash or wort, as the case may
be, as the State Government may prescribe:
Provided that, where payment is made upon issue of an excisable
article for sale from a warehouse established or licensed under
Section 18(d), it shall be at the rate of duty which is in force on the
article on the date when it is issued from the warehouse."
47. Rules 708, 709 and 813 of the Excise Manual, dealing with the
issues pertaining to loss of spirit in distilleries and wastage allowance,
read as under:
"708. Government not liable for loss of spirit in distilleries.
-Government shall not be liable for the destruction, loss or damage
of any spirit stored in distilleries by fire or theft, or by gauging, or
proof, or by any other cause whatsoever. In case of fire or other
accident officer-in-charge of distilleries shall immediately attend, to
open the premises at any hour by day or nights.
709. Distillers responsible for loss, etc. of spirit in
distilleries.-Distiller shall be responsible for the safe custody of
stock of spirit in their distilleries and shall be liable to make good
any loss of revenue caused to Government by their negligence.
*
*
*
813. Wastage allowance.-The free wastage allowances for
different kinds of spirit (excluding bottled spirit) stored in a distillery
shall be as follows:
Per cent
(1) Plain and spiced spirit
0.7
(2) Rectified spirit and sophisticated
0.4
spirit
(3) Denatured spirit
0.5
If the total wastage on any kind of spirit does not exceed 3% duty
will be charged on the net wastage in excess of the free allowances.
But if the total
wastage exceeds 1.5% duty shall be liable to be charged on the whole
wastage without allowing for the free allowances at the following rates:
(1) Plain and rectified sprits.-At the highest rate of duty
leviable on country spirit in the case of plain spirit and at the
highest rate of duty leviable on IMFL, in the case of rectified sprit.
(2) Sophisticated spirits including spiced country spirit.-At the
rate of duty leviable on that spirit.
(3) Denatured spirit.- penalty at the highest rate of purchase
tax leviable on such spirit:
Provided that if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Excise
Commissioner that the deficiency or wastage in excess of the
prescribed limit has been caused by an accident or other unavoidable
cause, the payment of duty on such deficiency or wastage shall be
not be required.
When the wastage does not exceed the prescribed limit, no action
need be taken by the officer-in-charge, but when an excess is found
in any case at the time of monthly stock-taking, the officer incharge
must obtain a written explanation from the distillers and forward the
same together with a full report of the circumstances to the
Assistant Excise Commissioner/Deputy Excise Commissioner. The
Assistant Excise Commissioner/Deputy Excise Commissioner shall
charge the duty on excess wastage if he is satisfied that the wastage
in excess of the prescribed limit is not on account of an accident or
any unavoidable cause. In case the excess wastage is due to an
accident or unavoidable cause, the matter will be referred to the
Excise Commissioner for orders."
48. One major activity concerning one of the intoxicating liquors,
namely, bottling and storage of foreign liquor, is regulated in the State
of Uttar Pradesh by the 1969 Rules which, inter alia, provide for grant
of bottling licence in Form FL-3 to a distiller to bottle spirits; to a
brewer to bottle beer; and to a vintner to bottle wines. Various general
conditions of such a licence are contained in Rule 6 of these Rules and
then, additional special conditions in relation to bottling of IMFL in bond
under FL-3 licence are contained in Rule 7. Elaborate provisions have
been made in Rule 7 concerning the actual operations of bottling and
storage as also supervision thereof. For the present purpose, only sub-
clause (11) of Rule 7 needs to be noticed and the same is reproduced
hereunder (while omitting other sub-clauses, being not relevant):
"7. Following additional special conditions will be applicable to
bottling of Indian made foreign liquor in bond under FL-3 licence:
*
*
*
(11)(a) An allowance up to one per cent may be made on the
total quantity of spirit stored during a month for actual loss in
bottling and storage. The licensee shall be responsible for the
payment of duty on wastage in excess of one per cent.
(b) When the wastage does not exceed the prescribed limit, no
action need be taken by the Excise Inspector incharge but if an
excess is found
at the time of monthly stock taking the Excise Inspector shall submit a
statement to the Collector by fifth day of the month in Form FLB-10
showing the quantity of actual wastage and the duty to be paid by the
licensee on the excess wastage. On receipt of the statement, the
Collector shall recover the duty from the licensee at the full rate of duty
leviable on Indian made foreign spirit."
49. Before proceeding further we may, at once, summarise that IMFL
destroyed in fire in this case undoubtedly answered to the description
of "spirit", "liquor" and "excisable article" within the meaning of clauses
(8), (11) and (22-a) of Section 3 of the 1910 Act, for being an
intoxicating liquor containing alcohol obtained by distillation; and the
same was manufactured under a licence granted in terms of Section 17
in the distillery of the respondent and was kept in the warehouse
established in terms of Section 18 of the 1910 Act. Thus, this liquor
(IMFL) could not have been removed from the place of storage unless
excise duty payable thereupon had been paid or a bond was executed
for the payment thereof. The duty was payable in terms of Section 28
and its rate was to be that as applicable on the date of its issue from
the warehouse in terms of Section 29. An allowance up to 1% was
admissible on the total quantity of liquor stored during a month for
actual loss in bottling and storage and else, no wastage allowance as
such was admissible thereupon.
50. Moreover, the Government was not to be liable for any loss in
the quantity of this stored liquor for whatever reason; and on the other
hand, the distillery i.e. the respondent was to be responsible for the
safe custody thereof and also liable to make good any loss of revenue
including owing to any loss during storage beyond permissible one per
cent of the total quantity. Considering that mandate, the respondent
was solely liable for payment of excise duty on wastage of stored total
quantity with allowance only up to one per cent, as specified. While
keeping in view these salient features emerging from a combined
reading of the above quoted provisions of the 1910 Act, the Excise
Manual and the 1969 Rules, we may take up the questions calling for
determination in this case.
Whether the demand in question is authorised by law?
51. With reference to the provisions abovementioned, the main
plank of submissions on behalf of the respondent Company has been
that the point of quantification and calculation of excise duty being the
point of issue from the bonded warehouse and that point/stage having
not reached in relation to the liquor destroyed in fire, the question of
demand of excise duty would not arise. It has also been submitted that
Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules has no application and only Rule 709 of
the Excise Manual could apply for which, negligence on the part of the
distillery is required to be proved. Before taking up the issue relating to
the applicable rule, we may deal with the fundamental question raised
on behalf of the respondent i.e. as to whether the demand is
unauthorised
for the reason that the point/stage of quantification and calculation of
duty had not reached and liquor got destroyed while lying in
warehouse.
52. As noticed, such an argument, that the demand of duty remains
unauthorised for the point of issue of liquor having not reached, was
not raised as such before the High Court nor the High Court had
proceeded on that basis. Be that as it may, the submission even
otherwise remains untenable and is required to be rejected.
53. It remains a fundamental constitutional mandate, and needs no
elaboration, that in terms of Article 265 of the Constitution, both levy
and collection of tax must be authorised by law, as held by this Court in
Somaiya Organics14. It remains equally trite that by virtue of Entry 51
of List II, the State has been authorised to impose duty of excise on
alcoholic liquors for human consumption manufactured or produced in
the State. The question raised on behalf of the respondent Company,
about the authority of the appellant State to levy excise duty on the
liquor in question that was destroyed in fire and had not reached the
point of issue, could be adequately answered with reference to the
principles concerning the event and the point where entitlement of the
State to levy excise duty, and corresponding liability of the respondent
to make payment thereof, comes into existence.
54. In State of U.P. V. Delhi Cloth Mills1 this Court dealt with the
question as to whether excise duty could have been levied on the
wastage of liquor in transit and held that the levy of differential duty,
which was charged upon reporting of excess wastage, did not cease to
be an excise duty even if it was levied upon declaration of excess
wastage because, "the taxable event was production or manufacture of
liquor". This Court further made it clear that the excise duty remained a
single point duty which could be levied at one of the points mentioned
in Section 28 of the 1910 Act. The relevant observations and
declaration of law by this Court could be usefully reproduced as under :
"8. The original Section 28 of the Act now re-numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof, and sub-sections (2) and (3) inserted by Section
2 of U.P. Act 7 of 1970 clearly covers Indian made foreign liquors.
There can be no dispute as to military rum being one of the Indian
made foreign liquors excisable under the Act. A duty of excise under
Section 28 is primarily levied upon a manufacturer or producer in
respect of the excisable commodity manufactured or produced
irrespective of its sale. Firstly, it is a duty upon excisable goods, not
upon sale or proceeds of sale of the goods. It is related to production
or manufacture of excisable goods. The taxable event is the
production or manufacture of the liquor. Secondly, as was held in
A.B. Abdulkadir V. State of Kerala¹ an excise duty imposed on the
manufacture and production of excisable goods does not cease to be
so merely because
the duty is levied at a stage subsequent to manufacture or production.
That was a case on Central Excise, but the principle is equally
applicable here. It does not cease to be excise duty because it is
collected at the stage of issue of the liquor out of the distillery or at the
subsequent stage of declaration of excess wastage. Legislative
competence under Entry 51 of List II on levy of excise duty relates only
to goods manufactured or produced in the State as was held in Bimal
Chandra Banerjee V. State of M.P. 17 In the instant case there is no
dispute that the military rum exported was produced in the State of
U.P. In State of Mysore V. D. Cawasji & Co.1 , which was on the Mysore
Excise Act, it was held that the excise duty must be closely related to
production or manufacture of excisable goods and it did not matter if
the levy was made not at the moment of production or manufacture but
at a later stage and even if it was collected from retailer. The
differential duty in the instant case, therefore, did not cease to be an
excise duty even if it was levied on the exporter after declaration of
excess wastage. The taxable event was still the production or
manufacture.
*
*
*
17.
If out of the quantity of military rum in a consignment, a
part or portion is claimed to have been wastage in transit and to that
extent did not result in export, the State would, in the absence of
reasonable explanation, have reason to presume that the same have
been disposed of otherwise than by export and impose on it the
differential excise duty. A statute has to be construed in light of the
mischief it was designed to remedy. There is no dispute that excise
duty is a single point duty and may be levied at one of the points
mentioned in Section 28."
(emphasis supplied)
55. In Mohan Meakin Breweries ¹², the question of exigibility of beer
to excise duty arose in respect of excess wastage in the brewery. With
reference to the aforesaid decision in Delhi Cloth Mills15 as also several
other decisions and upon interpretation of Section 29(e)(i) of the 1910
Act, this Court reaffirmed that exigibility of the liquor (beer in that
case) to excise duty occurred at the stage of manufacture or production
"33. Section 29(e)(i) of the U.P. Excise Act makes it clear that in
the case of beer manufactured in a brewery, excise duty may be
levied, by a rate charged upon the quantity produced or issued from
the brewery or issued from a warehouse. This means that in respect
of beer that undergoes the process of filtration, the exigibility to
excise duty will occur either at the end of the filtration process when
it is received in storage/bottling tanks or when it is issued from the
brewery. In regard to draught beer drawn directly from
fermentation vessels, without further processing or filtration, the
exigibility to excise duty will occur either at the end of the fermentation
process or when it is issued from the brewery."
(emphasis supplied)
56. The very same provision [i.e. Section 29(e)(i) of the 1910 Act],
which has been interpreted by this Court in the aforesaid decision of
Mohan Meakin12 in relation to beer manufactured in a brewery, applies
with necessary variations to the case of spirit manufactured in a
distillery established under Section 18. Undoubtedly, the liquor in
question was manufactured by the respondent Company in its distillery
established under Section 18. Thus, the liquor that had been produced,
became exigible to excise duty at the end of the distillation process
when it was received in storage/bottling tanks or when it was issued
from the distillery. To put it differently, the taxable event was
production or manufacture of this liquor, for it being a duty upon the
goods and not upon sale or proceeds of sale of the goods.
57. As per Section 19, no intoxicant (and that obviously includes the
liquor manufactured by the respondent) can be removed from the
distillery or the place of storage unless the duty leviable thereupon has
been paid or a bond has been executed for the payment thereof.
Considering the overall scheme of the Act and the Rules, it may not be
out of place to interpret the expression "removal" in Section 19 to
include wastage in excess of permissible limit of total quantity of spirit
produced or manufactured and stored. A comprehensive look at the
scheme of Sections 17 to 19 and 28 and 29 of the 1910 Act and the
enunciations of this Court leave nothing to doubt that in respect of the
liquor that had undergone the process of distillation, exigibility to
excise duty had occurred at the end of the distillation process or when
it was issued from the distillery. The point of quantification of this duty,
even if linked in point of time to the date of issue for sale in terms of
proviso to Section 29, does not relate to the "event of chargeability"
that had occurred as soon as the liquor was distilled and received in the
bottling tank or had been otherwise issued from distillery. In other
words, the liquor that was lying stored in the bonded warehouse had
already become subject to the excise duty, with postponement of actual
charging of the duty as per the rate applicable on the date and time of
issue for sale from the warehouse. It gets perforce reiterated that
taxable event was production or manufacture, and not sale, of the
liquor. In this view of the matter, the submission that the levy in
question is not authorised by law, and is hit by Article 265 of the
Constitution of India, remains untenable and is required to be rejected.
58. As regards the applicable rules for the demand in question, the
High Court has proceeded on the reasoning that the present one had
not been the case of wastage in handling and therefore, Rule 7(11) of
the 1969 Rules would not be applicable. The respondent Company has
also submitted that Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules is inapplicable and it
is pointed out that even the State Government
had directed the Excise Commissioner to proceed under Rule 709 of the
Excise Manual and not Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules, which deals only
with wastage in normal course of bottling operation and storage. It has
further been contended that only Rule 709 of the Excise Manual could
be taken recourse of by the Government, but in that case, the distillery
could be made liable only if it could be shown that the loss had been
caused to the Government by any negligence on the part of the
distillery.
59. In regard to the above submissions, though the demand in
question would be essentially referable to Rule 709 of the Excise
Manual, but Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules provides for an allowance up
to 1% on the total quantity of spirit stored during a month towards
actual loss in bottling and storage; and the licensee is responsible for
payment of duty on the wastage in excess of 1%. This Rule 7(11)
makes it clear that even in relation to the wastage in storage, the
allowance is only up to 1% of total quantity of spirit stored during a
month. This provision may also be read with Rule 813 of the Excise
Manual, which provides for free wastage allowance for different kinds of
spirit in a distillery with the specified percentage, namely, the plain and
spiced spirit (0.7%), rectified and sophisticated spirit (0.4%), and
denatured spirit (0.5%). The significant aspect of the matter is that
though wastage allowance is provided for different kinds of spirit but,
the bottled spirit is specifically excluded therein.
60. A comprehensive look at the relevant provisions of law makes it
clear that so far as IMFL is concerned, no provision is made in the
Excise Manual for any wastage allowance in relation to the bottled sprit,
but, in terms of Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules, an allowance up to 1%
on the total quantity of spirit stored during a month may be allowed for
actual loss in bottling and storage. Any allowance for any wastage or
loss beyond the same remains, obviously, impermissible. The logic is
not far to seek. As noticed, in respect of the liquor that had undergone
the process of distillation, exigibility to excise duty had occurred at the
end of the distillation process or when it was issued from the distillery.
Thus, any loss or wastage of the bottled spirit would be directly a loss
of excise duty it had already become exigible to. The rule-making
authority has taken abundant care to ensure that there is no pilferage
of the excise revenue available to the Government on the bottled spirit
by any act of wastage, while making the licensee responsible for
payment of duty on wastage in excess of 1% on the total quantity of
spirit stored during the month. Thus, neither the submissions on behalf
of the respondent Company nor the observations of the High Court
about the total inapplicability of Rule 7(11) could be accepted. In other
words, Rule 7(11) of the 1969 Rules is required to be taken into
account for the legal consequences that so far as the bottled spirit is
concerned, the licensee remains responsible for payment of duty on any
kind of wastage in excess of 1%. Coupled with this provision, Rule 709
of the Excise Manual makes it clear that the distillery remains
responsible for safe custody of the stock of spirit and remains liable to
make good any loss of revenue caused to the Government by their
negligence.
61. Therefore, a plain answer to the legal issue raised on behalf of
the respondent Company is that the demand in question cannot be said
to be unauthorised but, its validity would depend on answer to the
question as to whether negligence could be imputed on the respondent
Company in terms of Rule 709 of the Excise Manual. We shall examine
various features related with this question in the next segment of
discussion.
Whether respondent Company remains liable to pay excise duty
on the liquor lost in fire
62. As noticed, the fire incident in question led the Excise
Commissioner to propose recovery of excise duty on the stock of IMFL
destroyed in fire from the respondent Company and the respondent
Company maintained that the incident was due to the reasons beyond
human control and there was no negligence on its part. However,
ultimately, the Excise Commissioner passed the Order dated 11-7-2006
holding, inter alia, that the respondent Company had not arranged the
fireproof electric equipments of good quality due to which the incident
had taken place; and the carelessness of the distillery for the safety of
stock cannot be attributed to an act of God. The High Court has,
however, held that the inference drawn by the Excise Commissioner
was nothing but of conjectures and surmises without any material
foundation. The High Court has also observed that when a fiscal liability
was founded on a condition precedent i.e. negligence on the part of the
person concerned, no responsibility could be fixed unless such
negligence was shown to be founded on some material.
According to the appellants, the incident in question is
attributable only to some negligence on the part of the respondent
Company and it had not been an act of God for having occurred on
account of fault in the electrical installation and short circuit; and the
incident was avoidable if proper and necessary care was taken by the
respondent Company.
64. On the other hand, on behalf of the respondent, though the
principles relating to an "act of God" have not been invoked as such
before us but the contention has been that the fire was not caused by
the negligence of the respondent Company in maintaining safe custody
of the stock of spirits; and the incident had been the one which
occurred for the reasons beyond the control of human agency. It has
also been contended that the entire distillery (including the godown)
has been under lock and key of the Department; and the Department
had been exercising complete control and supervision over the distillery
and, therefore, no negligence could be imputed on the respondent.
Control of Department over the distillery and godown : Effect of
65. In view of rival submissions, we may begin with the issue
relating to supervision and control of State Excise Department over the
distillery and the godown. The submissions made in this regard on
behalf of the respondent Company remain baseless and have only been
noted to be rejected. In the scheme of the 1910 Act, the 1969 Rules
and the Excise Manual, it is evident that the Government is not liable
for destruction, loss or damage of any spirit stored
in distillery by fire or theft or any other cause (as per Rule 708 of the
Excise Manual). On the other hand, distillery is made responsible for
safe custody of the stock of spirit and is also made liable to make good
any loss of revenue caused to the Government by their negligence.
66. It has rightly been contended on behalf of the appellants that
the purpose of posting Excise Officers in the distillery is for securing the
interest of the State by collection of revenue and to put a check over
any act of theft, wastage, illegal sale as also to ensure proper
implementation of rules. Rule 736 of the Excise Manual makes it clear
that the doors of buildings or rooms which are used for storage of spirit
are under double locks, where one of the locks is of the Excise
Department and other of the distillery. The other provisions of the 1969
Rules and the Excise Manual further make it clear that as regards
general arrangement and management of distilleries, elaborate
provisions have been made like as to how the pipes would be laid, fixed
and painted, as to how lock fastening would be constructed, etc. Even a
minor alteration in the distillery arrangement requires previous sanction
of the Excise Commissioner (Rule 771) and repairs, etc. are to be
reported (Rule 772). The rules in their conspectus provide for strict
supervision and control of the Excise Department over the working of
distillery at every stage but that supervision and control does not
correspondingly absolve the distillery of its duty and responsibility
towards safe custody of the stock of spirit and towards avoidance of
wastage. Any doubt in that regard is effectively quelled by a combined
reading of Rules 708 and 709 of the Excise Manual as also Rule 7(11) of
the 1969 Rules. The contentions in this regard as urged on behalf of the
respondent Company are, therefore, rejected.
Negligence
67. Now, for entering into the core of this matter i.e. as to whether
the loss of revenue caused to the Government by destruction of liquor
in fire could be attributed to any negligence on the part of the
respondent Company, we may take note of the legal principles related
with the liability arising out of, or due to, negligence as also the
exceptions and defences in relation to any claim based on negligence.
68. "Negligence" is one such class of "wrongs" that leads to liability.
The fundamental jurisprudential principle of "liability" is crisply defined
in Salmond on Jurisprudence¹ 19 thus:
"Liability or responsibility is the bond of necessity that exists
between the wrongdoer and the remedy of the wrong."
"Liability" arises from breach of duty, which may be in the form of an
act or omission. We need not delve, for the present purpose, on the
classification of liability into civil or criminal and remedial or penal and
various other jurisprudential features of liability. In the present case,
we are primarily concerned with the question of liability arising out of
negligence. Having
regard to the questions involved and the provisions applicable, it would
be appropriate to take into comprehension the meaning and
connotation of the term "negligence" with reference to the dictionaries,
lexicons and decided cases.
68.1. In Concise Oxford English Dictionary the term "negligence"
is defined and explained as under:
"negligence
n. failure to take proper care over something. Law -
breach of a duty of care which results in damage."
The adjective of this expression is "negligent" and its adverb form is
"negligently". These expressions, for deeper understanding need to be
correlated with the verb "neglect" that has been defined and explained
in the same dictionary as under:
"neglect
V. fail to give proper care or attention to. fail to do
something. n. the state or process of neglecting or being neglected.
failure to do something."
68.2. In Webster's Third New International Dictionary, the terms
"neglect" and "negligence" are defined and explained as under:
"ne glect 1 a:... to give little or no attention or respect to :
consider or deal with as if of little or no importance : DISREGARD,
SLIGHT <some of the most significant issues have been ~ed -Bruce
Payne> <~ed the real needs of the students> b : to fail to attend to
sufficiently or properly : not give proper attention or care to 2 : to
carelessly omit doing (something that should be done) either
altogether or almost altogether : leave undone or unattended to
through carelessness or by intention : pass lightly over <~ing their
obvious duty> <~ed to mention that he was a convict - Bernard
Smith>,
negeliegence 1 a : the quality or state of being negligent b : a
failure to exercise the care that a prudent person usu. exercises -
opposed to diligence;"
68.3. In Black's Law Dictionary "negligence" and several of its
forms and features have been explained. For the present purpose, we
may usefully extract the relevant parts as under:
"negligence. n. (14c) 1. The failure to exercise the standard of
care that a reasonably prudent person would have exercised in a
similar situation; any conduct that falls below the legal standard
established to protect others against unreasonable risk of harm,
except for conduct that is intentionally, wantonly, or willfully
disregardful of others' rights; the doing of what a reasonable and
prudent person would not do under the particular
circumstances, or the failure to do what such a person would do under
the circumstances
*
*
*
active negligence. (1875) Negligence resulting from an affirmative
or positive act, such as driving through a barrier. Cf. passive
negligence.
advertent negligence. (1909) Negligence in which the actor is
aware of the unreasonable risk that he or she is creating;
RECKLESSNESS. - Also termed willful negligence; supine negligence.
casual negligence. (1812) A plaintiff's failure to : (1) pay
reasonable attention to his or her surroundings, so as to discover the
danger created by the defendant's negligence, (2) exercise
reasonable competence, care, diligence, and skill to avoid the danger
once it is perceived, or (3) prepare as a reasonable person would to
avoid future dangers.
*
*
*
gross negligence. (16c) 1. A lack of even slight diligence or care.
The difference between gross negligence and ordinary negligence is
one of degree and not of quality. Gross negligence is traditionally
said to be the omission of even such diligence as habitually careless
and inattentive people do actually exercise in avoiding danger to
their own person or property. - Also termed willful and wanton
misconduct. 2. A conscious, voluntary act or omission in reckless
disregard of a legal duty and of the consequences to another party,
who may typically recover exemplary damages. - Also termed
reckless negligence; wanton negligence; willful negligence; willful
and wanton negligence; willful and wanton misconduct; hazardous
negligence; magna neglegentia.
*
*
*
inadvertent negligence. (18c) Negligence in which the actor is not
aware of the unreasonable risk that he or she is creating, but should
have foreseen and avoided it. - Also termed simple negligence.
*
*
*
passive negligence. (18c) Negligence resulting from a person's
failure or omission in acting, such as failing to remove hazardous
conditions from public property. Cf. active negligence."
(emphasis in original)
68.4. In P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon²³ , various
connotations of the expression "negligence" are stated, inter alia, in the
following terms:
"Negligence. Failure to use the care that a reasonable and prudent
person would have used under the same or similar circumstances.
Negligence in law signifies a coming short of the performance of
duty.
Failure to use the care that a reasonably prudent and careful
person would use under similar circumstances.
Negligence is "the absence of proper care, caution and diligence;
of such care, caution and diligence, as under the circumstances
reasonable and ordinary prudence would require to be exercised."
69. Salmond on Jurisprudence²4 refers to a terse exposition in Grill
V. General Iron Screw Colliery Co. 25 that negligence is "the absence of
such care as it was the duty of the defendant to use"; and further
explains the subtle distinction of inadvertent and advertent negligence
in the following:
"It is to be observed, in the second place, that carelessness or
negligence does not necessarily consist in thoughtfulness or
inadvertence. This is doubtless the commonest form of it, but it is
not the only form. If I do harm, not because I intended it, but
because I was thoughtless and did not advert to the dangerous
nature of my act, or foolishly believed that there was no danger, I
am certainly guilty of negligence. But there is another form of
negligence, in which there is no thoughtlessness or inadvertence
whatever. If I drive furiously down a crowded street, I may be fully
conscious of the serious risk to which I expose other persons. I may
not intend to injure any of them, but I knowingly and intentionally
expose them to the danger. Yet if a fatal accident happens, I am
liable, at the most, not for wilful, but for negligent homicide. When I
consciously expose another to the risk of wrongful harm, but without
any wish to harm him, and harm actually ensues, it is inflicted not
wilfully, since it was not desired, nor inadvertently, since it was
foreseen as possible or even probable, but nevertheless negligently
(c).
Negligence then is failure to use sufficient care, and this failure
may result from a variety of factors...." "
70. Without multiplying the case law on the topic, sufficient it would
be to refer to the connotation of the term "negligence" explained
succinctly by this Court in State of Maharashtra V. Kanchanmala
"9.
Negligence is the omission to do something which a
reasonable man is expected to do or a prudent man is expected to
do."
71. Therefore, it could be reasonably summarised for the present
purpose that failure to exercise that care which a reasonably prudent
person would usually exercise under similar circumstances would
amount to negligence; it is not necessary that negligence would always
be advertent one where the wrongdoer is aware of unreasonable risk
being created but it may be inadvertent or passive too, arising for want
of foresight or because of some omission.
However, the question as to whether the liability because of negligence
could be fastened on the respondent Company or not cannot be
determined without dealing with the other aspects related with
exceptions and defence to the allegation of negligence.
Act of God
72. In its assertions before the Department as also before the High
Court, the respondent Company attempted to rely upon the principles
related with "act of God" and it was sought to be suggested that if the
fire had taken place despite the company having taken all care, it was
nothing but an act of God of which, no human agency had any control.
The High Court has accepted this part of submissions. Though in the
argument before us, the learned counsel for the respondent has not laid
much stress on this theory but looking to the relevant background, it
would be apposite to take note of a few features related with "act of
God" and its connotations on the jurisprudential principles of liability.
73. In P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon2, variegated
connotations of the term "act of God" or vis major are specified with
reference to the treatise and citations. A few relevant aspects for the
present purpose could be usefully extracted as under:
"All natural agencies, as opposed to human activities, constitute
acts of God, and not merely those which attain an extraordinary
degree of violence or are of very unusual occurrence. The distinction
is one of kind and not one of degree. The violence or rarity of the
event is relevant only in considering whether it could or could not
have been prevented by reasonable care : if it could not, then it is an
act of God which will relieve from liability, howsoever trivial or
common its cause may have been. If this be correct, then the
unpredictable nature of the occurrence will go only to show that the
act of God in question was one which the defendant was under no
duty to foresee or provide against. It is only in such a case that the
act of God will provide a defence. "28
"A natural act such as a storm, floods or an earthquake which
cannot be foreseen and usually absolves a person from liability if
damage occurs as a result.
Any event so out of the ordinary that it could not have been
prevented by any amount of human care and forethought e.g.
lightning, freak tidal waves or floods, etc., which relieves a
contractor, such as a freight carrier, of any liability for losses suffered
as a result of it."
"
The expression "act of God" signifies the operation of natural
force free from human intervention, such as lightning. It may be
thought to include such unexpected occurrences of nature as severe
gale, snowstorms, hurricanes, cyclones and tidal-bures and the like.
But every unexpected
wind and storm does not operate as an excuse from liability, if there is
a reasonable possibility of anticipating their happening. An act of God
provides no excuse, unless it is so unexpected that no reasonable
human foresight could be presumed to anticipate the occurrence,
having regard to the conditions of time and place known to be
prevailing at
"
74. The case of Mahadeva Shetty related to the loss suffered by the
claimant due to the injuries sustained in a vehicular accident that
rendered him paraplegic. The bus in which he was a passenger plunged
into a pit after rolling down from a great height. The stand of the
appellant Corporation in opposition to his claim petition was that the
accident was not due to rash and negligent driving but was an act of
God. In that context, this Court explained the essential features
concerning an act of God in contradistinction to an act or omission of
"9. The expression "act of God" signifies the operation of natural
forces free from human intervention, such as lightning, storm, etc. It
may include such unexpected occurrences of nature as severe gale,
snowstorms, hurricanes, cyclones, tidal waves and the like. But
every unexpected wind and storm does not operate as an excuse
from liability, if there is a reasonable possibility of anticipating their
happening. An act of God provides no excuse unless it is so
unexpected that no reasonable human foresight could be presumed
to anticipate the occurrence, having regard to the conditions of time
and place known to be prevailing. For instance, where by experience
of a number of years, preventive action can be taken, Lord Westbury
defined the act of God (damnum fatale in Scotch Laws) as an
occurrence which no human foresight can provide against and of
which human prudence is not bound to recognise the possibility. This
appears to be the nearest approach to the true meaning of act of
God. Lord Blancaburgh spoke of it as "an irresistible and
unsearchable providence nullifying our human effort"."
75. In Vohra Sadikbhai Rajakbhai-, the water released from a dam
constructed by the respondents flooded the land of the appellants and
destroyed the plantation therein. As per the respondents, the water had
to be released from the dam as it reached alarming level because of
heavy rains and non-release would have breached the dam; and that
the action was taken in public interest and it was occasioned because of
the rains, which was an act of God. The appellants, on the other hand,
contended that it was sheer negligence on the part of the respondents
in not maintaining low level of the water keeping in mind the ensuing
monsoon season and, therefore, the damage which the appellants
suffered had direct nexus or causal connection with the aforesaid act of
negligence and it could not be attributed to the rains; and hence, the
respondents could not term it as an act of God and excuse themselves
from
tortious liability. The trial court and the High Court accepted the case
of respondents that they were forced to release the water due to the
heavy rains; and that the land of the appellants was situated adjacent
to the river bank and, therefore, due to heavy rain, the river could have
overflown resulting in entering of the water into the fields of the
appellants in any case.
76. In appeal, this Court in Vohra Sadikbhai Rajakbhai-, while
examining the question as to whether it were a case of gross
negligence, observed that the respondents did not properly controvert
the allegations of the appellants that water was not maintained at an
appropriate level to take care of ensuing monsoons. They had also not
supported their plea to the effect that had the water been not released,
it would have breached the dam and that act would have caused more
public harm. This Court held that since the dam was constructed and
maintained by the respondents and the appellants suffered losses as a
result of release of water from the said dam, onus was on the
respondents to prove that they had taken proper care in maintaining
appropriate level of water in the dam. This Court further held that the
respondents were the owners of the dam in question; and they were
expected to keep the dam in such a condition which avoided any loss or
damage of any nature to the neighbours or passers-by. This Court
observed that merely by saying that the level of water in the dam
increased because of monsoon rains and that the water was released in
public interest could not be treated as discharging the burden on the
part of the respondents in warding off the allegation of negligence.
77. While rejecting the defence of an "act of God", this Court
"22.
An act of God is that which is a direct, violent, sudden and
irresistible act of nature as could not, by any amount of ability, have
been foreseen, or if foreseen, could not by any amount of human
care and skill have been resisted. Generally, those acts which are
occasioned by the elementary forces of nature, unconnected with the
agency of man or other cause will come under the category of acts of
God. Examples are : storm, tempest, lightning, extraordinary fall of
rain, extraordinary high tide, extraordinary severe frost, or a tidal
bore which sweeps a ship in mid-water. What is important here is
that it is not necessary that it should be unique or that it should
happen for the first time. It is enough that it is extraordinary and
such as could not reasonably be anticipated."
78. The case of Patel Roadways10 essentially related to a common
carrier's liability when goods entrusted to it were destroyed in a fire
that took place in the godown of the appellant. As regards the question
of negligence vis-à-vis a common carrier's liability, this Court referred
to a passage from Sarkar on Evidence (15th Edn., 1999) at p. 1724 and
observed that as a rule, negligence is
not to be presumed; it is rather to be presumed that ordinary care has
been used but that this rule does not apply in the case of common
carriers, who, on grounds of public policy, are presumed to have been
negligent if goods entrusted to their care have been lost or damaged or
delayed in delivery.
79. The present one had not been a case where anything related
with the forces of nature like storm, floods, lightning or earthquake had
been in operation or caused the fire. When nothing of any external
natural force had been in operation in violent or sudden manner, the
event of the fire in question could be referable to anything but to an act
of God in legal parlance. The observations of the High Court in this
regard do not appear sound and are required to be disapproved.
Inevitable accident
80. The submissions before this Court on behalf of the respondent
Company had been that the company had taken all precautions which
was expected of it and yet if the fire incident took place, it was
something beyond human control for which the respondent Company
cannot be held liable. This line of submission, at best, could be taken
into another exception to the rules governing liability, where inevitable
accident is generally recognised as a ground of exception. Again, we
may refer to the principles stated by Salmond30 thus:
"Accident, like mistake, is either culpable or inevitable. It is
culpable when due to negligence, but inevitable when the avoidance
of it would have required a degree of care exceeding the standard
demanded by the law. Culpable accident is no defence, save in those
exceptional cases in which wrongful intent is the exclusive and
necessary ground of liability. Inevitable accident is commonly a good
defence, both in the civil and in the criminal law.
To this rule, however, there are, at least, in the civil law,
important exceptions. These are cases in which the law insists that a
man shall act at his peril, and shall take his chance of accidents
happening. If he desires to keep wild beasts (f), or to construct a
reservoir of water (g), or to accumulate upon his land any substance
which will do damage to his neighbours if it escapes (h), he will do
all these things suo periculo (though none of them are per se
wrongful), and will answer for all ensuing damage, notwithstanding
consummate care...." "
81. To accept the case of the respondent Company about it being an
"inevitable accident", it is to be seen if preventing of the fire in
question would have required a degree of care from the respondent
Company beyond or exceeding the standard demanded by law. The
question would thus be as to what had been the normal and reasonable
requirement for safe custody of the liquor in question and if the
respondent Company, despite having attended on all such normal and
reasonable requirements, could not have prevented the fire in question.
While looking for an appropriate answer to this question, we shall have
to take an overall view of the material available on record as also all
the surrounding factors and circumstances. In this regard, before
proceeding further, we could profitably refer to a significant guiding
principle embodied in the maxim res ipsa loquitur whereby negligence
may be presumed from the mere fact of accident; of course, the
presumption depends upon the nature of the accident and the
surrounding factors.
Res ipsa loquitur
82. In order to understand the operation of the maxim res ipsa
loquitur, we may usefully refer to a couple of the decisions of this
Court. Of course, these decisions related with vehicular accidents but
the principles therein remain fundamental in operation of res ipsa
loquitur.
83. Shyam Sunder V. State of Rajasthan31 had been a case where
the victim was travelling in a truck whose engine got fire and while
jumping from the vehicle, he struck against a stone on the side of the
road and died on the spot. The High Court in that case held that merely
for the truck catching the fire would not be evidence of negligence on
the part of the driver; and that res ipsa loquitur had no application.
693, para 9)
"9. The maxim res ipsa loquitur is resorted to when an accident
is shown to have occurred and the cause of the accident is primarily
within the knowledge of the defendant. The mere fact that the cause
of the accident is unknown does not prevent the plaintiff from
recovering the damages, if the proper inference to be drawn from the
circumstances which are known is that it was caused by the
negligence of the defendant. The fact of the accident may,
sometimes, constitute evidence of negligence and then the maxim
res ipsa loquitur applies."
para 10) the following passage from Scott V. London & St. Katherine
Docks Co. 32 , H&C p. 601 : (Scott case³2, , ER p. 667)
"
where the thing is shown to be under the management of the
defendant or his servants, and the accident is such as in the ordinary
course of things does not happen if those who have the management
use proper care, it affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of
explanation by the defendants, that the accident arose from want of
care."
85. This Court further explained the operation of this maxim for
importing strict liability into negligence cases and observed : (Shyam
"10.
The mere happening of the accident may be more
consistent with the negligence on the part of the defendant than
with other causes. The maxim is based on commonsense and its
purpose is to do justice when the facts bearing on causation and on
the care exercised by defendant are at the
outset unknown to the plaintiff and are or ought to be within the
knowledge of the defendant (see Barkway V. South Wales Transport Co.
Ltd. 33)."
86. In Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi V. Ranjit Ginning & Pressing Co.
(P) Ltd.34, this Court again explained the application of the principle of
res ipsa loquitur and explained various features thereof in the following
"6. The normal rule is that it is for the plaintiff to prove negligence
but as in some cases considerable hardship is caused to the plaintiff
as the true cause of the accident is not known to him but is solely
within the knowledge of the defendant who caused it, the plaintiff
can prove the accident but cannot prove how it happened to
establish negligence on the part of the defendant. This hardship is
sought to be avoided by applying the principle of res ipsa loquitur.
The general purport of the words res ipsa loquitur is that the
accident "speaks for itself" or tells its own story. There are cases in
which the accident speaks for itself so that it is sufficient for the
plaintiff to prove the accident and nothing more. It will then be for
the defendant to establish that the accident happened due to some
other cause than his own negligence. Salmond on the Law of Torts
(15th Edn.) at p. 306 states:
'The maxim res ipsa loquitur applies whenever it is so
improbable that such an accident would have happened without
the negligence of the defendant that a reasonable jury could find
without further evidence that it was so caused'. In Halsbury's
Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 28, at p. 77, the position is stated
thus:
'An exception to the general rule that the burden of proof of
the alleged negligence is in the first instance on the plaintiff
occurs wherever the facts already established are such that the
proper and natural inference arising from them is that the
injury complained of was caused by the defendant's
negligence, or where the event charged as negligence "tells it
own story" of negligence on the part of the defendant, the story
so told being clear and unambiguous."
Where the maxim is applied the burden is on the defendant to show either that in
fact he was not negligent or that the accident might more probably have happened
in a manner which did not connote negligence on his part."
The respondent Company remains liable
87. For what has been discussed hereinabove, this much is apparent
that in this case, the warehouse in question indeed got engulfed in fire
and that led to destruction of the liquor stored therein. Here, the
respondent Company could be held liable to pay the excise duty on the
liquor destroyed in fire only if it could be held negligent in not ensuring
safe custody of the stored liquor. As regards this aspect, the fact that
the Department had control and supervision
over the distillery and godown would not absolve the respondent of its
liability. Further, the fire incident in question cannot be termed as an
"act of God".
88. The matter then boils down to the question if the fire incident
could be said to be an inevitable accident. For that matter, we need to
examine as what had been the normal and reasonable requirement for
safe custody of the liquor in question and as to what could be deduced
from the surrounding factors.
88.1. One of the basic factors to be noticed is that the goods in
question were not ordinary goods but had been containing alcohol
which, by its very nature, is highly inflammable. Therefore, a particular
nature of care which might be sufficient as regards ordinary goods may
not be adequate or sufficient for the goods in question.
88.2. On 19-9-2002, the Assistant Electricity Inspector who
conducted periodical inspection of the premises in question made two
observations. One of them was a minor aspect that "Caution" plate was
not placed at certain prominent place but the other observation was a
significant one that at one point of distribution panel, earth wiring was
found with thin wire; and it was suggested that same should be
removed and strip earthing should be done.
35
On
1-3-2003, while
issuing no-objection certificate, the Fire Brigade Officer, inter alia,
observed that firefighting equipments were at right place and were in
working condition but in future, they should be tested in Fire Station,
Shahjahanpur before refilling; and it was also suggested that Foam
Installation should be provided for better management of firefighting
36
arrangements.
88.3. From the material placed on record, it is not forthcoming if
strip earthing had indeed been carried out, though the respondent
Company generally stated in its letter dated 23-9-2002 that what was
pointed out by the Assistant Electricity Inspector had been carried out.
As to when strip earthing was done and in what manner is not
forthcoming. Further, it is also not forthcoming if Foam Installations
were provided, as suggested by the Fire Brigade Officer. In view of
extra care required of the highly inflammable material, significance of
none of these aspects could be gainsaid.
88.4. Though it is true that as per the suggestions made in the
reports relating to the fire incident in question, exact cause of fire could
not be ascertained but there had been indications that the officers,
including the Excise Officer and Station House Officer had seen burnt
wires; and it was reported that the fire "possibly" took place because of
short circuit. Taking note of these facts as also the other facts that
godown was an old one and the roof of the godown was made of
asbestos sheets, the Excise Commissioner, in his Order dated 11-7-
2006, inferred that short circuit could have taken place in old electric
wiring in the godown and in that context, observed that the licensee
had not arranged the fireproof electric equipments of good quality,
which led to the incident in question.
89. A few words as regards "short circuit" would also be apposite at
this juncture.
89.1. "Short circuit" is explained in the Dictionary of Technical
Terms37 by F.S. Crispin as follows:
"Short circuit (elec.) : A path of low resistance placed across an
electrical circuit causing an abnormal flow of current."
89.2. In McGrow-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology38, the
relevant features of short circuit are stated as under:
"An abnormal condition (including an arc) of relatively low
impedance, whether made accidentally or intentionally, between two
points of different potential in an electric network or system. SEE
CIRCUIT (ELECTRICITY); ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE.
Common usage of the term implies an undesirable condition
arising from failure of electrical insulation, from natural causes
(lightning, wind, and so forth), or from human causes (accidents,
intrusion, and so forth). From an analytical viewpoint, however, short
circuit represents a severe condition that the circuit designer must
consider in designing an electric system that must withstand all
possible operating conditions. The short circuit thus is important in
dictating circuit design parameters (wire size and so on) as well as
protective systems that are intended to isolate the shorted element.
SEE ELECTRIC PROTECTIVE DEVICES; ELECTRICAL INSULATION; LIGHTNING
AND SURGE PROTECTION."
89.3. In the present case, even when the exact cause of fire could
not be ascertained, the indications in the reports like that of Assistant
Excise Commissioner dated 2-8-200339 that burnt cables were seen in
the debris and possibility had been of short circuit, the only inference
could be about some fault or shortcoming in electric installations
(equipments and/or wiring) which led to the abnormal flow of current
and thereby, to the fire incident in question.
90. As noticed, the fire incident in question had not taken place due
to operation of any forces of nature. It has also not been the case that
the fire was a result of any mischief by any person. Noticeably, the fire
that started around 12 : 55 p.m. on 10-4-2003 could be brought under
control by the firefighters only by 5 : 00 a.m. on 11-4-2003. When all
the relevant factors are cumulatively taken into account, we find it
difficult to accept that the fire and the resultant loss had been beyond
the control of human agency so as to be termed as inevitable accident.
Obviously, the fire had not generated on its own and, with appropriately
laid fireproof electrical installations as also firefighting measures, the
incident was an avoidable one or at least the loss could have been
minimised.
91. As noticed, the fault of "negligence" need not always be of active
negligence or of gross negligence, but it may also be of an inadvertent
negligence or of a passive negligence. It does not require much of
discussion to say that the goods in question, being highly inflammable,
required extra and excessive care for their safe custody; and any laxity
or slackness in that regard
was impermissible. To put it differently, what was required for ensuring
safe custody of the goods in question was that of heightened safeguard
measures with foresight. When the respondent had not been able to
protect the goods in question from fire within the warehouse and when
all other factors, as noticed above, are taken into account, the
negligence as contemplated in Rule 709 of the Excise Manual is directly
attributable to the respondent Company. In other words, even if the
present case is taken to be that of inadvertence or of unintentional
omission on the part of the respondent Company, it would fall within
the definition of "negligence" for the purpose of Rule 709 of the Excise
Manual.
92. In the given set of facts and circumstances, we are unable to
endorse the approach and views of the High Court, where it had
basically proceeded on the premise as if the incident in question was
referable to an "act of God". As noticed, the incident in question had
not been because of any forces of nature and cannot be said to be an
"act of God". The criticism of Excise Commissioner's Order dated 11-7-
2006 by the High Court, while taking the observations and findings
therein being of surmises and conjectures, is also required to be
disapproved. What the Excise Commissioner had observed in the Order
dated 11-7-2006 had been of his inferences, which were deduced out of
the facts and circumstances of the case and in true application of the
principles of res ipsa loquitur.
93. Hence, we have no hesitation in disapproving the order of the
High Court and in endorsing the views of the Excise Commissioner in
the Order dated 11-7-2006.
Insurance coverage only of the value of liquor : effect of
94. Before concluding on the matter, it would also be appropriate to
deal with yet another feature of this case relating to the insurance
coverage taken by the respondent Company only of value of liquor and
not that of excise duty payable thereupon.
95. Admittedly, the respondent Company had taken insurance
coverage of the value of liquor and indeed received such value of liquor
from the insurer. However, the respondent Company did not take
insurance coverage of the excise duty payable over such value of liquor.
The appellants contend that when the distiller has received value of
liquor, on the principles of equity and fair play, the corresponding
excise duty ought to be made available to them. It has also been
contended that omission on the part of the respondent Company to
take insurance coverage of value of excise duty, while taking coverage
of the value of liquor, itself amounts to negligence. On the other hand,
the respondent would submit that the claim received from the insurer
cannot be termed as consideration because there was no transfer of
property in goods and there was no sale. It has also been submitted
that there was no such requirement in law that the respondent
Company was to take insurance coverage of the excise duty too. Yet
further, it has also been submitted that clearance of insurance claim by
the insurer itself shows that there was no negligence on the part of the
respondent. The Excise Commissioner in its Order dated 11-7-2006 has
observed that the
distiller had taken insurance of the value of goods and for this reason
too, it remained rather lax in taking all care against fire.
96. Having examined the matter in its totality, we are clearly of the
view that the liability of the respondent Company in this matter is
rather fortified from the facts that it had taken insurance coverage of
the value of liquor and indeed received such claim from the insurer.
Further, failure to insure the risk of excise duty liability cannot extricate
the respondent from that liability.
97. As noticed, in the scheme of law applicable, when duty of excise
is upon the goods and the taxable event is the production or
manufacture of the liquor, the liability to pay excise duty had arisen as
soon as the liquor was manufactured. Thereafter, when the liquor got
destroyed in fire but its value was recovered from the insurer, in our
view, these events shall answer to the broad expression "issue of an
excisable article for sale from a warehouse" for the purpose of proviso
to Section 29 (e) of the 1910 Act. Putting it differently, receiving of
insurance claim over the value of goods by the respondent related back
to the date of fire and the respondent became liable to pay excise duty
at the rate which was in force on the date of fire, which would be
deemed to be the date of "issue" from the warehouse.
98. In the given set of facts and circumstances, we are not dilating
on the decision of CESTAT in Dharampal Satyapal13 wherein remission of
duty on account of damage of pan masala in rainwater was disallowed,
when it was found that the assessee had been compensated by the
insurance company with an amount which was much more than the
duty involved but, the submissions in the present case that the goods
had not been sold and duty has not been recovered from consumers, do
not take the case of the respondent Company any further. It was for
the respondent Company to take necessary measures and care to
ensure that payable excise duty would reach the appellants once the
goods had been manufactured.
99. Another facet of this part of matter remains, and we agree with
the appellants, that not taking of insurance coverage of the excise duty
while taking such coverage on the value of liquor itself amounts to
negligence on the part of the respondent Company. As noticed,
"negligence" has different connotations and any particular act or
omission, which may not be negligence in a particular set of facts may
still amount to negligence in another set of facts. In the facts of the
present case, where excise duty became payable on manufacture of
liquor, it was obviously expected of the respondent Company, as a
reasonable and prudent distiller, to take all necessary steps to
safeguard not only the liquor and value thereof but also the
corresponding interest of the Government i.e. the excise revenue. The
Excise Commissioner had been rather justified in drawing inference that
the respondent Company, after having secured the value of goods for
its purpose, might not have been conscious and alert in taking all the
necessary care to guard against any loss to the Government due to any
mishap like fire.
100. The submission, that insurer would not have made payment of
insurance claim if there was any negligence on the part of the
respondent Company, has its own shortcomings. The terms of fire
insurance policy have not been placed on record and it cannot be
deduced as to what were the terms and conditions of that policy under
which insurer had acted in accepting the claim of the respondent
Company. Secondly, what was not treated as negligence by the insurer
for the purpose of insurance claim would not ipso facto become a
proposition binding on the appellants as regards loss of revenue
because of loss of liquor in fire. Such a contention of the respondent
could only be rejected.
Summation
101. In summation of what has been discussed hereinabove, we
hold:
101.1. The demand raised by the appellants against the respondent
Company, of excise duty on the liquor lost in fire, is authorised by law
and has rightly been raised as per the applicable provisions of the 1910
Act, the Excise Manual and the 1969 Rules.
101.2. The fire incident in question cannot be said to be that of an
event beyond human control and the High Court has been in error in
holding that no negligence could be imputed on the respondent
Company.
101.3. The fact that the respondent Company had taken insurance
coverage only of the value of liquor (and not that of excise duty
thereupon) and then, had received the insurance claim towards the
value of liquor also operates against the respondent Company and
fortifies the conclusion about negligence of the respondent Company.
102. Upshot of the discussion foregoing is that this appeal deserves
to succeed and the writ petition filed by the respondent Company
deserves to be dismissed. As a necessary corollary, the miscellaneous
application filed by the respondent Company, for consideration of its
refund application, is rendered redundant and deserves to be dismissed
as such.
Conclusion
103. Accordingly, and in view of the above, this appeal is allowed;
the impugned orders dated 10-4-2017- 1 in Misc. Bench No. 4493 of
2006 and dated 6-11-20192 in CM Application No. 90936 of 2019 are
set aside; and the writ petition as also the miscellaneous application
filed by the respondent Company are dismissed but with no order as to
costs.
+
Arising out of SLPs (C) Nos. 11596-597 of 2020. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment
Court, Lucknow Bench, Misc. Bench No. 4493 of 2006, dt. 10-4-2017) and CMA No. 90936 of
2019 (Allahabad High Court, Lucknow Bench, dt. 6-11-2019) [Reversed]
#
Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and Order in McDowell & Co. Ltd. V. State of U.P.,
2006, dt. 6-11-2019) [Reversed]
1
3
McDowell & Co. Ltd. V. State of U.P. Misc. Bench No. 4493 of 2006, order dated 25-7-2006
(All)
4
Misc. Bench No. 4493 of 2006.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
A.B. Abdulkadir V. State of Kerala, AIR 1962 SC 922
17
18
19 12th Edn., p. 349.
20 11th Edn., p. 958.
21
1976 Edn., Vol. II, p. 1513.
22
10th Edn., pp. 1196-1198.
23
5th Edn., Vol. 3, p. 3435.
24
12th Edn., p. 380.
25 Grill V. General Iron Screw Colliery Co., (1866) LR 1 CP 600
26
1002
27
5th Edn., p. 83.
28
R.F.V. Heuston, Salmond on the Law of Torts (17th Edn., 1977), p. 330.
29
30
12th Edn., p. 399.
31
32
Scott V. London & St. Katherine Docks Co., (1865) 3 H&C 596 : 159 ER 665
33
Barkway V. South Wales Transport Co. Ltd., (1950) 1 All ER 392, 399 (HL)
34
35
Vide para 6.1, above.
36 Vide para 6.3, above.
37
11th Edn., p. 369.
38
6th Edn., Vol. 16, p 387.
39
Vide para 11, above.