In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, C.J. AND SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, S. RAVINDRA BHAT, HIMA KOHLI AND P.S. NARASIMHA, JJ.)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1011 of 2022
Supriyo alias Supriya Chakraborty and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 93 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 5 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 8 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 9 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 11 of 2023
With
T.C. (Civil) No. 12 of 2023
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1020 of 2022
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1105 of 2022
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1141 of 2022
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1142 of 2022
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1150 of 2022
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 159 of 2023
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 129 of 2023
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 260 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 6 of 2023
With
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 319 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 7 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 10 of 2023
With
T. C. (Civil) No. 13 of 2023
And with
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 478 of 2023
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1011 of 2022; Writ Petition (Civil) No. 93 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 5 of 2023; T. C. (Civil)
No. 8 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 9 of 2023; T.C. (Civil) No. 11 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 12 of 2023; Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 1020 of 2022; Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1105 of 2022; Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1141 of 2022; Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 1142 of 2022; Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1150 of 2022; Writ Petition (Civil) No. 159 of 2023; Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 129 of 2023; Writ Petition (Civil) No. 260 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 6 of 2023; Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 319 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 7 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 10 of 2023; T. C. (Civil) No. 13 of 2023; and
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 478 of 2023
Decided on October 17, 2023
For Petitioners:
1.
Mukul Rohatgi, Sr. Advocate
2.
Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Sr. Advocate
3.
Raju Ramachandran, Sr. Advocate
4.
K.V. Viswanathan, Sr. Advocate
5.
Geeta Luthra, Sr. Advocate
6.
Anand Grover, Sr. Advocate
7.
Jayna Kothari, Sr. Advocate
8.
Menaka Guruswamy, Sr. Advocate
9.
Saurabh Kirpal, Sr. Advocate
10.
Vrinda Grover, Advocate
11.
Karuna Nundy, Advocate
12.
Arundhati Katju, Advocate
13.
Raghav Awasthi, Advocate
14.
Namit Saxena, Advocate
For Respondent:
1.
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India
Supriyo V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1011 of 2022
SUGGESTIONS ON BEHALF OF MR. MUKUL ROHATGI, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR THE PETITIONERS
1. It is declared that any two adults have the fundamental right to marry under the Constitution of India.
2. The incidents of a marriage include the right to cohabitation, the right to be recognized as a family unit, the right
to procreate and raise children, the right to exclude others from the marriage and the right to have the marriage gain
social acceptance.
3. It is necessary for any two persons wishing to get married to have documentary evidence of the same. This can
happen in any of the following 3 ways -
1. Solemnization of a marriage under section 4 read with section 12 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954;
11. Registration of a marriage under sections 15 and 16 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954;
111. Registration of a document evidencing marriage under Section 18(f) of the Registration Act, 1908, per the
affidavit suggested hereinunder -
OPTION I
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE INTENDING SPOUSES
4. I, A.B., hereby declare as follows -
1. I am at the present time unmarried and do not have a spouse living.
2. I have completed 21 years of age.
3. I am not related to C.D. (Deponent No. 2) within the degrees of prohibited relationship as specified under the
Special Marriage Act, 1954.
4.
I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I either know or
believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine.
5. I, "A.B.", take "C.D.", to be my lawful spouse.
(Sd.)
A.B. (Deponent No. 1)
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE INTENDING SPOUSE
5. I, C.D., hereby declare as follows -
1. | am at the present time unmarried and do not have a spouse living.
2. I have completed 21 years of age.
3.
I am not related to A.B. (Deponent No. 1) within the degrees of prohibited relationship as specified under the
Special Marriage Act, 1954.
4. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I either know or
believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine.
5. I, "C.D." take "A.B.", to be my lawful spouse.
(Sd.)
C.D. (Deponent No. 2)
OPTION 2
COMMON DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE INTENDING SPOUSES
6. We, A.B. and C.D., hereby declare as follows -
1. We are, at the present time, both unmarried and do not have a spouse living.
2. We have both completed 21 years of age.
3. We are not related to each other within the degrees of prohibited relationship as specified under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954.
4. We are aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement, we either know
or believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, we will be liable to imprisonment and also to fine.
5. I, "A.B." take "C.D.", to be my lawful spouse.
6. I, "C.D." take "A.B.", to be my lawful spouse.
(Sd.)
A.B. (Deponent No. 1)
(Sd.)
C.D. (Deponent No. 2)
Utkarsh Saxena V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
Civil Writ Jurisdiction
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1142 of 2022
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Utkarsh Saxena and Anr. Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondents.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1142 of 2022
Rejoinder Submissions by Dr. Abhishek Singhvi on Behalf of the
Petitioners
I.
ON THE INTERPRETATION OF THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT
11.
11. ON THE WORKABILITY OF THE RELIEF
Interaction with personal laws
Women's rights in heteronormative settings
Interaction with other laws that include matrimonial rights
Age related provisions
Civil unions not an equal alternative
111.
On the Notice and Objection Regime
ANNEXURE 1
ANNEXURE 2
ANNEXURE 3
ANNEXURE 4
ANNEXURE 5
"A room without books is like a body without a soul." - Cicero
The promises of human rights are like empty shells if they are not backed up by concrete actions and
meaningful change." - Mary Robinson
1. Petitioners raise three points in rejoinder :
a. That a Constitution-compliant reading of the Special Marriage Act 1954 ('SMA') to allow for marriage equality - in
the manner suggested by Petitioners - is within the bounds of legitimate statutory interpretation. It is not
judicial 'surgery', or judicial legislation;
b. That the relief sought by Petitioners is workable, and does not require this Hon'ble Court to create a 'new social
institution' or a 'new definition of marriage', or to enter into the thicket of personal law and a host of other laws;
C.
That the prayer for striking down the notice-and-objection regime under the SMA is an essential and indivisible
component to the prayer for marriage equality. Without it, Petitioners would have been granted a recognition of
'marriage' but without 'equality'.
2. As a preliminary point, Petitioners respectfully reiterate that they do not merely seek a declaration of their right
to marry, but an interpretation of the Special Marriage Act that would allow for the solemnisation and/or registration of
non-heterosexual marriages. The reason for this is that marriage is not an abstract concept but a concrete social
institution, valuable both in its own right, and as a gateway to other rights. What Petitioners seek is a right to access,
on equal terms, this social institution.
3. Furthermore, this is not a case where to grant this access, this Hon'ble Court would need to "legislate" or fill in
a
vacuum, and ought therefore to confine itself to a mere declaration. Access to the social institution of marriage, for
non-heterosexual persons (as for heterosexual couples), goes through an existing legal regime : the Special Marriage
Act. This case, therefore, is about how this existing legal regime may be interpreted in a non-discriminatory,
constitution-compliant manner.
I. ON THE INTERPRETATION OF THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT
4a. Both Petitioners and Respondents agree that marriage is a valuable and precious social institution, a source of
meaning and dignity in our society, and the legislative articulation of the fundamental right to choose one's partner.
Its importance lies, inter alia, in its expressive and symbolic valence, and in the protection and social legitimacy that it
offers (especially for vulnerable couples who need it the most). Consequently, discrimination in access to the
institution of marriage on the sole ground of ascriptive characteristics - in particular, sexual orientation and gender
identity - violates constitutional guarantees of equality (Article 14), non-discrimination [Article 15(1)], freedom of
expression [Article 19(1)(a)], and privacy and dignity (Article 21).
4b. Certain provisions of the SMA, as implemented thus far, prevent solemnisation and/or registration of non-
heterosexual marriages. It is submitted that this is not an instance of 'under-inclusive' classification; rather, since the
grounds for exclusion/non-inclusion in the SMA are ascriptive characteristics that amount to prohibited markers under
Article 15, the issue is one of non-discrimination (akin to historical examples of exclusion of women from the vote as
also exclusion of women from the industrial workplace/factories).
4c. However, the SMA admits of a constitutionally-compliant interpretation, by virtue of which the Act can be read
as authorising the solemnisation and/or registration of non-heterosexual marriages.
5. To suggest, as Respondents do that such an interpretation ought to be rejected because of the supposed original
intent of the statute, would go contrary to the doctrine of this Hon'ble Court, that the application of a statute ought
not to be forever circumscribed by the range of concrete circumstances that its framers intended it to apply to.1 The
basis on which, in this case, Petitioners urge this Hon'ble Court to apply the principle of updating construction is - as
submitted above - the need to interpret the SMA in a constitution-compliant manner.
6. To substantiate this argument, Petitioners have cited the House of Lords case of Ghaidan, which met
with
strenuous objection from Respondents on account of an alleged difference in factual context. Petitioners reiterate that
the purpose of citing Ghaidan was to illustrate to this Hon'ble Court that as a matter of interpretive doctrine, what
Petitioners seek in this case is not an outlier either in India or globally, but well within established judicial best
practices. Ghaidan offers guidance for the view that, to achieve a Convention or Constitution-compliant reading of a
statute, it is permissible for a Court to depart from the specific intention of the legislators, as long as the proposed
interpretation is consistent with the underlying thrust of the statute, and within the institutional competence of the
judiciary.
7. The underlying thrust of a statute can be gleaned from its text, structure, and overall legislative purpose (as
distinct from the purported original intention). The underlying thrust of the SMA is that it is a legislation that is not
only agnostic towards ascriptive characteristics (such as faith, caste) of parties and socia1/cultura1/personal law
conventions about marriage, but in fact, was designed to facilitate marriages lying outside the pale of social
acceptability. This is evident from
a. The long title and SOR of the SMA, which set it up as a pathway to marriage that is an alternative to personal
laws.
b. The text of the SMA - especially Section 4 - which does not explicitly discriminate on ascriptive characteristics.
8. This underlying thrust of the SMA remains undiluted by the view that non-heterosexual marriages were not
contemplated as part of its original intended application. Petitioners, therefore, request this Hon'ble Court to give full
effect to the underlying thrust of the SMA, by extending its application - through interpretation - to non-heterosexual
couples.
9. By way of conclusion on this point, Petitioners draw this Hon'ble Court's attention to the landmark judgement in
Brown V. Board of Education,* where the United States Supreme Court outlawed racial segregation in public
schools, on the touchstone of the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution. It was never in dispute that when the Fourteenth Amendment was enacted in 1868, its framers did not
intend it to apply to desegregation : indeed, it is popularly recounted that many legislators who supported the
amendment supported segregation and the "separate but equal" doctrine. In Brown, however, the US Supreme Court
discounted the specific application-intent of the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment, and asked itself, instead, what
the principle of equality required of it, by way of constitutional interpretation. 4 Similarly, Petitioners' interpretation of
the SMA focuses upon the underlying thrust and the principle - of recognising and legitimising marriages unsupported
in social conventions - upon which the SMA is founded, rather than asking how the framers intended to decide each
interpretive issue that might arise.
9A. Petitioners are taking the liberty of putting below an iconic photograph from 1960 of a young African-American
girl, Ruby Bridges, being escorted at a hitherto racially-segregated school by white U.S. Marshals. This submission
seeks to underline the fact that unpopular and anti-majoritarian impulses are necessarily absorbed into society only by
unelected non-majoritarian judges sworn to upholding the values of a written Constitution, which in turn entrenches
several counter-majoritarian values despite being an expression of the majority, We the People. That is the essence of
entrenched constitutional rights, viz. those not affected by transient elected majorities or legislatures.
10. Petitioners respectfully submit that the remedy that they seek is well within the bounds of statutory
interpretation and not judicial 'surgery' of laws, or the 'creation of a new social institution', or - in the words of
Respondents - a 'claim for a legislation. Rather, the issue before this Hon'ble Court is one of discrimination of non-
heterosexual persons from an already legally defined institution on the basis of prohibited markers under Article 15. A
right to marry - along with a scheme for its implementation - already exists, and Petitioners only ask for
non-discriminatory access to that existing right and institution. Indeed, Petitioners' request is modest : it
is to interpret certain provisions of the SMA in a way that is both Constitution-compliant, and consistent
with the SMA's own underlying thrust. Contrary to Respondents' submissions, this does not involve the Court in
altering the meaning of words, or "the meaning of marriage". It only brings into the ambit of the Special Marriage Act
a class that was hitherto (unconstitutionally) excluded.
10A. In conclusion, on the first issue, it is submitted that the mere recognition by way of judicial declaration of
same-sex marriages without anything more, as argued by some of the Respondents, would be akin to "a body without
a soul." Further, to suggest that legislatures will work out content, volume, scope, and direction of this declaration
would be somewhat like expecting statutory legislation to fill in content and meaning qua the right of non-
discrimination under Articles 14 and 15. Absent the rich and diverse jurisprudence of this Hon'ble Court under Article
14, including its evolution from the doctrine of classification to non-arbitrariness to procedural due process and onto
substantive due process, that Article would have remained a hollow shell with no operational reality and identity on
the ground.
10B. It is interesting to note that several legislative Bills to amend and decriminalise consensual homosexual sex
under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 were not carried by legislative majorities and were voted out by
overwhelming legislative majorities. It was only a harkening to entrenched constitutional values by constitutional
judges that led to decriminalisation of homosexuality.
10C. Another example of reference to empty, unproductive, and largely meaningless legislative/executive rhetoric,
is
the
established
fact that despite Navteji and its specific directions in Paragraph 370 mandating dissemination
in
the public domain by central and state governments, the admitted factual position is that almost no such
dissemination initiatives have been taken.6
10D. It is further respectfully submitted that legislative will is not necessarily a neutral, objective, or meritorious
manifestation of desired constitutional objectives and constitutional morality. The Constitution is supreme precisely
because, in many areas, it digresses from the wishes of mere electoral majorities. The zealous guarding and upholding
of several minority rights including its many nuances is crucial precisely because electoral majorities are presumed by
the Constitution-makers to be wrong, tyrannical, or oppressive at certain times. The excessive and repetitive reliance
on legislative majority by the Respondents, underlying each of their arguments is therefore misplaced.
11. ON THE WORKABILITY OF THE RELIEF
Interaction with personal laws
11. Respondents rely on Chapter IV of the SMA to suggest that the SMA is inextricably linked with personal laws,
creating unanticipated consequences that only the legislature can resolve. In particular, Section 19 of the SMA severs
ties of persons of Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, or Jaina religions married under the SMA from their undivided family. At the
same time, Section 21 provides that succession to the property of any person married under the SMA will be governed
by the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 ('ISA'). Respondents argue, however, that Section 21-A of the
SMA carves out an exception for marriages among persons professing the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion,
stating that they remain members of their undivided families and governed by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956
('HSA'), thus linking them back to religious and personal laws.
12. Petitioners submit that the Chapter IV scheme applied the following succession laws to different heterosexual
couples before and after the 1976 amendment that introduced Section 21-A
:
Table 1 Relevant succession laws applicable to different SMA couples
Pre-1976, prior to the introduction of Section 21-A
Partner 1
Partner 2
Relevant succession law
Hindu
Hindu
ISA, severance from undivided family
Muslim
Muslim
ISA
Christian
Christian
ISA
Hindu
Muslim
ISA
Hindu
Christian
ISA
Muslim
Christian
ISA
Post-1976 amendment and insertion of Section 21-A
Partner 1
Partner 2
Relevant succession law
Hindu
Hindu
HSA, no severance from undivided family by virtue of S.
21A
Muslim
Muslim
ISA
Christian
Christian
ISA
Hindu
Muslim
ISA
Hindu
Christian
ISA
Muslim
Christian
ISA
13. Petitioners submit that Section 21-A does not create a barrier to a constitution-compliant reading of the SMA.
Section 21-A only applies, even preliminarily, for marriages of two Hindus. Further, even when two Hindus marry
under the SMA, Section 21-A links the SMA regime to personal law only in two narrow respects, i.e. succession and
membership of the undivided family.
14. With respect to this narrow range of circumstances, Petitioners reiterate that there are three plausible
interpretive methods of addressing Section 21-A in its narrow application to SMA marriages between two Hindus.
a. First, theoretically, this Hon'ble Court may elect not to pronounce on the applicability of Section 21-A to non-
heterosexual Hindu couples in the present litigation, and leave questions of succession open for future litigation.
b. Secondly, in the alternative, this Hon'ble Court may hold that the SMA will apply to non-heterosexual couples
exactly as it is applied to heterosexual couples by virtue of the introduction of Section 21-A in 1976. Specifically,
Hindu non-heterosexual couples will be governed by the HSA (like Hindu heterosexual couples) and non-
Hindu/interfaith non-heterosexual couples will be governed by the ISA (like (non-Hindu/interfaith heterosexual
couples).
To achieve this reading, this Hon'ble Court may extend its gender-neutral reading of the SMA to the HSA
and ISA. It may hold that the words "widow", "widower" in the ISA (limited to issues of marriage) and "male
Hindu", "female Hindu", "widow", and "widower" in the HSA (again, limited to issues of marriage), shall be
interpreted in a manner that is agnostic of gender and sexual orientation. To include transgender persons, the
Court may further hold that the words "male" and "female" under Sections 8 and 15 of the HSA may be read
as persons, exactly as prayed for in the case of the SMA. For an outline of relevant provisions of the HSA and
the ISA, please see Annexure 4; for a detailed note on the workability of this gender-neutral approach to
different scenarios under the SMA, ISA, and HSA, please see Annexure 1.7
C. It is submitted that there is a third option : that this Hon'ble Court may hold that since religious and personal
law-related issues - by agreement of parties - are beyond the scope of this litigation, it follows that personal law
statutes as well as provisions of secular laws that relate back to personal laws (like Section 21-A of SMA) are
excluded from consideration. Since Section 21-A itself was introduced as an exception to the regime under
Sections 19-21, non-consideration of the issue of Section 21-A would simply mean a reversion to the default
regime of ISA. This would be a consistent interpretive approach.
15. It would not follow from this approach that non-heterosexual Hindu couples who marry under the SMA would be
excluded from legal succession regimes altogether. Like non-Hindu/interfaith couples, they are governed by the ISA.
This is because Section 21-A - on its terms - assumes that marriages that it applies to are also capable of being valid
under the Hindu Marriage Act (which is a precondition to apply the HSA to any marriage relationship). Till the right of
non-heterosexual couples to marry under the HMA is adjudicated upon by this Hon'ble Court or provided for by the
legislature, non-heterosexual marriages simply do not meet the preconditions for the triggering of Section 21-A.
16. Put yet another way, since the Petitioners are not seeking the right to marry, and the rights that flow from
marriage (such as succession) under personal laws codified under the HMA and HSA, the issue of Section 21-A - which
is
a gateway from the SMA to the HSA - need not be examined and can be expressly excluded from consideration by
the present Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court, even if non-heterosexual marriages are recognised under the
SMA.
Women's rights in heteronormative settings
17. In a nutshell, this subheading contends that several provisions of the SMA which attempt to create a protective
arc for women in a heterosexual marriage (treating them as - structurally - the more vulnerable gender) need not be
interpreted in favour of either spouse in a non-heterosexual marriage. This stand of the Petitioners fully answers and
takes care of the Respondents' wrongful contention that a gender-neutral approach to the SMA defeats the purpose of
certain provisions enacted to counter unique, gendered situations. If the aforesaid gender-neutral approach of the
Petitioners eschewing the sections dealing with preferential protective treatment of women under the SMA - is
accepted, the diverse contentions (eg. relating to Section 27 of the SMA) raised by the Respondents, would not arise.
In that sense, this set of submissions of the Respondents is either a red herring or attempts to set up a strawman in
the name of the Petitioners and then triumphantly shoot it down.
18. Petitioners submit that these grounds and sections of the SMA, which deal with important gendered and
heterosexual settings, and legal protections in such contexts, are not part of their prayer for marriage equality. The
Petitioners are not seeking interpretation of every gendered word in the SMA in a gender-neutral way. To the contrary,
they only assail those parts of the SMA that require a constitution-compliant reading on grounds of discrimination and
exclusion of non-heterosexual couples from the institution of marriage. Hence, the focus of interpretation similarly
has to be on the discriminatory aspects of the Act that are relevant to and exclude non-heterosexual
couples. Those provisions that specifically deal with heteronormative settings and offer rights/protections
to women qua men do not require a constitutionally-compliant interpretation, and are beyond the scope of
this Petition.
19. It is crucial to clarify that this is not a case of cherry-picking different interpretive regimes for the same words
within the same statute. Returning to the issue of the underlying thrust of legislation and a constitution-compliant
reading, when it comes to the use of gendered terms to specifically address gendered imbalances of power and
therefore achieve substantive equality, limiting such terms to their gendered, heterosexual, context is what is
consistent with the law's underlying thrust as well as Constitutional principles.
20. It can therefore be seen that the Petitioners' approach is entirely consistent in principle, with its two anchoring
points being the underlying thrust of the SMA and the fundamental rights in the Constitution. In other words, it is
permissible for the specific interpretation of different gendered terms across the SMA to be interpreted with a view to
ensuring that their interpretation serves the underlying thrust of the SMA and the principles of non-discrimination and
equality.
21. Hence, this Hon'ble Court may declare that provisions of the SMA with respect to solemnization and
registration of marriage are extended to non-heterosexual couples, except to the extent that provisions of
the SMA or any other law in force are enacted for a "wife" against "husband" in a heterosexual marriage or
for a "woman" against a "man" in a gender-specific context. These provisions, in their application to non-
heterosexual marriages, need not be interpreted exclusively in favour of either partner in a non-
heterosexual marriage. A list of such provisions in the SMA, clearly created for special protection in favour
of a structurally vulnerable section - such as women in a heterosexual marriage - is included in Annexure 2.
Interaction with other laws that include matrimonial rights
22. Respondents argue that the prayer for the bundle of allied rights that accompany marriage cannot be addressed
by this Court, as they involve multiple legislation and complications, and hence require rewriting by Parliament to
accommodate same-sex and queen couples.
23. Petitioners disagree. A valid marriage in the eyes of law is like an index or key to other secular matrimonial and
family laws. The current scheme holds that only a man and woman married under the Act can qualify as a legally
married couple, entitling them to benefits under other statutes that require married status.
24. Statutes that use the gender neutral word "spouse" require no further changes; rights under these statutes will
naturally flow if the Supreme Court interprets spouse to include same-gender and queen partners under the SMA. For a
list of allied rights that use the word "spouse", please see Annexure 3.
25. Statutes that use gendered words like "husband" and "wife" may be interpreted in a gender-neutral way as
"persons", consistent with the interpretation sought under the SMA for marriage equality. It is hereby clarified that the
present set of Petitioners have limited submissions specifically to the issues arising from the SMA and on succession
issues limited to the ISA (as in Paras 14 to 16) and are not seeking this Hon'ble Court's interpretation for the diverse
list of Acts that use gendered words, which may be reserved for future interpretation.
26. It is further submitted that it is not open for Respondents to argue that the Petitioners' fundamental rights may
not be recognised simply because it will open the pathway to further litigation seeking the full and equal import of the
rights that may be recognised here. The forward march of the law and of fundamental freedoms has been based on
litigations such as these, and recognition of fundamental rights of citizens cannot be held hostage to the false virtue of
preventing further litigation.
Age related provisions
27. On Section 4(c) and the age qualification-
a. In the case of same-sex couples, the provision may be read as prescribing 18 years for both parties in a lesbian
relationship, and 21 years for both parties in a gay relationship.
b. In the case of transgender persons, whichever gender/sex they identify as, the concerned age requirement would
apply. That is, a trans-man would become eligible at 21 years of age, while a trans-woman would become
eligible at 18 years of age.
28. The approach in the previous paragraph leaves open the question of age qualification for persons seeking to
marry under the SMA who do not identify as either 'man' or 'woman'. Petitioners suggest the following alternative
routes of interpretation that this Hon'ble Court may adopt to ensure inclusion of 'non-binary' and 'intersex' individuals
in the SMA's ambit :
a. First, the SMA's silence on the age of qualification for persons other than 'men' or 'women' may be read as
imposing no restriction beyond that imposed by other laws that stipulate the age at which persons become
capable of binding themselves under law. This age is 18 years. As such, therefore, this Court may hold that,
subject to the concerned Legislature exercising its power to introduce an age-based qualification for non-binary
persons, they will become eligible to marry under the SMA upon attaining 18 years of age. b. Alternatively, qua
the age issue, the Court may lay down guidelines as an interim measure, while leaving it open to Parliament to
fill in the vacuum in due course.
Civil unions not an equal alternative
29. During the course of hearings, an alternative of creating civil unions for same-sex and queen couples was also
discussed. Petitioners respectfully submit that civil unions do not address the constitutional anomaly presented by
exclusion of non-heterosexual couples from the legal and social institution of marriage.
30. In Lewis V. Harris, the New Jersey Supreme Court considered the validity of the state's marriage laws that
excluded non-heterosexual couples. The majority held such laws to be unconstitutional, but allowed for the anomaly to
be remedied either by an amendment to the marriage laws or by creation of a separate civil union status for queen
couples. Poritz C.J. (joined by Long, and Zazzali, JJ.), dissented from the aforesaid majority view and held that civil
union status for queen couples was not the right remedy for the problem. They said (in words which later became the
majority US SC view) :
"We must not underestimate the power of language. Labels set people apart as surely as physical
separation on a bus or in school facilities. Labels are used to perpetuate prejudice about differences that, in
this case, are embedded in the law. By excluding same-sex couples from civil marriage, the State declares
that it is legitimate to differentiate between their commitments and the commitments of heterosexual
couples. Ultimately, the message is that what same-sex couples have is not as important or as significant as "real"
marriage, that such lesser relationships cannot have the name of marriage.
"9
31. After the US Supreme Court decision in Obergefell V. Hodges,1 the aforesaid view, without reference to Poritz
C.J. and her judicial colleagues, has become the prevailing one : it has been held that equal protection requires that a
marriage between two persons of the same sex be recognised and licenced.
32. Indeed, any other view would militate against India's own jurisprudence on substantive equality. Relegating
non-heterosexual relationships to 'civil unions' and denying their access to the marital institution, would send those in
such relationships a clear message of subordination : that their relationships are 'less than', inferior to relationships
that comply with the entrenched heteronormative order. That the Petitioners' relationships do not deserve the name of
marriage. By doing so, civil union status would undermine the Petitioners' "full and equal social, economic, political,
and cultural participation in society", and contribute to the Petitioner's subordination as a disadvantaged group 11
33. Petitioners respectfully submit that a separate regime of civil unions to recognise their relationships of love
would be akin to reviving from its jurisprudential grave the "'separate-but-equal' doctrine that we today know as,
simply, segregation.
111. On the Notice and Objection Regime
34. Petitioners respectfully submit that the declaratory relief with respect to interpreting the SMA so as to allow
equal marriage regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity ["equal marriage"], is only an essential but
incomplete component of marriage equality. The other essential, indivisible component is the striking down as
unconstitutional of the inotice-and-objection regime provided under the SMA for marriages solemnised thereunder.
Without the latter, the former will give the Petitioners' access to marriage, but not equality with their heterosexual
counterparts. Moreover, even access to marriage will be rendered illusory, in particular, for socially and economically
vulnerable "non-elite" queen couples - i.e., the very category whose rights are most in need of effective protection by
this Hon'ble Court.
35. It is true that the notice-and-objection regime - in principle - applies to all kinds of marriages, including
heterosexual marriages. However, this should not become a reason for this Hon'ble Court to refrain from deciding it in
this case, as it applies to these specific Petitioners standing before this Hon'ble Court, for whom the issue squarely and
most urgently arises. Indeed, it is because of its universal nature that a challenge to the inotice-and-objection regime
can be made by any affected party : heterosexual or homosexual. In this case, the challenge is being made by
affected same-sex and queen couples, on the basis that - as submitted above - the declaratory relief would be illusory
without striking down the notice-and-objection regime.
35A. It would be erroneous to assume that unless and until all members or all categories of members of any class
affected by a legislation subject to challenge or interpretation, are present before the Hon'ble Court, the constitutional
court should not deal with the issue or relegate it to adjudication before Division Benches. The correct test is whether a
vitally and directly affected class (like the current Petitioners) undeniably having locus are before the Court. If they
are, the absence of other affected classes, e.g. heterosexual persons, will not and cannot foreclose or be a bar to the
decision of a constitutional court. Furthermore, if the content of such challenge by the class which approaches the
Court is credible, clear, and strong, it would be unjust to deny relief to the class (i.e. the Petitioners herein) on the
basis that other classes would be affected by that decision and are not before this Court. The test of judicial
intervention is a positive one, seeing as it does the standing and status of the class before the Court, and not denying
relief on the basis of another class not present before the Court.
36. Furthermore, there is a far more direct link between the two issues with respect to queen marriages. As it has
been clarified that this litigation deals only with the possibility of legalising queen marriages under the SMA, should
Petitioners prevail, the only law available to them to get married under will be the SMA - with its notice-and-objections
regime. Unlike most heterosexual couples, queen couples will not be able to get married under personal laws at all, and
are thus compulsorily subjected to the notice-and-objection regime. The only way for Petitioners to avoid the notice-
and-objection regime's onslaught on their privacy, dignity, and personal safety, is to simply not marry at all. This
makes a resolution of the notice and objection regime indispensable for the resolution of this case.
37. Thirdly, there is a further direct link between the two issues here, that does not arise for heterosexual couples.
The notice-and-objections regime removes the choice from a queen couple about when they want to come out to the
world at large and on what terms. This is an issue of decisional autonomy that directly impacts queer couples who
wish to marry - which is a central issue in these petitions.
38. Finally, as Petitioners have set out in their written submissions, and in oral arguments before this Hon'ble
Court, the reasons why a resolution of the notice-and-objections regime is essential to the grant of effective relief of
marriage include
a. The notice-and-objection period allows for public harassment and intimidation of vulnerable couples. Granting to
queen couples the right to marry while leaving the notice-and-objection regime intact will create a situation
where a large swathe of queer couples will have been granted the right under law, but will be unable to exercise
it by virtue of violence facilitated, though not sanctioned, by the same law itself. See Annexure 5 for a report on
threats faced by queen couples from their immediate families and communities.
12
b. Granting a declaratory relief while leaving the notice-and-objection regime intact will sanction a regime of
indirect discrimination, where the impact of this Hon'ble Court's judgement will vary along lines of class, caste,
and faith. As this Court (speaking through Chandrachud J. as he then was) has previously noted, legal provisions
that do not mandate, but nonetheless facilitate discrimination, are unconstitutional.
39. Indeed, in conclusion, on the issue of the notice-and-objections regime, it is submitted that this topic
constitutes a normal, secular, civic, but major irritant of the life of all couples invoking the SMA and the Petitioners
invite its invalidation on traditional, established, and classic grounds of constitutional adjudication, de hors Parts I and
11 of the submissions hereinabove.
DRAFTED BY
Gautam Bhatia, Adv.
Shadan Farasat, Adv.
Hrishika Jain, Adv.
Utkarsh Saxena, Adv. SETTLED BY
Abhinav Sekhri, Adv.
Aman Sharma, Adv.
Dr. Abhishek Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Annexure 1
Indian Constitutional Law and Philosophy
EQUALITY/FAMILY LAW AND THE CONSTITUTION/NON-DISCRIMINATION/SAME-SEX MARRIAGE/SEX
EQUALITY/TRANSGENDER RIGHTS
Guest Post : Gendered Beyond Repair? - Proposing an Interim Succession Regime for Same-Sex Marriages in
Existing Law
MAY 4, 2023MAY 9, 2023
GAUTAM BHATIA
COMMENT
[This is a guest post by Kartik Kalra.]
During the hearing stages of the marriage equality case (Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty V. Union of India) before
the Supreme Court, the Union has consistently highlighted the gendered language of the web of legislation governing
marital relations, which includes the succession regime. This argument highlights the Court's structural inability to
redress the discriminatory character of the exclusion of same-sex marriage even if the Court interprets Section 4(c)
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/594580/) of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("SMA") to permit same-sex marriages, the
highly gendered web of legislation governing marital relations subsists. Since this web of legislation includes the law
on succession, the argument proposes the Court's abstention as the sole way of avoiding unanticipated complications.
What happens when a Hindu homosexual couple marries - would they continue being a part of their respective Hindu
Undivided Families ("HUF")? When a gender-neutral interpretation of the SMA is offered, would the relationships
stipulated in the orders of succession in the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 ("HSA") and the Indian Succession Act, 1925
("ISA") be constructed similarly? In case this is done, would elements of classical Hindu law that permeate into
legislation - especially in context of notional partitions u/s 6 of the HSA, also undergo interpretive changes?
In this piece, I examine the veracity of this, and propose that a gender-neutral construction of the ISA and HSA
offers sufficient resolution. Since the HSA governs succession for Hindu unions pursuant to Section 21-A of the SMA, I
propose the extension of this interpretive choice to both the ISA and HSA in avoiding inter-se disparities among same-
sex unions. In saving the SMA from unconstitutionality due to its exclusion of same-sex marriages, therefore, the
Court must declare the extension of its gender-neutral interpretation of the words "widow" and "widower", as they
appear under the SMA, to both the ISA and HSA. Since the HSA (unlike the ISA) operates substantially within the
gender binary, preventing the exclusion of Hindu transgender persons from the succession regime requires yet another
declaration-the terms "male" and "female", especially as they appear u/ss 8 and 15 of the HSA (defining the orders of
succession), must be interpreted to include transgender persons based on their gender self-identification.
I make this argument in the following manner, using only extant statutory framework and doctrine -firstly, I
propose the framework for succession under the ISA for inter-faith and non-Hindu same-sex unions; secondly, I
propose the framework for succession under the HSA for Hindu same-sex unions; and thirdly, I propose that the ideal
path for the Court to adopt, in order to prevent a disparity among same-sex unions inter-se, would be to mandate the
continued application of the HSA to govern succession for Hindu same-sex unions.
A Preliminary Framework for Same-Sex Succession for Non-Hindus under the ISA
Section 21 (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/388438/) of the SMA holds that succession to the property of any
person whose marriage is solemnized therein would occur in accordance with the ISA, meaning that the personal laws
of neither partner in the devolution of property. An exception is carved u/s 21A
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/11410/), which states that when two Hindus marry under the SMA, the HSA governs
their succession. The HSA, however, won't be applicable when a Hindu marries a non-Hindu, given Section 19
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1168217/) calling for their severance from the HUF. On the other hand, when two
Muslims, Parsis, Christians or Jews marry under the SMA, the ISA applies with full force given Section 21, while
retaining their membership of their respective households given the absence of an equivalent Section 19. The law
governing succession for two kinds of marriages under the SMA - those between a Hindu and a non-Hindu; and those
among non-Hindus - is found in Chapter II of the ISA, which I shall demonstrate to be as efficaciously applicable to
same-sex unions using the gender-neutral interpretation of the terms "widow" and "widower" u/ss 33 and 35 of the
ISA. The law is quite simple, which is as follows
1. Section 33(a) of the ISA.-In the presence of widow and lineal descendants, the former takes a one-third
share, and the latter take two-thirds collectively;
2. Section 33(b) of the ISA - In the absence of lineal descendants, but the presence of widow and kindred, the
former takes one-half, while the latter take the remaining one-half collectively.
While Section 33 of the ISA uses the term "widow" to signify the spouse, Section 35 equates the rights of the
widow and the widower. Any reference to the rights of a widow, therefore, also constitutes a reference to those of the
widower. This already makes matters quite simple - a reference to a male's "widow", pursuant to extant statutory
framework, can be interpreted as a reference to their widower. Likewise, a reference to the rights of a female's
"widower" can be interpreted as one to their "widow". The succession regime under the ISA also prevents the
exclusion of transgender persons - a single order of succession is envisioned for all persons, irrespective of their
gender or sex identities. For clarity on spousal shares in succession for same-sex unions, consider the following
illustrations
A, a Muslim male, marries B, a Parsi trans-man under the SMA. A dies, leaving behind B, two adopted
sons, two adopted daughters, his mother, father, brother and sister.
Here, given the application of Section 21 of the SMA, succession occurs u/s 33 of the ISA. In the-presence of lineal
descendants, kindred are excluded. On this basis, A's mother, father, brother and sister are excluded. B, being A's
"spouse" under the reinterpreted succession regime, takes a one-third share. The two adopted sons and two adopted
daughters take a two-thirds collectively.
C, a Christian trans-woman, marries D, a Muslim female under the SMA. D dies, leaving behind C, one
adopted son, two adopted daughters, her mother, father, brother and sister.
Here, given the presence of lineal descendants, kindred are excluded. C, being D's "spouse", takes one-third. The
adopted son and two adopted daughters take two-thirds collectively.
From these two examples, it can be seen that the regime contained u/s 33 of the ISA, along with a gender-neutral
interpretation of Section 35, makes matters quite simple for intestate succession for same-sex unions without
requiring substantial legislative intervention. Matters may not be as simple for Hindu homosexual unions, both in
terms of the inclusion of transgender persons and the highly gendered order of succession contained in the Schedule. I
discuss this in the following section.
A Preliminary Framework for Succession for Hindu Homosexual Unions
Given the greater complexity of succession under the HSA, I propose a framework for same-sex succession
specifically for Hindu same-sex unions in this section. In order to do so, firstly, I examine succession under the HSA in
general (sub-section A); secondly, I evaluate the use of the HSA to undertake same-sex succession (sub-section B);
and thirdly, I discern some anomalies arising from a gender-neutral interpretation of the HSA (sub-section C).
Succession under the HSA
As noted above, Section 21-A of the SMA mandates the HSA's continued application to two Hindus who marry
therein. This section, inserted in 1976, serves the purpose of preserving the HUF. It claims to do so by excluding the
application of severance-based disability generated by Section 19, retaining the Hindu's membership of the HUF if
they marry another Hindu. The solemnization of a Hindu homosexual union under the SMA, therefore, mandates the
application of the HSA to govern the marital parties' succession.
The HSA retains the Mitakshara-based distinction between Joint Family Property ("JFP") and separate property, with
the former referring to property held jointly by the coparcenary - a managerial unit overseeing the property's economic
well-being. The coparcenary, following the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005, consists of sons and daughters
of up to three degrees of lineal descent, who possess a share in the JFP. The first stage of devolution occurs using a
process called a notional partition, which crystallizes the coparceners' shares in the JFP immediately prior to the
coparcener's death. Following the crystallization of all coparceners' shares, the second stage concerns the devolution of
the deceased coparcener's share on their heirs according to the order stipulated u/s 8 of the HSA r/w the Schedule if
they identify as "male"; and according to the order stipulated u/s 15 of the HSA if they identify as "female".
In Uttam V. Saubhag Singh (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/21722097/), the Supreme Court held that a property
loses its character as JFP once it devolves u/s 8, meaning that the devolution of a single coparcener's share in the JFP
may alter its identity [18]. The inheritors, however, are free to restart their own HUF, which carries a very low
threshold as held in Commissioner of Wealth Tax V. R. Sridharan (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902100/#
text=Commissioner%20of%20Income%2Dtax(1,tax%20Act%2 C%20or%20Wealth%20Tax) [10]. In that case, a
Hindu man married a Christian woman under the SMA, claiming to have begun an HUF with himself and his son as
coparceners. The Court accepted his contention, holding that the petitioner must only discharge the burden of being a
Hindu u/s 2(c) of the HSA [10]. This was quite easy to prove, given its extremely low threshold according to the
standards in Yagnapurushadji V. Muldas (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/145565/) [29]. On this basis, while all
property devolving u/s 8 at the death of any coparcener becomes separate property in the hands of coparcenary heirs,
those heirs can restart their HUF. Lastly, it must be noted that one's membership of the HUF (and the coparcenary) is
immune from decisions to the contrary made by its remaining members, irrespective of the grounds of such a
decision. The HSA contains an exhaustive list of factors disqualifying one from succeeding - murdering the person
whose property one wishes to inherit; and being a descendant of one who ceased to be a Hindu. Section 28
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/385983/#:~:text=28.,on%20any%20other%20ground%20whatsoever.) of the HSA
is explicit in holding that "[n]o person shall be disqualified from succeeding...or any other ground whatsoever",
emphasizing the exhaustive character of the HSA's two disqualifications. On this basis, therefore, the HUF's objections
to a same-sex marriage carry no implications for the marital parties' right to succeed to JFP.
Same-Sex Succession under the HSA
The rules for intestate succession for males and females are provided differently under the HSA, couched in
gendered terms - the property of a "male Hindu" devolves upon the "widow"; the property of a "female Hindu"
devolves upon the "widower". In case the Court holds that these terms must be construed as "spouse" to save them
from unconstitutionality, devolution for a same-sex female union would be covered u/s 15
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1202482/), and for a same-sex male union u/s
8
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1968317/). This interpretive choice will extend to transgender persons in the manner
done by Arunkumar V. Inspector General of Registration (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/188806075/) - one's gender
self-identification would determine their status as "male" or "female" for the purposes of the order of succession. A
transgender woman may be regarded as "female", and a transgender man as "male" for determining the applicable
order of succession. While this resolution is unsatisfactory due to its reduction of diverse identities into the gender
binary, its purpose is to demonstrate the Court's ability to secure sufficient equality using its gender-neutral
interpretive framework. The argument proposing the Court's structural inability in securing equality in matters of
succession, therefore, is weak.
I now discuss concrete scenarios demonstrating the functionality of the gender-neutral interpretation of the
succession regime. For the male union, the spouse of the deceased would inherit simultaneously with the deceased's
other Class I heirs specified in the Schedule (https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/1956/E-2173-1956-0038-
99150.pdf). For the female union, the spouse of the deceased would inherit simultaneously with their sons and
daughters, to the exclusion of all others. Consider the following illustrations
A, a Hindu trans-woman, marries B, a Hindu female under the SMA. A dies, leaving behind B, two
daughters D1 and D2, two sons S1 and S2, her brother, and her sister.
A, being a trans-woman, would be regarded as "female" pursuant to the gender-neutral interpretive framework. The
coparcenary shares of D1, D2, S1 and S2 would be crystallized, and an equal share conferred on B pursuant to
Gurupad V. Hirabai (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090707/) In that case, the Court held that the widow is entitled
to a share equal to that of the sons when undertaking a notional partition, since the notional partition occurs in
accordance with rules of classical Hindu law mandating the same [11]. The HSA, as amended by the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Act, 2005, states that all references to "sons" be construed as those to "daughters", leading to an
interesting amalgam of classical Hindu law and the HSA. In this amalgam, the spouse (B) is entitled to a share equal
to the S ^ ns' and daughters' coparcenary shares. The gender-neutral construction of the term "widow", therefore,
must be taken to its logical conclusion, and prior doctrine on devolution of property be interpreted to maximize the
rights of same-sex unions. When this notional partition is undertaken, the sons and daughters, along with B, get one-
sixth each. This one-sixth, according to Saubhag Singh, is their separate property. At the second stage of devolving
the deceased's share in the coparcenary, A's own one-sixth devolves upon their heirs u/s 15. This devolves upon the
sons and daughters along with B u/s 16, giving them an additional share of one-thirtieth each. The total property with
D1, D2, S1, S2 and B, at the end of the exercise, would be one-fifth each.
C, a Hindu male, marries F, a Hindu trans-man under the SMA. C dies, leaving behind F, two daughters D1
and D2, a daughter of a pre-deceased son D3, and a daughter of a pre-deceased daughter D4.
F, being a trans-man, would be regarded as "male" for the purposes of deciding the order of succession, which
would occur u/s 8 r/w the Schedule. A notional partition would be undertaken u/s 6, crystallizing the coparcenary
shares of D1, D2, D3, and D4, along with conferring an equal share on F (being Cs "spouse") pursuant to Gurupad V.
Hirabai. The reasoning in the above example applies directly.
In the notional partition, D1, D2, D3, D4 and F get one-sixth each. This one-sixth, according to Saubhag Singh, is
their separate property. At the second stage, Cs own share devolves u/s 8. This devolves upon the D1, D2, D3, D4 and
F since all of them are present in Class I of the Schedule giving them an additional share of one-thirtieth each. The
total property with each, the end of the exercise, would be one-fifth each.
On this basis, it can be seen that once a gender-neutral interpretation is offered to the terms "widow" and
"widower" in the HSA, intestate succession for same-sex unions can function within extant statutory framework and
doctrine. There arise anomalies, however, with regards to the relationship between one same-sex partner's spouse and
the other's HUF. I discuss these in the following section.
Anomalies
Some anomalies may arise despite the gender-neutral interpretation of the terms "widow" and "widower", since the
HSA's remaining text would remain highly gendered. In this section, I address one such anomaly - differential rights
of male and female same-sex partners to inherit the other's ascendants' property u/ss. 8 and 15. Consider the
following illustrations :
A, a Hindu male, and B, a Hindu male, marry under the SMA. A predeceases X, his father. X dies in 2023,
leaving behind two sons, two daughters, and B.
In this example, in order to make B eligible for inheriting A's property, the words "widow of a predeceased son" as
they appear under the Schedule would have to be read as "spouse of a pre-deceased son". Once this is done, B can
inherit the property of X as a Class I heir along with the two sons and daughters, obtaining a one-twenty-fifth share.
C, a Hindu female, marries D, a Hindu female, under the SMA. C predeceases her father X. X dies in 2023,
leaving behind two sons, two daughters and D.
25
In this example, there exists no statutory backing to make D eligible for inheriting X's property. Since C and D have
entered into a female same-sex union governed by Section 15, the order of succession provided thereunder must be
followed, which is the following (in the order of precedence) :
Sons, daughters (including children of pre-deceased children) and husband;
Heirs of the husband;
Mother and father;
Heirs of the father.
The term "widower of a pre-deceased daughter", which describes the relationship between X and D, is evidently
absent u/s 15. The absence of this term u/s 15 constitutes an impossibility to interpret it as "spouse of a pre-deceased
daughter", and to consequently confer succession rights on D. There exists, therefore, an anomaly - while a same-sex
partner of a male deceased could succeed to his partner's ascendant's property, the same-sex partner of a female
deceased would be unable to. This anomaly may be illustrative of the Union's argument - judicial intervention may be
unable to redress the highly gendered succession regime. In the following section, I argue that despite such
occasional anomalies, the wisest choice to be exercised by the Court is to simply hold that until structured legislative
change is introduced, the term "widow" and "widower/husband" shall signify "spouse" under both the ISA and the
HSA.
Judicial Intervention Towards Succession and the Court's Options in Supriyo
There exists no constitutional bar to the Court offering a gender-neutral interpretation to the terms "widow" and
"widower" under the HSA and ISA, which it would do to save the SMA's constitutionality. Marriage, without consequent
succession rights, would be a continued equality violation, which the Court has sufficient infrastructure to redress. The
options. therefore. are two - hold solelv the ISA applicable to same-sex unions. resulting in Hindu same-sex unions'
severance from the HUF and their consequent ineligibility to inherit from its members; or hold both the ISA and the
HSA applicable (with its limited anomalies), continuing their membership of the HUF and their eligibility to inherit
from its members.
If the Court doesn't wish to enter into the domain of succession under Hindu law due to anticipated allegations of
overreach in matters of personal law, it may choose the former option. This option, however, carries substantial
disadvantages for same-sex unions, for it would cause the extinction of their coparcenary rights and create a
disqualification from inheriting the property of their HUF's members. Alternatively, it can declare that both the HSA
and ISA be interpreted in a gender-neutral manner, with succession for same-sex unions occurring under both. This
option, I propose, is the least disruptive, and ensures a continuity of coparcenary rights for same-sex unions while
keeping intact their eligibility to inherit HUF's members' property. The argument portraying the exercise of this option
as judicial interference in matters of personal law misses a crucial point : this ship has already sailed, for the HSA's
contemporary succession regime for daughters and widows nowhere resembles its Mitakshara-law counterpart. The
institution of the JFP has already been substantially weakened by legislation and case-law, with every single unit of
property crystallizing upon a notional partition taking the avatar of separate property. The limited components of
classical Hindu law that permeate into legislation such as those dictating the manner of a notional partition, are
equally efficaciously applicable to same-sex unions. Further, as has been noted
(https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/fu11/10.1080/24730580.2022.2139584) before, succession is a question of
property, and concerns rights of a civil instead of religious character. The HSA has never been considered a religious
codification necessitating the Court's interpretive abstention, and has been consistently imputed with a transformative
character, at least on the lines of gender Gurupad Hirabai (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1090707/), Tulsamma V.
Sesha Reddy (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/485394/), and Vineeta Sharma V. Rakesh Sharma
(https://indiankanoon.org/doc/67965481/) are a few examples. The HSA's gender-neutral construction, therefore, is
in line with the Court's consistent interventionist approach towards issues of succession law. In Supriyo, therefore, the
Court must declare that same-sex marriages would occur under the SMA; and that succession for same-sex unions
would be navigated both under both the ISA and the HSA, with a gender-neutral construction of the terms "widow"
and "widower" as "spouse".
Conclusion
On this basis, I submit that despite a few anomalies, succession for same-sex unions can be navigated with relative
lease within existing succession law and doctrine. The JFP institution has been weakened by legislative change and
judicial decisions, and a risk of judicial interference must not be a consideration. The Court, while holding same-sex
marriage permissible under the SMA, must declare that succession shall be governed by the ISA for interfaith and non
-Hindu same-sex unions, and under the HSA for Hindu same-sex unions. In making this declaration, it must hold that
a gender-neutral construction of the terms "widow" and "widower" be done, undermining the gendered character of
property undergirding the succession regime. It must also strive to include transgender persons within the succession
regime following Arunkumar's interpretive approach, using gender self-identification as the basis to determine the
applicable order of succession. Members of a same-sex union must be conferred with the same succession rights as
their heterosexual counterparts, a move that is well within the Court's reach in Supriyo.
EQUALITY, FAMILY LAW, INON-DISCRIMINATION, SAME-SEX MARRIAGE SUCCESSION
One thought on "Guest Post Gendered Beyond Repair? -Proposing an Interim Succession Regime for Same-Sex
Marriages in Existing Law"
1. Guest Post : Gendered Beyond Repair? - Proposing an Interim Succession Regime for Same-Sex
Marriages in Existing Law - Prithwish Ganguli says : MAY 4. 2023 AT 4 AM
[...] [This is a guest post by Kartik Kalra.] During the hearing stages of the marriage equality case (Supriyo @
Supriya Chakraborty V. Union of India) before the Supreme Court, the Union has consistently highlighted the gendered
language of the web of legislation governing marital relations, which includes the succession regime. This argument
highlights the Court's Indian Constitutional Law and Philosophy Read More [...]
REPLY
ANNEXURE 2
Section 27-A, SMA
(1A) A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground,
(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape,
sodomy or bestiality; (ii) that in a suit under Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 1956), or in a proceeding under Section 125 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (or under the corresponding Section 488 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898) (5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has been
passed against the husband awarding maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was
living apart and that since the passing of such decree or order, cohabitation between the
parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards.]
Section 31
Court to which petition should be made-(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI
shall be presented to the district court within the local limits of whose original civil
jurisdiction--
(i) the marriage was solemnized; or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition resides; or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or
(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date
of
presentation of the petition;
or
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where
the respondent is at that time residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or
has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years by those who would naturally
have heard of him if he were alive.
(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under sub-section (1), the
district court may, by virtue of this sub-section, entertain a petition by a wife domiciled
in the territories to which this Act extends for nullity of marriage or for divorce if
she is resident in the said territories and has been ordinarily resident therein for a
period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition and the
husband is not resident in the said territories.
Section 36
Alimony pendente lite-Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI it appears to
the district court that the wife has no independent income sufficient for her support
and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the
wife, order the husband to pay to her the expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or
monthly during the proceeding such sum as having regard to the husband's income,
it may seem to the court to be reasonable.
Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such
weekly or monthly sum during the proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as
possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the
husband 13
Section 37
37.
Permanent alimony and maintenance-(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under
Chapter V or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent
to the decree, on application made to it for the purpose, order that the husband shall
secure to the wife for her maintenance and support, if necessary, by a charge on the
husband's property such gross sum or such monthly or periodical payment of money for a
term not exceeding her life, as, having regard to her own property, if any, her husband's
property and ability 5[the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case], it
may seem to the court to be just.
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party
at
any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of
either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as it may seem to the
court
to be just.
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an orden has been
made under this section has remarried or is not leading a chaste life, it may, at the
instance of the husband vary, modify or rescind any such order and in such manner
as the court may deem just. 14
ANNEXURE 3
Adoption
Regulation 5, Adoption Regulations, 2022 enacted under the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Child) Act, 2015, stipulates only a married couple or single individuals as
eligible candidates for adoption.
Surrogacy
Section 2(1)(h) read with Section 4 of the Surrogation (Regulation) Act, 2021 allows only a
married couple or a single widow/divorcee woman to avail surrogacy.
Intestate succession
Intestate succession under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, Hindu Succession Act, 1956, as
well as Muslim personal law only covers relations by marriage, consanguinity, or adoption.
Tax exemption for
Under Section 56(2)(v) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, gifts made by a person to a spouse
gifts received from
are exempt from income tax.
spouse
Tax deductions for
For instance, Section 80-D of the Income Tax Act, 1961 allows an assessee to deduct
diverse expenditures
expenditure on health premia made only for his spouse or dependent children. Similar
made
for
one's
provisions have also been enacted for other diverse expenditures.
spouse
Norms
for
For instance, the Scheme for Compassionate Appointment in the Registry of the Supreme
compassionate
Court of India, 2006 makes provisions for compassionate appointment of a spouse in case of
appointments
in
the death of a Court Officer while in service. Similar provisions exist for numerous other
government posts
posts in State institutions.
Compensation
to
For instance, under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, only persons related by
dependents for death
marriage or lineage are considered 'dependents' of the deceased entitled to
of kin under various
compensation (ref. Section 2(1)(d), Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923).
legislations
Appointment
of
Rules 19, 21 of All India Services (Death-cum-Retirement) Benefit Rules, 1958 consider only
nominee for receipt of
persons related by marriage, blood, or adoption as eligible nominees for receipt of a
post-retirement
deceased government employee's gratuity.
benefits, pension,
etc. after the death of
a
government
employee
Privilege in spousal
Section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 makes communication between a married
communication
couple made during the subsistence of the marriage, privileged.
Right to bodily In case of death, police/other authorities are often reluctant to return the deceased's bodily
remains of deceased
remains to persons not in a 'legal' relationship (such as marriage or lineage) with the
kin
deceased. 15
State protection from For example, the Rajasthan Prohibition of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial
social harassment,
Alliances in the Name of Honour and Tradition Bill, 2019 was passed by the Rajasthan
violence, and 'honour
Legislative Assembly to protect couples who are married or who intend to marry, from
killings' granted to
harassment by community/families.
couples marrying
outside the pale of
conventional morality
Family
insurance
Most insurance companies cover only the legally married spouse (and other blood/adoptive
coverage
relations) of a policy-holder under family floater insurance policies.
Renting homes
The housing market strongly prefers married couples and conventional families.
Opening of joint bank
Most banks facilitate joint savings accounts for legally married couples and other
accounts
recognised family types.
Bereavement or care-
For instance, bereavement leaves of many private companies only extend to death of loved
giving leave policies
ones recognised by the law as family, i.e. married spouse and other members of the
in
private
immediate conventional family.
16
employment
Right to be involved
Hospitals and healthcare centres generally provide information about a patient's condition to,
in the partner's and consult in that regard with, only legally-recognised family members of the patient,
healthcare and right including a married spouse and other relations by blood/adoption.
to
make
medical
decisions in that
regard
ANNEXURE 4
Surrogacy
Section 2(1) (h) read with Section 4 of the Surrogation (Regulation) Act, 2021 allows only a
married couple or a single widow/divorcee woman to avail surrogacy.
Hindu Succession
8. General rules of succession in the case of
Act, 1956
males.-The property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the
provisions of this Chapter-
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in class I of the Schedule;
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs, being the relatives specified
in class 11 of the Schedule;
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon the agnates of the
deceased; and
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the deceased.
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus.-
(1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set
out in Section 16,
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son or
daughter) and the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre deceased
son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified
therein, but upon the heirs of the father; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her father-in-law
shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children
of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1)
in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the husband.
Indian
Succession
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and kindred only, or
Act, 1925
widow and no kindred.-Where the intestate has left a widow- (a) if he has also left any
lineal descendants, one-third of his property shall belong to his widow, and the remaining
two-thirds shall go to his lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(b) 2[save as provided by Section 33-A], if he has left no lineal descendant, but has left
persons who are of kindred to him, one-half of his
property shall belong to his widow, and the other half shall go to those who are kindred
to
him, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained; (c) if he has left none who
are of kindred to him, the whole of his property shall belong to his widow.
Annexure 5
Same-Sex Marriage : 'One barrier less to live a fuller life'
NH lationalheraldindia.com/national/same-sex-marriage-one-barrier-less-to-live-a-fuller-lif
Rushati Mukherjee April 29, 2023
Fear, despair, joy and hope: what the ongoing marriage equality hearings mean to queen couples in India
who live beyond the metro cities
An illustration of a queen couple at the beach witnessing a sunset (Illustration : Harmeet Raha1/PinkList India)
Rushati Mukherjee
Published: 29 Apr 2023, 8:34 AM
The Indian Supreme Court has been hearing arguments in favour of, and against, legalising same-sex marriage in
India. Lawyers arguing for the legalisation on behalf of the petitioners have referred to it as a hearing about marriage
equality for all queer people rather than just same-sex marriage. This includes gender non-conforming, non-binary,
gender fluid and gender queen people.
The government of India has opposed the appeals, filed by many same-sex couples and other queen people to
legally have their unions recognised. One of the arguments presented in a court document by the government is that
these appeals are urban elitist views'. Chief Justice of India D.Y. Chandrachud observed on 26 April that the elitism
argument is "just prejudice and has no bearing on how the Court will decide the case".
We spoke to four queen couples from non-metropolitan and rural parts of India, to find out if marriage equality is
indeed an urban elitist desire, and what the verdict would mean to them.
Also Read : The curious case of Saurabh Kirpal Suresh and Chhaya (names changed)
Suresh, 22, and Chhaya, 20, are a couple from Uttar Pradesh. Suresh is a trans man, and Chhaya is a cis woman.
Suresh and Chhaya's relationship was outed to their families by Chhaya's relatives.
"Once our families found out, we were both locked into our homes," says Suresh. "Our families tried to find
rishtas for us to be married off to. I was taken to a psychiatrist, where I said very clearly that I knew I was a trans
man, and I knew this was not illegal or madness. My family told me to stop wearing boy's clothes and start dressing
more like a girl. I was only let out of the house to go give my college exams."
Suresh, who was then sitting for his university exams, managed to escape on the last day. He skipped the exam,
met up with Chhaya and went to Delhi, where they sought help from the Delhi Commission for Women. The
Commission helped them to find temporary accommodation, and Suresh found a job with the help of the LGBTQIA+
organisation PeriFerry, which helps queen people find jobs with accepting companies.
A few days later, they left for a major city in the south of India, having booked tickets with the money Suresh had
saved, and with the hope that Suresh's job would support them. Suresh later referred Chhaya to the same company,
and they are now settled in that city.
Housing was a big worry. At first, they lived in a girl's hostel. With the help of a journalist, Suresh began his
medical and legal transition. They then shifted into an apartment.
"The landlady asked for documents and I showed them my PAN card, which doesn't have gender," said Suresh.
"After I got my documents updated, | can show my Aadhaar card which now says I'm a man."
But there is no changing Suresh's birth certificate, which assigned him as female, and as the marriage equality
hearings go on, that is his biggest fear.
"All the marriage acts, even The Special Marriage Act, imply that marriage is between a man and a woman," he
says. "Chhaya and I plan to get married later this year or early next year. I have not undergone sex reassignment
surgery. What if our families legally object to our marriage based on our birth certificate, which shows that we are
of the same sex?" Courts have previously upheld marriages of transgender women. Citing the judgement passed by
the Supreme Court in the 2014 case of the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) V. Union of India, the Madras
High Court ruled in 2019 that under the Hindu Marriage Act, trans women can be legally recognised as brides. More
recently, trans men in relationships with trans women have applied to get their marriages solemnised under The
Special Marriage Act.
But the government, in its arguments during the ongoing hearings, is specifying that the act of marriage takes
place between a biological man and a biological woman.
Also Read : Same sex marriage : How does India perceive homosexuality?
Dutee Chand and Monalisa Dash
Olympian Dutee Chand is well known for being the first openly gay athlete from India. The 27-year-old sprinter has
previously posted about her relationship with Monalisa Dash on her social media accounts, declaring 'Love is love.' She
spoke to us from Bhubaneswar, where she said Monalisa is with her.
"Monalisa and I met in 2017 during the Khudurukuni Osha festival in our village of Chaka Gopalpur in Odisha,"
she says. "Monalisa said that was my fan. We exchanged phone numbers and that is how we started talking."
After they became close, they discussed living together "as husband and wife", she says. "I asked her, what if you
need a man around the house? She said she liked me a lot and didn't care about all that!" says Chand.
In 2018, after the overturning of Section 377 and the effective decriminalisation of same-sex relationships in India,
they made the joint decision to inform their parents that they'd like to live together. Initially, both families were
confused about the decision, but after they met each other, Chand says they agreed to let the two of them do as they
saw best for their lives.
"She has finished her studies and is at home, and I'd like to look after her," says Chand. "I want to work so that
she can take care of the home."
And what does the marriage equality verdict mean to her and Monalisa?
"It matters a lot to us in terms of our lives together," she says. "Marriage certificates make it easier to deal with
documents at banks, to adopt children, deal with property and just have legal rights towards each other, in case
anything happens to either of us. It would also make it easier for me to take her for competitions, on partner visas,
and even something as simple as staying in a hotel room together without being questioned."
Also Read : Same-sex marriage Urban fad or a question of rights?
Bhupen and Prantosh (names changed)
Dr. Bhupen, 35, met Dr. Prantosh, 26, when the latter was studying in Bhubaneswar. Prantosh is from the town of
Pratapgarh in Uttan Pradesh, and is currently pursuing his MBBS, while Dr. Bhupen is from the town of Bokaro in
Jharkhand and is a professor in a management studies institute in Odisha.
Bhupen says he became aware of being attracted to male stars in Bollywood from a young age. He never associated
any shame with the feeling, until he hit puberty, "I distinctly remember an instance in class 6, when I laughed too
loudly and a boy in my class called me chhakka," he says.
"I felt like I was suffocating in India and all I wanted to do was run away, because I could not imagine a future
for myself here," adds Bhupen. "As a teenager, I would go to these big fat Indian weddings and come home and
cry, knowing that this would never be an option for me, that I could never share my life with anyone. In college, all
I could think was, if I have to live a full life, I have to get out of this country."
His meeting with Prantosh changed his life. "I never thought I would meet someone with the same ideas and values
as me," he says. "We used to daydream about running away together."
Prantosh's parents caught him talking on the phone with Bhupen during the pandemic. "They brought up questions
of the family losing respect in society," he says. "They blamed my education for 'turning me gay' and at one point, my
mother suggested corrective rape for me."
Reading about the marriage equality hearing, Prantosh and Bhupen cried together.
"The judgement will remove one barrier for queen people to live a fuller life, if not all barriers," adds Prantosh. "I
also think it will help my parents accept me as I am."
"I didn't think I would see this in my lifetime," says Bhupen. "Given that we're both based in small-town India,
for us we cannot think of marriage or even co-habiting. Life seemed very bleak when I thought it couldn't be
shared. At one point, I couldn't even get out of bed in the mornings. Now, | can see hope."
An illustration of a queen couple at the beach witnessing a sunset (Illustration : Harmeet
Raha1/PinkList India)
(Illustration : Harmeet Raha1/PinkList India)
Also Read : Law students of 36 colleges condemn BCI resolution against same-sex marriage
Viji and Angel (names changed)
Vijin (32) is a cis gay man from Kanniyakumari district in Tamil Nadu. He was raised in a Christian family.
"I became aware that I'm attracted towards men in class 9," he says. "But I first heard the term 'gay' in college,
in a Tamil movie called Goa, which had two gay characters that my friends laughed at." Vijin could not accept his
sexuality at first. For three years, he immersed himself in prayers, fasting and worshipping to try and convert
himself into a heterosexual individual. He even asked his parents to find a woman for marriage-but it only made
things worse.
"After three months of being married, | was still not able to love or have affection towards my partner," he says.
"I started visiting hospitals, [trying] ayurvedic treatment to cure less manliness'. I lost a lot of money."
When nothing worked, Vijin knew he was coming to the end of his endurance. He decided to opt for a job in a
different city, with the idea that he would inform his wife, Angel, about his identity. Depending on her reaction, he
thought he would either move away, or take his own life.
To his enormous surprise and relief, she understood.
"She tried to support me, and we decided to inform her father that we wanted to separate," says Vijin. "But her
father begged me to stay in the marriage and not talk about divorce."
Vijin and Angel came to the conclusion that if they stayed on in India, neither of them would have a chance of
happiness. So together, they planned to work towards leaving. "I tried for Canada and Germany, because I had learnt
some German in a previous job," says Vijin. "Then I got the chance to work in Germany."
Vijin now works in the automotive industry in Munich, where he has met other queen people and, for the first time,
has a community.
"Now I'm here, Angel will soon join me," he says. "After that, I will help her to find another partner. I know it's
difficult to understand. But it's our way of dealing with the cards we were dealt."
For Vijin, the marriage equality verdict would mean a chance for future generations to avoid all this pain and
despair.
"I hope it will create more awareness, especially in villages, that attraction towards the same sex is not a crime,"
he says. "All my life I felt like I was possessed by a demon I could not get rid of I always felt insecure and inferior
to others, and that I could not live a life close to God. I don't want anyone else to feel this way."
RUSHATI MUKHERJEE is a journalist based in Kolkata
Also Read Open letter to CJI from queer Indian students of 10 IITs and 42 other colleges re same-sex
marriage
same sex marriage. LGBTQ+
Utkarsh Saxena V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Utkarsh Saxena and Anr.
Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondents.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1142 of 2022
Written Submissions on Behalf of the Petitioners
Senior Counsel on Behalf of the Petitioners : Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi Time Sought for Oral Arguments : 4
Hours
A.
On the Interpretation of the Special Marriage Act
1. Discrimination
11.
Freedom of Expression
111. Dignity
IV. Remedies
B.
On the Constitutionality of the Notice-and-Objections Regime
1.
Privacy
11.
Decisional Autonomy
III. Equality
IV. Proportionality
C.
On the Relief
Appendix-I
Appendix-II
Appendix-III
1.
These written submissions are being filed in compliance with the orden of this Hon'ble Court dated 06.01.2023, in
a batch of writ petitions concerning the legality of same-sex marriages in India [Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty and
Ann V. Union of India, WP (Civ) No. 1011/2022]. Through this order, this Hon'ble Court directed the petitioners to
file a common set of written submissions before the next date of hearing, i.e. 13th March 2023.
2. Petitioners' written submissions in the captioned matter are divided into three sections. First, Petitioners submit
that the Special Marriage Act 1954 ["SMA"] and Foreign Marriage Act 1969 ["FMA"], when interpreted consistent with
the Constitution, authorise the solemnisation of same-sex marriages [A.]; secondly, Petitioners submit that the notice-
and-objections regimes under the SMA and the FMA, which require publicisation to the world at large of an intent to
marry in advance of the marriage, are unconstitutional [B.]; and thirdly, Petitioners outline what relief this Hon'ble
Court may consider granting in this matter [C.].
3. Petitioners seek the leave of this Hon'ble Court to file brief, additional written submissions on the conclusion of
the hearing.
A. On the Interpretation of the Special Marriage Act
4. Secular marriages in India are governed by the SMA. Section 4 of the SMA - which regulates the conditions
relating to solemnisation of special marriages - uses the gender-neutral terms "a marriage between two persons", and
"spouse." In plain language, therefore, the Special Marriage Act applies both to marriages between same-sex couples,
and opposite-sex couples.
5. However, a degree of ambiguity is introduced into the SMA by Sections 4(c), and 4(d) read with Section 2(b)
and the First Schedule to the SMA. Section 4(c) introduces, as a condition for the solemnisation of a special marriage,
the requirement that "the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years."
Section 4(d) stipulates that the parties ought not to be "within the degrees of prohibited relationship." The term
"degrees of prohibited relationship" is defined in Section 2(b), and refers to "a man and any of the persons mentioned
in Part I of the First Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part 11." Part I of the First Schedule
consists exclusively of female family members, and Part 11 consists exclusively of male family members. Furthermore,
the Second Schedule uses the words "widower" and "widow", the Third and Fourth Schedules "bride" and
"bridegroom", and the Fifth Schedule "husband" and "wife".
6. Consequently, while the SMA is meant to solemnise a marriage between two persons, two of the pre-conditions
for solemnisation appear to restrict its application to heterosexual couples, i.e., a man and a woman.
7. As a preliminary point, Petitioners respectfully submit that none of the other conditions under Section 4 (for
instance, there should be no living spouse, the parties should be able to give consent etc.) are based upon a person's
ascriptive characteristics (such as race, caste, ethnicity, national origin etc). The term 'ascriptive' refers to attributes of
an individual that are pre-determined or designated or ascribed by society or other external norms. The implied
exclusion of LGBTQ+ relationships from the SMA, therefore, stands out as the only exclusion that is based on a marker
of identity.
8. The forward march of progress has caused this exclusion to be legislatively or judicially removed in 32
jurisdictions that now legalise same-sex marriage, an illustrative list of which include jurisdictions as diverse as
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, France, Germany, Mexico, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, Uruguay, and the United States of America.
9. Petitioners respectfully submit that SMA is reasonably liable to be read down in a manner so as to validate and
recognise same-sex marriage. Consequently, subsuming same-sex marriages under the SMA, does not require a
finding of unconstitutionality.
10. In its counter-affidavit filed before this Hon'ble Court, Respondent objects to this reading of the SMA, primarily
on the basis that the very concept of marriage "necessarily presupposes a union between two persons of the opposite
sex", and that this definition is "socially, culturally, and legally ingrained into the very idea and concept of
marriage." (Respondent's Counter-Affidavit, para 5). Notably, Respondent produces no evidence in support of this
claim. Furthermore, Respondent does not address the statutory scheme regulating marriages in India, where the
Special Marriage Act (as will be pointed out below) was enacted as an alternative to personal marriage laws, which
were - indeed - based on a certain cultural understanding of the nature of marriage.
11. Without, therefore, conceding the point, Petitioner submits, in response, that marriage is a social institution (as
argued below), and society is characterised by its capacity to evolve. There is, therefore, no timeless and immutable
"concept" of marriage that exists outside and beyond society, and is immune to change. Indeed, as recently as one
hundred years ago, child marriages were both legally and socially acceptable; now, we understand consent to be
a
cornerstone of marriage, and also understand that valid consent is predicated upon the attainment of majority.
12. Respondent suggests that if indeed the concept of marriage has evolved, the legislature is the only body that
can bring about a change in the law to reflect that evolution (Counter-Affidavit, para 9). Petitioners disagree. The
present case does not ask the Court to act as a substitute for the legislature, and alten the "concept of marriage."
Rather, it asks the Court to find that the existing legislative definition excludes a group of people solely by virtue of
their ascriptive characteristics, and that this exclusion is unconstitutional. Such an exercise is well within the
jurisdiction and the domain of this Hon'ble Court.
13. To substantiate this submission, Petitioners will address their contentions under the following heads of
argument non-dcrimination (1); freedom of expression and association (11); dignity (III); and remedies (IV).
I. Discrimination
14. By prohibiting same-sex couples from solemnising their marriages, the SMA discriminates on grounds of sexual
orientation. Sexual orientation is both a protected ground under Article 15(1) of the Constitution (subsumed within
sex discrimination), and as an ascriptive characteristic - attracts a higher standard of scrutiny under Article 14 of the
be facially more suspicious of, and more readily inclined to intervene with respect to, classifications that cause
disadvantage based on sex or gender.
15. The locus of discrimination in the present case is the exclusion of same-sex couples from the social institution
of marriage. The institution of marriage, in our society, serves the functions listed below. These are illustratively listed
to show that marriage is not simply a privilege or benefit, but is deeply embedded in society, forming the very basis of
a couple's ability to fully participate in it:
a. For those who seek any form of marriage at all, it is a source of social and community validation for a
relationship, expressed through official recognition by the State through its laws.
b. Relatedly, the ability to marry - and the State and social recognition that comes along with it - often provides a
sense of security to vulnerable couples, facing various forms of stigma or pressure. In that sense, the ability or
choice to marry is needed most by those whose relationships are often subjected to familial or community
disapproval.
C.
With respect to the partners themselves, marriage provides greater financial - and other forms of security,
especially to the more vulnerable partner.
d. Marital status is a gateway to a range of other legal and civil benefits, in the domains of tax, inheritance,
adoption, and others. [see Appendix
e. In our society, marriage and marital status - is a source of dignity, fulfilment, and self-respect.
f. Marriage is an integral aspect of the ability to have, and enjoy, a family life.
16. This demonstrates that marriage is not simply a benefit conferred by the State, whose conditions it can
therefore prescribe without any constitutional scrutiny. The fundamental, structural role that marriage plays in our
society means that it is imbued with, and overlaps with, constitutional values. The exclusion of one set of people from
accessing the institution, therefore, requires searching judicial scrutiny on the touchstone of anti-discrimination
doctrine.
17. Notably, Respondent agrees (Counter-Affidavit, paras 15-18). In par 17, Respondent eloquently argues that
"marriage and the family are important social institutions in India that provide for the security, support, and
companionship of members of our society." Petitioners could not have put it better themselves. And that is why, it is
respectfully submitted, exclusion of individuals from these valuable social institutions purely by virtue of their
ascriptive characteristics is unconstitutional.
18. Specifically, Petitioners submit that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the SMA constitutes direct
discrimination under Article 15(1), on grounds of sexual orientation, and is therefore ex facie unconstitutional.
Respondent's submission that the discrimination is not only on grounds of sex is untenable (Counter-affidavit, para
36). Given that "sexual orientation" has been read into "sex", the moment that Respondent submits before this Court
that it has defined marriage to mean a union between one man and one woman, it is - ipso facto - discrimination on
grounds only of sexual orientation.
19. In any event, Petitioners respectfully submit that the exclusion fails the test of Article 14. While there exists an
intelligible differentia (sexual orientation), there is no rational nexus with any legitimate State purpose.
20. First, it is important to reiterate that, in its origin and its evolution, the SMA is an avowedly secular law, which
was meant to serve as an alternative for individuals who could not - or did not want to - solemnise their marriages
objects and reasons of the SMA, the Act was passed "to provide a special form of marriage which can be taken
advantage of by any person in India and by all Indian nationals in foreign countries irrespective of the faith which
either party to the marriage may profess." Consequently, unlike legislation such as, for example, the Hindu Marriage
Act, where the conditions for solemnisation of marriages must comply with Hindu religion, the SMA is an areligious or
non-religious marriage-related legislation. This addresses a point that Respondent makes repeatedly in its counter-
affidavit, namely, the cultural understanding of marriage as a union between two persons of the opposite sex.
21. Indeed, in para 21, Respondent concedes that it has designed and framed marriage laws as relatable to the
customs of various religious communities (Counter-affidavit, para 21). However, as noted above, the question of
how a - or any religion defines marriage is irrelevant to the legislative purposes of the SMA. Without expressing any
opinion on the place of same-sex marriages within religion(s) it is respectfully submitted that other than alleged
invocations of culture and religion (which is the subject matter of other petitions in this batch), there is no other
putative, constitutionally valid legislative purpose that justifies the exclusion of same-sex couples from the purview of
the SMA. Notably, the Respondent does not attempt to provide one.
22. Secondly, the Respondent cannot argue - as it does in paragraph 23 - that it has simply defined marriage as
a union between a man and a woman, and that that constitutes the legislative policy (Counter-affidavit, para 23).
This would be circular and self-referential reasoning, which does nothing more than equate the classification with the
legislative purpose. This, obviously, cannot be a valid defence to an Article 14 challenge, as-in effect any legislative
classification can pass Article 14 scrutiny by the State simply declaring that the classification is the purpose.
23. As an analogy, one can imagine the State announcing a welfare benefit that it then declares off-limits for blue-
eyed people. On being challenged, the State simply says that it has "defined" the welfare benefit as one that all
persons but blue-eyed people are eligible for, and that the legislative purpose is to exclude blue-eyed people from
accessing the said welfare benefit. It is respectfully submitted that just as this self-referential reasoning would not
pass Article 14 scrutiny, so also the State's argument that it has simply "defined" marriage so as to exclude same-sex
couples from accessing the institution, must also be rejected.
24. For example, in Dipak Sibal V. Punjab University, (1989) 2 SCR 145, paras 18-20, when the State sought to
justify legislative classification limiting enrolment in evening law classes to government employees by deploying the
self-referential reasoning that the purpose was to provide legal education to government employees in effect,
equating the classification with the purpose-this Hon'ble Court struck down the classification on the basis, inter alia,
that the legislative purpose was "illogical."
25. Therefore, it is not sufficient for the Union to state simpliciter that, since marriage is by legal definition only a
union between a man and a woman, and since thus, the SMA's legislative purpose is to solemnise marriages fitting
such definition, an otherwise suspect classification on the basis of sexual orientation and gender would be rendered
constitutional.
26. In para 24 of its counter-affidavit, Respondent tries to buttress this classification by referring to the "cultural
ethos and societal values" of the country. This has already been addressed above; here, Petitioners respectfully add
that the invocation of "societal values" (even where such societal values have been established, which is not the case
here) cannot be used to defeat claims for equal treatment and non-discrimination By definition, equal treatment and
non-discrimination require challenging majoritarian social norms (whether these norms exist in the domain of gender,
caste, place of origin, and so on); if society was already minded to accord equal, non-discriminatory treatment to all,
there would be no need for a constitutional right to equality. In paragraph 35, Respondent makes a faint reference to
"social stability", but provides no argument for why the recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA would
adversely affect social stability.
27. Thirdly, this leaves the only remaining legislative purpose as animus against the LGBTQ+ community, and the
refusal to treat them as equal moral members of society, by offering them the same range of rights and benefits as
opposite-sex couples. It is clear that any such purpose needs only to be stated to be rejected : as held in Navtej Johan
V. Union of India, supra (para 353), legislative purpose cannot itself be discriminatory or unconstitutional. As noted by
the South African Constitutional Court in Ministry of Home Affairs V. Fourie, (2006) 1 SA 524 (CC), para 71, the
exclusion of same-sex couples from the legal institution of marriage conveys a message of unequal moral concern or
respect of the Constitution:
The exclusion of same-sex couples from the benefits and responsibilities of marriage, accordingly, is not a small and
tangential inconvenience resulting from a few surviving relics of societal prejudice destined to evaporate like the
morning dew. It represents a harsh if oblique statement by the law that same-sex couples are outsiders, and that their
need for affirmation and protection of their intimate relations as human beings is somehow less than that of
heterosexual couples. It reinforces the wounding notion that they are to be treated as biological oddities, as failed or
lapsed human beings who do not fit into normal society, and, as such, do not qualify for the full moral concern and
respect that our Constitution seeks to secure for everyone. It signifies that their capacity for love, commitment and
accepting responsibility is by definition less worthy of regard than that of heterosexual couples.
28. By sending a message of and perpetuating the subordination of a disadvantaged group of persons, the position
that marriage is the preserve of the heterosexual couple breaches this Hon'ble Court's understanding of substantive
29. In addition to failing the classification test, it is also submitted that the impugned exclusion is manifestly
arbitrary. This is because it privileges one conception of the "family unit" - i.e., a man, a woman, and associated
offspring - over other conceptions. However, the Constitution does not authorise - or sanction - a hierarchy between
different conceptions of the family where unions between some kinds of persons are more equal than others for no
reason other than their ascriptive characteristics.
Court specifically held that "atypical family units" - specifically including queen relationships - are "equally deserving
not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation."
31. It is therefore submitted that the legal privileging of the heterosexual marriage-based family unit over others
lacks any "determining principles", and therefore fails the test of manifest arbitrariness. (see e.g. Joseph Shine V.
32. For these reasons, it is respectfully submitted that insofar as the SMA prohibits same-sex couples from
solemnising their marriages, it is directly discriminatory, and violates Articles 14 and 15(1) of the Constitution.
11. Freedom of Expression
33. The guarantee of freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) is not limited to verbal or written
90). Furthermore and crucially - the right is not limited to speech-acts performed in isolation, but extends to
participation in socially valuable forms of expression, that are articulated in community : for instance, in NALSA V.
were both considered to be protected forms of expression, by virtue of their social salience to the community in
question. Separately, the act of casting a vote has also been held to be a protected expression, because of the social
34. Applying this doctrine, Petitioners respectfully submit that the act of entering into the marital relationship,
because of the social and symbolic meaning that it carries, is protected expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution.
35. Deprivation of the right to marry, therefore, must comply with one of the eight sub-clauses under Article 19(2)
of the Constitution. It is respectfully submitted that none of the sub-clauses are available to the State. In particular,
the term "decency and morality" under Article 19(2) must be read to mean not public morality, but constitutional
morality, i.e., morality infused by constitutional values. This rules out any restriction upon the right that is based
purely on ascriptive characteristics, such as sexual orientation.
36. It is therefore submitted that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the ambit of the SMA violates Article 19
(1) (a) (and, by extension, Article 19(1)(c)) of the Constitution, and is not saved by Articles 19(2) or 19(4).
111. Dignity
37. The right to dignity is at the core of Article 21 of the Constitution.
38. Dignity - in the context of the State's treatment of groups and communities - requires the State to treat
everyone with equal concern and respect, and to not send a message that an individual, or a set of individuals, are
less worthy by virtue of their ascriptive characteristics.
39. The central importance of marriage as a social institution - as outlined above - means that the ability to
participate in it on equal terms is a question of dignity. When the State excludes a set of people from participation in a
valuable social institution, by comparing their choice with the State proscribing what it considers noxious business
activities, it communicates both to the excluded and to the rest of the society that these individuals are less than
complete moral members of society it is, therefore, a message of subordination.
40. There are many historical instances of the exclusion of a group of people from a social institution being used to
send a public message about their worth as equal moral members of society : these include, for example, caste-based
restrictions on temple entry (see Shri Venkataramana Devaru V. State of Mysore, 1958 SCR 895), rules that prohibited
women from participating in certain "male" professions (see Anuj Garg V. Hotel Association, AIR 2008 SC 663) the
refusal to accommodate disability in public examinations (Vikash Kumar V. Union Public Service Commission, (2021) 5
exclusions, on the understanding that the ability to participate in the making and remaking of social institutions is
central to individual dignity. The exclusion of LGBTQ+ people from the social institution of marriage is one of the last
remaining legal outposts that sanctions such exclusion; it is therefore respectfully submitted that the removal of this
exclusion by this Hon'ble Court would advance the constitutional goal of guaranteeing the dignity of all.
41. Respondent submits that the right under Article 21 has been curtailed by virtue of a "legitimate state
interest" (Counter-affidavit, para 40), which - it reiterates - is the "the acceptance of Indian society based upon its
own cultural and societal values (Counter-affidavit, para 42), and "societal morality" (para 45). This submission has
been addressed in some detail above, and Petitioners shall not reiterate it here; it suffices to say that Respondent has
neither established what societal morality is or requires, and has also failed to demonstrate how the version of societal
morality that it articulates is in any way distinct from bare animus against the LGBTQ+ community.
IV. Remedies
42. Petitioners respectfully submit that the present case does not require a strike-down from this Hon'ble Court. It
only requires a declaratory judgement that, in accordance with well-established principles of statutory interpretation
and - when necessary - reading down:
a. The word "man" in Section 2(b) includes "any person", and that correspondingly, the word "woman" includes
"any person";
b. The words "man" and "woman" include trans-men and trans-women, intersex and non-binary individuals as the
case may be; it is respectfully submitted that this would be in furtherance of the judgement of this Hon'ble Court
gender identities that do not conform to the traditional binary genders, i.e. male or female).
C. Section 4(c) enacts only an age-based exclusion for persons otherwise eligible to marry under the provisions of
Section 4, and shall not be construed to impose any disabilities based on gender, sexual orientation, or sexual
identity of the parties. For same sex couples, in particular, Section 4(c) can, without any violence to
fundamentals, be read as a single age-restriction, be it 18 or 21;
d. The reference to "widow" and "widower" in Schedules 11 and 111 includes "widow or widower" and "widower or
widow", as the case may be, and shall not be construed to impose any disabilities based on gender, sexual
orientation, or sexual identity of the parties. (This phraseology is entirely consistent with an interpretation which
treats any surviving spouse in a same-sex marriage as a widow/widower.) e. References to "bride" and
"bridegroom" in Schedules 111 and IV includes "bride or bridegroom", as the case may be, and shall not be
construed to impose any disabilities based on gender, sexual orientation, or sexual identity of the parties. (This
phraseology is entirely consistent with an interpretation which treats any spouse in a same-sex marriage as a
bride/bridegroom.)
43. In the alternative, assuming without conceding, that at the time the SMA was passed, it was mainly, or
possibly only, heterosexual couples that were within the contemplation of the framers, it is entirely permissible as an
interpretive technique to expand the existing words of a statute from its original intent to subsume the evolutionary
Court held that the word "handwriting" in Section 45 of the Evidence Expert (which deals with expert evidence) would
be read to include "handwriting science", thus bringing typewriting experts within its ambit. In doing so, the Supreme
Court applied the principle of updating construction, quoting Francis Bennion on statutory interpretation for the
proposition that "the interpreter is to make allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since the Act's
passing, in law, social conditions, technology, the meaning of words, and other matters." (para 10, emphasis
supplied) In Laxmi Theatre Video, supra, para 7, similar logic was deployed to hold that the word "cinematograph"
covered video cassette players.
44. It is respectfully submitted that this principle is followed the world over. In the specific context of
marriage
equality, the US Supreme Court in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015) p. 20, noted that in interpreting
the
Equal Protection Clause, the Court has recognized that new insights and societal understandings can reveal unjustified
inequality within our most fundamental institutions that once passed unnoticed and unchallenged." In Fitzpatrick V.
Sterling Housing Association Ltd., [1999] UKHL 42, the UK House of Lords held that the word "family" under the
Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (Restrictions) Act included same-sex couples, eloquently observing that "it is
not the meaning which has changed but that those who are capable of falling within the words have changed.' (para
26) Following on from this, in Godin V. Ghaidan Mendoza, [2004] UKHL 30, the House of Lords approved a Court of
Appeal judgement that had interpreted the phrase "as his or her wife or husband" under the Rent Act of 1977 to mean
"as if they were his wife or husband", so as to include same-sex couples (para 51, speech of Lord Steyn).
45. It is therefore respectfully submitted that the original intent of the SMA notwithstanding, the principle of
updating construction justifies the granting of the declaratory relief, prayed for in the terms above.
46. Respondent objects to this relief on the basis that it would make unworkable a range of other laws such as the
Domestic Violence Act, the maintenance provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Dowry Prohibition Act,
Indian Penal Code provisions pertaining to cruelty, and so on (Counter-affidavit, para 27), as these provisions are
not gender neutral. It is respectfully submitted that all of Respondent's examples are of laws where gendered
language exists in order to address structural imbalances of power between men and women within the family (such
as, for example, dowry and maintenance). While there is a separate, ongoing debate about whether - and which - of
these provisions should be made gender neutral, that has no bearing on the question of same-sex marriage.
Respondent further submits that anomalies may be caused in Christian and Muslim marriage and divorce law
(Counter-affidavit, paragraph 28); it is respectfully submitted that these anomalies have no bearing on the
interpretation of the SMA, and in any event, if necessary, are easily resolved using the same interpretive technique
:
for example, the words "husband and wife" can be read to mean "as if they are husband and wife", as has been done
by the UK House of Lords (supra).
B. On the Constitutionality of the Notice-and-Objections Regime
47. Sections 5 9 of the SMA stipulate a set of procedural pre conditions to the solemnisation of special marriages
["the notice-and-objections regime"]. The "notice-and-objections regime" requires the following:
a. An intimation of the intended marriage to the Marriage Officer (in the district in which one of the parties has
resided for at least thirty days prior to the notice), given at least thirty days before the solemnisation of the
marriage [section 5].
b. The notice to be entered by the Marriage Officer in a Marriage Notice Book, which is open to inspection by
anyone, and to be affixed in a "conspicuous place" in the Marriage Officer's office [section 6].
C.
A process by which any person may object to the intended marriage, on the ground that it contravenes one of
the preconditions under Section 4 of the SMA [section 7].
d. The Marriage Officer to look into - and adjudicate the validity of - the objection, within a further thirty days
[sections 8 and 9]. It is important to note that the SMA does not define "objection", and consequently, even if
the said "objection" is frivolous, irrelevant, or outside the scope of Section 4, the Marriage Officer is still duty-
bound to investigate it. This, indeed, is how the statute works on the ground.
e. Furthermore, if the marriage is not solemnised within three months, a new notice must be provided, with the
process restarting. It is respectfully submitted that no other law places such a "ticking clock" for people to
solemnise their marriage.
48. The notice-and-objections regime thus compels individuals to affirmatively publicise their intention to marry.
This publicity is ongoing and continuous, for a period of at least thirty days before the solemnisation of the
marriage. Furthermore, this compelled publicising is indiscriminate, and to the world at large.
49. Petitioners respectfully submit that the notice-and-objections regime is unconstitutional, as it violates Articles
14, 15, and 21 of the Constitution. Petitioners further submit that the grant of declaratory relief - as prayed for in
Section I of these written submissions - without adequately addressing the notice-and-objections regime will render
this Hon'ble Court's relief illusionary for queen couples who are already vulnerable to economic and social pressure
from their immediate family or kinship structures. It is respectfully submitted that, for the reasons outlined below, the
effective exercise of the constitutional rights to equality and intimate decision-making will be possible only if
declaratory relief is accompanied by an invalidation or judicial modification of the notice-and-objections regime.
50. This is because, first, while marriage is undoubtedly a social institution and arguably carries with it a reasonable
expectation of publicity (the precise contours of which may be debated), the notice-and-objections regime compels
publicity of the intention to marry. The thirty-day notice period segregates the intention to marry and the
solemnisation of the marriage. It therefore forces individuals to undergo public - and indiscriminate scrutiny of their
intimate choices, for an extended period of time, before their formal entry into the social institution of marriage. Thus,
it constitutes a disproportionate invasion into an individual's right to privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution [1].
51. Secondly, it is respectfully submitted that, while examining the constitutionality of the notice-and-objections
regime, this Hon'ble Court can - and indeed, must - take into account well-known and incontrovertible social realities.
In large swathes of our society, non-State actors - backed by social and community forces - exert significant and - at
times debilitating pressure upon individual choice, especially in the context of marriage. This is especially the case
when a marriage is deemed to violate social mores and transgress social boundaries, whether it is a queen marriage,
an inter-caste marriage, or an inter-faith marriage. The notice-and-objections regime, therefore, in effect, acts as a
barrier upon the effective exercise of decisional autonomy under Article 21 of the Constitution (11).
52. Thirdly, when examined in the context of social realities, the notice-and-objections regime is discriminatory. It
disproportionately impacts vulnerable and marginalised couples, who do not have the resources to withstand social
pressure (pressure that could take the form of blackmail, threats, social boycotts, and so on) These vulnerabilities
exist at the intersection of caste, class, gender, religion, and sexual orientation, among others. In effect, therefore, the
notice-and-objections regime violates Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution. (111).
53. In a nutshell, the present case is indubitably more about choice, individual autonomy, privacy, and individual
dignity, than any other constitutional value. Parodoxically, there is no greater intrusion into and no greater decimator
of these core constitutional values than the 30 day pre-marriage notice period which de facto constitutes a dangerous
invitation to society at large to disrupt, obstruct, and indeed nullify the core choices involved in the relatively bold
decision of a same-sex marriage. Indeed, this is neither theoretical non apocryphal : there are already diverse
paradigms of physical intrusions and mental torture coupled with extreme family pressure, including destruction of life
and liberty, in inter-faith marriages in India, including many that are solemnised under the SMA.
54. The only legitimate aim of the notice period under SMA would appear to be to bring to light potential breaches
of the conditions of eligibility under Section 4-SMA. If that be so, firstly, that object is sufficiently subserved by
mandatorily requiring prior to registration a comprehensive affidavit/declaration certifying or declaring that the parties
meet each of the conditions stipulated under Section 4. Secondly, the possible benefit of a pre-marriage notice period
of 30 days has to be weighed in the calculus of the humongous drawbacks which have been itemised in the previous
paragraphs, and clearly in that comparative matrix, it is a disproportionate restriction. Thirdly, if for example,
bigamous marriages or underage marriages are illegal, they are in any case invalid, voidable, or void, as the case may
be, by the operation of law, and a notice period is of relatively limited importance to something already declared by
law to be illegal. The self-affidavit and declaration would constitute a sufficient substitute without the corresponding
danger of physical and mental harassment of an extreme kind. Therefore, as will be argued below, there exist less
restrictive means that can achieve the same goal, without compromising on privacy and equality (IV).
55. Petitioners also note that the Respondent's Counter-affidavit (as filed in March 2023) does not address these
submissions.
I. Privacy
56. It has long been accepted that the protection of intimate decisions from non-consensual public scrutiny is at
57. The right to privacy is not limited to private spaces (such as the home). The right belongs to persons (see
privacy must be exercised in public spaces. In Navtej Johan V. Union of India, supra, Chandrachud as he then was
- observed that:
The right to sexual privacy, founded on the right to autonomy of a free individual, must capture the right of
persons of the community to navigate public places on their own terms, free from state interference (paragraph
62).
58. It is respectfully submitted that the phrase "on their own terms" is crucial to understanding the contours of the
right to privacy in the present case. In Navtej Johan V. Union of India, supra, Chandrachud J. was referring to how
relegating same-sex relations to the putative "private" sphere or "behind closed doors", is insufficiently attentive to
the interaction between the public and private, and would entrench the "ambient heterosexism of the public
space" (Navtej Johar, para 471, supra, quoting Saptashi Mandal,
"Right to Privacy in Naz Foundation : A Counter-Heteronormative Critique" (2009) 2 NUJS Law Review
553.). The context of Navtej Johar, therefore, required a critical interrogation of the public/private divide while
applying the lens of privacy to same-sex relations.
59. The present case, it is respectfully submitted, is the mirror image of Navtej Johar, supra. While in Navtej
Johar, supra, Chandrachud J.'s conception of privacy required building an environment in which consensual same-sex
relations could be expressed in public spaces (free of harassment or State interference), the present case involves the
ability of and individual to engage with a public institution (and a public space) while preserving their right to privacy.
60. It is submitted that the pivot upon which this mirror turns is "the right of persons of the LGTBQ+ community to
navigate public places on their own terms." (para 471, Navtej Johar, supra) In one set of situations, this will entail
articulation and expression. In another set of situations, it will require silence and anonymity. The vision of privacy
-
flowing from Navtej Johar, supra accommodates both the mirror and its image.
61. It is respectfully submitted that a further facet of the right to privacy is the right to informational self-
determination (Justice K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India, supra, para 248). The right to informational self-
determination vests in each individual the ability to set the terms upon which intimate information about the self can
be shared with the public. The notice-and-objections regime deprives individuals of informational self-determination in
a domain where it is critical : the choice of a life-partner, and - in particular-the mutual decision of when - and if -
a
relationship is to crystallise into marriage and to whom, and at what stage, the intent of this crystallisation is to be
communicated to.
62. Petitioners reiterate that this is not a case about anonymous marriages, i.e. the striking down of a 30-day
notice period that the marriage will not be in public domain. There would be an official certificate of registration and
the marriage itself will be publicised amongst those the couple wishes to know. Shortly after marriage, the information
will be further disseminated. Far from therefore desiring an anonymous/secretive alliance, the Petitioners' object is to
prevent dangerous, illegal, unwarranted intrusion by meddlesome interlopers, over-aggressive family members, self-
anointed protection groups, and society at large.
Without entering into the merits of the argument, Petitioners concede that slightly different considerations
might apply at the point of entry into the social institution and afterwards. What is at stake here is the ability of
individuals to exercise their right or privacy over their intention to marry - the intimate decision to enter the social
institution - and their ability to control how they choose to share such deeply personal information with the world.
64. For the reasons advanced above, it is therefore submitted that the notice-and-objections regime violates the
right to privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution.
11. Decisional Autonomy
65. It is respectfully submitted that this Hon'ble Court has long held that constitutional adjudication must take
place with a keen awareness of the social context in which laws exist and operate. To this is allied the long-standing
doctrine of this Hon'ble Court that when assessing a law's constitutionality, what matters is its effect, and not its
intention or form (see Chandrachud, J. as he then was in Navtej Johar, supra, para 34 specifically with respect to
queen lives).
66. Chandrachud J. went on to note that a facially neutral law would nonetheless be unconstitutional if its effect
was to target certain communities (paragraph 42). Relying upon on-ground evidence - brought before the Court
through affidavits and personal testimony - Chandrachud J. held that it had been established that Section 377 of the
IPC created "a systemic pattern of disadvantage, exclusion and indignity for the LGBT community, and for individuals
who indulge in non-heterosexual conduct." (paragraph 42) Chandrachud J. specifically referred to the "possibility of
persecution" (paragraph 48), "blackmail" (paragraph 48), and-crucially - the impossibility of redress through law,
even though these acts were illegal (paragraph 48). Summing up the position, it was then held that:
While this behaviour is not sanctioned by Section 377, the existence of the provision nonetheless facilitates it by
perpetuating homophobic attitudes and making it almost impossible for victims of abuse to access justice.
(paragraph 51)
67. This Hon'ble Court has also recognised the possibility of systematic abuse of a rights-infringing measure, and
read that into its assessment of such a measure's constitutionality under the doctrine of proportionality (Gujarat
Civil Appeal No. 8819/2022, paras 48- 51). Following the judgement of Chandrachud, CJI in Gujarat Mazdoor Sabha
that welded safeguards against abuse into this Hon'ble Court's doctrine of proportionality, this Hon'ble Court in
Ramesh Chandra summed up the position of law as follows:
State action that leaves sufficient room for abuse, thereby acting as a threat against free exercise of fundamental
rights, ought to necessarily be factored in in the delicate balancing act that the judiciary is called upon to do in
determining the constitutionality of such state action - whether legislative, executive, administrative or otherwise.
(paragraph 51)
68. Therefore, in view of this Hon'ble Court's authoritative holding, it is not open for the Respondents to defend the
constitutionality of the notice-and-objections regime without regard to the on-ground evidence of its abuse by private
actors.
69. Petitioners rely upon this insight, and respectfully submit that it applies squarely to the notice-and-objections
regime. In the accompanying writ petition, Petitioners have adduced detailed evidence to demonstrate how the notice-
and-objections regime has enabled the persecution of individuals whose choice of a life partner is in conflict with the
social expectations of their family and broader kinship and community structures. (ref. Annexures P2, P3, P4, p.34-53,
containing news reports of such harassment; and Annexure P5, p.57, containing extracts from the 242nd Law
Commission Report noticing this problem).
70. Adopting the language of Navtej Johar, supra, para 458 Petitioners respectfully submit that the notice-and-
objections regime does not sanction persecution, but facilitates it by its operation in a society and an environment in
which the use of familiar, caste, and community power to override individual choice in matters of marriage is both
normalised and widespread.
71. It is in this fashion, therefore, that the notice-and-objections regime violates the right to decisional autonomy
under Article 21 of the Constitution. To be sure, the notice-and-objections regime does not, on its own terms, stop a
marriage. However, to limit the analysis to just that would be to view this provision in vacuum. The jurisprudence of
this Hon'ble Court is clean that effect and context are vital in interpreting a law from the perspective of fundamental
rights violations. It is respectfully submitted that the effect of the notice-and-objections regime, in context, makes it
pellucidly clear that it acts as a significant barrier between individuals and the effective exercise of their right to
decisional autonomy.
111. Equality
72. Drawing from the submissions in the previous section, Petitioners respectfully submit that the notice-and-
objections regime is discriminatory.
73. Different individuals have differing abilities to withstand familial, social, caste, and community pressure (as
outlined above). However, this difference in ability is not random or arbitrary : it is directly linked to an individual's
ascriptive identity (including, but not limited to, their socio-economic status). For example, individuals who are
economically dependent on their families will be less able to withstand familial pressure than individuals who are
economically independent. Individuals who belong to contexts in which kinship and community structures are
important sources of support, will be less able to withstand a threat of social boycott than individuals whose access to
basic goods is not mediated through community. At an even simpler level, individuals belonging to dominant social
groups (for example, dominant caste groups) will be more able to withstand pressure than individuals belonging to
already vulnerable or marginalised groups.
74. Consequently, the harm wrought by the notice-and-objections regime lies at the interface of two (related)
concepts of discrimination : indirect discrimination and intersectional discrimination.
75. Indirect discrimination refers to the phenomenon where a neutrally-worded statute is discriminatory in its effect
76. It is respectfully submitted that the term "social and economic" is carefully chosen, and ought to be given full
effect to.
77. Intersectional discrimination, on the other hand, is a more complex concept. It is based upon the insight that
individuals habitually occupy multiple axes of oppression simultaneously, and in such circumstances, the
discrimination that they experience does not come packaged separately by axis, and nor is it a simple sum of
individual forms of discrimination. Intersectional discrimination is a unique experience that - as the term suggests - is
located at the intersection of one or more ascriptive identities.
78. Intersectional discrimination has been recognised by this Hon'ble Court. In Navtej Johar, supra, Chandrachud J.
(as he then was) held that it was important to take into account "the intersectional nature of sex discrimination, which
cannot be said to operate in isolation of other identities, especially from the sociopolitical and economic
24). Repeatedly, therefore, this Hon'ble Court has stressed upon "social and economic context" as prerequisites for
understanding intersectional discrimination.
79. It is respectfully submitted that the (facially neutral) notice-and-objections regime is an instance of indirect,
intersectional discrimination. The notice-and-objections regime operates unequally on individuals who occupy the
intersection of ascriptive identities - gender, sexual orientation, caste, religion, and class - and places the benefits of
the SMA beyond their reach. For these reasons, it is respectfully submitted that the SMA violates Articles 14 and 15 of
the Constitution.
IV. Proportionality
80. It is well-settled that a law that violates Article 21 must conform to the five-pronged test of proportionality in
order to pass muster. The five prongs are:
a. A legitimate state aim.
b. A rational nexus between the rights-infringing measure and the State aim ["suitability"].
C. The rights-infringing measure should be the least restrictive measure open to the State to achieve its goals
["necessity"].
d. There should be a balance between the extent and severity of the infringement, and the State aim
["proportionality stricto sensu"].
e. There should be provided sufficient safeguards against the possibility of abuse of the rights-infringing measure
["safeguards against abuse"].
81. As submitted above, Petitioners do not dispute that there may exist a legitimate State aim, i.e., to prevent
violations of the Section 4 pre-conditions upon solemnisations of SMA marriages (such as bigamy, etc.). It is also
correct that there exists a rational nexus between the requirement of publicity, and the State aim of ensuring that
SMA marriages are compliant with Section 4.
82. Petitioners submit, however, that the (notice-and-objections regime fails at the prong of necessity. Completely
stripping away the right to privacy of individuals for a one-month period before the solemnisation of the marriage is
not the "least restrictive alternative" open to the State. This is obvious from the fact that for non-SMA marriages -
such as, for example, under Hindu customary law, or Christian personal law - there is no requirement of State-
mediated publicity (under Christian personal law, for example, registration is mandatory, but publicity is not; under
Hindu customary law, registration is not mandatory).
83. Relatedly, therefore, it is evident that ex ante compelled publicity is not the only way to check abuse. Indeed,
for most laws, the State does not resort to ex ante prohibitions, but rather, achieves the goals of prevention,
deterrence, and control through prosecution and punishment for law-breaking. It is open to the legislature to modulate
the penalty in order to ensure maximum compliance, and should this Hon'ble Court hold the notice-and-objections
regime to be unconstitutional, the legislature could well alter the punishment for violating Section 4 in order to
achieve deterrence and prevention. It is respectfully submitted, however, that ex post penalties are adequate - and
less restrictive - methods of achieving the State aim, rather than an ex ante deprivation of privacy of every individual
who wishes to get married under the SMA. Indeed, it is this mechanism that the State follows for ensuring compliance
with pre-conditions for marriage under personal laws; consequently, not only does a less restrictive alternative exist in
theory, but it also exists - and has been deployed - in practice.
84. It is further submitted that, for related reasons, the notice-and-objections regime fails the fourth prong of the
proportionality standard. In order to catch the few individuals who might attempt to use the cloak of secrecy in order
to get married in violation of Section 4 conditions, the notice-and-objections regime strips every individual of their
privacy under the SMA. This - effectively - amounts to a presumption of criminality the notice-and-objections regime
assumes that every individual who wishes to get married under the SMA is a potential violator of Section 4.
85. It is respectfully submitted that this jurisprudence of suspicion was held to fail the fourth prong of the
491, 1323); in that case, this Hon'ble Court held that the mandatory linking of Aadhaar with SIM cards was
unconstitutional, as it presumed that every citizen was a potential terrorist, and was therefore a tool of prevention. It
is respectfully submitted that the notice-and-objections regime is premised on the same assumption of general,
potential criminality.
86. Finally, the notice-and-objections regime is vulnerable to and has in fact been the site of rampant abuse by
various private actors. It is a well-known fact that couples marrying outside the bounds of conventional morality have
been killed, attacked at their homes, and separated, by anti-social elements and their own family members using the
device of the public notice required under the SMA. The fifth prong of the proportionality test does not leave it open for
the Respondents to claim that abuse of a law is irrelevant to an assessment of its constitutionality, when the law itself
does not safeguard against such abuse in any manner.
87. It is therefore submitted that the notice-and-objections regime constitutes a disproportionate invasion of Article
21, and ought to be struck down as unconstitutional by this Hon'ble Court.
C. On the Relief
88. In light of the above, this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue appropriate directions, writs, orders,
directions, or other relief as set out below.
a. Declare, particularly, that same-sex marriages are covered under the ambit of marriages that may be solemnised
and registered under the SMA;
b. Issue a writ of mandamus, or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring that the provisions of
solemnization and registration under the SMA extend to all marriages between any persons otherwise eligible
under the SMA, irrespective of the parties' gender, sexual orientation, and sexual identity. In particular, this
Hon'ble Court may declare that the words "man" and "woman" u/s 2(b); "male" and "female" u/s 4(c); "wife"
and "husband" u/s 12(2), 15(a), 22, 23, 25, 27, 36, 37, 44, and the Fifth Schedule; "widower" and "widow"
under the Second Schedule; and "bride" and "bridegroom" under the Third and Fourth Schedules be interpreted
as "any two persons", along the lines of S.4 of the Act.
89. In the alternative, the Court may strike down gendered words in the SMA that restrict marriage between
persons of opposite gender as violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of the Constitution of India. The gendered words
in issue are listed separately for the convenience of this Hon'ble Court in Appendix 111.
90. Similarly, issue a declaratory writ of mandamus, or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring that
the provisions of solemnization and registration under the FMA extend to all marriages between any persons
solemnised under the Act, irrespective of the parties' gender, sexual orientation, and sexual identity. An interpretation
to the contrary, restricting marriage between persons of opposite gender would be violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and
21 of the Constitution of India.
91. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and
10 of the SMA as unconstitutional, illegal, and void for all persons.
92. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and
10 of the FMA as unconstitutional, illegal, and void for all persons.
93. Issue any other writ, order, or direction as this Hon'ble Court
may deem fit and proper to do complete justice in the circumstances of the case
FILED BY:
Shadan Farasat,
Advocate for the Petitioner
DRAFTED BY:
Gautam Bhatia, Adv.
Shadan Farasat, Adv.
Hrishika Jain, Adv.
Utkarsh Saxena, Adv.
Abhinav Sekhri, Adv.
Aman Sharma, Adv.
SETTLED BY:
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Place New Delhi
Date 12t March, 2023
Appendix-
Vertical rights conferred or liabilities removed by the State itself for those enjoying the State-sanctioned
status of marriage
Adoption
Regulation 5, Adoption Regulations, 2022 enacted under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Child) Act, 2015, stipulates only a married
couple or single individuals as eligible candidates for adoption.
Surrogacy
Section 2(1)(h) read with Section 4 of the Surrogation (Regulation) Act,
2021 allows only a married couple or a single widow/divorcee woman to
avail surrogacy.
Intestate succession
Intestate succession under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, Hindu
Succession Act, 1956, as well as Muslim personal law only covers relations
by marriage, consanguinity, or adoption.
Tax exemption for gifts received from
Under Section 56(2)(v) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, gifts made by a
spouse
person to a spouse are exempt from income tax.
Tax
deductions
for
diverse
For instance, Section 80-D of the Income Tax Act, 1961 allows an assessee
expenditures made for one's spouse
to deduct expenditure on health premia made only for his spouse or
dependent children. Similar provisions have also been enacted for other
diverse expenditures.
Norms
for
compassionate
For instance, the Scheme for Compassionate Appointment in the Registry of
appointments in government posts
the Supreme Court of India, 2006 makes provisions for compassionate
appointment of a spouse in case of the death of a Court Officer while in
service. Similar provisions exist for numerous other posts in State
institutions.
Compensation to dependents for
For instance, under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, only persons
death of kin under various legislations
related by marriage or lineage are considered 'dependents' of the deceased
entitled to compensation (ref. Section 2(1)(d) Workmen's Compensation
Act, 1923).
Appointment of nominee for receipt
Rules 19, 21 of All India Services (Death-cum-Retirement) Benefit Rules,
of post-retirement benefits, pension,
1958 consider only persons related by marriage, blood, or adoption as eligible
etc. after the death of a government
nominees for receipt of a deceased government employee's gratuity.
employee
Privilege in spousal communication
Section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 makes communication between
a married couple made during the subsistence of the marriage, privileged.
Right to bodily remains of deceased
In case of death, police/other authorities are often reluctant to return the
kin
deceased's bodily remains to persons not in a 'legal' relationship (such as
marriage or lineage) with the deceased.
17
State protection from social
For example, the Rajasthan Prohibition of Interference with the Freedom of
harassment, violence, and honour
Matrimonial Alliances in the Name of Honour and Tradition Bill, 2019 was
killings' granted to couples marrying
passed by the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly to protect couples who are
outside the pale of conventional
married or who intend to marry, from harassment by community/families.
morality
Spousal maintenance
Persons in a live-in or other long-term relationship without the stamp of
marriage are not entitled to maintenance from their partner under Section
125, CrPC or under the diverse family legislations. Indeed, the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 which recognises live-in
relationships "in the nature of marriage" provides for maintenance only in
cases of domestic violence. Even in such cases, the 2005 Act has no
protection for couples who would not be otherwise eligible to marry (D.
Protection of the law to victims of
The special penal provision for domestic violence, i.e. Section 498A Indian
domestic violence
Penal Code 1860 covers only violence within marriages. The Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, albeit covering live-in
relationships in the nature of
marriage, also seemingly applies only to heterosexual relationships.
Horizontal rights conferred or disabilities removed by private entities on those enjoying the State-
sanctioned status of marriage
Family insurance coverage
Most insurance companies cover only the legally married spouse (and other
blood/adoptive relations) of a policy-holder under family floater insurance
policies.
Renting homes
The housing market strongly prefers married couples and conventional
families.
Opening of joint bank accounts
Most banks facilitate joint savings accounts for legally married couples and
other recognised family types.
Bereavement or care-giving leave
For instance, bereavement leaves of many private companies only extend to
policies in private employment
death of loved ones recognised by the law as family, i.e. married spouse and
other members of the immediate conventional family.
18
Right to be involved in the partner's
Hospitals and healthcare centres generally provide information about a
healthcare and right to make medical
patient's condition to, and consult in that regard with, only legally-
decisions in that regard
recognised family members of the patient, including a married spouse and
other relations by blood/adoption.
Appendix 11
Comparison of solemnisation, registration, and marriage validity provisions of HMA and SMA
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
Special Marriage Act, 1954
Solemnization
HMA allows for the solemnization of a
SMA does not allow for the solemnization of a
marriage without any notice, objection, or
marriage unless notice, objection, and
inspection requirements being completed.
inspection requirements u/s 5-10 of the Act
are met.
As per Section 7 of HMA, "a Hindu marriage
These sections require that (i) a notice period
may be solemnised in accordance with the
of 30 days be provided to the Marriage Officer
customary rites and ceremonies of either
of the District where one of the parties has
party thereto" and "where such rites and
resided (S. 5), (ii) that such notice of
ceremonies include the saptpadi, the
intended marriage be affixed to
a
marriage becomes complete and binding
"conspicuous place", (S.6 (3)) (iii) that the
when the seventh step is taken"
details of the parties giving such notice be
entered in a Marriage Notice Book that is
available for inspection to any person (S. 6
(2)), and (iv) any person has the authority to
object to the solemnization of the marriage
during notice period (S. 7).
In case of no objections, it may be
solemnised only after the expiration of 30-
day notice period
In case of objections, the marriage officer
cannot solemnise a marriage unless they
have inquired into the objection and satisfied
themselves that they "ought not to prevent
the solemnization of the marriage" (8(1))
Registration
Even at the stage of registration, a marriage
Registration of a marriage under SMA arises
solemnised under the HMA is not subject to
only after notice, objection, and inspection
any notice and objection requirements
requirements are met for solemnization.
Section 8 of HMA allows state governments
U/s 13(1) of the SMA, "when the marriage
to make rules related to marriage
has been solemnised" (after following notice,
registration. For example, Delhi passed The
objection, and inspection requirements) the
Delhi (Compulsory Registration of
marriage officer issues a
Marriage) Order, 2014 which does not have
marriage certificate in the form specified in
any notice, objection, or inspection
the Fourth Schedule. As per 13(2), this
requirements for the registration of marriages
certificate is "deemed to be conclusive
under the HMA. For such marriages to be
evidence of the fact that a marriage under
registered, only a verification of documents
this Act has been solemnised"
and appearance before the SDM is necessary.
The Marriage Notice Book maintained u/s 6
The marriage certificate is issued on the
(1) of the SMA needs to be available for
same day the parties appear before the SDM.
inspection before the marriage is solemnised
S. 8(1) and 8(4) of HMA require that a Hindu
or registered.
Marriage Register be maintained and be open
to inspection at all reasonable times after the
marriage is registered.
Validity
The lack of registration of a marriage does
Marriages under the SMA cannot be
not strike at the validity of a marriage per S.
solemnised (and are hence invalid) without
8(5) of HMA. Hence, a marriage is valid
adhering to the notice and objection
without meeting any notice and objection
prerequisites
requirements under the HMA.
Section 8(5) of the HMA opens with a non-
obstante clause to hold:
"notwithstanding anything in this section, the
validity of any Hindu marriage shall in no way
be affected by the omission to make the
entry [in a Hindu Marriage Register]
Appendix 111
List of gendered words used in the Special Marriage Act 1954 that require reading down to non-gendered
terms such as 'spouse' or 'person'
Provision
Extract
Section 2(b) Definitions
(b) "degrees of prohibited relationship" a man and any of the persons
read with First Schedule
mentioned in Part I of the First Schedule and a woman and any of the
persons mentioned in Part 11 of the said Schedule are within the degrees of
prohibited relationship.
Explanation I-Relationship includes,-
(a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;
(b) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;
(c) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; and all terms of relationship in this
Act shall be construed accordingly.
Explanation "Full blood" and "half blood"-tw persons are said to be related to
each other by full blood when they are descended from a common ancestor by the
same wife and by half blood when they are descended from a common ancestor
but by different wives.
Explanation -"Uterine blood"- two persons are said to be related to each other
by uterine blood when they are descended from a common ancestress but by
different husbands.
Explanation IV-In Explanations 11 and 111, "ancestor" includes the father and
"ancestress" the mother".
Part I of the First Schedule mentions only female kin, while Part II of the First
Schedule mentions only male kin. To that extent, the relationships may be read
down to include their gender-neutral corresponding parts.
Sections 4(c), (d) Conditions
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
relating to the
relating to solemnisation
of
solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two persons may be
special marriages
solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the following conditions
are fulfilled, namely:
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of
eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a
marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that
they are within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
Section 12
(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the Marriage Officer, or at
Place and form of solemnization
such other place within a reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may desire,
and upon such conditions and the payment of such additional fees as may be
prescribed.
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to
adopt : Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless
each party says to the other in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the three
witnesses and in any language understood by the parties, (A), take the (B),
to be my lawful wife (or husband)"
Section 15 Registration of
Any marriage celebrated, whether before or after the commencement of this Act,
marriages celebrated in other
other than a marriage solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of
forms
1872), or under this Act, may be registered under this Chapter by a Marriage
Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely: - (a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the
parties and they have been living together as husband and wife ever since
Section 22
When either the husband or the wife has, without
Restitution of Conjugal Rights
reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party
may apply by petition to the district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the
court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and
that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may
decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Section 23 Judicial Separation
(1) A petition for judicial separation may be presented to the district court either
by the husband or the wife
Section 25
Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be voidable and may be annulled by
Voidable marriages
a decree of nullity if,-
(iii) the consent of either party to the marriage was obtained by coercion or fraud,
as defined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872):
Provided further that in the case specified in clause
(iii), the court shall not grant a decree
(a) proceedings have not been instituted within one year after the coercion had
ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or
(b) the petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with the other party to the
marriage as husband and wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the case may
be, the fraud had been discovered.
Section 27 Divorce
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a
petition for divorce may be presented to the district court either by the husband
or the wife on the ground that the respondent-
Section 44 Punishment of
Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, during the
Bigamy
lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts any other marriage
shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), for the offence of marrying again during the
lifetime of a husband or wife, and the marriage so contracted shall be void.
Second Schedule Notice of
May be read down to the extent that it uses 'widower' and 'widow'.
Intended Marriage
Third Schedule Declaration to
May be read down to the extent that it uses 'bridegroom', 'bride', 'widow',
be Made by the Bridegroom
'widower'.
Declaration to be Made by the
Bride
Kajal V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Kajal & Anr.
Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India & Ors.
Respondents.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 93 of 2023
Decided on May 10, 2023
INDEX
S. No.
Particulars
1.
Summary of Rejoinder Arguments on behalf of Mr. Raju Ramachandran, Senior Advocate
2.
Rejoinder Submissions on behalf of Mr. Raju Ramachandran, Senior Advocate
New Delhi
10.05.2023
Summary of Rejoinder Arguments on behalf of Mr. Raju Ramachandran
I. Exclusion of same-gender couples and transgender persons from SMA is discrimination on the ground of
sexual orientation and gender identity
i.
This Hon'ble Court in NALSA (declaration of a new legal gender), K.S. Puttaswamy (declaration of a fundamental
right to privacy in all its aspects) and Navtej Johar (rejection of the legal assumption that a woman can only
have a male partner) has laid down the constitutional basis for the current claims sought by the Petitioners.
ii. The declaration of a fundamental right cannot be avoided where there is good constitutional ground for doing so.
Administrative inconvenience or expediency cannot be grounds for restricting fundamental rights of individuals,
especially from the oppressed minority [See : K.S. Puttaswamy Compilation IV-Judicial Precedents-Vol-1 at
11. Object of SMA is to provide a civil form of marriage to all Indians, irrespective of religion, and not to
promote only heterosexual unions
iii. The Union of India has sought to argue that "the heart of Special Marriage Act, 1954 is to provide a legislative
framework for interfaith marriages, but doubtlessly between heterosexual couples". This is an incorrect
understanding of the legislative intent of the SMA.
iv. The SMA was passed by Parliament in 1954 to separate the institution of marriage from religious notions of
marriage and create a civil system that was universally accessible to all Indians. It is for this reason the
Statement of Objects and Reasons ('SoR') identified its central objective was to allow "any person in India" to
get married "irrespective of their faith" [SoR, SMA].
V. Though Section 4(c) of SMA uses the words 'male' and 'female', the intention of Section 4(c) was not to indicate
'gender' of the parties, but to indicate the age differential between the parties. This is evident from the Special
Marriage Bill, 1952 that was introduced in the Parliament, wherein Clause 4(c) stated "the parties have
completed the age of eighteen years", thereby providing for a uniform age of marriage [Compilation III -
Statutory Material at p. 3142].
vi. This Hon'ble Court ought not to accept the circular reasoning advanced by the Respondents that marriage must
remain a heterosexual institution because that is what it historically has been. The Courts in USA and Canada
have categorically rejected this line of argument, and noted that the proper approach is to examine the impact
of the opposite-sex requirement on same-sex couples to determine whether defining marriage as an opposite-sex
institution is discriminatory" [See : Halpern V. Canada at para 71, Compilation IV-Judicial Precedents-Vol-IV at p.
1345; Goodridge V. Department of Public Health, Massachusetts, Compilation IV-Judicial Precedents-Vol-IV at p.
1248].
vii. The essence of marriage is one of choice- both choice of one's partner and the choice to enter the institution
itself, which constitute significant acts of individual self-definition.
111. Doctrine of Reading-In is well-recognised in the Indian Jurisprudence
viii. The Petitioners do not seek an extensive re-writing of the SMA, but merely seek that the SMA be interpreted in
a manner that is in consonance with the requirements of the Constitution after the decisions of this Hon'ble Court
in NALSA, Puttaswamy, and Navtej.
ix. It is well-settled that in exceptional cases, this Hon'ble Court can add or remove words from a legislation, in
order to construe the statute in consonance with its object as well as the constitutional tenets. [See
:
Ramaswamy Nadar V. State of Madras (3J), AIR 1958 SC 56 at para 6; M. Pentiah V. Muddala Veeramallappa
(5J), AIR (1961) SC 1107 at para 27].
Supply') at paras 140-145], a seven judge bench of this Hon'ble Court expanded the definition of 'industry' in
Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1948 by providing working principles of what constitutes an
'industry'. J. Krishna Iyer held that:
11. In a world of relativity where law and life interlace, a search for absolutes is a self-
condemned exercise. Legal concepts, ergo, are relativist, and to miss this rule of change and
developmental stage is to interpret oneself into error.
28. The second, though trite, guidance that we get is that we should not be beguiled by similar words in
dissimilar statutes, contexts, subject-matters or socio-economic situations. The same words may mean one
thing in one context and another in a different context. This is the reason why decisions on the
meaning of particular words or collection of words found in other statutes are scarcely of much
value when we have to deal with a specific statute of our own; they may persuade, but cannot
pressure.
xi.
Precedents-Vol-II, pp. 1892-1911, at p. 1910], this Hon'ble Court departed from the express legislative
intention that gave primacy to male patriarchal beliefs, and read in words/meaning that brought in gender
equality in consonance with the constitutional order. In Madhu Kishwar, this Hon'ble Court, while considering a
constitutional challenge to certain provisions to Chotanagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 that provided male succession to
property to the exclusion of female line, read in the right of the female dependents on the agricultural land,
which was against the express provisions of the legislation, to bring it in line with the requirements of the
Constitution and refrain from striking it down. It held that:
"13. In other words, the exclusive right of male succession conceived of in Sections 7 and 8 has to
remain in suspended animation SO long as the right of livelihood of the female descendant's of the
last male holder remains valid and in vogue. It is in this way only that constitutional right to livelihood of
a female can interject in the provisions, to be read as a burden to the statutory right of male succession,
entitling her to the status of an intervening limited dependents/descendants under Sections 7 and
8" [Compilation IV-Judicial Precedents-Vol.-11, p. 4609]
xii. Similarly, in Githa Hariharan, while considering the constitutional challenge to Section 6(a) of the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 to interpret the word 'after', this Hon'ble Court held that-
"45. Be it noted further, that gender equality is one of the basic principles of our Constitution and in the
event the word 'after' is to be read to mean a disqualification of a mother to act as a guardian during the
lifetime of the father, the same would definitely run counter to the basic requirement of the constitutional
mandate and would lead to a differentiation between male and female. Normal rules of interpretation shall
have to bow down to the requirement of the Constitution since the Constitution is supreme and the
statute shall have to be in accordance therewith and not de hors the same. The father by reason of a
dominant personality cannot be ascribed to have a preferential right over the mother in the matter of
guardianship since both fall within the same category and in that view of the matter the word 'after' shall
have to be interpreted in terms of the constitutional safe-guard and quarantee SO as to give a
proper and effective meaning to the words used." [Compilation IV-Judicial Precedents-Vol.- at p.
1910]
xiii. In both these cases, a narrow or literal interpretation of the statutes would have resulted in the laws being
declared void. This is the exact situation in the present case.
xiv. When dealing with constitutional issues, this Hon'ble Court has held that the question is not what the
statute does say but what the statute must say. If the Act or the Rules do not say what they should say in
terms of the Constitution, it is the duty of the Court to read the constitutional spirit and concepts into the Acts.
OnLine SC 1404 (3J) at para 51-55] In other words, it is not what the SMA says but what the SMA must say,
i.e., there can be no discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation and/or gender identity.
XV. Besides reading in words that did not exist, this Hon'ble Court in a number of cases has deleted words and
(2J), Compilation IV- Judicial Precedents-Vol.-II pp. 6234-6271, at para 32, p. 6267 and paras 41-42, p.
Precedents-Vol.- pp. 2046-2083, at para 50, p. 2083; Independent Thought V. Union of India [(2017) 10
considering a constitutional challenge to the appointment of the Election Commissioner of India under Article
324(2) of the Constitution, this Hon'ble Court categorically held that "the theory that the courts cannot or do not
make laws is a myth which has been exploded a long while ago" (para 86). It further reiterated a prior decision
-recognised throughout the world. If one is to put the doctrine of separation of power to such a rigidity, it would
not have been possible for any superior court of any country, whether developed or developing, to create new
rights through interpretative process" (para 86).
xvii. The doctrine of reading in is well-established in the foreign jurisdictions in Canada and South Africa. In K & B
(Re) [(1995) CanLII 7396 (ON SC), Compilation IV- Judicial Precedents-Vol-IV pp. 1635-1668] Ontario
Supreme Court (1995), while considering the issue of exclusion of joint adoption by lesbian couple under Child
and Family Services Act, 1990 from the definition of 'spouse' ["spouses", whether married or unmarried, are
persons of the opposite sex], the Court held that:
"112. the court can resort to "reading in" to the offending provision words necessary to render the provision
operative. First, the legislative objective is obvious, that is promoting the best interests of children by
permitting their adoption, and reading in words to include the group that has been excluded from the present
definition in breach of their Charter rights would further that objective. Second, it is reasonable to assume a
legislature would include in the definition words to correct the defect rather than not have a definition section
at all. Third, adding words to the provision to correct the defect would have no apparent impact or intrusion at
all into any legislative budgetary decisions." [Compilation IV-Judicial Precedents- Vol-IV, at p. 1667]
xviii. Similarly, the Constitutional Court of South Africa applied the doctrine of reading-in of words in Du Toit V. The
Minister For Welfare & Population Development & Ors [CCT 40/01, 10.09.2002] (exclusion of joint adoption by a
lesbian couple under the Child Care Act, 1983 and the Guardianship Act, 1993) [Compilation IV-Judicial
Precedents-Vol. IV, pp. 565-596, at para 39, 41 and 42, pp. 593-594]; JV. Director General, Department of
Home Affairs [(2003) ZACC 3] (status of children conceived through artificial insemination under the Children's
Status Act of 1987), [Compilation IV - Judicial Precedents - Vol IV, pp. 1539-1558, at para 22, p. 1552].
IV. Special provisions for heterosexual women in SMA and other laws would not be interfered with
xix. Article 15(3) of the Constitution enables Parliament to make special provisions for women. In consonance of
this constitutional mandate, provisions that have been specifically enacted for a 'wife' in a marriage of persons of
opposite-gender, i.e., under Sections 27(1A), 31 (iiia), 31(2), 36 and 37, SMA would remain available only to the
'wife' in such marriages.
XX. Those specific provisions will not be applicable to same-gender marriages or those involving transgender
persons (outside the binary of male and female) who have obtained identification as a transgender person under
Section 6 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.
xxi. Similarly, the provisions relating to gender-specific laws like Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, and the offence of rape under Section 375, IPC, amongst others, would not be
applicable in the context of same-gender marriages. The legal recognition of same-gender marriage is only under
SMA, along with access to the consequent spousal benefits available to the opposite-gender couples, with no
reference to the gender-specific context, which is protected by Article 15(3).
V. Religious Personal Laws not to be interfered with
xxii. Section 21A, SMA was introduced in May, 1976 because it was assumed that if two Hindus married under SMA,
that marriage could be valid under Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ('HMA') too, and thus they would not be severed
from their undivided family, and would inherit as per the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. But in case of an inter-
faith couple involving one Hindu party, since the marriage would not be valid under HMA, they would fall under
Sections 19-21, SMA.
xxiii. In the present case, if the same-gender marriage and those involving transgender persons would not be a
valid marriage under HMA, then Section 21A, SMA would not apply. But that determination is not necessary in
the present situation, and can be left open for the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
VI. Parliamentary exercise is akin to subjecting constitutional rights to majority approval
xxiv. The Union of India has repeatedly sought to argue that only Parliament can grant a new 'socio-legal status of
marriage to LGBTQ persons, after undertaking extensive consultations, public debates and eliciting views from
every part of the nation. The rights and lives of the LGBTQ persons are not a matter of debate by the larger
population, but a matter of protection of fundamental rights by the Constitutional Courts [See : K.S.
Puttaswamy, Compilation IV - Judicial Precedents- Vol I, at para 144, p. 484].
XXV. While marriage is a social institution, the issue of equal access to the civil institution of marriage under SMA
cannot be subject to a 'societal consensus' inquiry instead of a judicial scrutiny Such a popular acceptance
inquiry has never been the approach of the Indian courts, especially in constitutional rights cases [See : Navtej,
Compilation IV- Judicial Precedents-Vo I, at para 352, pp. 967-968]
VII. Demand for marriage is not rushed in
xxvi. During the course of arguments, it was suggested that the LGBTQ movement was at a nascent stage and it
would not be appropriate to short circuit the gradual development of their rights. This argument misses the point
that LGBTQ persons have been battling criminalization and marginalization for over 150 years, and they cannot
be told to wait any longer to fully live their lives with freedom and dignity [See : Navtej, Compilation IV-
Judicial Precedents-Vol I, at para 461, pp. 1012-1013]
xxvii. Just as Section 377, IPC rested on deep-rooted gender stereotypes, so too Section 4(c), SMA rests on deep-
rooted genden stereotypes, i.e., marriage is only between a man and a woman. It cannot be said that only
Section 377 can be impugned on the basis of gender stereotypes and not the SMA for insisting on the
heterosexual nature of the marital union. This inconsistency cannot be countenanced.
VIII. Possible Declarations for this Hon'ble Court's Consideration
xxviii. This Hon'ble Court may grant the following reliefs:
a. Same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons have a fundamental right to marry under
the Constitution, irrespective of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
b. The exclusion of same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons from the solemnisation of
marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is unconstitutional and violates Part III of the Constitution.
C. The provisions of the Special Marriage Act with respect to solemnisation and registration of marriage are
extended to same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons, except to the extent the
provisions of the SMA or any other law for the time being in force are enacted for a 'wife' against
a
'husband' in a heterosexual marriage or for a 'woman' against a 'man' in a gender specific context.
d. The same gender couples and those involving transgender persons are entitled to all rights, benefits, and
privileges accorded to a heterosexual married couple under the existing secular/civil laws in force. With
respect to the consequences of the marriage under SMA, the parties would be governed under Sections 19-
21, SMA.
e. As the underlying legislative policy of Section 21A assumes the validity of the marriage under the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955, Section 21A would not be applicable to the marriage of same-gender Hindu couples,
or
those involving Hindu transgender persons, till such time the validity of the said marriage is considered
under the Hindu personal law, by the appropriate court or authority.
f.
In the context of same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons, the word 'male' and
'female' in Section 4(c) is to include any two persons who identify in the male gender (including trans-
man) and/or in the female gender (including trans-woman). Section 4(c) then reads as
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years, and the female or transgender person the age
of eighteen years.
g. Consequent to the reading of Section 4(c), the provisions of SMA where the words 'husband/wife',
'man/woman', 'male/female', 'bridegroom/bride' in Sections 2(b), 12(2), 15(a), 22, 23, 25 (proviso b), 27,
44 read with First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Schedules occur, would be read as 'spouse' or 'spouses'
in the context of same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons only under SMA.
h. If any provision of the SMA incorporates by reference a provision of another law that uses gendered terms
like 'man' and 'woman' or 'husband' and 'wife', those terms will be read as 'spouse' mutatis mutandis to
the declaration with respect to Section 4(c), to the extent of their application to the same-gender couples
and those involving transgender persons. This would not automatically apply to religious personal laws
or
laws specifically applicable to heterosexual women against their husbands.
i.
The provisions of notice-publication-objection regime under Sections 5-10, SMA are ultra vires the
Constitution.
j. The Union of India to frame a protocol to be followed by all States, especially police, concerning the cases
involving adult and consenting LGBTQ+ persons, whether married or unmarried, who require protection
from their families.
IN THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 93 OF 2023
IN THE MATTER OF:
Kajal & Anr. Petitioners
versus
Union of India & Ors.
Respondent
REJOINDER SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MR. RAJU RAMACHANDRAN,
SENIOR ADVOCATE
I. Exclusion of same-gender couples and transgender persons from SMA is discrimination on the ground of
sexual orientation and gender identity
1. The Constitution guarantees to every individual the pursuit of happiness through the sanctity of marriage, the
choice of a family life and the dignity of being, irrespective of sexual orientation or gender identity [See :
Puttaswamy at Compilation IV Vol I, para 271 at pdf pg. 577]. The question is not whether there exists a
fundamental right to same-gender marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ('SMA'), but whether the
Constitution envisages the fundamental right to marry for all. It is what is permissible under the Constitution, and not
what is impermissible under SMA. A statute cannot be used to restrict a fundamental right, in fact, if there exists a
fundamental right, then the statute has to be expanded in line with that fundamental right.
2. It is well-settled that the declaration of a fundamental right cannot be avoided where there is good constitutional
ground for doing so. Administrative inconvenience or expediency cannot be grounds for restricting fundamental rights
of individuals, especially from the oppressed minority [See Puttaswamy at Compilation IV : Vol I, para 409 at pdf pg.
636, Jigya Yadav V. CBSE (2021) at para 135]
3. This Hon'ble Court in NALSA, Puttaswamy and Navtej Johan has laid down the constitutional basis for the current
claims sought by the Petitioners. In NALSA, this Hon'ble Court granted legal recognition to a whole new category of
'gender', i.e., transgender identity, which impacted the entire legal framework of innumerable laws cast in the binary
of 'male' and/or 'female'. Similarly, in Navtej, this Hon'ble Court rejected the legal assumption that a woman can have
only a male partner, thereby recognizing the intimate relations between the homosexual persons. This Hon'ble Court
further categorically held that discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation or gender identity impairs equality
before law and equal protection of law under Article 14 as well as is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of
the individual under Article 21. Thus, the constitutional declarations in NALSA, Puttaswamy and Navtej have to be at
the forefront, while examining the validity of the SMA.
11. Object of SMA is to provide a civil form of marriage to all Indians, irrespective of religion, and not to
promote only heterosexual unions
4. The Union of India has sought to argue that "the heart of Special Marriage Act, 1954 is to provide a legislative
framework for interfaith marriages, but doubtlessly between heterosexual couples" [See : Note-1, Written
Submissions of UOI at para 7, pdf pg. 7]. This is an incorrect understanding of the legislative intent of the SMA.
5. The SMA was passed by Parliament in 1954 to separate the institution of marriage from religious notions of
marriage and create a civil system that was universally accessible to all Indians. It is for this reason the Statement of
Objects and Reasons ('SoR') identified its central objective of the SMA to allow "any person in India" to get married
irrespective of their faith". The term 'person' is not qualified by the term 'heterosexual' or 'cis-gender', and, the SoR
does not identify marriage as a man to a woman as the law's central objective:
This Bill revises and seeks to replace the Special Marriage Act of 1872 SO as to provide a special form of marriage
which can be taken advantage of by any person in India and by all Indian nationals in foreign countries irrespective of
the faith which either party to the marriage may profess. The parties may observe any ceremonies for the
solemnisation of their marriage, but certain formalities are prescribed before the marriage can be registered by the
Marriage Officers. For the benefit of Indian citizens abroad, the Bill provides for the appointment of Diplomatic and
Consular Officers as Marriage Officers for solemnizing and registering and registering marriage between citizens of
India in a foreign country.
(2) Provision is also sought to be made for permitting persons who are already married under other forms of
marriage to register their marriages under this Act and thereby avail themselves of these provisions
6. Unlike religious personal laws, which prescribe specific ceremonies for a valid marriage (Section 7, Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955) or a religious venue for the ceremony (Section 11, Christian Marriage Act, 1872), the SMA makes
a stark departure by permitting parties to determine their own place and form of solemnisation of their marriage under
Section 12. It is, therefore, impermissible for the Union of India to use the religious definitions of marriage to argue
that marriage can only be between a man and a woman [See : Note-1, Written Submissions of UOI at para 23-
64, pdf pp. 10-19].
7. Though Section 4(c) of SMA uses the words 'male' and 'female', the intention of Section 4(c) was not to indicate
'gender' of the parties, but to indicate the age differential between the parties. This is evident from the Special
Marriage Bill, 1952 that was introduced in the Parliament, wherein Clause 4(c) stated "the parties have completed the
age of eighteen years", thereby providing for a uniform age of marriage. This uniform age of eighteen was retained
even by the Report of the Joint Committee on the Special Marriage Bill, 1952, even though the Joint Committee
suggested amendments on the other clauses. It is only when the legislators demanded that there could not be a
uniform age of marriage for men and women, the Clause 4(c) was changed to include the words 'male' and 'female'.
8. In fact, the Union of India has deliberately misconstrued the word 'party' in the Bill and the words 'male' and
'female' in Section 4(c), SMA to contend that the legislature intended to make the law only for a heterosexual union
between a man and a woman. This is not borne out from either the Preamble or the SoR of the Act.
9. The legislative intent to provide a civil form of marriage to all Indians, irrespective of their religion is also borne
out from Minister for Law and Justice, Mr. C. C. Biswas's statement on 28th July, 1952 when he introduced the Special
Marriage Bill, 1952 in the Rajya Sabha, when even the introduction of the Bill was opposed by the members of the
Rajya Sabha, which is as follows:
"The other point which he made was this : that it contravenes the Fundamental Rights. In answer to that, Sir,
you have drawn his attention to Article 44. This Bill is only the first attempt in the sphere of marriage law towards
achieving that ideal. That cannot be done overnight or in a single day. We have got to feel our way up to it and this
is only the first step in that direction. There is no question of interfering with Fundamental Rights. This is only a
permissive measure. We are not encouraging or compelling anybody to contravene the tenets of his religion. If any
person desires to have an inter-communal marriage, he is at liberty to do SO. There is no compulsion. There is no
attempt here to provide that any person professing a particular religion should be debarred from observing that
faith. But the House will do well to remember that a stage may come when it will compel people to abjure their
faith in respect of certain matters. / say that day may come much sooner than many of us expect, because that will
only mean the fulfillment of the ideal which the Constitution has set before us. But / think it will take time some
time. So far as this Bill is concerned, it does not contravene the Fundamental Rights, however strict a view you may
take of Fundamental Rights."
[See : Rajya Sabha Debate on 28.07.1952 on the Special Marriage Bill, 1952, Compilation 11 : Vol. 3, pdf
pg. 1538]
10. Even in the UOI's written submission [See : Note-1, para 110, pdf pp. 54-60], the Minister's statement
quoted in the Written Submission does not indicate the intention that UOI is ascribing to the Minister, which stated
that:
Shri Biswas : Let me now refer specifically to some of the salient features of this Bill. The first is, as / have
already pointed out marriage under this law will not require parties to forswear their religion or to declare that they
do not belong to any religion. Any two persons residing in India will be eligible to marry under the provision of this
law. It is permissive, no doubt, but it is compulsory only to this extent that if they marry under this law, the
conditions herein laid down must apply."
11. It is settled that while deciphering the legislative intention, the Courts cannot look into the statements of
individual MPs in the Parliament, but only at the Preamble, SOR and the Minister's statement in the House. [See CIT
at para 27-29]
12. Assuming without admitting that the object of SMA was to provide a 'special' form of marriage for heterosexual
couples in 1954, the constitutional scrutiny requires this Hon'ble Court to examine whether the rationale for that
object still continues or not. It is circular reasoning to state that marriage must remain a heterosexual institution
because that is what it historically has been. The Courts in USA and Canada have categorically rejected this line of
argument, and noted that "the proper approach is to examine the impact of the opposite-sex requirement on same-
sex couples to determine whether defining marriage as an opposite-sex institution is discriminatory" [See : Halpern V.
Canada at Compilation IV Vol I V, para 71 at pdf pg. 1353, and Goodridge V. Department of Public Health,
Massachusetts at Compilation IV Vol IV at pdf pg. 1248]
13. Just because the institution of marriage may be associated with the procreative potential of a heterosexual
couple, it does not mean that marriage has no meaning outside the realm of procreation. The fundamental right to
marriage is essentially the right to take the decision to enter the relationship that is the foundation of the family in our
society [See : Zablocki V. Redhail (US SC) at Compilation IV : Vol I V at pdf pg. 3529] In Griswold V. Connecticut, the
U.S. Supreme Court held that "marriage is a coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring and intimate
to the degree of being sacred. It's an association that promotes a way of life, not causes; a harmony in living, not
political faiths; a bilateral loyalty, not commercial or social projects" (Compilation IV : Vol I V at pdf pg. 1269).
There is nothing in this description of marriage that is not applicable to a same-gender couple. The essence of
marriage is one of choice : both choice of one's partner and the choice to enter the institution itself, which constitute
significant acts of individual self-definition. To limit the institution of marriage only to the scope of procreative
potential in a heterosexual union is to denude it of meaning and substance, i.e., of long-standing companionship and
intimate association, of mutual support and respect and standing by each other in thick and thin. Like the Constitution
protects different forms of families, it also protects different forms of marriage, including same-gender marriage.
14. It is noted that by privileging heterosexual unions, the State's action confers an official stamp of approval on
the destructive stereotypes that same-gender relationships are inherently unstable and inferior to opposite-gender
relationships and are not worthy of respect. It is well-known that the history of constitutional jurisprudence in India is
the history of the extension of constitutional rights and protections to people once ignored or excluded [See :
Goodridge V. Department of Public Health, Massachusetts Compilation IV : Vol I V at pdf pg 1198].
15. The Respondents have relied upon certain observations of this Hon'ble Court in Mr. X V. Hospital Z [(1998) 8
opposite sexes". The case pertained to the issue of breach of confidentiality of a person living with HIV who was about
(3J), See : Compilation IV : Vol 11, pdf pg. 5135]. Similarly, the Union of India has relied upon certain observations in
wherein it was held that the PWDVA does not recognise same-gender relationships, and those relationships cannot be
termed as relationship in the nature of marriage, which was in the nature of obiter dicta as the issue of a same gender
couple was not before the Court. Nonetheless, the rationale for this observation no longer holds water, in light of
NALSA, Puttaswamy and Navtej Thus, both these decisions are not relevant in the present context.
111. Proper and effective remedy is an integral part of Access to Justice guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution
16. "Ubi Jus Ibi Remedium, i.e., where there is a right, there is a remedy, is a basic principle of constitutional
jurisprudence. It is trite to say that LGBTQ+ persons have a fundamental right to choose their partner, and exercise
their right to sexual expression in an intimate relationship. If that is the case, the relief sought by the Petitioners
being complex would not be a sufficient ground to deny the relief sought by them. It is well-settled that as far as
possible, courts must always aim to preserve and protect the rights of parties and extend help to enforce them rather
than deny relief and thereby render the rights themselves otiose. Such a course would be more conducive and better
conform to a fair, reasonable and proper administration of justice [See Sardar Amarjit Singh Kalra (Dead) by LRs.
&
17. It is further well-settled that access to justice, of which the right to remedy is an integral part, is a basic and
inalienable human right which all civilized societies and systems recognise and enforce. An aggrieved person cannot
burden of the Petitioners to come up with appropriate reliefs, but only to establish that their rights have been violated,
which they have amply done in the present case.
IV. Different Forms of Remedies available before this Hon'ble Court
18. The questions that have arisen during the course of arguments, as encapsulated in the submissions of the UOI
are:
i. whether the reliefs sought by the Petitioners would involve substantial legislative re-writing;
ii. whether they would involve the Court ignoring some provisions which have been introduced as a matter of public
policy, such as the additional grounds for wives in divorce cases;
iii. whether they would involve reinterpretation of personal laws because there are segments of SMA which
specifically contain reference to personal laws.
A. Doctrine of Reading-In is well-recognised in the Indian Jurisprudence
19. The Petitioners do not seek an extensive re-writing of the SMA. The Petitioners merely seek that the SMA is
interpreted in a manner that recognizes marriages between persons of the same gender and those involving
transgender persons in consonance with the requirements of the Constitution after the decisions of this Hon'ble Court
in NALSA and Navtej.
20. It is well-settled that in exceptional cases, this Hon'ble Court can add or remove words from a legislation, in
order to construe the statute in consonance with its object as well as the constitutional tenets. [See : Ramaswamy
Nadar V. State of Madras (3J), AIR 1958 SC 56 at para 6, M. Pentiah & Ors. V. Muddala Veeramallappa (5J) [AIR
(1961) SC 1107 at para 27]
Supply') at 140-145], a seven judge bench of this Hon'ble Court expanded the definition of 'industry' in Section 2(j) of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1948 by providing working principles of what constitutes an 'industry'. J. Krishna lyer in
his majority opinion held that:
"2. There are no absolutes in law, since life, which it serves, is relative. What is an industry in America or the
Soviet Union may not be in India and even in our country, what was not an industry decades ago may well be one
now. Our judgment here has no pontifical flavour but seeks to serve the future hour till changes in law or industrial
culture occur.
11.
In a world of relativity where law and life interlace, a search for absolutes is a self-condemned exercise.
Legal concepts, ergo, are relativist, and to miss this rule of change and developmental stage is to interpret oneself
into error.
18. .statutory diction speaks for today and tomorrow; words are semantic seeds to serve the future hour.
Moreover, as earlier highlighted, it is legitimate to project the value-set of the Constitution, specially Part / V, in
reading the meaning of even a pre-Constitution statute. The paramount law is paramount and Part IV sets out
Directive Principles of State Policy which must guide the judiciary, like other instrumentalities, in interpreting all
legislation. Statutory construction is not a petrified process and the old bottle may, to the extent language and
realism permit be filled with new wine Of course, the bottle should not break or lose shape.
28. The second, though trite, guidance that we get is that we should not be beguiled by similar words in
dissimilar statutes, contexts, subject-matters or socio-economic situations. The same words may mean one thing in
one context and another in a different context. This is the reason why decisions on the meaning of particular words
or collection of words found in other statutes are scarcely of much value when we have to deal with a specific
statute of our own: they may persuade, but cannot pressure.
139. So we proceed to formulate the principles, deducible from our discussion, which are decisive, positively
and
negatively, of the identity if 'industry' under the Act. We speak, not exhaustively, but to the extent covered by
the debate at the bar and, to that extent, authoritatively, until over-ruled by a larger Bench or superseded by the
legislative branch."
C.J. Beg in his concurring opinion, while elaborating on his approach to a problem where relevant legislation left so
much for determination by the Courts so as to enable them to perform a function very akin to legislation, held:
"148. Perhaps, with the passage of time, what may be described as the extension of a method resembling the
"arm-chair rule" in the construction of wills, Judges can more frankly step into the shoes of the legislature where an
enactment leaves its own intentions in much too nebulous or uncertain a state. In M. Pentiah V. Muddala
Veeramallappa, Sarkar J. approved of the reasoning, set out above, adopted by Lord Denning. And / must that, in a
case where the definition of "industry" is left in the state in which we find it, the situation perhaps calls for some
judicial heroics to cope with the difficulties raised."
22. Thus, in Bangalore Water Supply, noticing the limitations of the statutory definition, this Hon'ble Court
substantially expanded the definition of 'industry', while formulating certain underlying working principles to hold the
field. In fact, it clearly observed that the same words can mean one thing in one statute, and another in a different
context, an in issue which has been considered by this Hon'ble Court in the present case.
Court,
while interpreting the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960, held that
"10. It is no doubt true that the court while construing a provision should not easily read into it words which
have not been expressly enacted, but having regard to the context in which a provision appears and the object of
the statute in which the provision is enacted the court should construe it in a harmonious way to make it
meaningful."
2
at pdf pp. 4608-4609], this Hon'ble Court, while considering a constitutional challenge to certain provisions to
Chotanagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 that provided male succession to property to the exclusion of female line, read in the
right of the female dependents on the agricultural land, which was against the express provisions of the legislation, to
bring it in line with the requirements of the Constitution and refrain from striking it down. J. Punchhi held:
"13. Traditionally and historically, the agricultural family is identified by the male head and this is what
Sections 7 and 8 recognise. But on his death, his dependent family females, such as his mother, widow, daughter,
daughter-in-law, granddaughter, and others joint with him have, under Sections 7 and 8, to make way to male
relatives within and outside the family of the deceased entitled thereunder, disconnecting them from the land and
their means of livelihood. Their right to livelihood in that instance gets affected. a right constitutionally recognised,
a right which the female enjoyed in common with the last male holder of the tenancy. It is the protection of that
right to livelihood, that the immediate female relatives of the last male tenant have the constitutional remedy to
stay on holding the land SO long as they remain dependent on it for earning their livelihood, for otherwise it would
render them destitute. It is on the exhaustion of, or abandonment of land by, such female descendants can the
males in the line of descent take over the holding exclusively. In other words, the exclusive right of male
succession conceived of in Sections 7 and 8 has to remain in suspended animation SO long as the right of
livelihood of the female descendant's of the last male holder remains valid and in voque. It is in this way
only that constitutional right to livelihood of a female can interject in the provisions, to be read as a burden to the
statutory right of male succession, entitling her to the status of an intervening limited dependents/descendants
under Sections 7 and 8. In this manner alone and up to this extent, can female dependents/descendants be given
some succour so that they do not become vagrant and destitutes. To this extent, it must be so held. We would
rather, on the other hand, refrain from striking down the provisions as such on the touchstone of Article 14 as this
would bring about a chaos in the existing state of law. The intervening right of female dependents/descendants
under Sections 7 and 8 of the Act is carved out to this extent, by suspending the exclusive right of the male
succession till the female dependents/descendants choose other means of livelihood manifested by abandonment or
release of the holding kept for the purpose."
[See : Compilation IV, Vol. 2, Para 13 at pdf pp. 4620-4621].
Compilation IV, Vol. 2, at pdf pp. 1921-1923], while considering the constitutional challenge to Section 6(a) of the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 to interpret the word 'after', held that:
"45. Be it noted further, that gender equality is one of the basic principles of our Constitution and in the event
the word 'after' is to be read to mean a disqualification of a mother to act as a guardian during the lifetime of the
father, the same would definitely run counter to the basic requirement of the constitutional mandate and would lead
to a differentiation between male and female. Normal rules of interpretation shall have to bow down to the
requirement of the Constitution since the Constitution is supreme and the statute shall have to be in
accordance therewith and not de hors the same. The father by reason of a dominant personality cannot be
ascribed to have a preferential right over the mother in the matter of guardianship since both fall within the same
category and in that view of the matter the word 'after' shall have to be interpreted in terms of the constitutional
safe-guard and guarantee SO as to give a proper and effective meaning to the words used.
46. In our opinion the word 'after' shall have to be given a meaning which would sub-serve the need of the
situation viz., welfare of the minor and having due regard to the factum that law courts endeavour to retain the
legislation rather than declaring it to be a void, we do feel it expedient to record that the word 'after' does not
necessarily mean after the death of the father, on the contrary, it depicts an intent SO as to ascribe the meaning
thereto as 'in the absence of '- be it temporary or otherwise or total apathy of the father towards the child or even
inability of the father by reason of ailment or otherwise and it is only in the event of such a meaning being ascribed
to the word 'after' as used in Section 6 then and in that event the same would be in accordance with the intent of
the legislation viz. welfare of the child.
47. In that view of the matter question of ascribing the literal meaning to the word 'after' in the context does not
and cannot arise having due regard to the object of the statute, read with the constitutional guarantee of gender
equality and to give a full play to the legislative intent, since any other interpretation would render the statute void
and which situation in our view ought to be avoided.
26. Both in Madhu Kishwar and Gita Hariharan, this Hon'ble Court departed from the express legislative intention
that gave primacy to male patriarchal beliefs, and read in words/meaning that brought in gender equality in
consonance with the constitutional order. A narrow or literal interpretation of the statutes would have resulted in the
laws being declared void. This is the exact situation in the present case. A narrow interpretation either of the
legislative intention or the plain text of the SMA, as is being contended by the Union of India, would render SMA void,
on the basis of discrimination on the prohibited grounds of sexual orientation and/or genden identity.
27. Besides reading in words that did not exist, this Hon'ble Court in a number of cases has deleted words and
recast a provision, in order to make it constitutional in the following cases:
at pdf pg. 6279, para 41-42 at pdf pg. 6283], this Hon'ble Court, while striking down Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi
Rent (Control) Act, 1958 as violative of the doctrine of equality embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution of India
insofar as it discriminated between the premises let for residential and non-residential purposes, and it recast the
provision, including deleting a proviso.
b. The same exercise of recasting a provision was undertaken by this Hon'ble Court in Hiral P. Harsora V. Kusum
definition of 'Respondent' in Section 2(q) of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 was struck
down to the extent of the words 'adult male', and the proviso was deleted. As a result, the Act was made appliable to
an additional class of persons.
Vol. 2, at pdf pg. 2295], this Hon'ble Court, while striking down Exception 2 to Section 375, IPC, which permitted non-
consensual sex between a married couple of man and woman, unless the woman was under 15 years, as
unconstitutional, and substituted the words "the wife not being under 18 years", thereby clearly adding words to a
penal provision. It further recast Section 198(6) of the CrPC to apply to marital rape of wives under 18 years.
B. Guidance from International Law on Reading-In
28. The doctrine of reading in is well-established in the foreign jurisdictions in Canada and South Africa. In K & B
(Re) Ontario Supreme Court (1995) [See : paras 112-113, Compilation IV : Vol. 4, pdf pp. 1675-1676], while
considering the issue of exclusion of joint adoption by lesbian couple under Child and Family Services Act, 1990 from
the definition of 'spouse' ["spouses", whether married or unmarried, are persons of the opposite sex], the Court held
that:
"112 the court can resort to "reading in" to the offending provision words necessary to render the provision
operative. First, the legislative objective is obvious, that is promoting the best interests of children by permitting
their adoption, and reading in words to include the group that has been excluded from the present definition in
breach of their Charter rights would further that objective. Second, it is reasonable to assume a legislature would
include in the definition words to correct the defect rather than not have a definition section at all. Third, adding
words to the provision to correct the defect would have no apparent impact or intrusion at all into any legislative
budgetary decisions.
113. Therefore, the definition of "spouse" as it appears in S. 136(1) of the Child and Family Services Act should
be read and applied as if enacted in the following form- "spouse" means the person to whom a person of the
opposite sex is married to or with whom a person of the same or opposite sex or with whom a person of the same or
opposite sex is living in a conjugal relationship outside marriage."
29. In Du Toit & Anr. V. The Minister For Welfare & Population Development [(CCT 40/01), date of decision-
10.09.2002 ('Du Toit')] [See : Compilation IV, Vol. 4., pdf pp. 601-602] the Constitutional Court of South Africa, while
considering the issue of exclusion of joint adoption by a lesbian couple under the Child Care Act, 1983 and the
Guardianship Act, 1993, held-
"39. This Court has recognised the remedy of reading into legislations wording that cures the constitutional
defect as an appropriate form of relief. In National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home Affairs,
Ackermann J. held that reading in is an appropriate form of relief under S. 38 of the Constitution.
41. / have no doubt that the provision of effective protection for children upon termination of a same-sex
partnership can best be cured by the passing of legislation by Parliament. However, in the interim, / am of the view
that the interests of the siblings and prospective adoptive children in general can adequately be addressed by the
high courts as the upper guardian of all minor children. In exercising that role, the high courts will seek to develop
the constitutional standard of the best interests of the child. The flexibility of that standard will ensure that the
welfare and best interests of children are protected.
42. Accordingly, / shall grant the relief sought by the applicants in this case and confirm the order made by the
High Court. / am of the view that such a remedy serves to protect not only the applicants' equal parenting rights in
respect of the siblings, but all permanent same-sex life partners wanting to adopt children jointly or to undertake
joint guardianship.
The Court then added the words "or permanent same-sex life partner" in different legislations to cure the
constitutional defect.
Thus, even the conclusion that the issue might best be resolved by Parliament did not prevent the Court from
granting relief to same-sex life partners.
30. Similarly, in J. V. Director General, Department of Home Affairs, [(2003) ZACC 3, Compilation IV : Vol. 4., para
13 at pdf pg. 1554 and para 28 at pdf pg. 1564], the Constitutional Court of South Africa, while considering the issue
of status of children conceived through artificial insemination under the Children's Status Act of 1987, rejected the
demand to suspend the order of unconstitutionality to give Parliament time to Amend the law, and held that
22. Where the appropriate remedy is reading in words in order to cure the constitutional invalidity of a statutory
provision, it is difficult to think of an occasion when it would be appropriate to suspend such an order. This is SO
because the effect of reading in is to cure a constitutional deficiency in the impugned legislation. If reading in words
does not cure the unconstitutionality, it will ordinarily not be an appropriate remedy. Where the unconstitutionality
is cured, there would usually be no reason to deprive the applicants or any other persons of the benefit of such an
order by suspending it. Moreover the legislature need not be given an opportunity to remedy the defect. which has
by definition been cured. In the present case, the effect of the order is not to leave a lacuna but to remedy the
constitutional defect complained of by the applicants by a combination of reading in and striking down. Under the
circumstances, it is not an appropriate case for our order to be suspended.
31. It is thus crystal clear that this Hon'ble Court in several cases raising constitutional validity of provisions has
read
in words/meaning or deleted words, in the face of express legislative intention, in order to make the impugned
provisions constitutional. In the present case too, a similar relief is sought with the reading in the word 'spouse' in the
provisions of SMA, where 'wife' and 'husband' occur in the context of same-gender couples and transgender persons.
C. Constitutional Mandate is Paramount
32. When dealing with constitutional issues, this Hon'ble Court has held that the question is not what the
statute does say but what the statute must say. If the Act or the Rules do not say what they should say in terms
of the Constitution, it is the duty of the Court to read the constitutional spirit and concepts into the Acts. [See :
1404 (3J) at para 51-55] In other words, it is not what the SMA says but what the SMA must say, i.e., no
discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation and/or gender identity.
33. In this regard, the doctrine of purposive interpretation is also relevant. It is settled law that the provisions of a
beneficial legislation have to construed with a purpose-oriented approach. The Act should receive a liberal construction
31-50, Compilation IV : Vol. 2, pdf pp. 8307-8311]. The SMA is a beneficial legislation, intended to allow any two
persons to solemnise their marriage under the law, irrespective of their religion and the religious disapproval of their
marriage. If this is the object of the law, then there is no bar on extending that object to include same-gender
marriage.
34. This Hon'ble Court has time and again held that changing social mores must be kept in mind when interpreting
the provisions of an enactment to further its object and purpose. It is not only the Constitution that is a living
document, but even legislations are alive to the needs of the changing times and contexts. This Hon'ble Court in X V.
Ministry of Health has categorically recognised that "statutes are considered to be always speaking". In Badshah V.
"16. The law regulates relationships between people. It prescribes patterns of behaviour. It reflects the values of
society. The role of the court is to understand the purpose of law in society and to help the law achieve its purpose
Indeed, when social reality changes, the law must change too. Just as change in social reality is the law of life,
responsiveness to change in social reality is the life of law. It can be said that the history of law is the history of
adapting the law to society's changing needs."
OnLine SC 1088 (2J) ('Deepika') at para 25, See Compilation IV Vol. 1, pdf pg. 91] and in Xv. Ministry of Health at
para 124 [See Compilation IV, Vol. 2, pdf pg. 8327], applied the doctrine of purposive interpretation to grant relief
to the Petitioners. In Deepika, this Hon'ble purposively interpreted maternity leave under Rule 43, Central Civil Service
(Leave) Rules, 1972, wherein a government employee was granted maternity leave, though she had taken two
children from her spouse's previous marriage in adoption. In X V. Ministry of Health, this Hon'ble Court purposively
interpreted Rule 3B(c), Medical Termination of Pregnancy Rules, 2003 to include 'unmarried women' within the ambit
of law, besides married women.
D. Legislative void is no answer
considering a constitutional challenge to the appointment of the Election Commissioner of India under Article 324(2)
of the Constitution, this Hon'ble Court categorically held that "the theory that the courts cannot or do not make laws is
a myth which has been exploded a long while ago" (para 86). It further reiterated a prior decision of this Hon'ble Court
in State of U.P. V. Jeet Bisht that "the judge-made law is now well-recognised throughout the world. If one is put the
doctrine of separation of power to such a rigidity, it would not have been possible for any superior court of any
country, whether developed or developing, to create new rights through interpretative process" (para 86).
37. It is well-settled that if there is a legislative void or vacuum, this Hon'ble Court can step in, within the meaning
of Article 32 read with Article 142 of the Constitution, to fill the void through necessary directions or guidelines [See
:
1].
pp. 742-813], this Hon'ble Court in a landmark decision held that non-recognition of transgender identity in India
resulted in violation of fundamental rights of transgender persons. This Hon'ble Court passed a declaration recognising
an additional legal gender, that had not been recognised in law till then, despite the fact that all existing statutory
laws enforced binary gender norms. The decision also contained several specific directions aimed to advance the rights
of transgender persons. Parliament passed a law after almost 6 years in December, 2019.
39. In Anoop Baranwal, this Hon'ble Court further held:
"224. While, it is true that, ordinarily, the Court cannot, without anything more, usurp what is a purely a
legislative power or function, in the context of the Constitution, which clothes the citizens with fundamental rights
and provides for constitutional goals to be achieved and inertia of the Legislative Department producing a clear
situation, where there exist veritable gaps or a vacuum, the Court may not shy away from what essentially would be
part of its judicial adjudication."
40. In the present case, this Hon'ble Court must recognise the fundamental rights of same-gender couples and
those involving transgender persons to marriage under SMA, and read in words/meanings to make SMA in accordance
with the constitutional mandate of equality and dignity.
41. In addition, this Hon'ble Court must strike down the provisions of inotice-publication-objection regime under
Sections 5-10, SMA, otherwise the fundamental right to marry, as recognised under SMA would be rendered illusory.
V. Queries raised by the Bench
A. Special provisions for heterosexual women in SMA and other laws would not be interfered with
42. Article 15(3) of the Constitution enables Parliament to make special provisions for women. In consonance of
this constitutional mandate, provisions that have been specifically enacted for a 'wife' in a marriage of persons of
opposite-gender, i.e., under Sections 27(1A), 31 (iiia), 31(2), 36 and 37, SMA would remain available only to the 'wife'
in such marriages. Those specific provisions will not be applicable to same-gender marriages or those involving
transgender persons (outside the binary of male and female) and have obtained identification as a transgender person
under Section 6 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.
43. For a transgender man or a transgender woman who have obtained male or female identification under Section
7 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019, may be considered as 'husband' and 'wife', then they
would be covered under those terms, and no one else.
44. Similarly, the provisions relating to gender-specific laws like Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, PWDVA, and offence
of
rape under Section 375, amongst others, would not be applicable in the context of same-gender marriages. The
legal recognition of same-gender marriage is only under SMA, along with access to the consequent spousal benefits
available to the opposite-gender couples, with no reference to the gender-specific context, which is protected by
Article 15(3). The Petitioners do no seek to disturb this existing legal framework and do not seek any directions in this
regard.
B. Religious Personal Laws not to be interfered with
45. The object of SMA, as noted before, is to take marriage out of the bounds of religious personal laws, and to
allow any two persons to marry under SMA, irrespective of their religion. Sections 19-21, SMA throw light on the
consequence of solemnisation of a marriage under SMA. Section 19 provides that any member of a Hindu
undividedfamily who marries a non-Hindu under SMA shall be deemed to effect their severance from the undivided
family. Section 21 states that the property of a person who marries under SMA would devolve on their children under
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 under Chapter III of Part V, ISA.
46. As per the 59th Report of the Law Commission of India [See : Compilation 11, Documents, Vol. 3, para 9.3 at
pdf pp. 984-985], the principal object of Section 19 "is to replace coparcenary rights and other rights concerning the
Hindu undivided family by a position under which the person marrying will become a divided coparcener. The section
creates a statutory severance of a person married under this Act from the joint family of which he might have been till
then a member" (para 9.2). It is to be noted that Section 19, SMA becomes relevant only with regard to devolution of
the joint family property by survivorship or inheritance, wherein the right of the widow and the deceased person's
children's right in the undivided property does not exist, while the Hindu person on their own remains entitled to all
those rights of intestate inheritance with respect to the self-acquired property of their other relations, near and remote
as if they had never married under SMA. The Law Commission Report further referred to the Joint Parliamentary
Committee Report of 1954 that noted one of the main reasons why persons marry under SMA was that in case of
intestate succession, the Indian Succession Act would apply and it would be extremely inconvenient to have different
laws of succession applicable to different types of property.
47. This situation changed in 1976, pursuant to the recommendations of the 59th Report of the Law Commission of
India, 1974, wherein the Law Commission recommended that:
"9.4. We have carefully considered the matter and we think no 'deterrent' is required against special marriages.
A provision of the nature contained in Section 19 is certainly not required where both parties are Hindus, Buddhists,
Sikhs or Jains."
[See : Compilation 11 : Documents, Vol. 3, pdf pg. 985]
48. Thus, it is clear that Section 21A, SMA was introduced in May, 1976 because it was assumed that if two Hindus
married under SMA, that marriage could be valid under Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ('HMA') too, and thus they would
not be severed from their undivided family, and would inherit as per the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. But in case of an
inter-faith couple involving one Hindu party, since the marriage would not be valid under HMA, they would fall under
Sections 19-21, SMA.
49. In the present case, if the same-gender marriage and those involving transgender persons would not be a valid
marriage under HMA, then Section 21A, SMA would not apply. But that determination is not necessary in the present
situation, and can be left open for the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
C. LGBTQ community is not an indeterminate category
50. The Union of India has sought to argue, albeit prejudicially, that the LGBTQ community is a vague and abstract
category, with "72 genders in the mix" [See : para 14, Note 1, Written Submissions of UOI, pdf pg. 8]. This is a gross
incorrect statement, attempting to undermine and belittle the constitutional claims of equality, autonomy and dignity
of the Petitioners. It is noted that the diversity of a particular class of persons cannot be used to defeat their legitimate
demands or grievances. In thesame vein, it can be said that the heterosexual persons are divided by class, caste,
religion, gender and other factors so as to desist any uniformity. The issue at present is that of marriage equality, i.e.,
the right to marry of the same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons. It is neither a vague claim
nor a vague category. In fact, this Hon'ble Court in Puttaswamy [para 29 at Compilation I V, Vol. 1 at pdf pg. 453]
had rejected the similar argument of the Union of India that the right to privacy as a juristic concept was so vague and
amorphous as to defy description and could not withstand constitutional scrutiny.
51. The Union of India has also tried to argue that the concerns of the lesbian, gay and bisexual persons are also
covered under the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 ('Transgender Persons Act'), which is an
incorrect assertion. The Transgender Persons Act and Rules, 2020 are applicable only to the transgender persons, as
defined in Section 2(k) of the Act, and to anyone else. This is another attempt on the part of the Union to conflate
sexual orientation with gender.
D.
Parliamentary exercise is akin to subjecting constitutional rights to majority approval
52. The Union of India has repeatedly sought to argue that only Parliament can grant a new 'socio-legal status of
marriage' to LGBTQ persons, after undertaking extensive consultations, public debates and eliciting views from every
part of the nation [See : para 17, Note 1, Written Submissions of UOI, pdf pg. 9]. The rights and lives of the LGBTQ
persons are not a matter of debate by the larger population, but a matter of protection of fundamental rights by the
Constitutional Courts. This Hon'ble Court in Puttaswamy has held:
"144. The purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature of guaranteed fundamental rights is to insulate their
exercise from the disdain of majorities, whether legislative or popular. The guarantee of constitutional rights does not
depend upon their exercise being favourably regarded by majoritarian opinion. The test of popular acceptance does
not furnish a valid basis to disregard rights which are conferred with the sanctity of constitutional
protection. Discrete and insular minorities face grave dangers of discrimination for the simple reason that
their views, beliefs or way of life does not accord with the 'mainstream' Yet in a democratic Constitution
founded on the rule of law. their rights are as sacred as those conferred on other citizens to protect their freedoms and
liberties".
[See : Compilation IV, Vol. 1, pdf pg. 515]
53. Similarly, the contention of first building a societal consensus for same-gender marriage before ushering in
legal reforms must be rejected. While marriage is a social institution, the issue of equal access to the civil institution of
marriage under SMA cannot be subject to a 'societal consensus' inquiry, instead of a judicial scrutiny. Such a popular
acceptance inquiry has never been the approach of the Indian courts, especially in constitutional rights cases. In
Navtej, J. Nariman emphatically observed that:
"352. Another argument raised on behalf of the interveners is that change in society, if any, can be reflected by
amending laws by the elected representatives of the people. Thus, it would be open to Parliament to carve out an
exception from Section 377, but this Court should not indulge in taking upon itself the guardianship of changing
societal mores. Such an argument must be emphatically rejected. The very purpose of the fundamental rights
chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdraw the subject of liberty and dignity of theindividual and place such
subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments SO that constitutional morality can be applied by this Court
to give effect to the rights, among others, of "discrete and insular" minorities.
One such minority has knocked on the doors of this Court as this Court is the custodian of the fundamental rights of
citizens. These fundamental rights do not depend upon the outcome of elections. And, it is not left to majoritarian
governments to prescribe what shall be orthodox in matters concerning social morality. The fundamental rights
chapter is like the North Star in the universe of constitutionalism in India. Constitutional morality always trumps any
imposition of a particular view of social morality by shifting and different majoritarian regimes."
[See Compilation I V, Vol. 1, pdf pp. 998-999]
54. Even in cases where the Courts have struck down statutory provisions in matrimonial laws like parts of Section
10, Indian Divorce Act, 1869 for being discriminatory against Christian women, the Government had vigorously
contended that judiciary should refrain from interfering in matrimonial laws by enlarging the legislative policy [See
Ammini E.J. V. Union of India (FB) (AIR 1995 Ker 252) [See : Compilation I V, Vol. 3, pdf pp. 69-92]; Pragati
Varghese V. Cyril George Varghese (FB) (1997) 3 Mh.L.J. 602 at para 45, Compilation IV, Vol. 3, pdf pg. 534]
55. If either the Parliament or the Central Government had any interest in advancing the rights of the LGBTQ
persons, then they would taken pro-active measures, after decriminalisation in Navtej in 2018, and passed
laws/policies to protect the rights of the LGBTQ persons. But not a single measure was undertaken for the benefit of
the lesbian, gay and bisexual persons, while the Transgender Persons Act was passed for the transgender persons.
E. Demand for marriage is not rushed
56. During the course of arguments, it was suggested that the LGBTQ movement was at a nascent stage and it
would not be appropriate to short circuit the gradual development of their rights. It was also pointed out that in
certain other jurisdictions, there was a specific law that prohibited same-gender marriages, which was not the case in
India, especially considering that decriminalisation happened only in 2018. In the same vein, Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi,
Senior Advocate, on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh, has even compared the struggle for women's rights with
that of sexual minorities, and how women even after 80 years have not got full equality, thereby seeking to argue that
society was not yet ready for same-gender marriages.
57. This contention is entirely fallacious, as the LGBTQ persons have been battling criminalization and
marginalization for over 150 years, and in a case which raises constitutional issues, they cannot be told to wait any
longer to fully live their lives with freedom and dignity. The fact that decriminalisation of homosexual conduct in India
happened too late only in 2018 cannot be held against the LGBTQ persons for aspiring to 'equal citizenship in all its
manifestations'. The words of J. Chandrachud in Navtej are relevant in this regard:
"461. History has been witness to a systematic stigmatization and exclusion of those who do not conform to
societal standards of what is expected of them, Section 377 rests on deep-rooted gender stereotypes. In the quest
to assert their liberties, people criminalized by the operation of the provision, challenge not only its existence, but
also a gamut of beliefs that
are strongly rooted in majoritarian standards of what is "normal". In this quest, the attack on the validity of Section
377 is a challenge to a long history of societal discrimination and persecution of people based on their identities. They
have subjugated to a culture of silence and into leading their lives in closeted invisibility. There must come a time
when the constitutional quarantee of equality and inclusion will end the decades of discrimination
practiced, based on a majoritarian impulse of ascribed gender roles. That time is now."
[See : Compilation IV, Vol. 1, pdf pp. 1043-1044]
58. It is humbly submitted that as Section 377, IPC rested on deep-rooted gender stereotypes, Section 4(c), SMA
too rests on deep-rooted gender stereotypes, i.e., marriage is only between a man and a woman. It cannot be said
that only Section 377 can be impugned on the basis of gender stereotypes and not the SMA for insisting on the
heterosexual nature of the marital union. This inconsistency cannot be countenanced.
59. This Hon'ble Court also stated that if a declaration, which is sought by the Petitioners, is given, then it might
affect the persons who are not before this Hon'ble Court, i.e., those who do not want marriage. It is pertinent to note
that any declaration with respect to SMA is merely an avenue for those who choose it. For those concerned about their
specific situations, they may decide in their own interest not to enter into a marriage till there are further changes in
the law. Any declaration from this Hon'ble Court would not bind anyone who chooses not to marry. It will only be an
enabling mechanism of including a class of persons under SMA who were hitherto excluded from marriage. In the
legislative debates on the SMA too, the idea of it being a permissive measure but not an insisted path is prevalent.
10.05.2023 New Delhi
Drawn By:
Amritananda Chakravorty, Advocate
Mihir Samson, Advocate
Shreya Munoth, Advocate
Aswathi Menon, Advocate
Sitamsini Cherukumalli, Advocate
Asawari Sodhi, Advocate
Settled By:
Mr. Raju Ramachandran, Senior Advocate
Submitted Through:
Dr. Anindita Pujari, Advocate on Record
APPENDIX
LIST OF CASES WHERE PROVISIONS WERE READ INTO/READ DOWN BY THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT
State of Bombay V.
Section 2(1)(d), the Bombay Lotteries and Prize
Section 2(1)(d) was read down to
RMD
Competition Control and Tax Act, 1948, as amended in
restrict the Act's application to
Chamarbaugwala
1952, read as 'Prize competition' includes-
prize competitions that were of a
[1957 SCR 874] (5J)
(1) cross-word prize competition,
gambling nature, consistent with
(2) missing word prize competition,
the purpose and scope of the Act
(3) picture prize competition,
(para 19), which read as follows:
(4) number prize competition, or
'Prize competition" includes-
(5) any other prize competition, for which the solution is
(i)(1)
cross-word
prize
or is not prepared beforehand by the promoters or for
competition,
which the solution is determined by lot or chance;
(2) missing word prize
competition,
(3) picture prize competition,
(4) number prize competition, or
(5) any other prize competition,
for which the solution is or is not
prepared beforehand by the
promoters or and for which the
solution is determined by lot or
chance;
Ramaswamy Nadan V.
Section 423(1)(a), Code Criminal Procedure, 1898-
This Hon'ble Court adopted a
State of Madras
In an appeal from an order of acquittal, reverse such
construction that was in
[1958 SCR 739] (3J)
order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that the
consonance with reason and
accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the case
justice and had the effect of
may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him
allowing the High Court hearing
according to law;
an appeal to find the accused
guilty of an offence other than
that which he had been charged,
and added the words "of the
offence disclosed" (para 6)-
Section 423 (1) (a) : In an appeal
from an order of acquittal,
reverse such order and direct that
further inquiry be made, or that
the accused be re-tried or
committed for trial, as the case
may be, or find him guilty of the
offence disclosed and pass
sentence on him according to
lawt
M. Pentiah V. Muddala
Section 16(1), Hyderabad District Municipalities Act,
Justice AK Sarkar in his
Veeramallappa [AIR
1956 states that:
concurring opinion (para 30) read
(1961) SC 1107] (5J)
Every general election requisite for the purpose of this
into the said provision the
Act shall be held by the Collector in the manner
following words, in orden to save
prescribed within three months before the expiry of the
it from falling into absurdity:
term of office of the members of the Committee as
16(1). Every general election
specified in Section 34,
requisite for the purpose of this
Act shall be held by the Collector
in the manner prescribed
provided that every general
election excepting the first
general election shall be held
within three months before the
expiry of the term of office of the
members of the Committee as
specified in Section 34,
Kedar Nath Singh V.
Section 124-A, Indian Penal Code, 1860
In order to save it from being
State of Bihar [AIR
124A. Sedition.- - -Whoever by words, either spoken or
unconstitutional, this Hon'ble
1962 SC 955] (5J)
written, or by signs, or by visible representation, or
Court read down the provision to
otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or
apply only to acts involving the
contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection
intention or tendency to create
towards the Government established by law in [India],
disorder, or disturbance of law
shall be punished with [imprisonment for life], to which
and order, or incitement to
fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may
violence (para 26)
extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or
with fine.
Explanation 1.-The expression "disaffection" includes
disloyalty and all feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2.-Comments expressing disapprobation of
the measures of the Government with a
lawful means, without exciting or attempting to
excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not
constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation
3. -Comments
expressing
disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under
this section.
Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji
Section 16, Nathdwara Temple Act, 1959
The expression "affairs of the
Maharaj etc. V. State of
authorised the Nathdwara Temple Board to
temple" in Section 16 was read
Rajasthan
manage the properties and affairs of the
down as referring to the purely
[AIR 1963 SC 1638] (5J)
temple.
secular affairs in regard to the
administration of the temple (para
71, 78), in orden to save it from
being held to be unconstitutional.
RL Arora V. State of Uttar
Section (aa) Land Acquisition Act, 1894:
To avoid a conflict with Article 31 1(2)
Pradesh [1964 AIR 1230]
(aa) that such acquisition is needed for the
of the Constitution prohibiting
(5J)
construction of some building or work for a
compulsory acquisition of property
company which is engaged or is taking steps for
save for a public purpose, the
engaging itself in any industry or work which is
provision was read down to apply
for a public purpose;
only to "such building or work",
which will subserve the public
purpose of the industry or work in
which the company, for which
acquisition is made, is engaged.
(para 9)
Bangalore Water Supply &
Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
The following elements were read
Sewerage Board V. A.
1947 that defines industry as
into the definition of 'industry' (para
any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture
140) (a) There is prima facie
(7J)
or calling of employers and includes any calling,
'industry' in an enterprise that has
service, employment, handicraft or industrial
i) Systematic activity ii) Organized
occupation or avocation of workmen.
by cooperation between employer
and employee (the direct and
substantial element is chimerical)
iii) For the production and/or
distribution of goods and services
calculated to satisfy human wants
and wishes (no spiritual or religious
but inclusive of material things or
services geared to celestial bliss)
(b) Absence of profit motive or
gainful objective is irrelevant, be the
venture in the public, joint, private
or other sector.
(c) The true focus is functional and
the decisive test is the nature of the
activity with special emphasis on the
employer-employee relations.
(d) If the organization is a trade or
business it does not cease to be one
because of philanthropy animating
the undertaking.
Hameedia Hardware Stores
Section 10(3)(a)(iii) Tamil Nadu Buildings
This Hon'ble Court read into the Act
V. B. Mohan Lal Sowcar
(Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 setting the
the following words, in view of the
threshold for the landlord to meet in eviction
ameliorative object of the legislation
proceedings provided that:
and context in which the provision
10(3)(a). A landlord may, subject to the
appeared (para 10):
provisions of clause (d), apply to the Controller
10(3)(a). A landlord may, subject to
for an order directing the tenant to put the
the provisions of clause (d), apply to
landlord in possession of the building... (iii) in
the Controller for an order directing
case it is any other non-residential building, if
the tenant to put the landlord in
the landlord or any member of his family is not
possession of the building. (iii) in
occupying for purposes of a business which he
case it is any other non-residential
or any member of his family is carrying on, a
building, if the landlord required it
non-residential
for his own use or for the use of his
any member of the
building in the city, town or village concerned
family and if the landlord or any
which is his own;
member of his family is not
occupying for purposes of a
business which he or any member
of his family is carrying on, a non-
residential building in the city, town
or village concerned which is his
own;
Indian Oil Corporation V.
Section 113 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation
The expression 'imported into the
Municipal
Corporation,
Act, 1976 read as 113. Levy of Octroi-Except
City was read down as 'imported
Jullundhar [AIR 1993 SC
as hereinafter provided, the Corporation shall
into the municipal limits for
844] (2J)
levy octroi on articles and animals imported into
purposes of consumption, use or
the City, at such rates as may be specified by
sale' to bring the provision within
the Government.
the power of the State Legislature
under Entry 52, List 11, Schedule
VII (para 9)
Madhu Kishwar V. State of
Sections 7 and 8 of the Chotanagpur Tenancy
This Hon'ble Court, while departing
Bihar
Act, 1908 were challenged as being violative of
from the express legislative
Article 15:
intention, read the right to
7. (1) Meaning of raiyat having khunt-katti
livelihood of female dependents on
rights'. -'Raiya having khunt-katti right's means
agricultural land into the male
a raiyat in occupation of, or having any
succession scheme of the
subsisting title to, land reclaimed from jungle by
Chotanagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 by
the original founders of the village or their
declaring that the exclusive right of
descendants in the male line, when such raiyat is
male succession in Section 7 and 8
a member of the family which founded the
would remain suspended until the
village or a descendant in the male line of any
female dependent/descendants
member of such family:
choose other means of livelihood
Provided that no raiyat shall be deemed to have
manifested by abandonment or
khunt-katti rights in any land unless he and all
release of the holding kept for the
his predecessors-in-title have held such land or
purpose (para 13 at
obtained a title thereto by virtue of inheritance
Compilation IV, Vol. 2, pdf pp.
from the original founders of the village.
4620-4621).
(2) Nothing in this Act shall prejudicially affect
the rights of any person who has lawfully
acquired a title to a khunt-kattidari tenancy
before the commencement of this Act.
8. Meaning of Mundari khunt-kattidar.- - -Mundari
khunt-kattidar means a Mundari who has
acquired a right to hold jungle land for the
purpose of bringing suitable portions thereof
under cultivation by himself or by male members
of his family, and includes-
(a) the heirs male in line of any such 'Mundari,
when they are in possession of such land or have
any subsisting title thereto; and
(b) as regards any portions of such land which
have remained continuously in the possession of
any such Mundari and his descendants in the
male line, such descendants.
Githa Hariharan V. Reserve
Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Section 6 was recast to lift the
Bank of India
Act, 1956 was challenged as unconstitutional for
disqualification of the mother to
violating the constitutional guarantee of gender
act as a natural guardian during
equality under Article 15, and read as:
the lifetime of the father, in view
6. The natural guardians of a Hindu minor, in
of the constitutional guarantee of
respect of the minor's person as well as in
gender equality, the object of the
respect of the minor's property (excluding his or
statute, obligations under
her undivided interest in joint family property),
international conventions, and to
are
give effect to the legislative intent
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl-the
(See : Compilation IV, Vol. 2, para
father, and after him, the mother...
10 at pdf pg. 1911, para 14 at pdf
pg. 1914, para 16 at pdf pg. 1915,
40, 45-47 at pdf pg. 1921-1923]
6. The natural guardians of a
Hindu minor, in respect of the
minor's person as well as in
respect of the minor's property
(excluding his or her undivided
interest in joint family property),
are-(a) in the case of a boy or an
unmarried girl-the father, and
after him in the absence of the
mother-
Satyawati Sharma V.
The impugned provision was partly
Union of India
Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent (Control) Act,
struck down to remove the
1958 was challenged
discriminatory portion (para 41, 42
] as violating Article 14, which read as:
Compilation I V, Vol. 2 at pdf pg.
14. (1)(e) Protection of tenant against eviction.
6283), and the explanation was
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
deleted.
contained in any other law or contract, no order or
14. (1)(e) Protection of tenant
decree for the recovery of possession of any
against
eviction.-(1)
premises shall be made by any court or Controller
Notwithstanding anything to the
in favour of the landlord against a tenant:
contrary contained in any other law
Provided that the Controller may, on an
or contract, no order or decree for
application made to him in the prescribed
the recovery of possession of any
manner, make an order for the recovery of
premises shall be made by any
possession of the premises on one or more of the
court or Controller in favour of the
following grounds only, namely- (e) that the
landlord against a tenant- Provided
premises let for residential purposes are required
that the Controller may, on an
bona fide by the landlord for occupation as a
application made to him in the
residence for himself or for any member of his
prescribed manner, make an order
family dependent on him, if he is the owner
for the recovery of possession of the
thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the
premises on one or more of the
premises are held and that the landlord or such
following grounds only, namely-(e)
person has no other reasonably suitable
that the premises let for residential
accommodation;
purposes are required bona fide by
Explanation. -For the purposes of this clause,
the landlord for occupation as a
'premises let for residential purposes' include any
residence for himself or for any
premises which having been let for use as
member of his family dependent on
residence are, without the consent of the landlord,
him, if he is the owner thereof, or
used incidentally for commercial or other
for any person for whose benefit the
purposes;
premises are held and that the
landlord or such person has no
other
reasonably
suitable
accommodation; Explanation.-
the purposes of this clause,
'premises let for residential
purposes' include any premises
which having been let for use as
residence are, without the consent
of the landlord, used incidentally for
commercial or other purposes;
Hiral P. Harsora V. Kusum
Section 2(q) Protection of Women from Domestic
This Hon'ble Court struck down the
Narottam Das Harsora &
Violence Act, 2005 was challenged as
words adult male' from the
Ors.
unconstitutional for restricting the ambit of
definition of Respondent, as they
respondent only to adult males':
did not square with Article 14, and
"respondent" means any adult male person who
held the proviso to be otiose as a
is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with
consequence of the deletion (para
the aggrieved person and against whom the
50,
aggrieved person has sought any relief under
Compilation I V, Vol. 2 at pdf pg.
this Act:
2095):
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living
"respondent" means any adult male
in a relationship in the nature of a marriage may
person who is, or has been, in a
also file a complaint against the relative of the
domestic relationship with the
husband or the male partner;
aggrieved person and against whom
the aggrieved person has sought
any relief under this Act- Provided
that an aggrieved wife or female
living in a relationship in the nature
of a marriage may also file a
complaint against the relative of the
husband or the male partner;
Independent Thought V.
Exception 2 to the offence of rape under Section
Upon striking down the exception
Union of India [(2017) 10
375 Indian Penal Code, 1860 was struck down
as being violative of Articles 14, 15,
for being inconsistent with other laws, including
21 of the Constitution, and
POCSO, on the age of consent, which read as:
inconsistent with the POCSO Act to
Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with
the extent that it relates to minor
his own wife, the wife not being 15 years of age,
girls, the Court made the following
is not rape.
substitution in the exception (Para
197, Compilation IV : Vol. 2, at pdf
pg. 2295):
Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by
a man with his own wife, the wife
not being 15 years of age18 years
of age, is not rape
Zainab J. Patel V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Zainab J. Patel Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Another Respondents.
T.C. (C) No. 12 of 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Submitted by:
Mr. K.V. Viswanathan, Senior Advocate
Assisted By:
Ms. Tara Narula, Advocate
Mr. Rahul Sangwan, Advocate
Mr. M.G. Aravind Raj, Advocate
Mr. Sivagnanam Karthikeyan, Advocate
Mr. Siddharth Sridhar, Advocate
Mr. Navjot Singh, Advocate
Mr. Karthik Sundar, Advocate
Ms. Aparajita Sinha, Advocate
Ms. Sonal K. Chopra, Advocate
Ms. Shivangi Sharma, Advocate
SUBMISSIONS-IN-REJOINDER OF MR. K.V. VISWANATHAN, SR. ADV. APPEARING ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
INDEX TO SUBMISSIONS-IN-REJOINDER ON BEHALF OF MR. K.V. VISWANATHAN
1. The Constitution is an organic document - it keeps pace with changing times
2. It is not beyond the ken of this Hon'ble Court to recognize and declare the Rights of LGBTQIA+
Persons to enter into the Union of Marriage
3. Gendered Rights and Laws - Petitioners' rights cannot be defeated due to the Government's inaction
4. The Petitioners' Constitutional Rights cannot be denied based on an argument that it would offend the
"Will of the People"
5. Rights and Privileges - Fallacy in the arguments made by the Respondents
6. LGBTQIA+ Couples must be put on an 'Even Platform'
7. Law in the 'times of sad cessation' of a relationship
8. Under-Inclusion and Article 14 - The Respondents' Arguments fail the 'Innate and Core Trait' Test
9. Rights of LGBTQIA+ Couples must be equalised
10. The Law must keep pace with the changing times
11. On Unscientific Claims made by the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
SUBMISSIONS-IN-REJOINDER OF MR. K.V. VISWANATHAN SR. ADV. APPEARING ON BEHALF OF THE
PETITIONER
The Constitution is an organic document - it keeps pace with changing times
1. Through our Constitution, we have consciously chosen to break away from regressive traditions followed in our
society. The evolving and progressive nature of our Constitution has been felicitously discussed by this Hon'ble Court
Dipak Misra, C.J. (for himself and Khanwilkar)
196. We have discussed, in brief, the dynamic and progressive nature of the Constitution to accentuate that
rights under the Constitution are also dynamic and progressive, for they evolve with the evolution of a society and
with the passage of time. The rationale behind the doctrine of progressive realisation of rights is the dynamic and
ever-growing nature of the Constitution under which the rights have been conferred to the citizenry.
XXX
268.9. There is a manifest ascendance of rights under the Constitution which paves the way for the doctrine of
progressive realisation of rights as such rights evolve with the evolution of the society. This doctrine, as a natural
corollary, gives birth to the doctrine of non-retrogression, as per which there must not be atavism of constitutional
rights. In the light of the same, if we were to accept the view in Suresh Kumar Koushal V. Naz Foundation, (2014) 1
and denial of progressive realisation of rights.
XXX XXX XXX
R.F. Nariman, J. -
5 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to another and that we must
therefore look at comparative law-making allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight of
international opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental rights for same sex
couples reflects a growing consensus towards sexual orientation equality. We feel inclined to concur with the
accumulated wisdom reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees contained
within the Indian Constitution, but to provide a sound and appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about
those guarantees.
564. This evolution has enabled societies governed by liberal constitutional values-such as liberty, dignity,
privacy, equality and individual autonomy- to move beyond decriminalisation of offences involving consensual
same sex relationships. Decriminalisation is of course necessary to bury the ghosts of morality which flourished
in a radically different age and time. But decriminalisation is a first step. The constitutional principles on which it
is based have application to a broader range of entitlements. The Indian Constitution is based on an abiding faith
in
those constitutional values. In the march of civilisations across the spectrum of a compassionate global order,
India cannot be left behind.
XXX XXX XXX
Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
617. The ability of a society to acknowledge the injustices which it has perpetuated is a mark of its evolution. In
the process of remedying wrongs under a regime of constitutional remedies, recrimination gives way to restitution,
diatribes pave the way for dialogue and healing replaces the hate of a community. For those who have been
oppressed, justice under a regime committed to human freedom, has the power to transform lives. In addressing
the causes of oppression and injustice, society transforms itself. The Constitution has within it the ability to produce
a social catharsis. The importance of this case lies in telling us that reverberations of how we address social conflict
in our times will travel far beyond the narrow alleys in which they are explored.
438]; and the decriminalization and legitimization of the union of LGBTQIA+ couples in Navtej Singh Johar (supra),
the petitioners are before this Hon'ble Court for declaration and recognition of their right to marry the person of their
choice.
It is not beyond the ken of this Hon'ble Court to recognize and declare the Rights of LGBTQIA+ persons to
enter into the Union of Marriage
3. The Respondents' primary objection to these proceedings, is that the regulation of marriage is within the
legislative competence of the Parliament and that this Hon'ble Court ought not to enter into an exercise that would
amount to "legislating".
4. In response to this objection, it is respectfully reiterated that determination and declaration of rights which flow
from Part 111 of our Constitution is fully within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Constitutional Court. Once a
Fundamental Right to Marry someone of one's choice is found to exist by this Hon'ble Court, nothing can prevent this
Hon'ble Court from giving remedy against violation of the said right.
5. Once a basic right is recognized, and there exists no legislative scheme to provide for effective enforcement of
the said right, it is respectfully submitted that it would be necessary for this Hon'ble Court to lay down appropriate
guidelines to provide a mechanism for the said right to be effectively enforced - as was done in the case of Vishaka V.
16. In view of the above, and the absence of enacted law to provide for the effective enforcement of the basic
human right of gender equality and guarantee against sexual harassment and abuse, more particularly against
sexual harassment at workplaces, we lay down the guidelines and norms specified hereinafter for due observance at
all workplaces or other institutions, until a legislation is enacted for the purpose. This is done in exercise of the
power available under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of the fundamental rights and it is further
emphasised that this would be treated as the law declared by this Court under Article 141 of the Constitution.
XXX XXX XXX
18. Accordingly, we direct that the above guidelines and norms would be strictly observed in all workplaces for
the preservation and enforcement of the right to gender equality of the working women. These directions would be
binding and enforceable in law until suitable legislation is enacted to occupy the field. These writ petitions are
disposed of, accordingly.
6. Similarly, in the recent judgment of a Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court in Anoop Baranwal V. Union of
this Hon'ble Court had laid down the proper procedure to be followed. The following paragraph from the said judgment
is instructive [S. No. 1, Page 5 of Rejoinder Compilation].
224. In fact, we may observe that the Doctrine of Separation of Powers has spawned decisions of this Court
largely in the context of litigation where challenges led to actions by the Legislative Organ, allegedly contravening
the limits set for it. This is not to say that we are holding that it would be open to the courts to be oblivious to the
true role it is called upon to perform and which flows from the judicial function that it discharges. As noticed by this
Court, however, there is no magic formula and what it all amounts to is, the need to maintain a delicate balance.
While, it is true that, ordinarily, the Court cannot, without anything more, usurp what is purely a legislative power
or function, in the context of the Constitution, which clothes the citizens with Fundamental Rights and
provides for constitutional goals to be achieved and inertia of the Legislative Department producing a
clear situation, where there exist veritable gaps or a vacuum, the Court may not shy away from what
essentially would be part of its judicial function.
7.
It is respectfully submitted that the Fundamental Rights are, by their very nature, a limitation on the legislative
powers of the parliament from enacting any law that is inconsistent with them. Cooley, in his seminal treatise on
Constitutional Limitations, notes as follows [S. No. 2, Page 6-7 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"Nor, where fundamental rights are declared by the constitution, is it necessary at the same time to prohibit the
legislature, in ex press terms, from taking them away. The declaration is itself a prohibition, and is inserted in the
constitution for the express purpose of operating as a restriction upon legislative power"
No. 3, Page 10 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"19 [Ed. : Paras 19, 20 and 21 corrected vide Official Corrigendum No. F.3/Ed.B.J./22/2012 dated 26-
3-2012.]. It is necessary to be clear about the meaning of the word "fundamental" as used in the expression
"fundamental in the governance of the State" to describe the directive principles which have not been made legally
enforceable. Thus, the word "fundamental" has been used in two different senses under our Constitution of India.
The essential character of the fundamental rights is secured by limiting the legislative power and by providing that
any transgression of the limitation would render the offending law pro tanto void. The word "fundamental" in Article
37 of the Constitution also means basic or essential, but it is used in the normative sense of setting, before the
State, goals which it should try to achieve. As already noticed, the significance of the fundamental principles stated
in the directive principles have attained greater significance through judicial pronouncements.
Gendered Rights and Laws - Petitioners' rights cannot be defeated due to the Government's inaction
9. One of the fundamental objections laid by the Respondents to the case of the Petitioners is that the law, as it
exists today, is heavily gendered [based on the binary notion of gender] and that any declaration by this Hon'ble Court
would cause several workability issues in relation to many of these statutes. Further, it has also been submitted before
this Hon'ble Court that as a result of Section 21-A of the Special Marriage Act, personal laws such as the Hindu
Succession Act would inevitably be entrenched upon and would lead to complications in interpretation of the said
statute. In this regard, the following submissions are apposite.
10. The stand taken by the Respondents regarding the workability issues with several statutes is essentially to play
smokes and mirrors with this Hon'ble Court. It is submitted that the laws as they exist today are primarily based on
the binary gender and continue to exist so merely as a result of the inaction on part of the legislature to keep up with
the times. Specifically in relation to rights of transgender persons, this Hon'ble Court in NALSA V. Union of India
of equal protection of the law, in the following terms [Page 757-758 r/w 765, Vol. / of Case Law Compilation]:
"53. The Indian law, on the whole, only recognises the paradigm of binary genders of male and female, based on
a person's sex assigned by birth, which permits gender system, including the law relating to marriage, adoption,
inheritance, succession and taxation and welfare legislations. We have exhaustively referred to various articles
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 1966, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 as well as the Yogyakarta
Principles. Reference was also made to the legislations enacted in other countries dealing with rights of persons of
transgender community. Unfortunately, we have no legislation in this country dealing with the rights of transgender
community. Due to the absence of suitable legislation protecting the rights of the members of the transgenden
community, they are facing discrimination in various areas and hence the necessity to follow the international
conventions to which India is a party and to give due respect to other non-binding international conventions and
principles, The Constitution-makers could not have envisaged that each and every human activity be guided,
controlled, recognised or safeguarded by laws made by the legislature. Article 21 has been incorporated to
safeguard those rights and a constitutional court cannot be a mute spectator when those rights are violated, but is
expected to safeguard those rights knowing the pulse and feeling of that community, though a minority, especially
when their rights have gained universal recognition and acceptance.
81. Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21, above discussion, would indicate, do not exclude hijras/transgenders from
their ambit, but the Indian law on the whole recognise the paradigm of binary genders of male and female, based
on one's biological sex. As already indicated, we cannot accept the Corbett Principle of "biological test", rather we
prefer to follow the psyche of the person in determining sex and gender and prefer the "psychological test" instead
of "biological test". Binary notion of gender reflects in the Penal Code, 1860 for example, Section 8, 10, etc. and
also in the laws related to marriage, adoption, divorce, inheritance, succession and other welfare legislations like
Nrega, 2005, etc. Non-recognition of the identity of hijras/transgenders in the various legislations denies them
equal protection of law and they face widespread discrimination."
[Emphasis Supplied]
11. However, despite this Court's specific finding, the legislature, as on date, has not amended the laws to tailor it
to the concerns of transgender persons. In fact, as has been noted by Karan Gulati & Tushar Anand in their paper
Inheritance rights of transgender persons in India the inheritance rights of transgender persons exist
in
a
state
of flux and the Courts have had to adopt interpretative exercises to deal with such concerns. It is submitted, that
given this position in law and given the laxity on part of the legislature, a wide range of issues and disputes have been
left in the domain of the Courts and their interpretative exercises. The submission of the Petitioner in the present case,
is that given that the law, as it exists today, sans the recognition of same-sex marriages, already has a wide range of
workability issues, to contend now that the said recognition would lead to problems in interpretation of statutes is
merely a representation of an illusory state of affairs. In fact, the fact that the laws as they exist today are based on
binary genders did not hold back this Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra) from recognising the rights of the third gender
and their concomitant rights.
12. The same logic applies on all fours to the argument pertaining Section 21-A of the Special Marriage Act and the
possible effect on the Hindu Succession Act. By the very declaration of this Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra), the rights
of transgender persons have been thrust upon the Hindu Succession Act and the interpretation of the gendered
provisions in the said Act would have to be done by the Courts of law in a given case scenario. The same scenario
would subsist in the case of marriages between same-sex persons and any interpretative exercise in relation to the
succession laws would either have to be done by the Courts on a case-by-case basis or by a suitable tailoring to be
done by the legislature.
13. The Petitioners in the present case have merely sought for the declaration of a fundamental right to marry and
for recognition of such marriages under the existing secular law being the Special Marriage Act. It is the say of the
Petitioners that any exclusion from the ambit of this Act would be violative of Article 14 and would render the Act
unconstitutional. This being the position, to argue that the workability of the Act would be a hurdle in the path of this
Hon'ble Court is wholly untenable. It would essentially render the recognition of the fundamental rights of the
Petitioners herein subordinate to the laxity on part of the legislature in suitably amending the laws.
14. It is respectfully submitted that the Parliament will face 'difficulties' in the implementation on the said right
cannot be sustained because, establishing a suitable legal framework to enable all individuals to exercise their
fundamental rights is the primary duty of the legislature - if this duty is not performed, it would be for this Hon'ble
Court to step in and provide an appropriate mechanism to ensure that the citizen's rights are effectively enforced - as
was done in Vishaka (supra) and Anoop Baranwal (supra).
The Petitioners' Constitutional Rights cannot be denied based on an argument that it would offend the
Will of the People"
15. It was also argued by the Respondents that, if this Hon'ble Court declares and recognizes the Petitioners' right
to marry any person of their choice, it would offend the 'will of the people'. In response to this, it is reiterated, as was
extensively argued by the counsels for the Petitioners, that constitutional morality cannot and ought not to be replaced
by social morality under the guise of the same being the representation of the 'will of the people'. A fundamental right
cannot be denied to a section of our society merely because crystallization of said right would potentially offend the
opinion of a another section of society. The will of the people can only prevail if it is in consonance with the principles
enshrined in our Constitution - anything to the contrary ought to be rejected. Holding that the Constitution must
follows [S. No. 5, Page 39-40 r/w Page 43 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"50. [...] The Constitution prevails over the will of the people as expressed through the majority party.
The will of the people as expressed through the majority party prevails only if it is in accord with the
Constitution. [...I
XXX XXX XXX
72. [...]. But in the matter of formation of Government if the said majority political party elects a person as their
leader, whom the Constitution and the laws of the country disqualifies for being chosen as a member of the
Legislative Assembly, then such an action of the majority-elected member would be a betrayal to the electorates
and to the Constitution to which they owe their existence. In such a case, the so-called will of the people must
be held to be unconstitutional and, as such, could not be and would not be tolerated upon. When one
speaks of legislative supremacy and the will of the people, the doctrine essentially consists of a rule
which governs the legal relationship between the Legislature and the court, but what is stated to be the
legislative supremacy in the United Kingdom has no application in our country with a written
Constitution limiting the extent of such supremacy of the Legislature or Parliament. In other words, the
people of the country, the organs of the Government, Legislature, executive and judiciary are all bound by the
Constitution which Hon'ble Justice Bhagwati, J. describes in Minerva Mills case [Kesavananda Bharati V. State of
Constitution
16. It is respectfully submitted that the Constitution, being the fundamental law of the land, is the ultimate will of
the people. Therefore, the Constitution must always prevail over the will of the Legislature. As observed in the case of
Compilation]:
328. The Constitution of India which we have given to ourselves is the fundamental law of the land. The
judiciary, under the Constitution, is designed to be an intermediary body between the people on the one side and
the executive on the other. It belongs to the judiciary to ascertain the meaning of the constitutional provisions and
the laws enacted by the legislature. In order to keep the executive/legislature within the limits assigned to their
authority under the Constitution, the interpretation of laws is the proper and peculiar province of the judiciary.
Constitution is the "will" of the people whereas the statutory laws are the creation of the legislators who
are the elected representatives of the people. Where the will of the legislature - declared in the statutes
- stands in opposition to that of the people - declared in the Constitution - the will of the people must
prevail. The Constitution of India provides for an elected President. House of people is elected. The State legislators
are elected. Supreme Court Judges are not elected, they are appointed under the Constitution. So are other High
Court Judges. Yet the Constitution gives unelected Judges a power - called judicial review - under which they may
nullify unconstitutional acts of the executive and of the elected representatives of the people assembled in the
Parliament and the State Legislatures. This conclusion does not suppose that the judiciary is superior to the
legislature. It only supposes that the power of the people - embodied in the Constitution - is superior to both.
1], this Hon'ble Court has held that it is the duty of Constitutional Courts to preserve and protect the will of the people
declared in the Constitution. In doing the same, Court cannot be influenced by the opinion of the majority and what
would find favour with the public at large in society. Relevant observations supporting the aforesaid assertion are [S.
No. 7, Page 49-51 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
Madan B Lokur, J
840. It was observed (on an issue relating to the constitutionality of the death penalty) in Makwanyane [State V.
Makwanyane, 1995 ZACC 3 (1995) 3 SA 391, para 16 (CC) (Eleven-Judge Bench)], [Per Chaskalon, J., paras 88
and 89] as follows:
"88. Public opinion may have some relevance to the enquiry, but in itself, it is no substitute for the duty
vested in the Courts to interpret the Constitution and to uphold its provisions without fear or favour. If public
opinion were to be decisive there would be no need for constitutional adjudication. The protection of rights could
then be left to Parliament, which has a mandate from the public, and is answerable to the public for the way its
mandate is exercised, but this would be a return to parliamentary sovereignty, and a retreat from the new legal
order established by the 1993 Constitution.
89. This Court cannot allow itself to be diverted from its duty to act as an independent arbiter of the
Constitution by making choices on the basis that they will find favour with the public. Powell, J.'s
'415. the weight of the evidence indicates that the public generally has not accepted either the morality
or the social merit of the views SO passionately advocated by the articulate spokesmen for abolition. But
however one may assess amorphous ebb and flow of public opinion generally on this volatile issue, this type of
inquiry lies at the periphery-not the core-of the judicial process in constitutional cases. The assessment of
popular opinion is essentially a legislative, and not a judicial, function."
So too does the comment of Jackson, J. in West Virginia State Board of Education V. Barnette [West Virginia
'27. The very purpose of a Bill of Rights was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of
political controversy, to place them beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them
as legal principles to be applied by the courts. One's right to life, liberty, and property, to free speech,
a
free press, freedom of worship and assembly, and other fundamental rights may not be submitted to
vote; they depend on the outcome of no elections.
To put it differently: "The legitimacy of the Judicial Branch ultimately depends on its reputation for impartiality
p. 407 (1989)] Public opinion, manifested through Parliament or otherwise, really pales into insignificance over the
law that is interpreted impartially and in a non-partisan manner.
XXX XXX XXX
A Goel, J.
1070. At this stage, it may be mentioned that the claim of the learned Attorney General that Parliament
represented the will of the People or that the 99th Amendment represented the will of the People and interference
therewith will be undesirable is contrary to the law laid down in Kesavananda Bharati case [Kesavananda Bharati V.
Constitution while Parliament represents the will of the majority at a given point of time which is subordinate to the
Constitution, that is, the will of the People. The Constitution was supreme and even Parliament has no
unlimited amending power. The learned Attorney General rightly submitted that the last word on the
validity of a constitutional amendment is of this Court. Even if the judiciary is not an elected body, it
discharges the constitutional functions as per the will of the People reflected in the Constitution and the
task of determining the powers of various constitutional organs is entrusted to the judiciary [Paras 328
Rights and Privileges - Fallacy in the arguments made by the Respondents
18. The Respondents herein have sought to argue before this Hon'ble Court that there does not exist a fundamental
right to marry and that the recognition of such a fundamental right at the behest of same-sex couples would result in
a situation where the pandora's box would be opened leading to multiple frivolous claims arising before this Court. As
an example, it has been cited before this Hon'ble Court that persons in prohibited degrees of relationship or persons in
polygamous marriages might seek recognition of their right.
19. It is humbly submitted that these arguments placed before this Hon'ble Court miss the crux of the Petitioner's
case before this Hon'ble Court and further misconstrue the jurisprudential underpinnings of such a statement. It is the
case of the Petitioners that, given their sexual orientation is a protected right, as a result of the trifecta of judgments
cited before this Court, and given that their relationships are now considered to be legally sustainable, the right to
associate themselves under the rubric of marriage is a right which inheres in their very existence and which deserves
recognition by this Hon'ble Court. The case of the petitioner is based on the discrimination between heterosexual and
LBGTQIA+ unions. To that end, the restrictions that apply to heterosexual unions would continue to apply to
LGBTQIA+ couples.
20. As Salmond puts it, a right is an interest recognized and protected by a rule of right and which contains a CO-
relative duty. He argues that every 'wrong' involves an attack on some 'interest' and that such interests would include
many 'elements of human well-being, such as life, liberty, health, reputation, and uses of material objects". He further
recognises that such rights can be either moral or natural right or a legal right, the latter of which is a right protected
by a rule of legal justice. [S. No. 8, Page 53-55 of Rejoinder Compilation]. Thereafter, he sets out the
characteristics of a legal right in the following words [Page 57 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"(1) A person in whom it is vested, and who may be distinguished as the owner of the right, the subject of it, or the
person entitled.
(2) A person against whom the right avails, and upon whom the correlative duty lies. He may be distinguished as
the person bound, or as the subject of the duty.
(3) An act or omission which is obligatory on the person bound in favour of the person entitled. This may be termed
the content of the right.
(4) Some thing to which the act or omission relates, and which may be termed the object or subject-matter of the
right.
(5) A title : that is to say, certain facts or events by reason of which the right has become vested in its owner."
21. It is humbly submitted that the rights which are pressed for recognition and constitutional acceptance by this
Hon'ble Court is founded in Salmond's conception of a right. The right to co-habit, the right to have sexual relations
and the right to choose one's partners are rights that are already recognised and in that scenario, a person such as the
Petitioner being on the same pedestal as that of a heterosexual person, ought to be recognised to have the right
to
marry. This is essential to effectuate their meaningful exercise of their Right to Life. Therefore, it is the case of the
Petitioners before this Hon'ble Court that while the State is under an obligation to regulate the institution of marriage,
it cannot do so in a manner which takes away the right that inheres in persons such as the Petitioner. The State is
then under a duty to enable such a right and any act or omission that violates such a right ought to be viewed strictly
by this Hon'ble Court.
22. To argue that the rights claimed by the Petitioners, which flows from the legal recognition that exists for their
relationships, would result in absurd consequences is patently contrary to the nature of demand placed by the
Petitioners herein. The cases such as those relating to prohibited degrees of relationship or those relating to bigamy or
polygamy are based and founded on the idea that such relationships are not recognised by the State and society and
the non-recognition of the same goes to the very root of the existence of such relationships. This is completely
different from the case put forward by the Petitioner, namely, that the right to marry of the Petitioner(s) are
in
furtherance of the constitutionally recognised right to self-defined gender identity and sexual orientation, which lead to
there existing a basic right to associate themselves under the rubric of marriage.
23. Now, assuming that marriage is an institution entry into which is the prerogative of the State and the
conferment of the 'privilege' of marriage is solely within its domain, the said exercise cannot be discriminatory in
grants a 'privilege' to certain persons, it cannot grant this privilege arbitrarily and without satisfying the tests under
Article 14. The Court held [S. No. 9, Page 60-61 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"33. But, before we do so, we may at this stage conveniently refer to a contention of a preliminary nature
advanced on behalf of the State Government and Respondents 5 to 11 against the applicability of Article 14 in a
case dealing with the grant of liquor licences. The contention was that trade or business in liquor is SO inherently
pernicious that no one can claim any fundamental right in respect of it and Article 14 cannot therefore be invoked
by
the petitioners. Now, it is true, and it is well settled by several decisions of this Court including the decision in
254] that there is no fundamental right in a citizen to carry on trade or business in liquor. The State under its
regulatory power has the power to prohibit absolutely every form of activity in relation to intoxicants - its
manufacture, storage, export, import, sale and possession. No one can claim as against the State the right to carry
on trade or business in liquor and the State cannot be compelled to part with its exclusive right or privilege of
manufacturing and selling liquor, But when the State decides to grant such right or privilege to others the State
cannot escape the rigour of Article 14. It cannot act arbitrarily or at its sweet will. It must comply with the equality
clause while granting the exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing or selling liquor. It is, therefore, not possible
to uphold the contention of the State Government and Respondents 5 to 11 that Article 14 can have no application
in a case where the licence to manufacture or sell liquor is being granted by the State Government. The State
cannot ride roughshod over the requirement of that article."
[Emphasis Supplied]
24. On the basis of the above, it is humbly submitted before this Hon'ble Court that the recognition of the
Petitioner's right to marry a person of choice and to lead a marital life is an exercise of personal autonomy and would
be in the nature of recognition of a right that inheres in the very existence of the Petitioner and is in furtherance of the
constitutionally recognised rights of the Petitioner. The State cannot be allowed to discriminate against the Petitioner
in relation to grant of such rights by arguing that it would lead to opening of the pandora's box, which situation does
not arise in the present case.
LBGTQIA+ Couples must be put on an 'Even Platform'
25. The Respondents have argued that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ["SMA"] was only "intended for heterosexual
couples". It must be born in mind that, at the time of enacting the SMA, the parliament could not have contemplated
its applicability to LGBTQIA+ couples due to the fact that, at that time, Sec. 377 of the IPC in so far as it criminalized
consensual sex between LGBTQIA+ couples was still considered valid law. This position is now completely reversed -
with the passing of the judgment in Navtej Singh Johan (supra) whereby this Hon'ble Court has declared Sec. 377 of
the IPC (in so far as it criminalized consensual sex between LGBTQIA+ couples) to be unconstitutional.
26. It is the Petitioners' case that their right to marry the person of their choice must flow as a natural corollary to
the recognition of the equal right of transgenders in NALSA (supra): and the decriminalization and legitimization of the
union of LGBTQIA+ couples in Navtej Singh Johar (supra).
27. It is the Petitioners' case that, in view of this Hon'ble Court's recognition of the right of a person to choose a
partner of their choice in marriage in cases like Shafin Jahan V. Asokan KM [(2018) 16 SC 368)]; Lata Singh V. State
also be put on the 'even platform' as heterosexual couples in terms of their choice to enter into a marriage with a
partner of their choosing.
28. Non-recognition of the equal rights of LGBTQIA+ couples leads to harsh social stigma. Reliance is placed on
orientation is an essential attribute of privacy. Discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual orientation is
deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality demands that the sexual orientation of each
individual in society must be protected on an even platform. The right to privacy and the protection of sexual
orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution [...]" The
same was reiterated in para 175 in Navtej Singh Johar (supra).
29. To limit the institution of marriage to only heterosexual unions would not only be violative of the Petitioners'
Fundamental Right to Equality, but also would be treating LGBTQIA+ individuals as 'biological oddities' and 'second
class citizens'. Recognition of any other form of union for petitioners in place of marriage would be reinforcing the
notion that all forms of LGBTQIA- unions stand at a lower footing in comparison to heterosexual unions. To that end,
the observations in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie CCT 60/04 are reiterated as follows:
"[71] The exclusion of same-sex couples from the benefits and responsibilities of marriage, accordingly, is not
a
small and tangential inconvenience resulting from a few surviving relics of societal prejudice destined to evaporate
like the morning dew. It represents a harsh if oblique statement by the law that same-sex couples are
outsiders, and that their need for affirmation and protection of their intimate relations as human beings
is somehow less than that of heterosexual couples. It reinforces the wounding notion that they are to be
treated as biological oddities, as failed or lapsed human beings who do not fit into normal society, and,
as such, do not qualify for the full moral concern and respect that our Constitution seeks to secure for
everyone. It signifies that their capacity for love, commitment and accepting responsibility is by definition less
worthy of regard than that of heterosexual couples."
Law in the 'times of sad cessation" of a relationship
30. It is humbly submitted that the Petitioner herein and other persons before this Hon'ble Court have reiterated
that they seek to take on, not just the joys and happy moments that result from being recognised as married, but also
the set of responsibilities and duties that arise from the said institution. Quite apart from this requirement, it is also
the say of the Petitioner that what is commonplace for any relationship is that the happy and the momentous
occasions between couples is also interspersed with weaker moments where the union is soured through factors that
are sometimes beyond the control of the persons involved. Prior to this Hon'ble Court's decision in Navtej (supra), the
union of same sex persons was criminalized and socially stigmatized. However, after the decision, the rights of same
sex persons to be part of a relationship and to sustain such a relationship on par with any other heterosexual union is
no longer res integra. Therefore, a relationship which has been held to be lawful and Constitutionally protected, must
be permitted recognition by way of entry into the institution of marriage. Persons in such lawful unions want to be
treated on par with couples in a heterosexual union, and anything short of this would fall foul of Articles 15 & 16 of the
Constitution. Recognition of LGBTQIA+ rights and relationships by this Hon'ble Court makes it imperative that the law
provide for, treat equally and protect the persons involved in a lawful union in such weak moments and this Hon'ble
Court would be justified in enforcing this positive obligation upon the State.
31. It is submitted that in the case of marriage, as it exists today, heterosexual couples are provided with a whole
gamut of rights and remedies under the law which are all-encompassing. The law surrounds and takes into account
the weak moments of these heterosexual unions right from the very inception of marriage, stays through during the
subsistence of the marriage and subsists on the cessation of marriage [for eg. Laws relating to divorce, maintenance
etc.]. It is humbly submitted that the Petitioners not only seek the right to get married, but also seek the similar
protection given by the law during the sour moments of a relationship. To exclude and leave out same-sex couples
from this field of legislation would not only lead to individual harm being caused to the person, it would have a ripple
effect on society and cause family breakdown which is, in the opinion of the government, foundational to society.
32. Therefore, it is submitted that the government, in seeking to preserve and protect only certain forms of familial
units, must take into account the fact that the absence of such inclusion in such beneficial legislations would result in
direct impact on any family including LGBTQIA+ persons. To that end, the South African Constitutional Court in Fourie
(supra) has encapsulated this dilemma in the following words, on which the Petitioner places complete reliance:
"[73] Equally important as far as family law is concerned, is the right of same-sex couples to fall back upon state
regulation when things go wrong in their relationship. Bipolar by its very nature, the law of marriage is invoked both
at moments of blissful creation and at times of sad cessation. There is nothing to suggest that same-sex couples
are any less affected than are heterosexual ones by the emotional and material consequences of a rupture of their
union. The need for comprehensive judicial regulation of their separation or divorce. or of devolution of property or
rights to maintenance or continuation of tenancy after death, is no different. Again, what requires legal attention
concerns both status and practical regulation.
[74] The law should not turn its back on any persons requiring legal support in times of family breakdown. It
should certainly not do so on a discriminatory basis; the antiquity of a prejudice is no reason for its survival."
[Emphasis Supplied]
Under-Inclusion and Article 14 The Respondents' Arguments fail the 'Innate and Core Trait' Test
33. It has been vehemently contended by the Respondents before this Hon'ble Court that the present case is, at
best, an under-inclusion' in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 in as much as it only recognises heterosexual unions and
that deference is usually shown to the wisdom of the legislature in cases involving under-inclusion' It has further
been argued before this Hon'ble Court that the omission of same-sex unions from the ambit of the Special Marriage
Act would not fall foul of Article 14 since it is in line with the legislative intent and object to only regulate heterosexual
unions.
34. In this regard, it is humbly submitted that this Hon'ble Court in a plethora of cases has tested the classification
made out by a legislature on the anvil of Article 14 even when the contention before it was in the nature of under-
inclusion' of certain classes of persons. As noticed by this Hon'ble Court in State of Gujarat V. Shri Ambica Mills (1974)
legitimate purpose but does not confer the same benefit or place the same burden on others who are similarly
situated" [Para 55].
35. It is the case of the Petitioners before this Hon'ble Court that if the SMA is to be so construed to be excluding
LGBTQIA+ Couples, it would tantamount to treating similarly placed individuals unequally. Importantly, the Petitioners
have not only made a frontal challenge to the provisions as they exist in the Statute today but also to the
discriminative interpretation which has been rendered to the provisions and to the broader framework of marriage by
the Respondents.
36. While it may be a settled principle of law that the legislation is not required to be all-embracing, it has also
been simultaneously stated by this Hon'ble Court that this principle would not save the legislation from
unconstitutionality when its sphere of operation is discriminatory in nature. In Atam Prakash V. State of Haryana
15(1)(a) to (c) of the Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1913. The impugned section provided for a right of pre-emption to
certain kinsfolk of the vendor of an agricultural land which was completely based on consanguinity and agnatic
traditions. In holding the said parts of the Section to be violative of Article 14, this Hon'ble Court noted as follows [S.
No. 10, Page 73-75 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"11. We now come to the primary question whether the right of pre-emption based on consanguinity and
contained in the remaining clauses of Section 15(1)(a), (b) and (c) and Section 15(2)(a) and (b) can be sustained.
Earlier we have briefly indicated the character of the right of pre-emption based on consanguinity. In the counter-
affidavit, the classification in favour of the persons mentioned in Section 15 is sought to be justified in the following
manner:
"The classifications have been made on reasonable basis in the interests of the public:
(i) to preserve integrity of village community;
(ii) to avoid fragmentation of holdings;
(iii) to implement the agnatic theory of succession;
(iv) to promote public and private decency;
(v) to facilitate tenants to acquire ownership rights;
(vi)
to reduce litigation consequent to introduction of an outsider on family property or jointly owned property."
The real question is whether a classification in favour of the kinsfolk of the vendor can be considered
reasonable so as to justify a right of preemption in their favour for the purpose of preserving the integrity of the
village community or implementing the agnatic theory of succession or preserving the unity and integrity of the
family.
12. A scrutiny of the list of persons in whose favour the right of pre-emption is vested under Section 15 reveals
certain glaring facts which appear to detract from the theory of preservation of the integrity of the family and the
theory of agnatic right of succession. First we notice that neither the father non the mother figures in the list though
the father's brother does. The son's daughter and the daughter's daughter do not appear though the son's son and
the daughter's son do. The sister and the sister's son are excluded though the brother and the brother's son are
included. Thus relatives of the same degree are excluded either because they are women or because they are
related through women. It is not as if women and those related through women are altogether excluded because
the daughter and daughter's son are included. If the daughter is to be treated on a par with the son and the
daughter's son is treated on a par with the son's son it does not appear logical why the father's son (brother)
should be included and not the father's daughter (sister). These are but a few of the intrinsic contradictions that
appear in the list of relatives mentioned in Section 15 as entitled to the right of pre-emption. It is un-
understandable why a son's daughter, a daughter's daughter, a sister or a sister's son should have no right of pre-
emption whereas a father's brother's son has that right. As Section 15 stands, if the sole owner of a property sells it
to his own father, mother, sister, sister's son, daughter's daughter or son's daughter, the sale can be defeated by
the vendor's father's brother's son claiming a right of pre-emption.
13. We are thus unable to find any justification for the classification contained in Section 15 of the Punjab Pre-
emption Act of the kinsfolk entitled to preemption. The right of pre-emption based on consanguinity is a relic of the
feudal past. It is totally inconsistent with the constitutional scheme. It is inconsistent with modern ideas. The
reasons which justified its recognition quarter of a century ago, namely, the preservation of the integrity of rural
society, the unity of family life and the agnatic theory of succession are today irrelevant. The list of kinsfolk
mentioned as entitled to pre-emption is intrinsically defective and self-contradictory. There is, therefore, no
reasonable classification and clauses "First", "Secondly" and "Thirdly" of Section 15(1)(a), "First", "Secondly" and
"Thirdly" of Section 15 (1)(b), clauses "First", "Secondly" and "Thirdly" of Section 15(1)(c) and the whole of Section
15(2) are, therefore, declared ultra vires the Constitution."
[Emphasis Supplied]
37. As has been noted above, the classification made by the legislature by including only certain classes of persons
[which choice was based on consanguinity and agnatic traditions] was struck down by a Constitution Bench inter alia
based on the fact that the classification was based on an object which is 'inconsistent with modern ideas' and since
certain classes of persons were irrationally excluded. It is humbly submitted that the same principle would apply on all
fours in the present case inasmuch as the exclusion of same-sex couples is based on a deeply discriminatory intent
and would therefore violate the tenet of Article 14. The only way the statute can be saved is if this Hon'ble Court
equalizes the two categories.
38. Further, this Court in State of Tamil Nadu V. National South Indian River Interlinking Agriculturist Association
and over-inclusive classifications, has observed that less deference would be shown in cases where the classification
which is alleged goes to the root of an individual's core existence [Opinion of Hon'ble Justice D.Y. Chandrachud,
as the Hon'ble Chief Justice then was]:
"32. While non-classification arbitrariness is tested based on the proportionality test, where the means are
required to be proportional to the object, classification arbitrariness is tested on the rational nexus test, where it is
sufficient if the means share a "nexus" with the object. The degree of proof under the test would impact the
judgment of this Court on whether the law is under-inclusive or over-inclusive. A statute is "under-inclusive" if it
fails to regulate all actors who are part of the problem. It is "over-inclusive" if it regulates actors who are not a part
of the problem that the statute seeks to address. The determination of under-inclusiveness and over-inclusiveness,
and degree of deference to it is dependent on the relationship prong ("rational nexus" or "proportional") of the test.
33. The nexus test, unlike the proportionality test, is not tailored to narrow down the means or to find the best
means to achieve the object. It is sufficient if the means have a "rational nexus" to the object. Therefore, the courts
show a greater degree of deference to cases where the rational nexus test is applied. greater degree of deference
is shown to classification because the legislature can classify based on the degrees of harm to further the principle
of substantive equality, and such classification does not require mathematical precision. The Indian courts do not
apply the proportionality standard to classificatory provisions. Though the two-Judge Bench in Anuj Garg [Anuj Garg
and core trait" of an individual, this is not the case to delve into it. Since the classification in the impugned scheme
is based neither on the grounds in Article 15 nor on the "innate and core trait" of an individual, it cannot be struck
down on the alleged grounds of under-inclusiveness and over-inclusiveness.'
[Emphasis Supplied]
of gender reflected in several laws, found that the 'non-recognition of identity of hijras/transgenders' denies them the
equal protection of the law and exposes them to widespread discrimination [Para 81 at Page 765, Vol. / of Case Law
Compilation].
40. It is therefore submitted that the under-inclusive nature of the Special Marriage Act would not be in line with
the tenets of equality recognised under the Constitution. The interpretation sought to be given by the Respondents in
the present case is fundamentally based on a 'core and innate trait' of an individual and would fall foul of Article 14 of
the Constitution. The non-recognition of the rights of same-sex couples to marry and the non-inclusion of such persons
from the ambit of a secular law such as the Special Marriage Act renders the Act unconstitutional and it would be
necessary for the court to equalise the rights of the Petitioners.
Rights of LGBTQIA+ Couples must be equalised
41. It is respectfully submitted that it is well within the powers of this Hon'ble Court to "equalize" the rights of
LGBTQIA+ couples by reading-into the relevant statutes - without having to nullify the statute by declaring it
unconstitutional. This process of 'equalizing the rights of a section of the community who have been excluded from
a
SC 38 [S. No. 14, Page 323-380 of Additional Compilation dated 10.04.2023] where this Hon'ble Court held that
the exclusion of "Old Indian settlers", who have permanently settled in Sikkim prior to merger of Sikkim with India on
26.04.1975 from the definition of "Sikkimese" in Section 10(26AAA) of the Income Tax Act was violative of Article 14.
Upon holding the "exclusion" as unconstitutional, it was ordered that all "old Indian settlers" were entitled to the
exemption benefits provided under the said provision in order to sustain the constitutionality of the said provision.
Some important paras from the judgment are as follows:
"M R Shah, J
legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation, which classification must satisfy the
twin tests of classification being founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are
grouped together from those that are left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational nexus to the
object sought to be achieved by the statute in question. In the present case, the exclusion of old Indian settlers,
who have settled in Sikkim prior to the merger of Sikkim with India on 26.04.1975 from the definition of
"Sikkimese" in Section 10(26AAA) does not fulfill the aforesaid two conditions.
B V Nagarathna, J.
148. Individuals having become citizens of India and were domiciled in Sikkim as on 26th April, 1975 are also
entitled to the benefit of registration and exemption. Thus, in my view, all individuals domiciled in Sikkim till 26th
April, 1975 and who have since become citizens of India are entitled to exemption from payment of income tax as
per Section 10 (26AAA) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
149. The rationale being, Sikkim merged with India and became a State within India in the year 1975 and a
special status was given to it by virtue of Article 371-F of the Constitution of India. This does not mean that all
persons domiciled in Sikkim who have been treated as citizens of India are entitled to the exemption. Only such
individuals are entitled to the exemption who fall within the three clauses of the Explanation. Hence, the
Explanation must be construed strictly as it is in the nature of a definition of the expression "Sikkimese" for the
purpose of granting an exemption from payment of income tax under the I.T. Act, 1961. However, the exemption
must be extended to incorporate all such individuals who have been domiciled in Sikkim as on 26th April, 1975 and
who have since then become citizens of India. This would mean that all other citizens of India who do not fall within
the ambit of the Explanation as interpreted above and who have been domiciled in Sikkim State subsequent to 26th
April, 1975 would not have the benefit of exemption under Section 10 (26AAA) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
150. In view of the above interpretation, in my view, the Explanation has to be saved from being in violation of
Articles 14 or 15 of the Constitution of India as there is rationale in the three clauses of the Explanation which is a
reasonable classification which has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved, which is to grant of exemption from
payment of income tax only to those individuals who would qualify as 'Sikkimese' in terms of the Explanation to
clause (26AAA) of Section 10 of the I.T. Act, 1961. Thus, any individual not falling within the said clause would not
be entitled to the said exemption. This would however be discriminatory insofar as those settlers in Sikkim are
concerned who have been domiciled in Sikkim subsequent to promulgation of 1961 Regulation and till 26th April,
1975 when Sikkim merged with India. Such individuals are old settlers who have become citizens of India from 26th
April, 1975 but who were domiciled in Sikkim prior to the said date. In my view, they are also entitled to the
exemption under Section 10 (26AAA). Hence, directions in that regard have to be issued to fill the Legislative
vacuum and amendment to the Explanation is necessary. However, those individuals who have been domiciled in
Sikkim subsequent to 26th April, 1975 shall not be entitled to the benefit of exemption from payment of income tax.
151. This Court has on previous occasions, sought to enforce rights of citizens even in areas of
3011]. To this end, Article 142 of the Constitution of India has been invoked and the law so declared in
order to fill the vacuum has been treated as law declared by this Court under Article 141 until a proper
legislation is made.
152. Hence, it has to be directed that till such amendment is made to the down the Explanation to
Section 10(26AAA) of the I.T. Act, 1961, all individuals domiciled in Sikkim up to 26th April, 1975 shall be
entitled to the exemption under the said provision from the current financial year i.e., 1st April, 2022 onwards. This
direction is being issued in exercise of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution SO as to eliminate
discrimination and disparity in respect of the aforesaid category of Sikkimese, who subsequently have become
citizens of India w.e.f. 26th April, 1975 and to save the Explanation from being rendered unconstitutional vis-
-vis such individuals who form a small percentage of Sikkimese and who are also entitled to such an exemption.
Such as approach is being adopted rather than striking downthe Explanation to Section 10(26AAA) of the I.T.
Act, 1961 which would have the effect of withdrawing the benefit of exemption even from those categories of
persons who are presently eligible for the same.
153. Hence, until the amendment is made, the following clause shall be read as a part of the
Explanation to Section 10(26AAA) of the I.T. Act, 1961, possibly as sub-clause (iv) thereof:
"(iv) any other individual, whose name does not appear in the Register of Sikkim Subjects but it is established
that such individual was domiciled in Sikkim on or before 26th April, 1975."
154. This provision would extend the benefit of exemption to those individuals, domiciled in Sikkim on the day it
merged with India, i.e., 26th April, 1975.
155. In the result, the writ petitions are disposed of in the following terms:
i) That the benefit of income-tax exemption presently is restricted only to those Sikkimese who fall within the
three clauses of the Explanation to Section 10(26AAA) of the I.T. Act, 1961, or those persons domiciled in
Sikkim, or are Sikkimese as covered under the 1961 Regulation.
ii) In terms of the Sikkim (Citizenship) Order, 1975 as amended by the Sikkim (Citizenship) Amendment Order,
1989, issued by the Government of India any person who was a Sikkim Subject under the 1961 Regulation
was to be deemed to be a citizen of India w.e.f. 26th April, 1975. Conversely, it is held that all citizens of
India, having a domicile in Sikkim on the day it merged with India i.e. 26th April, 1975 must be covered under
the Explanation in order to avail the benefit of the exemption under Section 10(26AAA) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
iii) The Union of India shall make an amendment to Explanation to Section 10 (26AAA) of I.T. Act, 1961, so as to
suitably include a clause to extend the exemption from payment of income tax to all Indian citizens domiciled
in Sikkim on or before 26th April, 1975. The reason for such a direction is to save the explanation from
unconstitutionality and to ensure parity in the facts and circumstances of the case.
iv) Till such amendment is made by the Parliament to the Explanation to Section 10 (26AAA) of I.T. Act, 1961,
any individual whose name does not appear in the Register of Sikkim Subjects but it is established that such
individual was domiciled in Sikkim on or before 26th April, 1975, shall be entitled to the benefit of exemption.
This direction is being issued in exercise of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution so as to eliminate
discrimination and disparity in respect of the aforesaid category of Sikkimese, who subsequently have become
citizens of India w.e.f. 26th April, 1975 and to save the Explanation from being rendered unconstitutional vis-
-vis such individuals who form a small percentage of Sikkimese.
v) Proviso to Section 10 (26AAA), insofar as it excludes from the exempted category, "a Sikkimese woman who
marries a non-Sikkimese man after 1st April, 2008" is hereby struck down as being ultra vires Articles 14, 15
and 21 of the Constitution of India."
42. It is imperative to note that courts are equipped with the power to read in the left-out categories in a statute in
a manner so as to equalize. In the present context, the exclusion of a certain class would violate the equality code,
and therefore, to maintain the vires and sanctity of any given statute, Courts must equalise the same in favour of the
class of persons who are otherwise being excluded from the conferment of the benefits contemplated under the said
statute.
examine the question arising in respect of the rights of children born from void marriages under Section 16 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, held as follows [S. No. 12, Page 113, 117-118, 120-122, 124 of Rejoinder
Compilation]:
"34. Whenever an enactment is attacked on the ground of discrimination, it becomes the duty of the court to
look to the legislation as a whole and to find out why class legislation was introduced and what was the nexus
between the classification and the object sought to be achieved by it. In order to decipher this question we have to
have a peep into the background.
[...]
50. The requirements for the applicability of Section 16 (as originally enacted), which protected legitimacy, were
that:
(i) there was a marriage;
(ii) the marriage was void under Section 11 or voidable under Section 12;
(iii) there was a decree annulling such marriage either under Section 11 or under Section 12;
(iv) the child was begotten or conceived before the decree was made.
[...]
59. The object of Section 16 was to protect legitimacy of children born of void or voidable marriages. In leaving
out one group of illegitimate children from being treated as legitimate, there did not appear to be any nexus
between the object sought to be achieved by Section 16 and the classification made in respect of illegitimate
children similarly situate or circumstanced. The provisions of Section 16 were, therefore, to that extent, clearly
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
60. The legislature, as a matter of fact, committed the mistake of borrowing in this section the language of
Section 9 of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950 made by the British Parliament which dealt with the legitimacy of
children of only voidable marriages and not the children of marriages void ipso jure.
[...]
64. In order, therefore, to give full effect to what was intended to be achieved by enacting Section 16,
Parliament intervened and amended Section 16 by Act No. 68 of 1976 pointing out in the Notes to the clauses of
the Bill and the Amending Act, 1976 that:
this clause seeks to substitute Section 16 SO as to clarify the intention and to remove the difficulties in
interpretation."
[...]
66. The question now to be considered is the question relating to the 'vires' of the section in its present form, or,
to put it differently, if Section 16. as originally enacted, contravened, in any way, Article 14, for the reason that it
discriminated between two groups of illegitimate children similarly circumstanced, does the section, after its
amendment by Act No. 68 of 1976 continue to be still violative of Article 14.
67. There is always a presumption that an Act made by Parliament or the State legislature is valid; SO also there
is a strong presumption in favour of the validity of legislative classification. It is for those who challenge the Act as
unconstitutional to show and prove beyond all doubts that the legislature arbitrarily discriminated between different
persons similarly circumstanced. This presumption, however, can be displaced by showing that the discrimination
was SO apparent and manifest that any proof was hardly required. Section 16, as originally enacted, fell under this
category and we have already held that to the extent it discriminated between two groups of illegitimate children in
the matter of conferment of status of legitimacy, it was violative of Article 14. The vice or the mischief from which
unamended Section 16 suffered has been removed or not is our next concern.
68. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is a beneficent legislation and, therefore, it has to be interpreted in such a
manner as advances the object of the legislation. The Act intends to bring about social reforms. Conferment of
social status of legitimacy on a group of innocent children, who are otherwise treated as bastards, is the prime
object of Section 16.
[...]
79. Section 16 contains a legal fiction. It is by a rule of fictio juris that the legislature has provided that children,
though illegitimate, shall, nevertheless, be treated as legitimate notwithstanding that the marriage was void or
voidable.
[...]
82. In view of the legal fiction contained in Section 16, the illegitimate children, for all practical purposes,
including succession to the properties of their parents, have to be treated as legitimate. They cannot, however,
succeed to the properties of any other relation on the basis of this rule, which in its operation, is limited to the
properties of the parents.
[...]
80. When an Act of Parliament or a State legislature provides that something shall be deemed to exist or some
status shall be deemed to have been acquired, which would not have been so acquired or in existence but for the
enactment, the court is bound to ascertain the purpose for which the fiction was created and the parties between
whom the fiction was to operate, SO that full effect may be given to the intention of the legislature and the purpose
44. This Court, in S.K. Dutta, CIT V. Lawrence Singh Ingty, reported in (1968) 2 SCR 165, has held that a
discrimination against persons belonging to a certain tribal community on the basis of their employment as
government servants, in respect exemption from income tax was deemed to be unconstitutional, while also holding
that the specific portion of the provision of the statute in question was easily severable. It was also observed that
classification based on past legislative practice and history does not mean that because in the past the legislature was
enacting arbitrary laws it could do so now. The relevant paragraphs have been extracted hereinbelow for your ready
reference [S. No. 13, Page 127-129 r/w Page 131-132 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"6. Part of the impugned assessments were made under the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 and the rest, under
the Income Tax Act, 1961. If the aforementioned provisions are valid, then the assessments in question are beyond
challenge. Therefore the only question for decision is whether the legislature had no power to exclude
the
government servants from the benefit of the exemptions given under the aforementioned Sections 4(3)(xxi) and 10
(26). [...]
8. It is not in dispute that taxation laws must also pass the test of Article 14. That has been laid down by this
Court in Moopil Nair V. State of Kerala [(1961) 3 SCR 77]. But as observed by this Court in East India Tobacco Co.
V. State of Andhra Pradesh [(1963) 1 SCR 404, 409], in deciding whether a taxation law is discriminatory or not it
is necessary to bear in mind that the State has a wide discretion in selecting persons or objects it will tax, and that
a statute is not open to attack on the ground that it taxes some persons or objects and not others; it is only when
within the range of its selection. the law operates unequally, and that cannot be justified on the basis of any valid
classification, that it would be violative of Article 14. It is well settled that a State does not have to tax everything
in order to tax something. It is allowed to pick and choose districts, objects, persons, methods and even rates for
taxation if it does so reasonably.
9. The complaint in this case is that within the range of the selection made by the State for the purpose of
exemption, namely, members of certain scheduled tribes residing in specified areas, the law operates unequally and
the inequality in question cannot be justified on the basis of any valid classification.
10. There can be no distinction between the income earned by government servant and that earned by a person
serving in a company or under a private individual. More or less similar is the case in respect of the income earned
by persons practising one or more of the professions. Admittedly the income earned by the members of the
scheduled tribes residing in Khasi-Jaintia Hills excepting in the case of government servants is exempt from income
tax be it as salaried officers, lawyers, doctors or persons other walks of life. Is there any legal basis for this
differentiation? Prima facie it appears that the government servants have been discriminated against and the
discrimination in question is writ large on the face of the provisions in question.
13. We know of no legislative practice or history treating the government servants as a separate class for the
purpose of income tax. The government servants' income has all along been treated in the same manner as the
income of other salaried officers. We not know under what circumstances the notifications dated 5-6-1890 and 21-3
-1922, referred to earlier, came to be issued. But they are insufficient to prove a well established legislative
practice. At the time those notifications were issued the power of the legislature to grant or withhold any exemption
from tax was not subject to any constitutional limitation. Hence the validity of the impugned provisions cannot be
tested from what our legislatures or governments did or omitted to do before the Constitution came into force. If
that should be considered as a true test then Article 13(1) would become otiose and most, if not all, of our
constitutional guarantees would lose their content. Shri Setalvad, learned counsel for the respondent is justified in
his comment that classification based on past legislative practice and history does not mean that because in the
past the legislature was enacting arbitrary laws it could do so now.
15. It was lastly contended by the learned Solicitor-General a contention which was not taken either in the return
or before the High Court or in the appeal memo that it is not possible to strike down only a portion of Section 4(3)
(xxi) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 and Section 10(26) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, namely, the words
"provided that such member is not in the service of government" found in Section 4(3)(xxi) of the Indian Income
Tax Act, 1922 and the words "who is not in, the service of government" found in Section 10(26) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961, as those words are not severable from the rest of the provisions in which they appear. Further according
to him it cannot be definitely predicated that the legislature would have granted the exemption incorporated in
those provisions without the exception made in the case of government servants. Therefore if we hold that those
provisions as they stand are violative of Article 14 then we must strike down the aforementioned Sections 4(3)( (xxi)
and 10(26) in their entirety. We are unable to accept the contention that the words mentioned above are not
severable, from the rest of the provision in which they appear. They are easily severable. Taking into consideration
the reasons which persuaded the legislature to grant the exemption in question we have no doubt that it would
have granted that exemption even if it was aware of the fact that it was beyond its competence to exclude the
government servants from the exemption in question.
The Law must keep pace with the changing times
45. It is no longer res integra that law is dynamic, and will have to keep pace with the times, even in the event of
the legislature's inability to progress along with the change in social realities. This Hon'ble Court, in State of
witness in a cross-examination not only acknowledged Francis Bennion's Principle of Updating Construction, but also
held that with the progress of time, procedure and law must be interpreted in a manner that would enable the State to
achieve the object and intent of the law. The relevant paragraphs thereof have been extracted herein below [S. No.
14, Page 143-146 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"16. This Court has approved the principle of updating construction, as enunciated by Francis Bennion, in a
number of decisions. These principles were quoted with approval in the case of CIT V. Podar Cement (P) Ltd.
in Section 45 of that Act was construed to include "typewriting". These principles were also applied in the case of
"notice in writing". in Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, were construed to include a notice by fax. On
the same principle courts have interpreted. over a period of time, various terms and phrases. To take only a few
examples: "stage carriage" has been interpreted to include "electric tramcar"; "steam tricycle" to include
"locomotive": "telegraph" to include "telephone"; "banker's books" to include "microfilm"; "to take note" to include
"use of tape recorder"; "documents" to include "computer databases". [...]
19[...]. It is akin to submitting that a person seen through binoculars or telescope is not in the "presence" of the
person observing. Thus it is clear that so long as the accused and/or his pleader are present when evidence is
recorded by video-conferencing that evidence is being recorded in the "presence" of the accused and would thus
fully meet the requirements of Section 273 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Recording of such evidence would be as
per "procedure established by law".
20. Recording of evidence by video-conferencing also satisfies the object of providing, in Section 273, that
evidence be recorded in the presence of the accused. The accused and his pleader can see the witness as clearly as
if the witness was actually sitting before them. In fact the accused may be able to see the witness better than he
may have been able to if he was sitting in the dock in a crowded courtroom. They can observe his or her
demeanour. In fact the facility to playback would enable better observation of demeanour. They can hear and rehear
the deposition of the witness. The accused would be able to instruct his pleader immediately and thus cross-
examination of the witness is as effective, if not better. The facility of playback would give an added advantage
whilst cross-examining the witness. The witness can be confronted with documents or other material or statement
in the same manner as if he/she was in court. All these objects would be fully met when evidence is recorded by
video-conferencing. Thus no prejudice, of whatsoever nature, is caused to the accused. Of course, as set out
hereinafter, evidence by video-conferencing has to be on some conditions.
21. [. ]The advancement of science and technology is such that now it is possible to set up video-conferencing
equipment in the court itself. In that case evidence would be recorded by the Magistrate or under his dictation in
open court. If that is done then the requirements of these sections would be fully met."
46. This Hon'ble Court, through Justice Madan Lokun and Justice Deepak Gupta, vide a concurring opinion, rendered
in Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for husbands who indulge in sexual acts with 'wives' who are between
the ages of 15 to 18, irrespective of consent, also observed that law cannot be deemed as static or rigid, but is very
dynamic in its very nature, and held the following [S. No. 15, Page 154 of Rejoinder Compilation]:
"84. In law, it is difficult to accept any one of these justifications. There is no question of a girl child giving
express or implied consent for sexual intercourse. The age of consent is statutorily and definitively fixed at 18 years
and there is no law that provides for any specific deviation from this. Therefore unless Parliament gives any specific
indication (and it has not given any such indication) that the age of consent could be deviated from for any rational
reason, we cannot assume that a girl child who is otherwise incapable of giving consent for sexual intercourse has
nevertheless given such consent by implication, necessary or otherwise only by virtue of being married. It would be
reading too much into the mind of the girl child and assuming a state of affairs for which there is neither any
specific indication non any warrant. It must be remembered that those days are long gone when a married woman
or a married girl child could be treated as subordinate to her husband or at his beck and call or as his property.
Constitutionally a female has equal rights as a male and no statute should be interpreted or understood to derogate
from this position. If there is some theory that propounds such an unconstitutional myth, then that theory deserves
to be completely demolished.
85. Merely because child marriages have been performed in different parts of the country as a part of a tradition
or
custom does not necessarily mean that the tradition is an acceptable one nor should it be sanctified as such.
Times change and what was acceptable a few decades ago may not necessarily be acceptable today. This was noted
by a Constitution Bench of this Court (though in a different context) in State of M.P. V. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd.
[State of M.P. V. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd., (1964) 6 SCR 846 : AIR 1964 SC 1179] that (AIR p. 1182, para 6)
"6. But, by the passage of time, considerations of necessity and expediency would be obliterated, and the
grounds which justified classification of geographical regions for historical reasons may cease to be valid.
47. It has been repeatedly put to this Hon'ble Court that the recognition of the fundamental rights of the Petitioners
herein would be subject to there being social acceptance to marriages of this nature and that social equality must
precede any adjudication of rights or even legislation to that effect. In this regard, it becomes imperative to make
reference to the reasoning of the United States Supreme Court in Plessy (supra), as was referred to in the Written
Submissions dated 20.04.2023 [See S. No. 11 @Page 291-292, Compilation of Additional Authorities cited in
Written Submissions on behalf of Mr. K.I Viswanathan]:
"The argument also assumes that social prejudices may be overcome by legislation, and that equal rights cannot
be secured to the negro except by an enforced commingling of the two races. We cannot accept this proposition. If
the two races are to meet upon terms of social equality, it must be the result of natural affinities, a mutual
appreciation of each other's merits and a voluntary consent of individuals. If the civil and political rights of both
races be equal one cannot be inferior to the other civilly or politically. If one race be inferior to the other socially, the
Constitution of the United States cannot put them upon the same plane."
48. It is humbly submitted that the argument on behalf of the Respondents herein is indicative of a thought
process which is rooted in the past and which has since been held untenable by this Hon'ble Court on multiple
occasions. To say that the determination of rights of persons such as the petitioner must be relegated to a day when
social equality is obtained would be in the face of the very role that this Court takes onto itself inasmuch as it acts as a
counter-majoritarian institution.
On Unscientific Claims made by the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
49. Compilation Part D as circulated by the counsel for National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR)
includes articles on effect of puberty blocker/sex-transition therapy on children. The said articles in the compilation
(many of which are anecdotal in nature) are from various sources and discuss the "supposed" harms of puberty
blockers and other medical interventions in transgender or gender diverse adolescents. The said articles are lacking
reference to scientifically sound research and are in complete disregard to the internationally accepted guidelines
issued by World Profession Association for Transgender Health (WPATH), which are also referenced in the Transgender
Persons (Protection of Rights Act), 2019. WPATH has established accepted Standards of Care (SOC) for the treatment
of individuals with gender dysphoria. These guidelines are designed to promote the health and welfare of transgender,
transsexual and gender variant persons in all cultural settings. The Standards of Care are updated and revised as new
scientific information becomes available.
50. WPATH guidelines are well recognized and followed by India. The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights
Act), 2019 provides that the appropriate government shall bring out health manual related to sex reassignment
surgery in accordance with the WPATH guidelines. The National Medical Commission further formed an expert
committee pursuant to the Order of the Hon'ble High Court of Madras in W.P. (C) No. 7284 of 2021 "Ms. S. Sushma V.
The Commissioner of Police" The Expert Committee recommended modifications in competency based medical
education curriculum to include criteria to diagnose Gender Dysphoria according the latest psychiatric classifications,
referring to WPATH guidelines.
51. The Compilation Part D also includes a Florida Act, 2023 relating to treatments for sex reassignment surgery
and Florida Senate bill that would ban puberty blockers for transgender minors. The said Act and Bill are being heavily
criticized and condemned by medical practitioners and the LGBTQIA community alike.
52. The adoption of Fla. Admin. Code R. 59G-1.050(7), which prohibits Medicaid coverage of medically necessary
treatments for gender dysphoria, is also under challenge before the United States District Court For The Northern
District of Florida, Tallahassee Division in Augist Dekker V. Jason Weida (Case No. 4 : 22-cv-00325-RH-MAF).
Professional medical and mental health organizations including WPATH have made a representation in support of the
challenge, providing necessary scientific data debunking myths around gender affirming medical intervention, stating:
"Gender-affirming care is care that supports individuals with gender dysphoria as they explore their gender
identity-in contrast with efforts to change the individual's gender identity to match their sex assigned at birth,
which are known to be ineffective and harmful. For adolescents with persistent gender dysphoria that worsens with
the onset of puberty, gender-affirming care may include medical interventions to align their physiology with their
gender identity. Empirical evidence indicates that gender-affirming care, including gender-affirming medical
interventions, in carefully evaluated patients who meet diagnostic criteria can alleviate clinically significant distress
and lead to significant improvements in the mental health and overall well-being of adolescents with gender
dysphoria.'
53. WPATH has, in a recent public statement, supported Gender-Affirming interventions and condemned the
emergency regulation issued by Missouri Attorney General stating that the same is based upon manipulated statistics,
flawed reports, and incomplete data, and prevents the provision of medically necessary care.
54. The reliance placed by NCPCR on articles claiming risks and harms of gender-affirming healthcare is in complete
derogation of WPATH guidelines, which are well recognized and followed in India. Reliance on such articles furthers the
stigma against transgender persons and supports the unscientific claims to deny transgender adolescents gender
affirming healthcare which is a statutory obligation of the State under the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights)
Act and Rules.
Vaibhav Jain V. Union of India
Supreme Court of India
Vaibhav Jain and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
T.C. (C) No. 10 of 2023
Decided on April 25, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Shally Bhasin Advocate on Record for the Petitioners
INDEX
S. NO.
PARTICULARS
1.
WRITTEN NOTE OF ARGUMENTS IN T.C. (C) NO. 10 OF 2023
2.
National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home Affairs, [2000] 4 LRC 292
-
Constitutional Court of South Africa
"If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would
be no more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing
mankind. John Stuart Mill
The tendency of society is normally to impose, by other means than civil penalties, its own ideas and practices
as rule of conduct on those who dissent from them, to fetter the development and, if possible, prevent the
formation of any individuality not in harmony with its ways and compel all characters to fashion themselves upon
the model of its own." - John Stuart Mill
1. BACKGROUND
1.1 P-1 is an Indian Citizen, married to P-2, an OCI Cardholder
1.2 Married in 2017 under US Law; 4-months old daughter. But their valid marriage is not recognized and
invisible in India.
2. 23rd LAW COMMISSION REPORT
2.1 Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("SMA") applied only when both parties were Indian Citizens: to fill the
lacuna, the 23rd Law Commission recommended introduction of a new legislation Foreign Marriage Act ("FMA"),
which will apply when at least one party is Indian.
2.2 Object:
a.) To provide for solemnization of marriages outside India where atleast 1 party is an Indian citizen.
b.) To enable such parties to obtain matrimonial reliefs in India.
2.3 Enabling Provision: Mode of marriage under FMA is in addition not supersession.
3. FOREIGN MARRIAGE ACT 1969
3.1. The sole criteria to fall under FMA is Indian Citizenship.
3.2 FMA Provides for both solemnization + registration.
3.3 Sections 4, 11, 17, 27
3.4 Section 17 (Registration) - Marriage to be valid as per foreign law + Consistent with international law and
comity of nations
4. RIGHTS OF CITIZEN UNDER FMA
4.1 FMA provides for recognition of marriage of Indian citizen (s) outside India as facet of his citizenship.
4.2 In this case, P-1 is entitled to protection of Part III under FMA as Fundamental Rights travel with
citizens.
4.3 P-1 has the right to choose his partner. Discrimination on the ground of sex, sexual orientation and gender of
his partner is violative of his inherent human rights and Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15, 19
and 21.
5. CONCEPT OF 'MARRIAGE' AND 'FAMILY'
5.1 Marriage: Social institution which is older than 'Bill of Rights' (Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644). Marriage
has been an expansive, evolutionary & inclusive concept. Inter-racial, inter-caste, inter-religious marriages have
been allowed and recognized. (Refer Art. 15)
5.2. Rights & Benefits conferred on Married Person: Inheritance, Adoption, Succession. Spouse of Indian
Citizen.' OCI Cardholder entitled to apply for citizenship u.'S 7A Citizenship Act, 1955.
5.3 DV Act even protects live-in relationships. As early as in 1978, in Badri Prasad V. Dy. Director of
couples and the concept of "de facto marriage" to afford protection to a class of persons who were being treated
unjustly. Such right has been time and again reaffirmed by this Hon'ble Court (See : S.P.S. Balasubramanyam V.
5.4 Marriage of the Petitioner is already valid for 6 years. Their family can't be a nullity in India.
Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere" - Martin Luther King
6. COMITY OF NATIONS
6.1 Sec. 17 (3): Local laws of foreign country, international law & comity of nations.
6.2 Black's Law: "'Comity," in the legal sense, is neither a matter of absolute obligation, on the one hand, nor of
mere courtesy and goodwill, upon the other. But it is the recognition which one nation allows within its territory to
the legislative, executive, or judicial acts of another nation, having due regard both to international duty and
convenience, and to the rights of its own citizens, or of other persons who are under the protection of its laws."
6.3 Scheme of FMA is to respect international law & comity of nations. (Evident from S. 17 as well as from
the Law Commission Report)
6.4 Yogyakarta Principles: Have been referred to, relied upon and accepted in Navtej Singh Johan V. UOI
6.5 In Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 3011, Alcon Electronics (P) Ltd. V. Celem S.A. of France,
recognized in Indian jurisprudence. (See S. 13, CPC)
6.6 Specific Submission: Comity of nations in context of same-sex marriage is recognition of Constitutional,
inalienable rights of Indian Citizens in a progressive democracy like ours.
6.7 Constitutional Comity: P-1's Fundamental rights are no less than those of others in any free, progressive
democracy.
7. JUDGMENTS
7.1 Judgments which are being relied upon are where same-sex marriage has been recognized through judicial
intervention and where Courts have 'read-in' the statutes to recognize same-sex marriages.
7.1 Constitutional Courts of (1). South Africa in (a.) National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister
of Home Affairs, [2000] 4 LRC 292 & in (b.) Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT 60.'04 (2). Austria in G-
258-259 of 2017) & (3.) United States of America in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644, etc. have given
progressive interpretation to constitutional rights of citizens while 'reading-in' the statutes.
8. WORKABILITY
8.1 S. 4(c), 13(2) and 18(2)(b) FMA can be read and interpreted in gender-neutral fashion.
manner which is Constitutionally-Compliant
9. CONCLUSION
9.1 A Child born to heterosexual parents can have a homosexual orientation and a child borne to homosexual
parents can have a heterosexual orientation. Children of same-sex couples need not necessarily have the same
sexual orientation as that of their parents. Sexuality. Sexual Orientation of parents have no bearing on Sexuality.
Sexual Orientation of the children.
9.2 FMA is for citizens who get married outside India. Being an Indian citizen, P-1 is entitled to the same
rights as an opposite-sex couple.
9.3 FMA is pari materia to SMA. Similar interpretation as to same-sex marriages is required to be followed.
"Marriage is a magic word. And it is magic throughout the world. It has to do with our dignity as human
beings, to be who we are openly." - Edie Windsor
Neither love nor terror makes one blind : indifference makes one blind."
-
Author James Baldwin
South Africa
National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home Affairs
Constitutional Court
Chaskalson P, Langa D-P, Ackermann, Goldstone, Madala, Mokgoro, Ngcobo, O'Regan, Sachs, Yacoob JJ and
Cameron AgJ
17 August, 2 December 1999
(1)
Constitutional law - Fundamental rights - Right to equality - Right to respect for dignity - Freedom from
discrimination - Statutory provision for immigration of 'spouses' of South African residents - Whether
discriminating against same-sex couples - Whether infringing right to respect for dignity - Whether
unconstitutional Impact of discrimination on affected group - Whether reasonable and justifiable -Aliens
Control Act, 1991, S 25(5) - Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1996, SS 9, 10.
(2)
Statute - Interpretation - Principles - Avoidance of constitutional inconsistency - 'Spouse' - Whether 'spouse'
to be construed as including same-sex partners - Whether constitutional issue ripe for determination - Aliens
Control Act, 1991, S 25(5).
(3) Constitutional law - Fundamental rights - Enforcement - Remedies - 'Reading-in' - Statutory provision under-
inclusive - Omission rendering provision unconstitutional - Whether reading-in words appropriate relief
-
Relevant considerations - Aliens Control Act, 1991, S 25 (5) - Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
1996, SS 38, 172(1)(b).
1. The leighth-to-thirteenth applicants were South African citizens who were in permanent same-sex life
partnerships with, respectively, the second-to-seventh applicants. The second-to-seventh applicants were not South
African citizens. Section 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 allowed the 'spouses' of South African citizens to apply
for and subsequently gain authorisation for immigration permits. From January 1998 the Department of Home Affairs
pursued a policy of blanket refusals to foreign same-sex partners seeking immigration permits on the basis of their
relationships. The applicants contended that it was unconstitutional to allow the immigration of spouses of South
African citizens but not to afford the same benefits to same-sex permanent life partners. The High Court found that
the differential treatment was inconsistent with the equality guarantee in S 9 of the Constitution on the grounds that
sexual orientation was one of the enumerated grounds in S 9(3) and that any differentiation was consequently
presumed to be unfair unless the contrary was shown. The court fund, however, that the word 'spouse' in S 25(5)
could not reasonably be interpreted to include same-sex life partners and consequently that it was not in a position to
read this interpretation into the terms of S 25(5). Its orden was therefore in the terms that the invalidity of S 25(5)
would be suspended for 12 months to give the legislature time to correct the inconsistency. The applicants appealed
against this second part of the High Court order and the respondents appealed against the order in full, contending
that as a sovereign independent state, South Africa was lawfully entitled to exclude any foreign nationals from the
Republic. This discretion, it was contended, was beyond the reach of the Constitution and the courts. The respondents
further argued that any discrimination faced was not as a result of the applicants' sexual orientation but on the
grounds that they were 'non-spouses' and that that was not an enumerated ground in S 9(3) or, in the alternative,
that, even if the discrimination was on the basis of non-marital status, there was no relevant discrimination as there
was nothing, other than their own choice, stopping the applicants from engaging in marriage with a person of the
opposite sex and thus becoming spouses.
HELD. Applicants' appeal allowed; S 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 to be read with 'or partner, in a
permanent same-sex life partnership' added after 'spouse'; respondents' appeal dismissed.
(1) The limitation imposed by S 25(5) constituted overlapping or intersecting discrimination on the grounds of
sexual orientation and marital status as enumerated in S 9(3) of the Constitution. It also offended against the
right to respect for human dignity in S 10. The unfairness of discrimination had to be considered on the basis of
its context and impact on the complainant or members of the affected group; discrimination did not take place in
discrete areas of the law, hermetically sealed from one another, where each aspect of discrimination was to be
examined and its impact evaluated in isolation. It followed that discrimination could take place on a number of
overlapping grounds and to disregard this amounted to a misconception of the reality of discrimination as it was
experienced by individuals. Section 25(5) discriminated against gays and lesbians on the grounds of sexual
orientation because it did not extend to the only form of conjugal relationship in which they were able to
participate in harmony with their sexual orientation, and on grounds of marital status as that status was required
to qualify for the benefit. The argument that lesbians and gays could nevertheless marry someone of the
opposite sex was a meaningless abstraction that ignored the constitutional injunction that gays and lesbians
could not be discriminated against on the grounds of their sexual orientation and the constitutional right to
express that orientation in a relationship of their own choosing. The discrimination caused by S 25 could not
reasonably be justified in an open and democratic society based on human dignity, equality and freedom as
expressed in S 36(1) of the Constitution. The aim of S 25 was to protect and benefit family life and the traditional
institution of marriage. Societal and legal concepts of what family life comprised had undergone transformation
and marriage could no longer be considered as its only manifestation. The family life which gays and lesbians
were capable of establishing with their foreign national same-sex partners was in all significant respects
indistinguishable from that of heterosexual married couples and was equally as important to gay and lesbian
same-sex partners. Therefore, there was no rational connection between the exclusion of same-sex life partners
from the benefits under S 25(5) and the government interest sought to be achieved thereby. To so exclude them
implied that they did not have the inherent dignity or human respect accorded to heterosexuals and their
relationships. This discrimination occurred at a deeply intimate level of human existence and denied to gays and
lesbians the protection of the fundamental constitutional concepts of equality and dignity. Although it had been
argued for the respondents that the state had absolute discretion beyond reach of the Constitution to exclude
aliens, the case properly fell to be decided upon the basis of whether the rights of the citizen applicants had been
unconstitutionally infringed. However, on the objective theory of constitutionality, a litigant with standing could
properly rely on the objective unconstitutionality of a statute for the relief sought, even though the right
unconstitutionally infringed was not that of the litigant in question but of some other person. Therefore the non-
citizen applicants as well as their citizen partners, were entitled to rely on the unconstitutional infringement of
the rights of the citizens (see paras 29, 35, 36, 38-42, 47, 54-56, 59, post). National Coalition for Gay and
Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Justice, [1998] 3 LRC 648 applied. Dicta of Sachs J in National Coalition for Gay
and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Justice, [1998] 3 LRC 648 and of Heureux-Dube J in Canada (A-G) V. Mossop,
[1994] 2 LRC 436 applied. Rattigan V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, [1994] 1 LRC 343, Salem V. Chief
Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, [1994] 1 LRC 354 and Kohlhaas V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, 1998
(3) SA 1142 considered.
(2) Inconsistency with the Constitution could not be avoided by adopting an interpretation of the word 'spouse' in S
25(5) of the Act so as to include same-sex life partners. The principle of constitutional interpretation that, where
possible, a statute should be construed in a way that did not give rise to constitutional inconsistency could not
be applied where it would distort the meaning of the provision in question. The text had to be reasonably capable
of having the meaning purporting to be attributed to it. Spouse, in its ordinary sense connoted either a wife or a
husband. The context of S 25(5) did not suggest a wider meaning. Furthermore, there was no indication that the
word 'marriage' in the Act extended any further than its normal meaning. Accordingly, the applicants were
unable in law to pursue a non-constitutional remedy on the basis of a possible interpretation of the word
'spouse' Therefore the respondents' argument that the constitutional issue was not ripe for hearing had rightly
been dismissed by the High Court (see paras 23, 25-26, post). Fitzpatrick (AP) V. Sterling Housing Association
Ltd, [2000] 3 LRC 294 and Quilter V. A-G, [1998] 3 LRC 119 applied.
(3) It was permissible to read words into a statute which was found to be under-inclusive to render it constitutional.
Whereas the presence of wording that offended against the Constitution might have been cured by the tool of
notional severance, this could not be employed to correct an omission in a statute. Instead, the only logical
equivalent was the device of reading-in, a position which was supported by international authority. In reading
text into a statute, a court was required to balance the obligation to provide just and equitable appropriate
relief, under SS 38 and 172(1)(b) of the Constitution, with the deference owed to the legislature. Thus, a court
had to endeavour to be as faithful as possible to the legislative scheme of the statute in question within the
constraints of the Constitution and could not read in words that might result in an unsupportable budgetary
intrusion. Further, any extension by a court of a statutory provision needed to be capable of being defined with
sufficient precision so as to ensure compliance with the Constitution. Whether reading-in words was an
appropriate remedy would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. In the instant case, the court
sought to vindicate the rights of permanent same-sex life partners to establish a family unit. Whilst the striking
down of S 25(5) would have resulted in depriving spouses from the benefits conferred by the section, the
government's policy behind the S 25(5) benefit would be left intact by a reading-in remedy and the budgetary
implications would be small. The words 'or partner, in a permanent same-sex life partnership.' were therefore to
be read-in after the word 'spouse' in S 25(5). Permanent meant an established intention of the parties to cohabit
with one another permanently (see paras 63-66, 68, 74-77, 80-82, 86, 71, 72, post). Schachter V. Canada,
(1992) 93 DLR (4th) 1 applied. Miron V. Trudel, (1995) 124 DLR (4th) 693, El AI Israel Airlines Ltd V. Danilowitz
(Case 721/94, unreported), Califano, Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare V. Westcott, (1979) 443 US 76
and Iowa-Des Moines National Bank V. Bennett, (1931) 284 US 239 considered.
2. [Editors' note: Section 25 of the Aliens Control Act, 1991, so far as material, is set out at para 15, post.
3. Sections 9, 10, 38 and 172 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1996, so far as material, are set
out at paras 30, 65, 69, post.
Cases referred to in judgment
18 BVerfGE, 288
22 BVerfGE 349
Adams V. Howerton, (1982) 673 F 2d 1036, US Ct of Apps (9th Circuit)
Bernstein V. Bester NNO, [1996] 4 LRC 528, 1996 (2) SA 751, SA CC
Bivens V. Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bureau of Narcotics, (1971) 493 US 388, US SC
Braschi V. Stahl Associates Co, (1989) 74 NY 2d 201
Califano, Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare V. Westcott, (1979) 443 US 76, US SC
Canada (A-G) V. Mossop, [1994] 2 LRC 436, (1993) 100 DLR (4th) 658, Can SC
Dawood V. Minister of Home Affairs (Case 12745.'98, unreported), SA
De Lange V. Smuts NO, [1999] 2 LRC 598, 1998 (3) SA 785, SA CC
Egan V. Canada, (1995) 29 CRR (2d) 79, (1995) 124 DLR (4th) 690, Can SC
El AI Israel Airlines Ltd V. Danilowitz (Case 721/94, unreported), Israel HC
Executive Council, Western Cape Legislature V. President of the Republic of South Africa, 1995 (4) SA 877, 1995
(10) BCLR 1289, SA CC
Ferreira V. Levin NO; Vryenhoek V. Powell NO, [1996] 3 LRC 527, 1996 (1) SA 984, SA CC
Fitzpatrick (AP) V. Sterling Housing Association Ltd, [2000] 3 LRC 294, [1999] 4 All ER 705, UK HL
Fong Yue Ting V. United States, 698 US (1893), US SC
Fose V. Minister of Safety and Security, [1998] 1 LRC 198, 1997 (3) SA 786, SA CC
Galvanv Press, (1954) 347 US 522, US SC
Grobbelaar V. Havenga, 1964 (3) SA 522, SA Natal Prov Div
Harksen V. Lane NO, [1998] 2 LRC 171, 1998 (1) SA 300, SA CC
Herold V. Sinclair, 1954 (2) SA 531, SA AC
Hugo V. President of the Republic of South Africa, [1998] 1 LRC 662, 1997 (4) SA 1, SA CC
Iowa-Des Moines National Bank V. Bennett, (1931) 284 US 239, US SC
JT Publishing (Pty) Ltd V. Minister of Safety and Security, 1997 (3) SA 514, 1996 (12) BCLR 1599, SA CC
Knodel V. British Columbia (Medical Services Commission), (1991) 91 CLLC, 58 BCLR (2d) 356, Can SC
Kohlhaas V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, 1998 (3) SA 1142, Zim SC
Larbi-Odam V. Member of the Executive Council for Education (North-West Province), [1998] 2 LRC 505, 1998
(1) SA 745, SA CC
Law V. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), (1999) 170 DLR (4th) 1, Can SC
Mv. H, [1999] 4 LRC 551, sub nom A-G for Ontario V. M, (1999) 171 DLR (4th) 577, Can SC
Madnitsky V. Rosenberg, 1949 (2) SA 392 (A)
Member of the Executive Council for Development Planning and Local Government, Gautengv Democratic Party
1998 (4) SA 1157, 1998 (7) BCLR 855, SA CC
Miron V. Trudel, (1995) 124 DLR (4th) 693, Can SC
Myburgh Transport V. Botha t/a SA Truck Bodies 1991 (3) SA 310, Nam SC
Naidenov V. Minister of Home Affairs, 1995 (7) BCLR 891 (T)
National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home Affairs, 1999 (3) SA 173, 1999 (3) BCLR 280
National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Justice, [1998] 3 LRC 648, 1999 (1) SA 6, 1998
(12) BCLR 1517, SA CC
Nelles V. Ontario, (1989) 60 DLR (4th) 609
New National Party of South Africa V. Government of the Republic of South Africa, 1999 (3) SA 191, 1999 (5)
BCLR 489, SA CC
Nilbati Behera V. State of Orissa, [1994] 2 LRC 99, Ind SC
Nishimura Ekiu V. United States, (1892) 142 US 651, US SC
Parbhoo V. Getz NO, [1998] 2 LRC 159, 1997 (4) SA 1095, SA CC
Parekh V. Minister of Home Affairs, 1996 (2) SA 710, SA Durban and Coast Local Div
Peter V. Minister of Law and Order, 1990 (4) SA 6, SA Eastern Cape Div
Premier, Mpumalangav Executive Committee, Association of State-Aided Schools, Eastern Transvaal 1999 (2) SA
91, 1999 (2) BCLR 151, SA CC
President, Ordinary Court Martial V. Freedom of Expression Institute, 1999 (11) BCLR 1219, SA CC
Pretoria City Council V. Walker, 1998 (2) SA 363, 1998 (3) BCLR 257, SA CC
Quilter V. A-G, [1998] 3 LRC 119, [1998] 1 NZLR 523, NZ CA
RV. Zockey, 1945 AD 505
Rattigan V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, [1994] 1 LRC 343, 1995 (2) SA 182, Zim SC
Rodriguez V. British Columbia (A-G), [1994] 2 LRC 136, (1994) 107 DLR (4th) 342, Can SC
Salem V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, [1994] 1 LRC 354, 1995 (4) SA 280, Zim SC
Schachterv Canada, (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 1, Can SC
Shalabi V. Minister of Home Affairs (Case 13503/98, unreported)
Skinner V. Oklahoma, (1942) 316 US 535, US SC
State V. Bequinot, 1997 (2) SA 887, 1996 (12) BCLR 1588, SA CC
State V. Makwanyane, [1995] 1 LRC 269, 1995 (3) SA 391, SA CC
State V. Mhlungu, [1995] 2 LRC 503, 1995 (3) SA 867, SA CC
Thomas V. Minister of Home Affairs (Case 13435/98, unreported)
Tsotetsi V. Mutual & Federal Insurance Co Ltd, 1997 (1) SA 585, 1996 (11) BCLR 1439, SA CC
Vriendv Alberta, [1998] 3 LRC 483, (1998) 156 DLR (4th) 385, Can SC
Ward V. Sulzer, 1973 (3) SA 701, SA AC
Welsh V. United States, (1970) 398 US 333, US SC
Zantsi V. Council of State, Ciskei, 1995 (4) SA 615, 1995 (10) BCLR 1424, SA CC
Legislation referred to in judgment
Canada
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 1982, is 15(1)
Family Law Act, RSO 1990, Pt 111
South Africa
Aliens Control Act, 1991, Ch 111, SS 1(1), 23, 24(1), 25, 26, 28, 29
Basic Conditions of Employment Act, 1997, S 27(2)(c)(i)
Child Care Act, 1983, S 17(b)
Companies Act, 1973, is 417(2)(b)
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1993, SS 7(4)(a), 8(2)
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1996, SS 9, 10, 19, 21(3), (4), 22, 36(1), 38, 39(1), (2), 167(5),
172, 187
Constitutional Court Complementary Act, 1995, S 8(1)(b)
Constitutional Court Rules, rr 15(2)(4), 29, 30(1)
Employment Equity Act, 1998, S 1
Housing Act, 1997, S 8(6) (e) (iii) (aa)
Immigration Quota Act, 1930, S 3(1) (b)
Independent Broadcasting Authority Act, 1993, SS 5(1)(e), (f)
Independent Media Commission Act, 1993, S 6(1)
Lotteries Act, 1997
Medical Schemes Act, 1998
Road Traffic Management Corporation Act, 1999, SS 10(2), 15(9)
South African Civil Aviation Authority Act, 1998, SS 9(4), 11(5)(b)
Special Pensions Act, 1996, S 31 Supreme Court Act, 1959, S 22(1)
Other sources referred to in judgment
Baloro 'Immigration and Emigration' in Joubert The Law of South Africa (Lawsa) (1st reissue, 1998) vol 11 para
39 m 1
Caminker 'A Norm-Based Remedial Model for Under-inclusive Statutes' (1985- 86) 95 Yale LJ 1185
Chaskalson Constitutional Law of South Africa (3rd revision service, 1998) pp 8-15
Duclos and Roach 'Constitutional Remedies as Constitutional Hints-A
Comment on RV. Schachter', (1991) 36 McGill LJ 1 Hogg
Constitutional Law of Canada (3rd edn, 1992) p 910, para 37.1(h), paras 52.6(a) and(b)
Jennings and Watts Oppenheim's International Law, (9th edn, 1997) vol 1, pp 897-899
Lin 'Social Norms and Judicial Decision-making : Examining the Role of Narratives in Same-Sex Adoption
Cases' (1999) 99 Col LR 739 at 741-742
Martin 'Refugees and Migration' in Christopher C Joyner (ed)
The United Nations and International Law (1997) p 155
Miller 'Constitutional Remedies for Underinclusive Statutes : A Critical Appraisal of Heckler V. Mathews' in (1985)
20 Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties LR 79
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993)
Sinclair and Heaton The Law of Marriage Vol 1 (1996) pp 6, 7, 422
Tribe American Constitutional Law (2nd edn, 1988) p 82 Walzer
Spheres of Justice : A Defence of Pluralism and Equality (1983) p xiii
Appeal
4. The applicants, the National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality, Sven Patrik Alberding, Fiona Jane Liebe
Saunders Watson, Malcolm Clive North, Franck Andre Charles Joly, Linda Aoudia, Argyris Sotiris Argyrou, Clint Lewis
Tatchell, Lucinda Slingsby, Steven Mark Le Grange, Hilton Marc Kaplan, Christine Hazebroucq, Jacobus Johannes De
Wet Steyn and the Commission for Gender Equality appealed in part against a decision of the Cape of Good Hope High
Court (Davis J, Conradie J and Knoll AJ) granting an order of invalidity against a statutory provision which was
suspended for a year. The respondents, the Minister for Home Affairs, the Deputy Minister for Home Affairs and the
Director-General of Home Affairs appealed against the whole of the decision of that court. The facts are set out in the
judgment of the court.
W Trengove SC and A Katz for the applicants.
EM Patel SC, KD Moroka and TP Dhalamini for the respondents.
2 December 1999. The following judgment of the court was delivered.
ACKERMANN J.
Introduction
5. This matter raises two important questions. The first is whether it is unconstitutional for immigration law to
facilitate the immigration into South Africa of the spouses of permanent South African residents but not to afford the
same benefits to gays and lesbians in permanent same-sex life partnerships with permanent South African residents.
The second is whether, when it concludes that provisions in a statute are unconstitutional, the court may read words
into the statute to remedy the unconstitutionality. These questions arise from the provisions of S 25(5) of the Aliens
Control Act, 1991 (the 'Act') and the application of the provisions of S 172(I)(b) of the 1996 Constitution (the
'Constitution') should S 25(5) be found to be inconsistent with the Constitution. Section 25(5) reads:
'Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (4), but subject to the provisions of subsections (3) and (6), a
regional committee may, upon application by the spouse or the dependent child of a person permanently and
lawfully resident in the Republic, authorize the issue of an immigration permit.'
6. Section 25(5) was declared constitutionally invalid and consequential relief granted by the Cape of Good Hope
High Court (the 'High Court') (per Davis J, Conradie J and Knoll AJ concurring) in the form of the following order. (The
judgment is reported as National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home Affairs, 1999 (3) BCLR
280:
'1. Section 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 is declared invalid to the extent that the benefit conferred
exclusively on spouses is inconsistent with is 9(3) in that on the grounds of sexual orientation it discriminates
against same-sex life partners;
2. the declaration of invalidity of S 25(5) is suspended for a period of twelve months from the date of confirmation
of this order to enable parliament to correct the inconsistency;
3. the exclusion of same-sex life partners from the benefits conferred by S 25(5) of the Constitution constitutes
special circumstances requiring the grant of an application for exemption made in terms of S 28(2) of the Act by
a
same-sex life partner of a person permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic. This part of the order shall
remain in force for as long as it takes Parliament to correct the inconsistency;
4. under S 172(2)(b) of the Constitution second and further applicants are exempted, in terms of S 28(2) of the Act,
from the provisions of S 23 thereof;
5. no action may be taken against them in terms of the Act arising out of their living, working or studying in the
Republic.
Respondents are ordered to, jointly and severally pay the applicants' costs including the cost of two counsel.
7. This order was made pursuant to an application by the fourteen appellants/applicants (hereinafter referred to as
the 'applicants') against the three respondents, namely the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the Director-General of
Home Affairs (hereinafter referred to collectively as the 'respondents' and individually as the 'Minister', the 'Deputy
Minister' and the 'DG' respectively) in which the applicants sought an order in the following terms:
'1. Reviewing and setting aside or correcting the decision of the First Respondent to deny the Seventh Applicant an
extension of the exemption granted on 23 April 1997 in terms of S 28(2) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991, as
amended, in consequence of his abiding same-sex relationship with the Thirteenth Applicant; and
2. Reviewing and setting aside or correcting the decision of the First Respondent to deny the Second to Sixth
Applicants an exemption in terms of S 28(2) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991, as amended, in consequence of
their abiding same-sex relationships with the Eighth to Twelfth Applicants respectively; and
3. Reviewing and setting aside or correcting the decision of the First Respondent, alternatively the Third
Respondent, that special circumstances no longer exist in terms of S 28(2) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 as
amended, to accommodate the same-sex life partners of South African citizens involved in committed
relationships; and
4. Directing the Third Respondent to accept, process and refer the applications of the Second to Seventh Applicants
for an immigration permit in terms of S 25(2) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 as amended on terms no less
favourable than those applicable to married couples under Section 25 of the Act, to the appropriate Immigrants'
Selection Board for consideration;
5. Declaring S 25 of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 as amended, to be inconsistent with the provisions of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act, 1996, and therefore invalid to the extent of its inconsistency;
6. Directing the First Respondent to extend the exemptions already granted to the Seventh Applicant in terms of S
28(2) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 as amended, pending any amendment to the Aliens Control Act to comply
with the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act, 1996;
7.
Directing the First Respondent to grant to the Second to Sixth Applicants exemptions in terms of S 28(2) of the
Aliens Control Act, 1991 as amended, pending any amendment to the Aliens Control Act to comply with the
provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act, 1996;
8. Declaring that the failure of the First Respondent to recognise committed same-sex relationships as a special
circumstance in terms of S 28(2) of the Act [is] unconstitutional
8. The applicants have appealed to this court under the provisions of S 172(2)(d) of the Constitution (read with S 8
(1) (b) of the Constitutional Court Complementary Act, 1995 (the 'CCC Act') and r 15(2) of this court) seeking a
variation of the order granted by the High Court. They have simultaneously applied for confirmation (under the
provisions of S 172(2)(d). read with SS 172(2)(a) and 167(5) of the Constitution, and read with S 8(1)(b) of the CCC
Act and r 15(4)) of the whole order, except those parts against which the appeal is brought and 'those parts of the
order, if any, which are not subject to confirmation by this court in terms of SS 167(5) and 172(2) of the
Constitution/The respondents then appealed against the entire judgment and order of the High Court.
The High Court's refusal of a postponement to the respondents
9. The respondents did not file any answering affidavits in the High Court. Less than twenty-four hours before the
matter was due to be heard by the High Court, the respondents sought a postponement of the hearing. They tendered
costs on the attorney and client scale, coupled with an undertaking that the status quo with regard to the second to
thirteenth applicants would persist until the final determination of the matter. The purpose was, according to the
respondents, to-
'file comprehensive answering affidavits, as this Honourable Court would otherwise be left with little assistance
regarding the purpose and practical implementation of the statutory provisions in question and the Government's
reasons for opposing this application. These include issues of ripeness and the meaning, nature and purpose of the
fundamental rights on which the Applicants rely, any issues of justification which arise, and the nature of the
interim and final relief described in the Applicants' heads of argument...'
10. The High Court refused the application for postponement.
11. The relevant surrounding facts are detailed in the judgment of the High Court and need not be repeated here;
their gist is summarised in the following passage of Davis J's judgment:
In this case the respondents were served with the applicants' papers some seven months before the matter
came before this court. Persistent efforts were made by the applicants to remind the respondents of their
obligations not only to this court but ultimately to the Constitutional Court. No explanation was provided as to why
the respondents had chosen to ignore the proceedings for more than seven months. Mr Mokoena's [the DG's]
affidavit simply states that the cabinet decided the day before the hearing that the application should be opposed
and that important matters were raised/(at 287.)
12. Davis J also correctly pointed out that this court has made it clear (in Parbhoo V. Getz NO, [1998] 2 LRC 159 at
para 5, which was decided seven months before the application in the present matter was launched) that any evidence
that the state considers relevant to an issue of the constitutional invalidity of a statutory provision ought to be
adduced before the High Court first hearing the matter (at 286-287). The learned judge held that such consideration,
however important, did not in itself justify the granting of a postponement which had to be based on clear principle.
Davis J pointed out that no reasons at all had been furnished for the respondents' failure to observe the rules of court,
that they had treated their obligations to the court with disdain and had ignored the rights of the applicants to
a
resolution of their claims and that accordingly the application had been dismissed (at 287-288).
13. The respondents sought in this court to revisit the refusal of this application in two ways. First, they applied on
notice of motion for an order with, amongst others, the following terms:
'1. Condoning the [respondents'] failure to file their Answering Affidavit in the Court a quo;
2. Granting the [respondents] leave to file their Answering Affidavit together with the annexures thereto;
3. Alternatively to prayer 2 above, remitting the matter to the court a quo for rehearing of the application;
14. If the relief sought in para 2 of the above notice of motion were to be granted, their founding affidavit in the
application in this court would stand as answering affidavit in the High Court application. The respondents did not
attempt to make out a case, non argue, for the reception of the founding affidavit as new evidence on appeal,
(Constitutional Court r 29 read with S 22(1) of the Supreme Court Act, 1959) or as material falling under
Constitutional Court rule 30(1). (Rule 30(1) provides: Any party to any proceedings before the court and an amicus
curiae properly admitted by the court in any proceedings shall be entitled, in documents lodged with the registrar in
terms of these rules, to canvass factual material which is relevant to the determination of the issues before the court
and which do not specifically appear on the record : Provided that such facts-(a) are common cause or otherwise
incontrovertible; or, (b) are of an official, scientific, technical or statistical nature capable of easy verification.')
15. Secondly, and in the alternative to the above, they applied for an amendment of their notice of appeal in order
to introduce a further ground of appeal, namely, that the High Court 'in exercising its discretion erred in rejecting the
[respondents'] application for postponement/The effect of this would be to set aside the orders made by the High
Court and to have the matter remitted to the High Court, either to reconsider the application for the filing of an
answering affidavit or to reconsider the application in the light of the respondents' answering affidavit. Although there
is a brief passing reference to the former application in the respondents' written argument, neither application was
even alluded to in the respondents' oral argument in this court, despite the fact that both applications were
comprehensively and vigorously opposed in the applicants' written argument, in which both are characterised as being
without merit, constituting an abuse and their dismissal sought with costs on an attorney and own client scale.
16. Both these applications have, as their ultimate objective, the nullification of the High Court order and a re-
hearing of the issue on the basis of the respondents' answering affidavit. The first application is wholly misconceived.
Short of setting aside on appeal an order made by another court and substituting a different order, this court has no
jurisdiction to make an order on behalf of another court properly seized of a matter or to condone, on behalf of such
court, non-compliance with the rules of procedure to which such court is subject. The second application and the
ground of appeal which it seeks to introduce are without merit for the reasons which follow.
17. A court of appeal is not entitled to set aside the decision of a lower court granting or refusing a postponement
in the exercise of its discretion merely because the court of appeal would itself, on the facts of the matter before the
lower court, have come to a different conclusion; it may interfere only when it appears that the lower court had not
exercised its discretion judicially, or that it had been influenced by wrong principles or a misdirection on the facts, or
that it had reached a decision which in the result could not reasonably have been made by a court properly directing
itself to all the relevant facts and principles. (See R V. Zackey, 1945 AD 505 at 511-512, Madnitsky V. Rosenberg,
1949 (2) SA 392 at 398-399, and Myburgh Transport V. Botha t/a SA Truck Bodies, 1991 (3) SA 310 at 314-315 and
the authorities there cited). On its face, the complaint embodied in the ground of appeal sought to be introduced by
the amendment does not meet this test because it alleges only an error in the exercise of its discretion by the High
Court. Even assuming, however, that such ground correctly formulates the test which would permit interference by
this court, the respondents have got nowhere near to establishing such a ground, on the facts before the High Court.
No such vitiating error on the part of the High Court was contended for by the respondents in their written or oral
argument before this court and none can, on the papers, be found. In fact I am of the view that the High Court
correctly dismissed the application for good and substantial reasons and that both the applications in this court
relating to such dismissal ought to be refused. The question of the appropriate costs order will be dealt with at the
conclusion of this judgment.
The statutory framework and relevant facts
18. Before reaching the constitutional issue in this matter it is necessary to consider the contentions raised by the
respondents that the High Court should not have decided the issue of the constitutional validity of S 25(5) because it
was not ripe for decision. But even this preliminary issue requires a consideration of the statutory framework and the
facts relevant to the issue to be determined.
19. As its long title indicates, the Act is wide-ranging and provides for 'the control of the admission of persons to,
their residence in, and their departure from, the Republic; and for matters connected therewith/For purposes of the
present case it is sufficient to refer to Chapter 111, which deals with residence in the Republic and domicile, and to
certain of its relevant provisions. Section 24(1) of the Act establishes an Immigrants Selection Board which consists of
the central committee and at least one regional committee (a 'regional committee') for each of the provinces of the
Republic. An important provision, for the purposes of this case, is S 23 which deals with 'aliens', an 'alien' being
defined in S 1(1) as 'a person who is not a South African citizen', and which provides as follows:
'Subject to the provisions of SS 28 and 29, no alien shall-(a) enter or sojourn in the Republic with a view to
permanent residence therein, unless he or she is in possession of an immigration permit issued to him or her in
terms of S 25; or
(b) enter or sojourn in the Republic with a view to temporary residence therein, unless he or she is in possession
of a permit for temporary residence issued to him or her in terms of S 26.
20. For present purposes the exceptions enacted in S 29 are not germane, but the exemptions provided for in S 28
are, and to the extent relevant stipulate:
'28(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, the Minister may, if he or she is satisfied that there are special
circumstances which justify his or her decision, exempt any person or category of persons from the provisions of S
23, and for a specified or unspecified period and subject to such conditions as the Minister may impose, and may do
so also with retrospective effect
(4) The Minister may withdraw any exemption granted under subsection (2).
(5) The Minister may, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this Act, issue to any person whose
exemption is withdrawn under subsection (4), an appropriate temporary residence permit referred to in section 26
to sojourn in the Republic or any particular part of the Republic/
21.
It is in the above legislative context that the provisions of S 25 must be understood and evaluated:
'25. Immigration Permit
(1) [An application by an alien for an immigration permit is to be submitted to the DG.]
(2) [Such application is in turn submitted by the DG to a regional committee, who may not consider the
application unless the applicant intends taking up permanent residence within the province in respect of which
that regional committee has been appointed.]
(3) [Unless contrary to the provisions of the Act] the regional committee concerned may authorize the issue to
the applicant of [an immigration] permit and make the authorization subject to the condition that the
applicant shall pursue his or her occupation in the province in which he or she intends to take up permanent
residence, for a minimum period of 12 months, and any other condition which the committee may deem
necessary.
(4) The regional committee concerned may authorize the issue to the applicant of an immigration permit if the
applicant-(a)(i) is of a good character; and (ii) will be a desirable inhabitant of the Republic; and (iii) is not
likely to harm the welfare of the Republic; and (iv) does not and is not likely to pursue an occupation in which,
in the opinion of the regional committee, a sufficient number of persons are available in the Republic to meet
the requirements of the inhabitants of the Republic; or
(b) is a destitute, aged or infirm member of the family of a person permanently and lawfully resident in the
Republic who is able and undertakes in writing to maintain him or her.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (4), but subject to the provisions of subsections (3) and (6), a
regional committee may, upon application by the spouse or the dependent child of a person permanently and
lawfully resident in the Republic, authorize the issue of an immigration permit.
(6) A regional committee may, in the case of a person who applies for an immigration permit and who has
entered into a marriage with a person who is permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic, less than two
years prior to the date of his or her application, refuse to authorize such a permit unless the committee is
satisfied that such marriage was not contracted for the purpose of evading any provision of this Act.
(7) [Requires, subject to the discretion of the DG to extend the period, that the person to whom the immigration
permit is issued must] enter the Republic for the purpose of permanent residence therein within a period of
six months from the date of issue of the permit..
(8) If any person to whom a permit has been issued in terms of subsection (7) does not enter the Republic for
the purpose of permanent residence therein within a period of six months from the date of issue of such
permit or within the further period which the [DG] may determine, the validity of such permit shall lapse.
(9)-(a) [Provides for the issue to an alien, who has been permitted under this Act to temporarily sojourn in the
Republic in terms of a permit referred to in section 26(1)(b), of an immigration permit] mutatis mutandis as if
he or she were outside the Republic, and upon the issue of that permit he or she may reside permanently in
the Republic;
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a), a regional committee may authorize a permit in terms of
this section to any person who has been permitted under section 26(1) to temporarily sojourn in the Republic,
if such person is a person referred to in subsections (4)(b) or (5).
(10) [Provides for the rejection and renewal of applications for an immigration permit.]
(11) [Provides for the reconsideration of an application at the request of the DG.]
(12) [Establishes the circumstances under which a regional committee refers an application to the central
committee for consideration or reconsideration.]
(13) [Sets out the powers of the central committee on considering or reconsidering an application.]
(14) [Criminalises certain conduct in relation to the application for and the issuing of an immigration permit.]
(15) [Provides for certain procedural powers of the DG.]'
22. The attack on the constitutional validity of S 25(5) concentrated on the fact that it enables preferential
treatment to be given to a foreign national applying for an immigration permit who is 'the spouse of a person
permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic', but not to a foreign national who, though similarly placed in all
other respects, is in a same-sex life partnership with a person permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic (the
term 'alien' to describe a non-citizen is outmoded and modern writings and international legislation use the term
'foreign national' (see, J Baloro 'Immigration and Emigration' in Joubert et al The Law of South Africa (Lawsa) (1st
reissue, 1998) vol 11 para 39 fn 1), which expression will be employed in this judgment to connote 'alien' as defined
in the Act).
23. The first applicant is a voluntary association of individual gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgendered people in
South Africa and of 69 organisations and associations representing such people. Its principal objectives include the
promotion of equality before the law for all persons, irrespective of their sexual orientation; the reform and repeal of
laws that discriminate on the basis of such orientation; the promotion and sponsoring of legislation to ensure equality
and equal treatment of people in respect of their sexual orientation; and to challenge by means of litigation, lobbying,
advocacy and political mobilisation, all forms of discrimination on the basis of such orientation. The second to seventh
applicants, none of whom is a South African citizen, are the 'same-sex life partners' (the import of this expression will
be dealt with later in this judgment) of the eighth to the thirteenth applicants respectively. The eighth to the
thirteenth applicants (the 'South African partners') are all permanently and lawfully resident in South Africa. The
fourteenth applicant is the Commission for Gender Equality (the statutory body established as such under S 187 of the
Constitution).
24. Because none is a South African citizen, the second to seventh applicants must all, for purposes of the Act, be
regarded as 'aliens' (see S 1(1) of the Act cited in para 13 above). Their same-sex life partnerships with their
respective South African partners are of differing duration and not all identical in content (the fifth applicant's
relationship had been established for a little longer than one year when the High Court application was brought. The
others have all been longer; the second respondent's relationship as well as that of the fourth respondent have been
longer than four years). They all have certain features in common. Each relationship is an overt, same-sex life
partnership which is intimate and mutually interdependent. This emerges more explicitly in the case of certain of the
applicants. The third applicant and her South African partner have lived together in a joint household since March
1995, jointly purchased a home in February 1998, share living expenses, have joint insurances, and regulate their
relationship by a domestic partnership agreement. Their emotional, physical and material interdependence is, like
other applicants, (for example the second, fourth and fifth applicants and their respective partners) such that they
would marry each other if the law permitted them to do so. The fourth applicant and his partner celebrated a public
affirmation of their relationship attended by family members and friends. The seventh and the thirteenth applicants
are reciprocal beneficiaries in each other's wills. If the second applicant is not granted permanent residence in South
Africa, the eighth applicant would emigrate in orden to pursue the relationship (the eleventh applicant would likewise
emigrate in order to pursue his relationship with the fifth applicant if the latter were not permitted to remain in South
Africa).
25. After the 1994 elections, the first applicant initiated discussions with the DG on a number of issues, including
the failure to recognise same-sex relationships for purposes of immigration permits under S 25(4), (5) and (6) of the
Act. Pursuant to these discussions, which apparently developed into a cordial working relationship, a written
confirmation was given to the first applicant on behalf of the DG that: 'all the requests for exemptions in terms of S 23
(b) of the Aliens Control Act... will be considered on merit.' Although the reference to S 23(b) of the Act is somewhat
obscure, it is clear from the context that what was being referred to was an exemption under S 28 of the Act from the
requirements of S 23(b).
26. Notwithstanding the above confirmation, the first applicant continued making representations for the express
statutory recognition of same-sex relationships for purposes of SS 25(4), (5) and (6) of the Act. In consequence
thereof at least thirteen temporary exemptions were granted between April and November 1997, under S 28(2) of the
Act, to foreign same-sex partners of lesbian or gay South Africans who were seeking permanent residence in the
Republic. The exemptions were granted by an official duly delegated by the Minister and in each case it was stated
that the temporary exemption had been granted for a period of twelve months 'to await the outcome of the
memorandum submitted to the Minister of Home Affairs' and that the grantor was 'satisfied that special circumstances
exist which justify such an exemption' under the provisions of S 28(2) from the requirements of is 23(b) of the Act.
27. During the course of 1997 the department changed its attitude which culminated on 9 January 1998 in a
blanket refusal of such exemptions to foreign same-sex partners of South African permanent residents. This refusal
was embodied in a letter of the same date from the DG to the first applicant in which the following was, amongst other
things, stated:
'In terms of S 28[2] of the Act the Minister may only grant exemptions where there are special circumstances
which justify such a decision. In view of the steady flow of applications for exemptions, one can hardly argue that
special circumstances exist in any of these cases as contemplated by the said section of the Act. The mere fact that
the Aliens Control Act, 1991, does not cater for same-sex relationships cannot be considered as 'special
circumstances' for the purposes [of] exercising the powers of exemption under that Act. In view of the above
consideration, it has been decided not to grant exemptions under S 28[2] of the Act merely to accommodate alien
partners in same-sex relationships/(Emphasis in original.)
28. The first applicant took various steps on behalf of certain of the applicants and other foreign partners in same-
sex relationships to ameliorate their position in regard to the granting of exemptions under S 28(2) of the Act and
otherwise, but to no avail, and ultimately the application was launched in the High Court.
The ripeness of the matter for hearing
29. Although, in the High Court, the question of mootness was also raised by the respondents, there has been no
appeal against the High Court's dismissal of this argument. (A case is moot and therefore not justiciable, if it no longer
presents an existing or live controversy which should exist if the court is to avoid giving advisory opinions on abstract
propositions of law. Such was the case in JT Publishing (Pty) Ltd V. Minister of Safety and Security, 1997 (3) SA 514,
where Didcott J said the following at para '[T]here can hardly be a clearer instance of issues that are wholly
academic, of issues exciting no interest but an historical one, than those on which our ruling is wanted have now
become.' See also President, Ordinary Court Martial V. Freedom of Expression Institute, 1999 (4) SA 682 at paras 12-
16, 18, 23 and Chaskalson et al Constitutional Law of South Africa (3rd revision service, 1998) pp 8-15. Compare
Laurence H Tribe American Constitutional Law (2nd edn, 1988) p 82). While the concept of ripeness is not precisely
defined, it embraces a general principle that where it is possible to decide any case, civil or criminal, without reaching
a constitutional issue, that is the course which should be followed, (see State V. Mhlungu, [1995] 2 LRC 503 at 530,
Zantsi V. Council of State, Ciskei, 1995 (4) SA 615 at paras 2-5, Ferreira V. Levin NO, Vryenhoek V. Powell NO, [1996]
3 LRC 527 at para 199 and State V. Bequinot, 1997 (2) SA 887 at paras 12-13. As Chaskalson, pp 8-15, aptly put
it: [w]hile the "ripeness" doctrine is concerned with cases which are brought too early, the "mootness" doctrine is
relevant to cases which are brought, or reach the hearing stage, too late, at a time when the issues are no longer
"live"/Compare Tribe, op cit, p 78).
30. On the issue of ripeness, the argument followed much the same line as in the High Court. The contention was
that the only remedy pursued by the second to seventh applicants was the obtaining of exemptions under S 28(2) of
the Act. The decision regarding an exemption was one to be taken by the Minister. The applicants in question have
never applied for an immigration permit under the provisions of S 25 of the Act, which application has to be dealt with
by
a regional committee and not the Minister. Without having followed such a course, so the argument ran, the
applicants had not forced a determination of the issue as to whether a foreign national same-sex partner of a
permanent and lawful resident in South Africa was entitled to be treated as a spouse and to the preferential treatment
envisaged by S 25(5). The applicants had accordingly failed to pursue a non-constitutional remedy which, if successful,
might have rendered it unnecessary to consider the constitutional validity of S 25(5). Such failure was in conflict, so it
was contended, with the general principle, referred to in the previous paragraph, that where it is possible to decide
any case without reaching a constitutional issue, that course should be followed.
31. According to the respondents' argument, it was reasonably possible that a regional committee might, under S
39(2) of the Constitution, interpret 'spouse' in S 25(5) of the Act as including a same-sex life partner, thus making it
unnecessary to consider the constitutional validity of the subsection. (Section 39(2) provides: When interpreting any
legislation, and when developing the common law or customary law, every court, tribunal or forum must promote the
spirit, purport and objects of the Bill of Rights.') In my view the word 'spouse' cannot, in its context, be so construed.
There is, it is true, a principle of constitutional interpretation that where it is reasonably possible to construe a statute
in such a way that it does not give rise to constitutional inconsistency, such a construction should be preferred to
another construction which, although also reasonable, would give rise to such inconsistency, (see De Lange V. Smuts
NO, [1999] 2 LRC 598 at para 85 and Bernstein V. Bester NNO, [1996] 4 LRC 528 at para 59 and the authorities cited
therein). Such a construction is not a reasonable one, however, when it can be reached only by distorting the meaning
of the expression being considered.
32. There is a clean distinction between interpreting legislation in a way which 'promote[s] the spirit, purport and
objects of the Bill of Rights' as required by S 39(2) of the Constitution and the process of reading words into or
severing them from a statutory provision which is a remedial measure under S 172(1)(b), following upon a declaration
of constitutional invalidity under S 172(1)(a). I deal later with the constitutional permissibility of reading words into a
statutory provision (see para [65] et seq below). What is now being emphasised is the fundamentally different nature
of the two processes. The first process, being an interpretative one, is limited to what the text is reasonably capable of
meaning. The latter can only take place after the statutory provision in question, notwithstanding the application of all
legitimate interpretative aids, is found to be constitutionally invalid.
33. The High Court correctly concluded that 'spouse', as used in S 25(5), was not reasonably capable of the
construction contended for by the respondents. The word 'spouse' is not defined in the Act, but its ordinary meaning
connotes '[a] married person; a wife, a husband' (New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993)). The context in
which 'spouse' is used in S 25(5) does not suggest a wider meaning. The use of the expression 'marriage' in S 25(6)
and the special provisions relating to a person applying for an immigration permit and 'who has entered into a
marriage with a person who is permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic, less than two years prior to the date
of his or her application' is a further indication that 'spouse', as used in S 25(5), is used for a partner in a marriage.
There is also no indication that the word 'marriage' as used in the Act extends any further than those marriages that
are ordinarily recognised by our law. In this regard reference may be made to the recent House of Lords decision in
Fitzpatrick (AP) V. Sterling Housing Association Ltd, [2000] 3 LRC 294 where 'spouse' likewise could not be given such
an extensive meaning and Quilter V. A-G, [1998] 3 LRC 119 where the statute at issue did not define 'marriage' but
the New Zealand Court of Appeal unanimously held that textual indications prevented the term from being construed
to include same-sex unions.
34. Had the word 'spouse' been used in a more extensive sense in S 25(5) of the Act, it would have been
unnecessary to provide specifically in S 1(1) that marriage 'includes a customary union'. It is significant that the
definition of 'customary union' namely-
'the association of a man and a woman in a conjugal relationship according to indigenous law and custom, where
neither the man nor the woman is party to a subsisting marriage, which is recognised by the Minister in terms of
subsection (2);
is based on an opposite-sex relationship. Under all these circumstances it is not possible to construe the word 'spouse'
in
S 25(5) as including the foreign same-sex partner of a permanent and lawful resident of the Republic. The
applicants were accordingly not able in law to pursue successfully a non-constitutional remedy, based on such
a
construction of 'spouse'. Accordingly the respondents' contention that the constitutional issue was not ripe for hearing
was rightly dismissed by the High Court.
The constitutional validity of S 25(5)
INTRODUCTION
35. It is convenient to deal at the outset with a submission advanced on the respondents' behalf which is central to
their approach to the case and their categorisation of the issues concerning the constitutionality of S 25(5). Mr Patel,
who together with Ms Moroka and Mr Dhlamini appeared for the respondents, submitted that the Republic, as a
sovereign independent state, was lawfully entitled to exclude any foreign nationals from the Republic; that it had an
absolute discretion to do so which was beyond the reach of the Constitution and the courts; and that, to the extent
that Parliament legislated to permit foreign nationals to reside in South Africa, it did so in the exercise of such
discretion and that the provisions of such legislation were equally beyond the reach of the Constitution and the courts.
(For this submission, reliance was placed on, amongst others, DA Martin 'Refugees and Migration' in Christopher C
Joyner (ed) The United Nations and International Law (1997) p 155; Sir Robert Jennings and Sir Arthur Watts
Oppenheim's International Law (9th edn, 1997) pp 897-899, Fong Yue Ting V. United States, (1893) 149 US 698 at
705-711, Nishimura Ekiu V. United States, (1892) 142 US 651, Galvan V. Press, (1954) 347 US 522 at 530-532,
Adams V. Howerton, (1982) 673 F2d 1036 at 1042, Naidenov V. Minister of Home Affairs, 1995 (7) BCLR 891 (T) at
901 and Parekh V. Minister of Home Affairs, 1996 (2) SA 710 (D) at 714-715. But see also Larbi-Odam V. Member of
the Executive Council for Education (North-West Province), [1998] 2 LRC 505. Other authorities dealing with the
consequences of a state's territorial authority and its right to control the entry of foreign nationals into its territory are
usefully collated in Van Heerden Ag J's judgment in Dawood V. Minister of Home Affairs (case 12745/98, unreported),
Shalabi V. Minister of Home Affairs (case 13503/98, unreported), Thomas V. Minister of Home Affairs (21 September
1999, case 13435/98, unreported.) This case is pending before this court under S 172(2)(a) of the Constitution and on
appeal). He submitted that this was recognised by the Constitution in that certain provisions of the Bill of Rights
conferred significant rights only on citizens of the Republic. Thus, only a citizen has the right to 'enter, to remain in
and to reside anywhere in the Republic' (s 21(3)); to 'a passport' (s 21(4)); to certain political rights (s 19); and to
choose a 'trade, occupation or profession freely' (s 22).
36. Such an argument, even if correct, would not assist the respondents, because in the present case we are not
dealing with such a category of foreign nationals, but with persons who are in intimate life partnerships with persons
who are permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic (to whom I shall refer as 'South Africans'). This is a
significant and determinative difference. The failure of the Act to grant any recognition at all to same-sex life
partnerships impacts in the same way on the South African partners as it does on the foreign national partners. In my
view this case can, and ought properly to be, decided on the basis of whether S 25(5) unconstitutionally limits the
rights of the South African partners, namely the eighth to the thirteenth respondents. In an important line of
decisions, the Zimbabwean Supreme Court has held that the constitutional right of citizens to freedom of movement is
contravened when the foreign national spouses of such citizens are denied permission to reside in Zimbabwe (see
Rattigan V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, [1994] 1 LRC 343, Salem V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe,
[1994] 1 LRC 354 and Kohlhaas V. Chief Immigration Officer, Zimbabwe, 1998 (3) SA 1142 (ZSC), particularly at
1146-1147). We do not reach the question of freedom of movement in the present case but it is important to note that
the issue of the contravention in the Zimbabwean cases was considered in relation to the rights of the citizen spouse
residing in Zimbabwe.
37. Such an approach presents no procedural or substantive difficulty. It is true that the parties seeking
immigration permits are the foreign national partners. On the objective theory of unconstitutionality adopted by this
court (see Ferreira V. Levin NO; Vryenhoek V. Powell NO, [1996] 3 LRC 527 at paras 26-28, New National Party of
South Africa V. Government of the Republic of South Africa, 1999 (3) SA 191 at para 22, Member of the Executive
Council for Development Planning and Local Government, Gauteng V. Democratic Party, 1998 (4) SA 1157 at para 64)
a litigant who has standing may properly rely on the objective unconstitutionality of a statute for the relief sought,
even though the right unconstitutionally infringed is not that of the litigant in question but of some other person.
Thus, the second to the seventh applicants are entitled to rely on any unconstitutional infringement of any of the
rights of the South African partners (the eighth to the thirteenth applicants) which has been brought about by the
failure of the Act to grant any recognition to same-sex life partnerships. Obviously the South African partners may also
invoke such infringement themselves.
The limitation by S 25(5) of the S 9 right to equality and the S 10 right to dignity
38. Section 9 of the Constitution provides:
'Equality-(1) Everyone is equal before the law and has the right to equal protection and benefit of the law.
(2) Equality includes the full and equal enjoyment of all rights and freedoms. To promote the achievement of
equality, legislative and other measures designed to protect or advance persons, or categories of persons,
disadvantaged by unfair discrimination may be taken.
(3) The state may not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds, including
race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic on social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability,
religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth.
(4) No person may unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds in terms of
subsection (3). National legislation must be enacted to prevent or prohibit unfair discrimination.
(5) Discrimination on one or more of the grounds listed in subsection (3) is unfair unless it is established that the
discrimination is fair.'
Section 10 provides:
'Human dignity-Everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and protected.'
39. Davis J found that S 25(5) constituted a clear limitation of the S 9 guarantee against unfair discrimination
because it differentiated on the grounds of sexual orientation; under S 9(5) such differentiation, being a ground
specified in S 9(3), is presumed to be unfair unless the contrary is established; and that the contrary had not been
established (at 291G-292F). The High Court considered it unnecessary to deal with the other grounds on which S 25
(5) had been attacked. In National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Justice, (1999 (1) SA 6, the
Sodomy case') this court pointed out that in particular circumstances the rights of equality and dignity are closely
related and found the criminal offence of sodomy to be unconstitutional because it breached both rights (the court also
held that the right to privacy had been breached, which is not relevant to the present case). In the present case the
rights of equality and dignity are also closely related and it would be convenient to deal with them in a related
manner.
40. In dealing with the equality challenge, I shall follow the approach laid down by this court in various of its
judgments as collated and summarised in Harksen V. Lane NO, [1998] 2 LRC 171 para 53 per Goldstone J and as
applied to S 9 of the Constitution in the Sodomy case (paras 58-63). The differentiation brought about by S 25(5) is of
a
negative kind. It does not proscribe conduct of same-sex life partners or enact provisions that in themselves
prescribe negative consequences for them. The differentiation lies in its failure to extend to them the same advantages
or benefits that it extends to spouses. The applicants' complaint, as upheld by the High Court, is in effect that S 25(5)
is under-inclusive [because] it confers a benefit on a class that is defined too narrowly in that the class fails to include
all members that have an equality based right to be included' (P Hogg Constitutional Law of Canada (3rd edn, 1992) at
910, para 37.1(h)). This is, for purposes of establishing a breach of the right to equality, constitutionally irrelevant.
Section 9(1)-
'makes clear what was already manifestly implicit in S 8(1) of the interim Constitution, namely, that both in
conferring benefits on persons and by imposing restraints on state and other action, the state had to do so in a way
which results in the equal treatment of all persons.' (see the Sodomy case para 59)
41. Before this court the respondents challenged the conclusion reached by the High Court that the omission in S
25(5) of spousal benefits to same-sex life partners was a differentiation based on the ground of sexual orientation. It
was submitted on their behalf that the differentiation was based on the ground that they were non-spouses, which had
nothing to do with their sexual orientation, and that accordingly, because the differentiation was on 'non-spousal'
grounds, rather than on marital status, it did not constitute unfair discrimination. There is no merit in this submission
because, as indicated above in para 25, spouse is defined with regard to marriage and is but the name given to the
partners to a marriage.
42. In the alternative it was argued that, even if the differentiation was on grounds of marital status, there was
nothing that prevented gays and lesbians from contracting marriages with persons of the opposite sex, thus becoming
and acquiring spouses and accordingly being entitled to the spousal benefits under S 25(5). Therefore, so the
submission proceeded, the fact that they did not enjoy the advantages of a spousal relationship was of their own
choosing. What the submission implies is that same-sex life partners should ignore their sexual orientation and,
contrary thereto, enter into marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
43. I am unable to accede to this line of argument. It confuses form with substance and does not have proper
regard for the operation, experience or impact of discrimination in society. Discrimination does not take place in
discrete areas of the law, hermetically sealed from one another, where each aspect of discrimination is to be examined
and its impact evaluated in isolation. Discrimination must be understood in the context of the experience of those on
whom it impacts. As recognised in the Sodomy case-
'[t]h experience of subordination-of personal subordination, above all-lies behind the vision of
equality.' (Paragraph 22, quoting with approval Michael Walzer Spheres of Justice : A Defence of Pluralism and
Equality (1983) p xiii.)
44. Moreover, the submission fails to recognise that marriage represents but one form of life partnership. The law
currently only recognises marriages that are conjugal relationships between people of the opposite sex. It is not
necessary, for purposes of this judgment, to investigate other forms of life partnership. Suffice it to say that there is
another form of life partnership which is different from marriage as recognised by law. This form of life partnership is
represented by a conjugal relationship between two people of the same sex. The law currently does not recognise
permanent same-sex life partnerships as marriages. It follows that S 25(5) affords protection only to conjugal
relationships between heterosexuals and excludes any protection to a life partnership which entails a conjugal same-
sex relationship, which is the only form of conjugal relationship open to gays and lesbians in harmony with their sexual
orientation.
45. A notable and significant development in our statute law in recent years has been the extent of express and
implied recognition the legislature has accorded same-sex partnerships. A range of statutory provisions have included
such unions within their ambit. While this legislative trend is significant in evincing Parliament's commitment to
equality on the ground of sexual orientation, there is still no appropriate recognition in our law of the same-sex life
partnership, as a relationship, to meet the legal and other needs of its partners (see, for example, the use of the
expressions 'spouse, partner or associate" in S 6(1)(f) of the Independent Media Commission Act, 1993 and SS 5(1)
and (f) of the Independent Broadcasting Authority Act, 1993 and the fact that, for purposes of these provisions,
'spouse' includes 'a de facto spouse'; life-partner' in SS 3(7)(a)(ii) 3(8) and 7(5) of the Lotteries Act, 1997 and S 27
the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, 1997; the definition of spouse in S 31 of the Special Pensions Act,
1996 to mean 'the partner in a marriage relationship' which latter relationship is defined to include 'a continuous
cohabitation in a homosexual or heterosexual partnership for a period of at least 5 years'; the definition of 'family
responsibility in S 1 of the Employment Equity Act, 1998 which includes 'responsibility of employees in relation to
their spouse or partner'; the definition of 'dependant' in the Medical Schemes Act, 1998 which includes the 'the
spouse or partner, dependant children or other members of the member's immediate family in respect of whom the
member is liable for family care and support'; and the definition of 'spouse' in S (aa) of the Housing Act,
1997 which includes 'a person with whom the member lives as if they were married or with whom the member
habitually cohabits' and SS 9(4) and 11(5)(b) of the South African Civil Aviation Authority Act, 1998 and 'life partners'
in SS 10(2) and 15(9) of the Road Traffic Management Corporation Act, 1999).
46. It follows that same-sex partners are in a different position from heterosexual partners who have not contracted
a marriage and have not become spouses. As will be emphasised later in this judgment, it is unnecessary in this case
to deal at all with the position of such unmarried heterosexual partners. The respondents' submission that gays and
lesbians are free to marry in the sense that nothing prohibits them from marrying persons of the opposite sex, is true
only as a meaningless abstraction. This submission ignores the constitutional injunction that gays and lesbians cannot
be discriminated against on the grounds of their own sexual orientation and the constitutional right to express that
orientation in a relationship of their own choosing (see Quilter V. A-G at 140 per Thomas J).
47. There is much to be said for the view that the discrimination in S 25(5) is on the ground of sexual orientation.
As previously pointed out, the S 25(5) protection is not extended to the only form of conjugal relationship in which
gays and lesbians are able to participate in harmony with their sexual orientation, namely, same-sex life partnerships.
A similar conclusion was reached by the Canadian Supreme Court in Canada (A-G) V. Mossop, [1994] 2 LRC 436 at
450, Egan V. Canada, (1995) 29 CRR (2d) 79 at 141 and Mv. H, [1999] 4 LRC 551 at paras 2, 62.
48. The better view, however, in my judgment, is that the discrimination in S 25(5) constitutes overlapping or
intersecting discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and marital status, both being specified in S 9(3) and
presumed to constitute unfair discrimination by reason of S 9(5) of the Constitution. As Sachs J correctly pointed out
in the Sodomy case (para 113):
'One consequence of an approach based on context and impact would be the acknowledgement that grounds of
unfair discrimination can intersect, so that the evaluation of discriminatory impact is done not according to one
ground of discrimination or another, but on a combination of both, that is globally and contextually, not separately
and abstractly.
49. I also agree with the following observations by L 'Heureux-Dube' J in Mossop:
'This argument [of Lamen CJC] is based on an underlying assumption that the grounds of 'family status' and
'sexual orientation" are mutually exclusive. However [i]t is increasingly recognized that categories of
discrimination may overlap and that individuals may suffer historical exclusion on the basis of both race and
gender, age and physical handicap, or some other combination. The situation of individuals who confront multiple
grounds of disadvantage is particularly complex Categorizing such discrimination as primarily racially oriented, or
primarily gender-oriented, misconceives the reality of discrimination as it is experienced by individuals.
Discrimination may be experienced on many grounds, and where this is the case, it is not really meaningful to
assert that it is one or the other. It may be more realistic to recognize that both forms of discrimination may be
present and intersect.' (See Mossop, [1994] 2 LRC 436 at 489.)
(Although Lamer CJ, for the majority, did not find overlapping grounds in the case at hand, he expressly
recognized the principle of overlapping grounds at 451 of the judgment.) The prerequisite of marriage before the
benefit is available points to that element of the discrimination concerned with marital status, while the fact that no
such benefit is available to gays and lesbians engaged in the only form of conjugal relationship open to them in
harmony with their sexual orientation represents discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. I propose
dealing with the present case on this basis.
The impact of the discrimination on the affected applicants
50. As affirmed in the Sodomy case the determining factor regarding the unfairness of discrimination is, in the final
analysis, the impact of the discrimination on the complainant or the members of the affected group. The approach to
this determination is a nuanced and comprehensive one in which various factors come into play which, when assessed
cumulatively and objectively, will assist in elaborating and giving precision to the constitutional test of unfairness.
Important factors to be assessed in this regard (which do not however constitute a closed list) are:
(a) the position of complainants in society and whether they have suffered in the past from patterns of
disadvantage;
(b) the nature of the provision or power and the purpose sought to be achieved by it. If its purpose is manifestly
not directed, in the first instance, at impairing the complainants in their fundamental human dignity or in a
comparably serious respect, but is aimed at achieving a worthy and important societal goal, such as, for
example, the furthering of equality for all, this purpose may, depending on the facts of the particular case, have
a significant bearing on the question whether the complainants have in fact suffered the impairment in question.
(c) with due regard to (a) and (b) above, and any other relevant factors, the extent to which the discrimination has
affected the rights or interests of complainants and whether it has led to an impairment of their fundamental
human dignity or constitutes an impairment of a comparably serious nature. (See the Sodomy case, para 19.)
51. It is noteworthy how the Canadian Supreme Court has, in the development of its equality jurisprudence under S
15(1) of the Canadian Charter, come to see the central purpose of its equality guarantee as the protection and
promotion of human dignity. (In Law Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), (1999) 170 DLR (4th)
1,
lacobucci J, writing for a unanimous Supreme Court stated the following at paras 52-54:
[[]]n the articulation of the purpose of S 15(1) a focus is quite properly placed upon the goal
of
assuring
human dignity by the remedying of discriminatory treatment [T]he equality guarantee
in
S
15(1)
is
concerned
with the realization of personal autonomy and self-determination. Human dignity means that an individual or group
feels self-respect and self-worth. It is concerned with physical and psychological integrity and empowerment.
Human dignity is harmed by unfair treatment premised upon personal traits or circumstances which do not relate to
individual needs, capacities, or merits. It is enhanced by laws which are sensitive to the needs, capacities, and
merits of different individuals, taking into account the context underlying their differences The equality
guarantee
in S 15(1) of the Charter must be understood and applied in light of the above understanding of its purpose. The
overriding concern with protecting and promoting human dignity in the sense just described infuses all elements of
the discrimination analysis'.)
52. In the Sodomy case this court dealt with the seriously negative impact that societal discrimination on the
ground of sexual orientation has had, and continues to have, on gays and their same-sex partnerships, (see paras 20-
27), concluding that gay men are a permanent minority in society and have suffered in the past from patterns of
disadvantage (see para 26(a)). Although the main focus of that judgment was on the criminalisation of sodomy and on
other proscriptions of erotic expression between men, the conclusions regarding the minority status of gays and the
patterns of discrimination to which they have been and continue to be subject are also applicable to lesbians. Society
at large has, generally, accorded far less respect to lesbians and their intimate relationships with one another than to
heterosexuals and their relationships. The sting of past and continuing discrimination against both gays and lesbians is
the clear message that it conveys, namely, that they, whether viewed as individuals or in their same-sex relationships,
do not have the inherent dignity and are not worthy of the human respect possessed by and accorded to heterosexuals
and their relationships. This discrimination occurs at a deeply intimate level of human existence and relationality. It
denies to gays and lesbians that which is foundational to our Constitution and the concepts of equality and dignity,
which at this point are closely intertwined, namely that all persons have the same inherent worth and dignity as
human beings, whatever their other differences may be. The denial of equal dignity and worth all too quickly and
insidiously degenerates into a denial of humanity and leads to inhuman treatment by the rest of society in many
other
ways. This is deeply demeaning and frequently has the cruel effect of undermining the confidence and sense of self-
worth and self-respect of lesbians and gays.
53. Similar views, with which I agree, were expressed in Vriend V. Alberta, [1998] 3 LRC 483 per Cory and
lacobucci JJ (Lamer CJ, Gonthier, McLachlin and Bastarache JJ concurring; L 'Heureux-Dube' and Major JJ concurring in
part and dissenting in part)) where Cory J (in this part of the judgment writing for the court) expressed himself thus:
'It is easy to say that everyone who is just like "us" is entitled to equality. Everyone finds it more difficult to say
that those who are "different" from us in some way should have the same equality rights that we enjoy. Yet so soon
as
we say any group is less deserving and unworthy of equal protection and benefit of the law all minorities and
all
of society are demeaned. It is so deceptively simple and so devastatingly injurious to say that those who are
handicapped or of a different race, or religion, or colour or sexual orientation are less worthy.' (See paras 69 and
also 102 respectively, in passages cited in the Sodomy case, at paras 22 and 23 respectively. See also Egan at 144-
145. Although the court was divided in Egan on the disposition of the case, no disagreement was expressed with
the views expressed in this passage from the joint dissenting judgment of Cory and lacobucci JJ.)
54. This court has recognised that '[t]he more vulnerable the group adversely affected by the discrimination, the
more likely the discrimination will be held to be unfair' (see Hugo V. President of the Republic of South Africa, [1998]
1 LRC 662 at para 112 per O'Regan J, as confirmed by the court in the Sodomy case at para 27). Vulnerability in turn
depends to a very significant extent on past patterns of disadvantage, stereotyping and the like. This is why an inquiry
into past disadvantage is so important. In a passage endorsed in H (at para 68), lacobucci J in the Law case
expressed this tellingly as follows:
[P]robably the most compelling factor favouring a conclusion that differential treatment imposed by legislation
is
truly discriminatory will be, where it exists, pre-existing disadvantage, vulnerability, stereotyping or prejudice
experienced by the individual or group [citations omitted]. These factors are relevant because, to the extent that
the claimant is already subject to unfair circumstances or treatment in society by virtue of personal characteristics
or circumstances, persons like him or her have often not been given equal concern, respect, and consideration. It is
logical to conclude that, in most cases, further differential treatment will contribute to the perpetuation or
promotion of their unfair social characterization, and will have a more severe impact on them, since they are already
vulnerable. (See Law, para )
55. In the present case, like in Mv. H (at para 69), there is significant pre-existing disadvantage and vulnerability.
56. I turn now to deal with the discriminatory impact of S 25(5) on same-sex life partners. I agree with the
submission advanced on the respondents' behalf that S 25(5) is manifestly aimed at achieving the societal goal of
protecting the family life of lawful marriages' (which I understand to mean marriages which are formally valid and
contracted in good faith and not sham marriages for the purposes of circumventing the Act) and certain recognised
customary unions, by making provision for family re-unification and in particular by entitling spouses of persons
permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic to receive permanent residence permits. The pertinent question that
immediately arises is what the impact of being excluded from these protective provisions is on same-sex life partners.
57. The starting point is to inquire what the nature of such family life is in the case of spouses, that S 25(5)
specially protects and benefits. For the purposes of this case it is unnecessary to consider comprehensively the nature
of traditional marriage and the spousal relationship. It is sufficient to indicate that, under South African common law,
a marriage 'creates a physical, moral and spiritual community of life, a consortium omnis vitae (Sinclair and Heaton
The Law of Marriage Vol 1 (1996) p 422 ('Sinclair and Heaton') and authorities there cited) which has been described
as-
'an abstraction comprising the totality of a number of rights, duties and advantages accruing to spouses of a
marriage These embrace intangibles, such as loyalty and sympathetic care and affection, concern as well as the
more material needs of life, such as physical care, financial support, the rendering of services in the running of the
common household or in a support-generating business ...' (See Peter V. Minister of Law and Order, 1990 (4) SA 6
at 9 per Erasmus J.)
58. As Sinclair and Heaton point out, (p 423), the duties of cohabitation and fidelity flow from this relationship. In
Grobbelaar V. Havenga, 1964 (3) SA 522 at 525 it was held that '[c]ompanionship, love, affection, comfort, mutual
services, sexual intercourse-all belong to the married state. Taken together, they make up the consortium."
59. It is important to emphasise that over the past decades an accelerating process of transformation has taken
place in family relationships as well as in societal and legal concepts regarding the family and what it comprises.
Sinclair and Heaton, (at pp 6-7), after alluding to the profound transformations of the legal relationships between
family members that have taken place in the past, comment as follows on the present:
'But the current period of rapid change seems to "strike at the most basic assumptions" underlying marriage and
the family Itself a country where considerable political and socio-economic movement has been and is taking
place, South Africa occupies a distinctive position in the context of developments in the legal relationship between
family members and between the state and the family. Its heterogeneous society is "fissured by differences of
language, religion, race, cultural habit, historical experience and self-definition" and, consequently, reflects widely
varying expectations about marriage, family life and the position of women in society.' [Internal citations omitted]
60. In other countries a significant change in societal and legal attitudes to same-sex partnerships in the context of
what is considered to constitute a family has occurred. Evidence of these changes are to be found in the jurisprudence
dealing with equality issues in countries such as Canada, (in M V. H at paras 49-53, 57, 59, 60, Miron V. Trudel,
(1995) 124 DLR (4th) 693 at paras 151-8, 96-100), Israel, (EI AI Israel Airlines Ltd V. Danilowitz (case 721/94,
judgment of the Supreme Court of Israel sitting as the High Court of Justice, unreported), the United Kingdom
(Fitzpatrick (AP) V. Sterling Housing Association Ltd, [2000] 3 LRC 294 at 302-305) and the United States (Braschi V.
Staid Associates Company, (1989) 74 NY 2d 201 at 211-3). In referring to these judgments from the highest courts of
other jurisdictions I do not overlook the different nature of their histories, legal systems and constitutional contexts
non that, in the last two cases, the issue was one essentially of statutory construction and not constitutional invalidity.
Nevertheless, these judgments give expression to norms and values in other open and democratic societies based on
human dignity, equality and freedom which, in my view, give clean expression to the growing concern for,
understanding of, and sensitivity towards human diversity in general and to gays and lesbians and their relationships
in particular. This is an important source from which to illuminate our understanding of the Constitution and the
promotion of its informing norms. (Section 39(1) provides, in its relevant parts: 'When interpreting the Bill of Rights, a
court, tribunal or forum-(a) must promote the values that underlie an open and democratic society based on human
dignity, equality and freedom; (c) may consider foreign law'.)
61. The impact of S 25(5) is to reinforce harmful and hurtful stereotypes of gays and lesbians. At the heart of these
stereotypes whether expressly articulated or not, lie misconceptions based on the fact that the sexual orientation of
lesbians and gays is such that they have an erotic and emotional affinity for persons of the same sex and may give
physical sexual expression thereto with same-sex partners:
There are two predominant narratives that circulate within American society that help to explain the difficulty
that lesbians and gays face in adopting children and establishing families. First, there is the story of lesbians and
gays that centres on their sexuality. Whether because of disgust, confusion, or ignorance about homosexuality,
lesbian and gay sexuality dominates the discourse of not only same-sex adoption, but all lesbian and gay issues.
The classification of lesbians and gays as "exclusively sexual beings" stands in stark contrast to the perception of
heterosexual parents as "people who, along with many other activities in their lives, occasionally engage in sex."
Through this narrative, lesbians and gays are reduced to one-dimensional creatures, defined by their sex and
sexuality.' (See Timothy E Lin 'Social Norms and Judicial Decision-making Examining the Role of Narratives in
Same-Sex Adoption Cases' (1999) 99 Col LR 739 at 741-742.)
62. Such false classifications must be rejected. Our law has never proscribed consensual sexual acts between
women in private (see Sodomy case at para 14 and the authorities there referred to) and the laws criminalising certain
consensual sexual acts between males in private and certain acts in public have been declared constitutionally invalid.
A second stereotype, often used to bolster the prejudice against gay and lesbian sexuality, is constructed on
the fact that a same-sex couple cannot procreate in the same way as a heterosexual couple. Gays and lesbians are
certainly individually permitted to adopt children under the provisions of S 7 (b) of the Child Care Act, 1983 (s 17(b)
provides that: A child may be adopted (b) by a widower or widow or unmarried or divorced person; ') and
nothing prevents a gay couple or a lesbian couple, one of whom has so adopted a child, from treating such child in all
ways, other than strictly legally, as their child. They can certainly love, care and provide for the child as though it was
their joint child.
64. From a legal and constitutional point of view, procreative potential is not a defining characteristic of conjugal
relationships. Such a view would be deeply demeaning to couples (whether married or not) who, for whatever reason,
are incapable of procreating when they commence such relationship or become so at any time thereafter. It is likewise
demeaning to couples who commence such a relationship at an age when they no longer have the desire for sexual
relations. It is demeaning to adoptive parents to suggest that their family is any less a family and any less entitled to
respect and concern than a family with procreated children. I would even hold it to be demeaning of a couple who
voluntarily decide not to have children or sexual relations with one another; this being a decision entirely within their
protected sphere of freedom and privacy. [52] I find support for this view in the following conclusions of L'Heureux-
Dube J (with whom Cory and McLachlin JJ concurred) in Mossop, [1994] 2 LRC 436 at 480-481 and the judgment of
Thomas / in Quitter, [1998] 3 LRC 119 at 137:
The argument is that procreation is somehow necessary to the concept of family and that same-sex couples
cannot be families as they are incapable of procreation. Though there is undeniable value in procreation, the
Tribunal could not have accepted that the capacity to procreate limits the boundaries of family. If this were so,
childless couples and single parents would not constitute families. Further, this logic suggests that adoptive families
are not as desirable as natural families. The flaws in this position must have been self-evident. Though procreation
is an element in many families, placing the ability to procreate as the inalterable basis of family could result in an
impoverished rather than an enriched version.'
65. The message that the total exclusion of gays and lesbians from the provisions of the subsection conveys to gays
and lesbians and the consequent impact on them can, in my view, be conveniently expressed by comparing (a) the
facts concerning gays and lesbians and their same-sex partnerships which must be accepted, with (b) what the
subsection in effect states:
(a)-(i) Gays and lesbians have a constitutionally entrenched right to dignity and equality;
(ii) Sexual orientation is a ground expressly listed in S 9(3) of the Constitution and under S 9(5) discrimination on it
is unfair unless the contrary is established:
(iii) Prior criminal proscription of private and consensual sexual expression between gays, arising from their sexual
orientation and which had been directed at gay men, has been struck down as unconstitutional;
(iv) Gays and lesbians in same-sex life partnerships are as capable as heterosexual spouses of expressing and
sharing love in its manifold forms including affection, friendship, eros and charity;
(v) They are likewise as capable of forming intimate, permanent, committed, monogamous, loyal and enduring
relationships; of furnishing emotional and spiritual support; and of providing physical care, financial support and
assistance in running the common household;
(vi) They are individually able to adopt children and in the case of lesbians to bear them;
(vii) In short, they have the same ability to establish a consortium omnis vitae;
(viii) Finally, and of particular importance for purposes of this case, they are capable of constituting a family,
whether nuclear or extended, and of establishing, enjoying and benefiting from family life which is not
distinguishable in any significant respect from that of heterosexual spouses.
(b) The subsection, in this context, in effect states that all gay and lesbian permanent residents of the Republic,
who are in same-sex relationships with foreign nationals, are not entitled to the benefit extended by the
subsection to spouses married to foreign nationals in order to protect their family and family life. This is so
stated, notwithstanding that the family and family life which gays and lesbians are capable of establishing with
their foreign national same-sex partners are in all significant respects indistinguishable from those of spouses
and in human terms as important to gay and lesbian same-sex partners as they are to spouses.
66. The message and impact are clear. Section 10 of the Constitution recognises and guarantees that everyone has
inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and protected. The message is that gays and lesbians
lack the inherent humanity to have their families and family lives in such same-sex relationships respected or
protected. It serves in addition to perpetuate and reinforce existing prejudices and stereotypes. The impact constitutes
a crass, blunt, cruel and serious invasion of their dignity. The discrimination, based on sexual orientation, is severe
because no concern, let alone anything approaching equal concern, is shown for the particular sexual orientation of
gays and lesbians.
67. We were pressed with an argument, on behalf of the Minister, that it was of considerable public importance to
protect the traditional and conventional institution of marriage and that the government accordingly has a strong and
legitimate interest to protect the family life of such marriages and was entitled to do so by means of S 25(5). Even if
this proposition were to be accepted it would be subject to two major reservations. In the first place, protecting the
traditional institution of marriage as recognised by law may not be done in a way which unjustifiably limits the
constitutional rights of partners in a permanent same-sex life partnership.
68. In the second place there is no rational connection between the exclusion of same-sex life partners from the
benefits under S 25(5) and the government interest sought to be achieved thereby, namely the protection of families
and the family life of heterosexual spouses. No conceivable way was suggested, non can I think of any, whereby the
appropriate extension of the S 25(5) benefits to same-sex life partners could negatively effect such protection. A
similar argument has been roundly rejected by the Canadian Supreme Court, which court has also stressed, correctly
in my view, that concern for the protection of same-sex partnerships in no ways implies a disparagement of the
traditional institution of marriage. (In H, [1994] 4 LRC 551 at para 109 lacobucci J, writing for the court, said the
following:
'Even if I were to accept that Part 111 of the Act is meant to address the systemic sexual inequality associated
with opposite-sex relationships, the required nexus between this objective and the chosen measures is absent in
this case. In my view, it defies logic to suggest that a gender-neutral support system is rationally connected to the
goal of improving the economic circumstances of heterosexual women upon relationship breakdown. In addition, |
can find no evidence to demonstrate that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the spousal support regime of the
FLA in any way furthers the objective of assisting heterosexual women.
69. In Mossop, [1994] 2 LRC 436 at 482 L'Heureux-Dube J said:
[[]]n some ways, the debate about family presents society with a false choice. It is possible to be pro-family
without rejecting less traditional family forms. It is not anti-family to support protection for non-traditional families.
The traditional family is not the only family form and non-traditional family forms may equally advance true family
values."
70. The same learned judge confirmed this view in Miron V. Trudel, (1995) 124 DLR (4th) 693 at para 100:
'[Legislatures have intervened in a wide variety of contexts to protect individuals' vested interests in
relationships of some permanence and interdependence. These interventions are not anti-marriage. They simply
acknowledge that the family unit is evolving in response to changing times'.)
71. There is nothing in the scales to counteract such conclusion. I accordingly hold that S 25(5) constitutes unfair
discrimination and a serious limitation of the S 9(3) equality right of gays and lesbians who are permanent residents in
the Republic and who are in permanent same-sex life partnerships with foreign nationals. | also hold, for the reasons
appearing throughout this judgment and culminating in the conclusion reached at the beginning of this paragraph,
that S 25(5) simultaneously constitutes a severe limitation of the S 10 right to dignity enjoyed by such gays and
lesbians. Having come to this conclusion it is unnecessary to consider whether any of the freedom of movement rights
of the eighth to the thirteenth applicants, guaranteed under S 24 of the Constitution, have been limited in any way by
S 25(5).
Justification
72. I now apply the S 36(1) justification analysis, incorporating that of proportionality applied to the balancing of
different interests, as enunciated in State V. Makwanyane, [1995] 1 LRC 269 at 316 and as adapted for the 1996
Constitution in the Sodomy case (paras 33-35). The rights limited, namely equality and dignity, are important rights
going to the core of our constitutional democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom (see SS (a) and 7(1)
of the Constitution). The forming and sustaining of intimate personal relationships of the nature here in issue are for
many individuals essential for their own self-understanding and for the full development and expression of their
human personalities. Although expressed in a different context and when marital status was not a ground specified in
S 8(2) of the interim Constitution, the following remarks of O'Regan J in Harksen, are apposite:
'I agree that marital status is a matter of significant importance to all individuals, closely related to human
dignity and liberty. For most people, the decision to enter into a permanent personal relationship with another is a
momentous and defining one.' (See Harksen, [1998] 2 LRC 171 at para 92.)
73. The effect of omitting same-sex life partnerships from S 25(5) limits the above rights at a deep and serious
level.
74. There is no interest on the other side that enters the balancing process. It is true, as previously stated, that
the
protection of family and family life in conventional spousal relationships is an important governmental objective, but
the extent to which this could be done would in no way be limited or affected if same-sex life partners were
appropriately included under the protection of S 25(5). There is, in my view, no justification for the limitation in the
present case and it therefore follows that the provisions of S 25(5) are inconsistent with the Constitution and invalid.
75. It is important to indicate and emphasise the precise ambit of the above holding. The court is in the present
case concerned only with partners in permanent same-sex life partnerships. The position of unmarried partners in
permanent heterosexual partnerships and their omission from the provisions of S 25(5) was never an issue in the case
non was any argument addressed thereon. The court does not reach the latter issue in this case and I express no view
thereon, leaving it completely open. Nor does the court in this case reach the issue of whether, or to what extent, the
law ought to give formal institutional recognition to same-sex partnerships and this issue is similarly left open.
The appropriate remedy
76. The High Court was faced with the difficult task of devising an appropriate remedy consequent upon its finding
S 25(5) to be constitutionally invalid because of what it omitted.
77. As far as the declaration of invalidity is concerned the High Court considered that three options were open to it.
The first was to remedy the constitutional invalidity of S 25(5) by introducing ('reading-in') words into the section in
such a way that its provisions also applied to persons in same-sex life partnerships. The High Court decided against
such remedy as an appropriate one, principally because it was of the view that it was not possible to define with a
sufficient degree of precision the words that had to be inserted in S 25(5) in order for it to comply with the
Constitution (at 294-295). The second was postulated as follows:
'Were a declaration of invalidity to provide that the section is inconsistent with the Constitution to the extent that
it
confers an exclusive benefit on spouses and hence discriminates on the grounds of sexual orientation, the rest of
the section could remain valid. Thus spouses as defined in terms of the Act at present would continue to enjoy a
benefit.' (At 296.)
78. The third was to 'declare the section in its entirety to be invalid' (at 296). The High Court purported to adopt
the second option because it appeared-
'preferable to frame the declaration of invalidity so as to save a legitimate purpose (that is, acknowledging the
importance of some forms of permanent relationships) rather than to deny a benefit to all who deserve it. But this
perpetrates discrimination in respect of certain forms of permanent relationships. Thus legislative action is required
to remedy the position and ensure that no unjustified discrimination is permitted by the Act.' (At 296.)
and accordingly drafted para 1 of its order to read:
'Section 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991 is declared invalid to the extent that the benefit conferred
exclusively on spouses is inconsistent with S 9(3) in that on grounds of sexual orientation it discriminates against
same sex-life partners.' (At 296.)
79. The High Court suspended this order for a period of twelve months 'from the date of confirmation of this order
to enable Parliament to correct the inconsistency' and made the further orders quoted in para 2 of this judgment.
80. While appreciating the novelty and difficulty of framing an appropriate order in the circumstances of the present
case, one is driven to conclude that the High Court did not, in effect, through para 1 of its order, bring about the
invalidity of any portion of S 25(5). This is so for two reasons. It appears clearly from its motivation for the second
option (which it adopted) that it aimed, through its order, to preserve the benefits of the section for spouses and was
intent on giving an order to achieve this object. This was in fact also the effect of the order, the interpretation of which
is complicated by the fact that it conflates reasons for the order with its operative terms. The device of notional
severance can effectively be used to render inoperative portions of a statutory provision, where it is the presence of
particular provisions which is constitutionally offensive and where the scope of the provision is too extensive and hence
constitutionally offensive, but the unconstitutionality cannot be cured by the severance of actual words from the
provision. An order giving effect to and embodying such notional severance in the case of constitutional invalidity was
made for the first time in Ferreira V. Levin NO; Vryenhoek V. Powell NO (where, in para 1 of the order at para 157 of
the judgment, the following declaration is made The provisions of S 417(2)(b) of the Companies Act, 1973 are, with
immediate effect declared invalid, to the extent only that the words "and any answer given to any such question may
thereafter be used in evidence against him" in S 417(2)(b) apply to the use of any such answer against the person
who gave such answer, in criminal proceedings against such person, other than proceedings where that person stands
trial on a charge relating to the administering or taking of an oath or the administering or making of an affirmation or
the giving of false evidence or the making of a false statement in connection with such questions and answers or a
failure to answer lawful questions fully and satisfactorily.') (My emphasis.)
81. Where, however, the invalidity of a statutory provision results from an omission, it is not possible, in my view,
to achieve notional severance by using words such as invalid to the extent that', or other expressions indicating
notional severance. An omission cannot, notionally, be cured by severance. This is implicit in the constitutional
jurisprudence of Canada and the United States dealt with later in this judgment and has been expressly so held in
Germany. (See 18 BVerfGE 288 at 301 and 22 BVerfGE 349 at 360). The only logical equivalent to severance, in the
case of invalidity caused by omission, is the device of reading-in. In the present case there are only two options;
declaring the whole of S 25(5) to be invalid or reading-in provisions to cure such invalidity.
82. In fashioning a declaration of invalidity, a court has to keep in balance two important considerations. One is the
obligation to provide the 'appropriate relief 'under S 38 of the Constitution, to which claimants are entitled when 'a
right in the Bill of Rights has been infringed or threatened' (the relevant part of S 38 reads: 'Anyone listed in this
section has the right to approach a competent court, alleging that a right in the Bill of Rights has been infringed or
threatened, and the court may grant appropriate relief, including a declaration of rights ...'). Although the remedial
provision considered by this court in Fose V. Minister of Safety and Security, [1998] 1 LRC 198 was that of the interim
Constitution, (s 7(4)( provided the following: When an infringement of or threat to any right entrenched in this
Chapter is alleged, any person referred to in para (b) shall be entitled to apply to a competent court of law for
appropriate relief, which may include a declaration of rights') the two provisions are in all material respects identical
and the following observations in that case are equally applicable to S 38 of the Constitution:
'Given the historical context in which the interim Constitution was adopted and the extensive violation of
fundamental rights which had preceded it, I have no doubt that this court has a particular duty to ensure that,
within the bounds of the Constitution, effective relief be granted for the infringement of any of the rights
entrenched in it. In our context an appropriate remedy must mean an effective remedy, for without effective
remedies for breach, the values underlying and the rights entrenched in the Constitution cannot properly be upheld
or enhanced. Particularly in a country where so few have the means to enforce their rights through the courts, it is
essential that on those occasions when the legal process does establish that an infringement of an entrenched right
has occurred, it be effectively vindicated. The courts have a particular responsibility in this regard and are obliged to
"forge new tools" and shape innovative remedies, if needs be, to achieve this goal' (see Fose, [1998] 1 LRC 198 at
para 69.)
83. The footnote omitted from the end of the quotation in the text, reads as follows: 'See the observations of Verma
J
in Nilbati Behera V. State of Orissa, [1994] 2 LRC 99 quoted in para 51 (supra) and the remarks of Harlan J in
Bivens, (1971) 493 US 388 at 407 quoted in paras 33, 34 and fn 67 (supra). In Nelles V. Ontario, (1989) 60 DLR (4th)
609 at 641-2 Lamen J observed as follows: "When a person can demonstrate that one of his Charter rights has been
infringed, access to a court of competent jurisdiction to seek a remedy is essential for the vindication of a
constitutional wrong. To create a right without a remedy is antithetical to one of the purposes of the Charter which
surely is to allow courts to fashion remedies when constitutional infringements occur." The court's obligation to provide
appropriate relief, must be read together with S 172(I)(b) which requires the court to make an order which is just and
equitable.
84. The other consideration a court must keep in mind, is the principle of the separation of powers and, flowing
therefrom, the deference it owes to the legislature in devising a remedy for a breach of the Constitution in any
particular case. It is not possible to formulate in general terms what such deference must embrace, for this depends
on the facts and circumstances of each case. In essence, however, it involves restraint by the courts in not trespassing
onto that part of the legislative field which has been reserved by the Constitution, and for good reason, to the
legislature. Whether, and to what extent, a court may interfere with the language of a statute will depend ultimately
on the correct construction to be placed on the Constitution as applied to the legislation and facts involved in each
case (see Executive Council, Western Cape Legislature V. President of the Republic of South Africa, 1995 (4) SA 877 at
paras 99-100).
85. I am persuaded by Mr Trengove's submission that, as far as deference to the legislature is concerned, there is
in principle no difference between a court rendering a statutory provision constitutional by removing the offending part
by actual or notional severance, or by reading words into a statutory provision. In both cases the parliamentary
enactment, as expressed in a statutory provision, is being altered by the order of a court, in the one case by excision
and in the other by addition.
86. This chance difference cannot by itself establish a difference in principle. The only relevant inquiry is what the
consequences of such an order are and whether they constitute an unconstitutional intrusion into the domain of the
legislature. Any other conclusion would lead to the absurdity that the granting of a remedy would depend on the
fortuitous circumstance of the form in which the legislature chose to enact the provision in question. A legislature
could, for example, extend certain benefits to life-partners generally and exclude same-sex life partners by way of
express exception. In such case there would be no objection to declaring the exception invalid, where a court was
satisfied that such severance was, on application of whatever the appropriate test might be, constitutionally justified
in relation to the legislature. It would be absurd to deny the reading-in remedy, where it was equally constitutionally
justified in relation to the legislature, simply because of its form.
87. There is nothing in the Constitution to suggest that form must be placed above substance in a way that would
result in so glaring an anomaly. The supremacy clause, S 2, does not enact that 'words' inconsistent with the
Constitution are invalid but rather that inconsistent law' is. Similarly S 172(1)(a) obliges a competent court to declare
that 'any law that is inconsistent with the Constitution is invalid to the extent of its inconsistency' and not 'any
words' or 'any words in any law'. The same conclusion regarding the nature and permissibility of reading-in as a
constitutional remedy was reached by the Canadian Supreme Court in the leading case of Schachterv Canada, (1992)
93 DLR (4th) 1 at 12-13 per Lamer CJ for the court.
88. I accordingly conclude that reading-in is, depending on all the circumstances, an appropriate form of relief
under S 38 of the Constitution and that-
'whether a court "reads in" or "strikes out" words from a challenged law, the focus of the court should be on the
appropriate remedy in the circumstances and not on the label used to arrive at the result.' (See Knodel V. British
Columbia (Medical Services Commission), [1991] 6 WWR 728 per Rowles J, as quoted with approval by Lamer CJ in
Schachter, (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 1 at 13.)
89. The real question is whether, in the circumstances of the present matter, reading-in would be just and
equitable and an appropriate remedy.
90. I am strengthened in this conclusion by the fact that in several jurisdictions, courts have held that they do
possess the power to read words into statutes where appropriate. In Schachter, (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 1 at 11-25, the
leading Canadian case, the Supreme Court of Canada held that a court may read words into a statute in appropriate
circumstances and set out principles to guide such decisions. Since then, Canadian courts have read words into
statutes on several occasions. (See Miron V. Trudel, (1995) 124 DLR (4th) 693 at paras 178-181. See also Egan V.
Canada, (1995) 29 CRR (2d) 79 at 159-161 (in which the dissenters proposed the reading of words into a statute),
Rodriguez V. British Columbia (A-G), [1994] 2 LRC 136 at 171). Courts in the United States also accept that they have
the power to read words into statutes to provide remedies for unconstitutionality (see Iowa-Des Moines National Bank
V. Bennett, 284 239 US (1931), Welsh V. United States, 333 US (1970), Califano, Secretary of Health, Education
and Welfare V. Westcott et al, 443 76 US (1979), Skinner V. Oklahoma, 316 US 535 (1942), and a discussion of the
issue by Bruce K Miller 'Constitutional Remedies for Underinclusive Statutes : A Critical Appraisal of Heckler
V.
Mathews' in (1985) 20 Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties LR 79 and by Evan H Caminker 'A Norm-Based Remedial
Model for Under-inclusive Statutes' in (1985-86) 95 Yale LJ 1185. The Israeli Supreme Court (in (El AI Israel Airlines
Ltd V. Danilowitz (case 721/94, a judgment of the Supreme Court of Israel sitting as the High Court of Justice,
unreported) and the German Constitutional Court have also made similar orders (the German court had previously
declined to make such an order but in a landmark decision in November 1998 it adopted an approach which essentially
constituted the reading in of words to a statute. Reported in 1999 NJW 557).
91. Criticism has also been expressed of a model for remedy selection, with respect to under-inclusive provisions,
which assumes that there is no constitutional norm, albeit inchoate, which can guide such selection. While it is
impossible to reflect adequately, in any summary, the richness and depth of the contentions advanced in this regard
by Caminker, the following passages capture important aspects of their thrust and are relevant to the present inquiry:
'[G]iven the presence of an inchoate substantive norm and the absence of structural values obliging judicial
passivity, the current model's assumption that courts conclude their "essentially judicial" role simply by mandating
equal treatment through either extension or nullification is false. Though both remedies are formally adequate, one
is substantively preferred; courts (at least temporarily) can further actualize constitutional norms by choosing the
preferred remedy. Setting the remedial starting point in this manner maintains respect for the legislature's
authority to participate in the remedial decision; the potential for subsequent legislative review "vitiates any
objection that the Supreme Court, in fashioning interstitial rules, violates separation of powers principles vis-a-vis
Congress." Indeed, employing the norm-based model not only will better execute the judiciary's proper remedial
function, but it also will enrich the legislature's contribution by enhancing its subsequent deliberative process.
When selecting a particular remedy according to this model, a court necessarily will discuss candidly the source and
strength of the constitutional preference expressed by relevant inchoate norms. This discussion will inform the
ensuing legislative deliberations and generate normative claims for leaving the court's starting point undisturbed;
the legislature therefore is more likely to take account of both constitutional values and policy preferences when
formulating its ultimate remedial response.' (See Caminker, op cit, pp 1204-1205)
92. Having concluded that it is permissible in terms of our Constitution for this court to read words into a statute to
remedy unconstitutionality, it is necessary to summarise the principles which should guide the court in deciding when
such an order is appropriate. In developing such principles, it is important that the particular needs of our Constitution
and its remedial requirements be constantly borne in mind.
93. The severance of words from a statutory provision and reading words into the provision are closely related
remedial powers of the court. In deciding whether words should be severed from a provision or whether words should
be read into one, a court pays careful attention first, to the need to ensure that the provision which results from
severance or reading words into a statute is consistent with the Constitution and its fundamental values and secondly,
that the result achieved would interfere with the laws adopted by the legislature as little as possible. In our society
where the statute books still contain many provisions enacted by a Parliament not concerned with the protection of
human rights, the first consideration will, in those cases, often weigh more heavily than the second.
94. In deciding to read words into a statute, a court should also bear in mind that it will not be appropriate to read
words in, unless in so doing a court can define with sufficient precision how the statute ought to be extended in order
to comply with the Constitution. Moreover, when reading-in, (as when severing), a court should endeavour to be as
faithful as possible to the legislative scheme within the constraints of the Constitution. Even where the remedy of
reading-in is otherwise justified, it ought not to be granted where it would result in an unsupportable budgetary
intrusion (see the discussion concerning the appropriateness of a retrospective order which has serious budgetary
implications in Tsotetsi V. Mutual & Federal Insurance Co Ltd, 1997 (1) SA 585 at para 9). In determining the scope of
the budgetary intrusion, it will be necessary to consider the relative size of the group which the reading-in would add
to the group already enjoying the benefits. Where reading-in would, by expanding the group of persons protected,
sustain a policy of long standing or one that is constitutionally encouraged, it should be preferred to one removing the
protection completely (see Schachter, (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 1 at 23-25).
95. It should also be borne in mind that whether the remedy a court grants is one striking down, wholly or in part;
or reading into or extending the text, its choice is not final. Legislatures are able, within constitutional limits, to amend
the remedy, whether by re-enacting equal benefits, further extending benefits, reducing them, amending them, 'fine-
tuning' them (as it was put in Califano, Secretary of State, Education and Welfare V. Westcott, (1979) 443 US 76) or
abolishing them. Thus they can exercise final control over the nature and extent of the benefits (see, for example,
Caminker, pp 1187 where the following is aptly stated: Whether a court creates graveyards or vineyards, its choice is
not final. Where courts nullify provisions, legislatures can respond by enacting extended and hence constitutional
versions; where courts extend provisions, legislatures can subsequently repeal them. Thus, the legislature retains final
control over the extension/nullification decision. Still, a court must implement a remedy which acts as a "starting
point" for legislative review.' See also Bruce Miller 'Constitutional Remedies For Underinclusive Statutes A Critical
Appraisal of Heckler V. Mathews', op cit, and Nitya Duclos and Kent Roach 'Constitutional Remedies as Constitutional
Hints-A Comment on RV. Schachter', (1991) 36 McGill LJ 1, for illuminating discussions on this general topic).
96. I turn finally to the application of the principles or guidelines, referred to above, to the facts and legislative
unconstitutionality in the present case. The striking down of S 25(5) will have the unfortunate result of depriving
spouses, as presently defined, from the benefits conferred by the section; it will indeed be 'equality with a vengeance'
and create 'equal graveyards' (see Schachter, (1992) 93 DLR (4th) 1 at 15). This consequence cannot properly be
addressed by the device of suspending such order for a fixed period of time. The above unfortunate consequences
would ensue if Parliament did nothing and the suspension lapsed with the effluxion of time.
97. More important perhaps is the fact that, normatively, such an order would convey an impression that achieving
equality by striking down the benefits which spouses presently enjoy would be a constitutionally permissible result. It
is unnecessary and undesirable to decide, in the present case, whether the failure to afford spouses the benefits that
they currently enjoy by virtue of the provisions of S 25(5) would be constitutionally defensible. It would be equally
undesirable to suggest the contrary by making a striking down order.
98. In any event, the benefits conferred on spouses express a clear policy of the government to protect and
enhance the family life of spouses. This policy extends back at least 69 years, for the provisions of S of the
Immigration Quota Act, 1930 provided a comparable benefit, although less fully and in a more discriminatory manner.
(The relevant part of S 3(1) reads: 'Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section it shall be competent for
the board in any calendar year to permit in its discretion any person born in any particular country not specified in the
Schedule to this Act to enter the Union for permanent residence therein, notwithstanding that the maximum number
of persons born in that country which may, under section 1, be permitted to enter the Union, have already been
granted permission to enter the Union during that year : Provided-(a) (b) that every person so
admitted-(i)
is
of
good character; and (ii) is in the opinion of the board likely to become readily assimilated with the inhabitants of the
Union and to become a desirable citizen of the Union within a reasonable period after his entry into the Union; and (iii)
is not likely to be harmful to the economic, or industrial welfare of the Union; and (iv) does not and is, in the opinion
of the board, not likely to pursue a profession, occupation, trade or calling in which, in the opinion of the board, a
sufficient number of persons is already engaged in the Union to meet the requirements of the inhabitants of the Union;
or (v) is the wife or a child under twenty-one years of age, or a destitute or aged parent or grandparent of a person
permanently and lawfully resident in the Union who is able and undertakes to maintain him or her. (Our emphasis.))
The indications are therefore strong that, had Parliament considered the most appropriate way for it to remedy the
unconstitutionality of S 25(5), it would have chosen a remedy which did not deprive spouses of their current benefits
under the section. This view is fortified by the fact that the government is, in other areas, giving effect to its legislative
obligations under the equality clause in respect of same-sex partners (see the statutes referred to in para [37],
above). All these considerations indicate that, if reasonably possible, a striking down order should not be the remedy
resorted to.
99. The group that reading-in would add to 'spouses' in S 25(5), namely same-sex life partners, must be very small
in comparison to the group benefited by the section. No statistics were provided by any of the litigants to quantify
this, but it is safe in my view to make this assumption. The government's policy behind the S 25(5) benefit would thus
be left intact by a reading-in remedy and the budgetary implications would be minuscule.
100. In my view the observations made in Fose which were quoted above (see para [65]) are of particular
application in the present case. In order for the norms and values lying at the heart of our Constitution to be made
concrete, it is particularly important for the court in this case to afford an effective remedy, which will also be seen to
be effective, to the eighth to thirteenth applicants, and people similarly placed within the context of S 25(5). If, in
order to do this properly, new tools have to be forged and innovative remedies shaped, this must be done.
101. An appropriate remedy in the present case must vindicate the rights of permanent same-sex life partners to
establish a family unit that, while retaining the characteristic features derived from its same-sex nature, receives the
same protection and enjoys the same concern from the law and from society generally as do marriages recognised by
law. But it must vindicate at more than an abstract level. It must operate to eradicate these stereotypes. Our
constitutional commitment to non-discrimination and equal protection demands this. There is a wider public
dimension. The bell tolls for everyone, because-
'[t]he social cost of discrimination is insupportably high and these insidious practices are damaging not only to
the individuals who suffer the discrimination, but also to the very fabric of our society' (see Mossop, [1994] 2 LRC
436 at 471 per L'Heureux Dube J. See also the plea by Thomas J in Quilter, [1998] 3 LRC 119 at 154: [the basic
human rights of minority groups are being denied], it is important to spell that denial out if the basic dignity of
everyone in a more enlightened age is to be secured.')
102. The most effective way of achieving this in the present case is by a suitable reading-in order, if this is
reasonably possible.
103. The only bar to such an order in this case would be if it were not possible to define with sufficient precision
how S 25(5) ought to be extended in order to comply with the Constitution. What constitutes sufficient precision must
depend on the facts and the demands of each case. In deciding what sufficient precision is, one must not lose sight of
the fact that the reading-in is not a final act. It is important to point out in this context that if the remedy decided
upon by a court were the striking down of S 25(5), coupled with a suspension order, the question of interim relief to
protect the successful applicants would present the same problems concerning the precise formulation of such an
interim order as does the remedy of reading-in. It was for this reason that the court in Miron declined to make a
suspended striking-down order coupled with a constitutional exemption as a form of relief (see Miron V. Trudel, (1995)
124 DLR (4th) 693, para 179).
104. The legislature is empowered to amend or fine-tune any extension that the court, through its order, might
make to S 25(5), or to do so with regard to any related or relevant provision, in order to give more accurate effect to
its policy, provided it does so in a manner which is not inconsistent with the Constitution. Equal protection and non-
discrimination as guaranteed under S 9 do not require identical treatment. (See Hugo V. President of the Republic of
South Africa, [1998] 1 LRC 662 at paras 41 and 112; and compare Hogg Constitutional Law of Canada (3rd edn, 1992)
p 910, paras 52.6(a) and (b)). The family unit of a same-sex life partnership is different from the family unit of
spouses and to treat them identically might in fact, in certain circumstances, result in discrimination. Spouses in a
conventional marriage are in a legal relationship acknowledged by the law in a particular way and the existence of the
conventional marriage is capable of easy and virtually incontestable proof; the legal relationship can also not be
terminated without the intervention of the courts. Same-sex life partnerships are as yet not recognised or protected in
a comparable manner by the law. In order to ensure equal protection and non-discrimination for persons in such
different family units it might be necessary to treat them differently. (Pretoria City Council V. Walker, 1998 (2) SA 363
para 46).
105. Reasonable legislative and administrative steps may be taken to prevent abuse of S 25(5) and evasion of the
provisions of the Act generally. Section 25(6) is such a step for it provides that-
[[a] regional committee may, in the case of a person who applies for an immigration permit and who has entered
into a marriage with a person who is permanently and lawfully resident in the Republic, less than two years prior to
the date of his or her application, refuse to authorize such a permit unless the committee is satisfied that such
marriage was not contracted for the purpose of evading any provision of this Act.'
106. Should the provisions of S 25(5) be extended to include permanent same-sex life partners, it would likewise
be permissible for Parliament and the executive to take reasonable steps to prevent persons falsely purporting to be in
same-sex life partnerships from evading the provisions of the Act.
107. Against the background of what has been said above I am satisfied that the constitutional defect in S 25(5)
can be cured with sufficient precision by reading-in, after the word 'spouse', the following words: 'or partner, in a
permanent same-sex life partnership,' and that it should indeed be cured in this manner. Permanent in this context
means an established intention of the parties to cohabit with one another permanently. In my view, such a reading-in,
seen in the light of what has been said above concerning the legislature's right to fine-tune the section as so extended
and other provisions that may be relevant thereto, does not intrude impermissibly upon the domain of the legislature.
108. It is necessary to emphasise again that the court need only provide the reading-in remedy for excluded same-
sex life partners, because it is only in relation to them that the court was called upon to decide, and only in relation to
them that it has been decided above, that their exclusion from the provisions of S 25(5) is constitutionally invalid.
Apart from those cases where the Constitution makes express provision to the contrary, a court decides constitutional
disputes and makes, where appropriate, orders of constitutional invalidity, only on the issues presented to it and not
as a matter of abstract constitutional adjudication. When a statutory provision has been partially invalidated by way of
notional severance, the hypothetical possibility always exists that subsequently, because of the issues and contentions
then placed before the court, the ambit of the constitutional invalidity might have to be extended. Likewise, after
reading-in matter to cure a constitutionally invalid under-inclusive provision, the possibility exists that, for identical
reasons, a court may have to extend the reading-in, in order to cure the constitutional invalidity. There is in principle
no difference between these two possibilities. The conclusion I have reached in this case is that S 25(5) is
unconstitutional in that it fails to include within its benefits a group entitled to such benefits. The order to be made
affords relief to such group. This does not mean that other groups are not entitled to the benefits provided by S 25(5).
109. Whoever in the administration of the Act is called upon to decide whether a same-sex life partnership
is
permanent, in the sense indicated above, will have to do so on the totality of the facts presented. Without purporting
to provide an exhaustive list, such facts would include the following the respective ages of the partners; the duration
of the partnership; whether the partners took part in a ceremony manifesting their intention to enter into a permanent
partnership, what the nature of that ceremony was and who attended it; how the partnership is viewed by the
relations and friends of the partners; whether the partners share a common abode; whether the partners own or lease
the common abode jointly; whether and to what extent the partners share responsibility for living expenses and the
upkeep of the joint home; whether and to what extent one partner provides financial support for the other: whether
and to what extent the partners have made provision for one another in relation to medical, pension and related
benefits; whether there is a partnership agreement and what its contents are; and whether and to what extent the
partners have made provision in their wills for one another. None of these considerations is indispensable for
establishing a permanent partnership. In order to apply the above criteria, those administering the Act are entitled,
within the ambit of the Constitution and bearing in mind what has been said in this judgment, to take all reasonable
steps, by way of regulations or otherwise, to ensure that full information concerning the permanent nature of any
same-sex life partnership, is disclosed.
The order
110. No case has been made out for the suspension of an order giving effect to such reading-in. Permanent same-
sex life partners are entitled to an effective remedy for the breach of their rights to equality and dignity. In the
circumstances of this case an effective remedy is one that takes effect immediately. At the same time, if the order
were to have retrospective effect, it might cause uncertainty concerning the validity of decisions taken and acts
performed in the past, in good faith and in reliance on the provisions of the Act as they then read, with regard to
applications under the Act by partners in permanent same-sex life partnerships. In my view such uncertainty ought, if
possible, to be avoided by limiting the order so that it has no retrospective effect. Such an order can cause no
prejudice to partners in permanent same-sex life partnerships who wish to seek afresh, or persist with seeking, relief
under the Act, for nothing prevents them from doing so immediately after the order is granted. It is therefore just and
equitable to make such a limiting order.
Costs
111. Mr Trengove submitted that the costs which should be awarded to the applicants in respect of the two abortive
interlocutory applications in this court should include the costs of two counsel and should be taxed on the scale as
between attorney and own client for two reasons; first, because they constitute an abuse of court process and, second,
because they are manifestly without merit.
112. The fact that both applications are manifestly without merit appears from what has already been said. The
High Court is rightly critical in its judgment of the conduct of the respondents in the High Court proceedings, their
dilatory approach to the litigation, and their attempt at the last moment to delay the hearing of the case. The same
criticism can be directed to their belated attempt to raise new issues through the two abortive interlocutory
applications to which I have referred at the commencement of this judgment, and their failure to explain why, even at
the stage of the hearing of the matter before this court, they had for a period of over 14 months failed to lodge an
answer to the factual averments made in the main application.
113. The wasted costs occasioned by these applications form part of the costs which the respondents will be
required to pay. What is in issue is whether the applications constitute an abuse of the process of the court which
merits the making of an order that the costs of the applications be paid as between attorney and client.
114. If the argument addressed to this court by the respondents concerning the merits of the appeal had revealed
the same lack of substance and apparent disregard for the rights of the applicants I would have had no hesitation in
ordering them to pay costs as between attorney and client, notwithstanding the fact that such costs are rarely
awarded on appeal. (See Herold V. Sinclair, 1954 (2) SA 531 (A) at 537, Ward V. Sulzer, 1973 (3) SA 701 (A) at 707
and Premier, Mpumalanga V. Executive Committee, Association of State-Aided Schools, Eastern Transvaal, 1999 (2)
SA 91 at para 55)
115. As far as the merits of the appeal are concerned, however, there is no criticism of the respondents' conduct.
They raised issues of substance, and it cannot be said that their decision to oppose the confirmation of the order made
by the High Court, and to appeal against the order made, was frivolous.
116. The two applications were concerned with collateral issues which could be disposed of summarily and took up
very little time. There are some wasted costs occasioned by the respondents having had to consider the issues raised
in the interlocutory applications and to respond to them on affidavit. In relation to the costs of the appeal as a whole,
however, such costs will be comparatively slight.
117. It is regrettable that the state should have considered it appropriate to raise before this court issues of such
little merit as those contained in the two abortive applications. Its conduct in doing so, however, taken in the context
of the appeal as a whole, does not constitute such a serious abuse of the process of the court as would warrant an
order that the costs of such applications be paid on an attorney and client basis.
Summary
118. Section 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991, by omitting to confer on persons, who are partners in
permanent same-sex life partnerships, the benefits it extends to spouses, unfairly discriminates, on the grounds of
their sexual orientation and marital status, against partners in such same-sex partnerships who are permanently and
lawfully resident in the Republic. Such unfair discrimination limits the equality rights of such partners guaranteed to
them by S 9 of the Constitution and their right to dignity under S 10. This limitation is not reasonable or justifiable in
an open and democratic society based on human dignity, equality and freedom and accordingly does not satisfy the
requirements of S 36(1) of the Constitution. This omission in S 25(5) of the Act is therefore inconsistent with the
Constitution. It would not be an appropriate remedy to declare the whole of S 25(5) invalid. Instead, it would be
appropriate to read in, after the word 'spouse' in the section, the words 'or partner, in a permanent same-sex life
partnership'. The reading-in of these words comes into effect from the making of the order in this judgment.
119. The following order is made:
1. The applications of the respondents for
(a) condonation of their failure to file answering affidavits in the High Court;
(b) leave to file their answering affidavits;
(c) the matter concerning the filing of answering affidavits to be remitted to the High Court; and
(d) an amendment of their notice of appeal are dismissed with costs, including the costs of two counsel, such
costs to be paid by the respondents jointly and severally.
2.
The appeal of the applicants succeeds and paras 1, 2 and 3 of the order made by the High Court are set aside
and replaced with the following:
2.1 the omission from S 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991, after the word 'spouse', of the words 'or partner, in a
permanent same-sex life partnership, is declared to be inconsistent with the Constitution;
2.2 S 25(5) of the Aliens Control Act, 1991, is to be read as though the following words appear therein after the
word 'spouse': 'or partner, in a permanent same-sex life partnership'.
3. The orders in para 2 only come into effect from the moment of the making of this order.
4. Paragraphs 4, 5 and the costs part of the High Court order are confirmed.
5. The costs of the proceedings in this court, including the costs of two counsel, are to be paid by the respondents,
jointly and severally.
Solicitors:
Legal Resources Centre for the applicants.
State Attorney for the respondents.
Vaibhav Jain V. Union of India
IN THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
In the Matter of:
Vaibhav Jain and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Another Respondents.
T.C. (C) No. 10 of 2023
Decided on May 10, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Shally Bhasin Advocate on Record for the Petitioners
INDEX
S. NO.
PARTICULARS
1.
Rejoinder Note of Arguments on behalf of Ms. Geeta Luthra, Senior Advocate
This is my truth. Truth is like a prism. My truth has to get full expression and this Court should
acknowledge my right as a citizen. My right cannot be trammelled upon or reduced to nothing as long as
it does no harm to any other person.
0 My fundamental right to choose/marry has to be accompanied by a basket of rights that accompany
the constitutional right to marry which include with it a right to have a family.
0 It cannot be an illusionary right/paper tiger/ephemeral right.
Marriage is the oldest social institution which gives legitimacy to my relationship. I too want to
cement the relationship the same way heterosexual couples want to cement their relationship. I also
want the same bundle/basket of core rights which are there of other married couples.
1. Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 has not been discussed by the Respondents:
- Since the discussion has been mostly centered around the Special Marriage Act, we want to re-emphasize
that the Foreign Marriage Act is a secular Act and is of great import.
- The Foreign Marriage Act, though being enacted on similar lines as SMA, stands on a slightly different
footing.
- While several Respondents have argued that reliance on foreign judgments/law is misplaced due to
difference of ethos of our society from theirs. | submit that it is wholly incorrect because:
a) We have drawn inspiration from best of their constitutions in framing our constitution.
b) Citizenship, International Law and Comity of Nations - are the core and basis of FMA.
c) Neighbouring countries like Nepal have identical social ethos - recognize same-sex marriage
- FMA has to be given a more purposive and expansive interpretation to include non-heterosexual couples within
its framework.
- The wrong being done to the Petitioners who have come under FMA before this Court is more stark and
glaring than wrong being to other Petitioners.
- We are already VALIDLY married. My marriage cannot be nothing in India.
-
My rights as an Indian citizen cannot be less in my own country/ cannot be less of a citizen in my own
country.
2. Right to Family and Marriage in Article 16, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
- Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 has the right to marry and to found a family
included in it.
- Once we agree that sexual orientation cannot come in the way, the natural corollary is the right to marry and
have a family.
1. [Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry
and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
3. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State.]
- Every HUMAN has a right to marry and have a family of his/her own. It cannot be denied by State. Petitioners
cannot even be asked to settle for a registered civil partnership. It is their right as equal human beings to marry
and have a family. These rights are fundamental rights under Part 111 as these rights are fundamental to a person's
existence as a human being.
- Just like marriage, concept of family has evolved over time. It does not encompass within its ambit only a man
and woman and their children, as has been argued by the Respondents.
"HARM PRINCIPLE" - John Stuart Mill articulated the 'harm principle' in his theory on Liberty. The same has
already been referred to in Navtej Johar. "The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over
any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others."
The State can intrude into private life by way of sanction only if harm is caused to others or if the
conduct is "other-affecting."
TIME INTENTION OF LEGISLATURE - Respondents are asking this Court to interpret SMA and FMA as per
the legislative intention in 1954 and 1969. But this Court has interpreted S. 377 (Homosexuality), 497 (Adultery)
and even S. 124 (Sedition) IPC in accordance with the present times. This is how a progressive judiciary and
democracy interprets.
3. Constitutional Morality over Societal Morality:
- Dr. Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly Debates said, The diffusion of 'constitutional morality', not merely
among the majority of any community, but throughout the whole is the indispensable condition of a government at
once free and peaceable; since even any powerful and obstinate minority may render the working of a free
institution impracticable, without being strong enough to conquer ascendance for themselves."
- 'Constitutional Morality' was reiterated in Kesavananda Bhrarati which cites Grote, one of the greatest
historians of Greece and echoes his words on Constitutional Morality.
- Time and again, the Supreme Court has held that Constitutional Morality will always prevail over Societal
Morality. [Navtej Singh; NCT of Delhi V. UOI.]
Societal Morality is always dependant on majority opinion. The rights of minority have to be secured by the
Constitutional Court.
- The principles of Equality, Liberty and Fraternity enshrined in our Preamble which are to be secured to the
people of this country cannot succumb to popular opinion.
- AS PER PRESENT LAW, homosexual couples have been reduced to and stereotyped of only having a
physical/sexual expression of their relationship, incapable of having a family. It is demeaning to suggest that their
love (and right) is any less than that of heterosexual couples.
4. Principle of Constitutional Comity needs to be recognized:
- The term 'Constitutional Morality' has developed over time. It is now time that the principle of 'Constitutional
Comity is also recognized by this Court.
- Meaning of Fundamental Rights cannot be different in different countries. Right to equality and liberty will have
the same meaning in India as in the USA or any other country.
5. Fundamental Rights cannot be denied/stalled till the Parliament acts: The Respondents have argued that it
is
for the legislature to make/amend laws with respect to marriage of same-sex couples.
- But FRs cannot be denied and homosexual couples cannot be asked or expected to keep waiting till the
legislature decides to act on it.
- Navtej Singh Johan judgment dates back to September 2018. SC has already recognized right to sexual
autonomy, dignity, privacy and equality for homosexual couples. Still for 5 years, the legislature has not done
anything for them. CORE RIGHTS HAVE TO BE SECURED.
6.
Reading-In" is an accepted mode of interpretation:
- This Court can 'read-in' the word husband/wife as 'spouse' wherever required. In such a case, the Court will not
be entering into legislature's domain and will just be reading the statutes in a manner to make it Constitutionally
Compliant while securing the fundamental rights of homosexual couples.
- Constitutional Court of South Africa in National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home
Affairs, [2000] 4 LRC 292 preceded the formal recognition to same-sex marriages and stopped short of considering
whether a global or umbrella institutional recognition was to be given to same-sex partnerships as it was not raised
in that matter.
- S. 25(2), Aliens Control Act - permitted foreign 'heterosexual spouses' of permanent South African residents to
apply for immigration permits but not to foreign 'permanent same-sex life partners' of such residents. The Court
held the section to constitute unfair discrimination and read in the words 'or permanent same sex life partners 'after
the word spouses.
- The South African Court held 'reading-in' to be an appropriate remedy obersving that a statutory
provision can be made constitutional either by excision (removing the offending part) or by addition
(reading words into provision). [Para 67]
- Gender-Neutral Interpretation: Court has interpreted provisions in a gender-neutral manner in the context
of family law to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality.
125 CrPC was in question - 'him' in the provision was held to include daughters also.
- Vishaka V. State - This Court in order to ensure compliance with CEDAW and ICCPR did not hesitate to bring in
the guidelines for women.
- Medha Kotwal V. UOI - This Court has ensured that guidelines in Vishaka have not remained a paper right for
women who are alleging sexual harassment at workplace and have become a reality.
- Gainda Ram V. MCD - This Court gave time to MCD and NDMC to frame a law within a specific time period.
-
If reading a statute in a manner that it upholds Part III, if that makes the statute more inclusive, so be it.
- Where it is required for a fundamental right in a statute, this Court has read-in.
7. Declaration of right to marry of same-sex couples is imperative: The Respondents have not once submitted
before this Court that same-sex couples have a right to marry. They are not even willing to recognize it.
- It is for the Constitutional Court to recognize and declare the right to marry of same-sex couples. Any kind of
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity is ultra vires the Constitution and cannot be
allowed to continue by this Court on the ground of "Legislative Domain".
- The right to marry will also include the various ancillary rights, entitlements, etc.
- Special Marriage Act and Foreign Marriage Act are secular legislations. Religious opinions or personal laws are
not being touched in the present matter.
8. Administrative 'privileges" which the Respondents are offering are not sufficient:
- The Respondents, while explicitly denying the Petitioners the right to marry, are offering to 'consider' giving
them administrative privileges.
- The administrative perks cannot be equated with the right to marry. These privileges follow the institution of
marriage and are not its substitute.
9.
Inconvenience" or Difficulties in Implementation" cannot be an argument to deny Fundamental Rights:
- The Respondents have argued that there are more than 72 variations of 'LGBTQIA+ community and that it is
not feasible to recognize them.
- The said argument is unsustainable. Fundamental rights are not dependant on convenience of the legislature
and this Court is not creating any right. What is only being sought is recognition of the rights which already exist.
Supriyo V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1011 of 2022 & Connected Matters
Decided on April 5, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Drawn & Settled By:
Adv. Thulasi K Raj
Mohammad Sadique Advocate for the Applicant
Compilation I Written Submissions on behalf of the Petitioners
LIST OF ARGUING COUNSEL IN RESPECTIVE MATTERS AND TENTATIVE TIME SOUGHT FOR ARGUMENTS
[NOTE : Sequence of matters is as per Order dated 06.01.2023 and date of issuance of notice in matters
listed thereafter.]
S. No.
Case Particulars
Statute
Counsel
Time (Hrs.)
Page Nos.
challenged
1.
Supriyo
@
Special Marriage
Mukul
Rohatgi,
4
1-101
Supriya
Act
Sr. Adv.
Chakraborty
V.
UOI,
W.P.
(C)
1011/2022
6.
Udit Sood V. UOI,
391-423
T.C. (C) 13/2023
2.
Parth
Phiroze
Special Marriage
Saurabh
Kirpal,
1
102-157
Mehrotra V. UOI,
Act
Sr. Adv.
W.P.
(C)
1020/2022
[Submissions
and rejoinder
submissions]
3.
Dr. Kavita Arora
Special Marriage
Arundhati Katju,
2
158-268
V. UOI, T.C. (C)
Act
Adv.
08/2023; along
with Aditi Anand
V. UOI, W.P. (C)
no. 1141/2022
4.
Sameer Samudra
Foreign Marriage
Anand Grover, Sr.
2
269-322
V. UOI, W.P. (C)
Act,
Special
Adv.
1105/2022;
Marriage
Act,
along with Nitin
Hindu Marriage
Karani V. UOI,
Act
W.P. (C) no.
1150/2022
5.
Nibedita Dutta V.
Hindu
Marriage
Dr.
Menaka
4
323-390
UOI,
T.C.
(C)
Act
Guruswamy, Sr.
07/2023
Adv.
7.
Utkarsh
Saxena
Special
Marriage
Dr.
Abhishek
4
424-461
V. UOI, W.P. (C)
Act,
Foreign
Manu Singhvi, Sr.
no. 1142/2022
Marriage Act
Adv.
8.
Zainab Patel V.
Right
of
K.V.
1.5
462-520
UOI, T.C.
(C)
transgender
Vishwanathan,
12/2023
persons to marry
Sr. Adv.
under
all
matrimonial laws
9.
Mellissa Ferrier V.
Special Marriage
Karuna Nundy,
2
521-552
UOI,
T.C.
(C)
Act,
Foreign
Adv.
09/2023;
along
Marriage Act, and
with
Joydeep
Citizenship Act
Sengupta
V.
Ministry of Home
Affairs, T.C. (C)
11/2023
10.
Vaibhav Jain V.
Foreign Marriage
Geeta Luthra, Sr.
1.5
553-604
UOI,
T.C.
(C)
Act
Adv.
10/2023
11.
Nikesh PP V. UOI,
Special Marriage
Manu
Srinath,
15 minutes
605-628
T.C. (C) 05/2023
Act
Adv.
12.
Abhijit lyer Mitra
Hindu
Marriage
Raghav Awasthi,
3
629-689
V. UOI, T.C. (C)
Act
Adv.
06/2023
[Submissions
and additional
submissions]
13.
Kajal V. UOI, W.P.
Special Marriage
Raju
3
690-731
(C) no. 93/2023
Act
Ramachandran,
Sr. Adv.
14.
Amburi Roy V.
Foreign Marriage
Anitha
Shenoy,
1.5
732-769
UOI, W.P. (C) no.
Act,
Adoption
Sr. Adv.
129/2023
Regulations,
2022
15.
Akkai Padmashali
Right
of
Jayna Kothari, Sr.
1
770-792
V. UOI, W.P. (C)
transgender
Adv.
no. 159/2023
persons to marry
under the Special
Marriage Act
16.
Rituparna Borah
Special Marriage
Vrinda
Grover,
1.5
793-902
V. UOI, W.P. (C)
Act
Adv.
no. 260/2023
17.
Harish lyer V.
Special Marriage
Shivam
Singh,
25 minutes
903-909
UOI, W.P. (C) no.
Act
Adv.
319/2023
18.
Arun Kumar T.R.
Special Marriage
Thulasi
K.
Raj,
35 minutes
910-932
[I.A.
Act
Adv.
57252/2023]
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 1011 OF 2022
In the Matter of:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty & Anr
Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MR. MUKUL ROHATGI, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR THE PETITIONERS
INDEX
BACKGROUND OF THE PETITIONERS 3
PRAYER 5
SUBMISSIONS 5
I. Existing LGBTQ Rights jurisprudence recognizes same-sex marriage 5
11. Article 19 and 21 of the Constitution guarantee all persons the right to marry a person of their choice, including
LGBTQIA+ citizens. 12
111. Article 21 : The impugned statute violates the right to dignity and decisional autonomy of LGBTQIA+ persons.
15
IV. Article 15 : Excluding LGBTQIA+ persons from the SMA discriminates based on their (i) their sexual orientation,
and (ii) the sex of their partner. 18
A. Denying same-sex and gender non-conforming couples the right to marry discriminates on the basis of sexual
orientation 18
B. Denying same-sex and gender non-conforming couples the right to marry is discrimination on the basis of sex
19
V. Article 14 : The impugned statute (a) denies LGBTQIA+ persons the equal protection of laws (b) are manifestly
arbitrary and (c) fail the rational nexus test. 20
A. Non-recognition of same-sex and gender non-conforming marriage denies LGBTQIA+ persons equal protection
of the laws 20
Non-recognition of same-sex and gender-non conforming marriage causes prejudice to LGBTQIA+
persons and denies them rights under social welfare and beneficial legislations 21
B. It is manifestly arbitrary to exclude LGBT couples from the framework of the SMA 23
C. Excluding LGBTQ couples from the SMA fails the rational nexus test 24
The object of the SMA is to provide for civil and uniform marriage 25
There is no intelligible differentia between LGBT and opposite-sex couples 29
VI. Recognizing marriage of LGBTQ couples upholds constitutional morality 31
A. This Hon'ble Court has a duty to uphold constitutional morality over social morality 31
B. The Constitution is a living document and ought to adapt to changing social realities 35
VII. Finding that impugned matrimonial statutes allow LGBTQ couples to marry will save them from the vice of
unconstitutionality 38
A. This Court has the power to read the impugned matrimonial statues in a gender-neutral manner 38
B. The impugned matrimonial statues can be read in a gender-neutral manner qua LGBTQ couples 40
Matrimonial statues can be read in a gender-neutral manner qua LGBTQ couples 40
Other statutory provisions can also be read in a gender-neutral manner 41
VIII. There is growing international consensus recognizing same-sex and gender non-conforming marriages, and
the same is in line with India's international obligations 48
A. India has an international obligation to recognize marriage equality 48
B.
There is an increasing international judicial consensus around sexual orientation equality, including
recognizing same-sex marriages 51
ANNEXURE A - TABLE ON ILLUSTRATIVE BUNDLE OF RIGHTS ENJOYED BY MARRIED COUPLES AND THEIR
CHILDREN 58
ANNEXURE B - TABLE ON INDICATIVE CHANGES MADE TO PERSONAL LAWS, CIVIL UNIFORM MARITAL LAWS,
AND CUSTOMS THROUGH LEGISLATIONS AND PRECEDENTS 89
ANNEXURE C - TABLE ON THE PROPOSED WORKABILITY OF THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954 94
ANNEXURE D - TABLE ON LEGAL STATUS OF SAME-SEX UNIONS ACROSS THE WORLD 96
BACKGROUND OF THE PETITIONERS
1. Mr. Supriyo Chakraborty and Mr. Abhay Dang are gay men and citizens of India. Petitioners are 32 and 35 years
old, and have been in a committed relationship for almost a decade. [Annexure P-6 @ pg.78] Petitioners live
together in Hyderabad, Telangana.
2. The pandemic brought the frailty of life home to both partners and their families. They both got COVID during
the second wave but Supriyo was much worse; Abhay had to look desperately for oxygen and rush Supriyo to the ER
while taking care of himself. Although they had always discussed getting married someday in the future, the pandemic
accelerated this conversation. Petitioners felt that they needed a little more than love, and wished for the security that
marriage brought along. They decided to have a wedding-cum-commitment ceremony on their 9th anniversary to
celebrate their relationship with all their loved ones.
3. On 17-18 December 2021, Supriyo and Abhay held a commitment ceremony to commemorate their relationship,
with the blessings of their families and friends. The ceremony meant as much to their parents as it did to them. In
true Bengali fashion, Supriyo's mother performed the boron ritual for Abhay and welcomed him into their family as
she
would her son's bride. [Annexures P-9 @ pg.94; P-10 @ pg.97, P-11 @ P-12 @
4. Supriyo's parents thereafter organized a reception in Ashoknagar, West Bengal for the Petitioners, so that other
relatives and neighbours who could not attend the ceremony in December could bless the couple. Surprisingly, the
reception ceremony organized by Supriyo's parents had a bigger turnout than the commitment ceremony held in
December, 2021. It was a matter of great pleasure and joy for the Petitioners and their families. @ pg.
5. Unfortunately, after the euphoria of the ceremony has worn off, Petitioners are faced with a cold reality of their
lives. Despite being a couple for over a decade, calling their parents mummy-papa and maa-baba and going on
holidays with them, having bought a home and built a life together, Supriyo and Abhay's relationship is still legally as
fragile as it was during the dark days of the pandemic. They do not enjoy any of the rights that married couples do,
even though this Hon'ble Court has time and again declared that all adults have the right to marry a person of their
choice.
6. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 ["SMA"], was introduced to provide a civil form of marriage for couples who
cannot marry under their personal law. Petitioners submit that the Special Marriage Act is ultra vires the Constitution
to the extent it discriminates between same sex and gender non-conforming couples on one hand, and opposite sex
couples on the other hand, denying same-sex and genden non-conforming couples both legal rights as well as the
social recognition and status that flow from marriage. Non-recognition of same-sex marriage violates their rights under
Article 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India, and therefore, warrants judicial review by this Hon'ble Court.
PRAYER
7. Petitioners pray that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate
writ:
(a) Declaring that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ought to apply to "a marriage between any two persons"
regardless of their gender identity and sexual orientation; or in the alternative
(b) Declaring that the Special Marriage Act, 1954, is unconstitutional and violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of
the Constitution of India, insofar as it does not provide for solemnization of marriage between a same sex
couple; and
(c) Pass any other writ, order or direction that this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and necessary in the interest of
justice.
SUBMISSIONS
I. Existing LGBTQ Rights jurisprudence recognizes same-sex marriage
8. Vide Order dated 13.03.2023 in WP (C.) no. 1011/2022, the present matter was referred to the present
Constitution Bench to "determine the broader context of the petitions before this Court and the inter relationship
between the statutory regime and constitutional rights".
9. This Hon'ble Court has crystallized the fundamental rights of LGBTQIA+ persons in the following decisions:
10. In his concurring opinion in Puttaswamy, Justice R.F. Nariman held that the right to privacy includes protecting
individual interests in making "vital personal choices", such as "the rights of same-sex couples-including the right to
marry..." [Para 46]. Hence, the right of LGBTQ couples to marry has already been recognized by a nine-judge bench of
this Hon'ble Court.
11. Further, this Hon'ble Court's existing jurisprudence on LGBTQIA+ rights, as laid down in Puttaswamy, Johar and
NALSA, declares that LGBTQIA+ persons are entitled to dignity, equality, and privacy. They enjoy all constitutional
rights at par with other citizens. This Court's jurisprudence thus encompasses the fundamental right of LGBTQIA+
persons to marry a person of their choice, as is available to all citizens. Accordingly, statutory recognition of such
fundamental rights of LGBTQIA+ persons is merely a consequence of this Hon'ble Court's jurisprudence.
12. Hence, at the outset, the reference to this Hon'ble Court may be answered by considering Puttaswamy, Johar,
NALSA and Deepika Singh in detail.
13. In Puttaswamy, Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. (as he then was) noted in Paragraph 144 in the context of
constitutional rights of gender non-conforming persons and sexual minorities that ...their rights are as sacred
as
those
conferred on other citizens to protect their freedoms and liberties." This Court further held that sexual orientation is an
essential attribute of privacy and that "discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual orientation is deeply
offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual." Finally, this Court held that the right to privacy and "the
protection of sexual orientation lies at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the
Constitution."
14. Further in paragraph 145, the Court held that the rights of LGBT persons are not "so-called rights". They are
founded on "sound constitutional doctrine", "inhere in the right to life" and dwell in "privacy and dignity". Therefore,
which directly bears upon the evolution of the constitutional jurisprudence on the right to privacy" [paragraph 142 per
Chandrachud, J. (as he then was)]
15. In paragraph 298, Chandrachud, J. (as he then was) further held that decisional autonomy and dignity of the
individual are essential to the protection of privacy. In holding so, the Court observed that "family, marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual." The Court further held that "freedom
of self-determination", as a facet of Article 19, is also intrinsic to the right to dignity.
16. In paragraph 479, RF Nariman, J. (as he then was) held that the right to privacy includes protecting individual
interests in making "vital personal choices", such as "the rights of same-sex couples-including the right to
marry
17. In paragraph 647, SK Kaul, J. concurring with the opinions of Chandrachud and Nariman, JJ. held that sexual
orientation is "undoubtedly an attribute of privacy."
18. Dipak Mishra, CJ (as he then was), in paragraph 22 observed that sexual orientation is integral to not just
LGBTQIA+ persons' "intimate lives" but also impacts their "family, professional, social and educational life". Further, in
paragraphs 119-121, Chief Justice Misra held that the right to choose a life partner is an aspect of individual liberty
immune from "social standardisation". He further held that dignity and choice are inherent to the individual.
19. This Hon'ble Court expounded a broad understanding of the right to a union under Article 21, which includes
marriage. Dipak Mishra, CJ (as he then was), in paragraph 167 held as under-
"167. The above authorities capture the essence of the right to privacy. There can be no doubt that an individual
also has a right to a union under Article 21 of the Constitution. When we say union, we do not mean the union of
marriage, though marriage is a union. As a concept, union also means companionship in every sense of the word,
be it physical, mental, sexual or emotional. The LGBT community is seeking realisation of its basic right to
companionship, so long as such a companionship is consensual, free from the vice of deceit, force, coercion and
does not result in violation of the fundamental rights of others."
20. In paragraph 183, the Court noted that in cases involving the fundamental rights of LGBTQIA+ persons, the
test is "whether the community is entitled to certain fundamental rights which they claim, and whether such
fundamental rights are being violated due the presence of a law in the statute book." The Court held that if both
questions are answered in the affirmative, the such provisions ought to be struck down by constitutional courts.
Mishra, CJ (as he then was) rejected the submission that procreation is the only reason for which people choose to
marry (para 230).
21. In paragraph 255, Mishra, CJ held that:
"255. The LGBT community possess the same human, fundamental and constitutional rights as other
citizens do since these rights inhere in individuals as natural and human rights.
The organization of intimate relations is a matter of complete personal choice especially between
consenting adults. It is vital personal right falling within private protective sphere and real of individual choice
and autonomy."
[Emphasis supplied]
22. In paragraph 268.7, the Court held that "any discrimination on the basis of one's sexual orientation would
entail a violation of the fundamental right of freedom of expression."
23. Nariman J, in his concurring opinion held that LGBTQIA+ persons have a fundamental right to live with dignity
and are entitled to the equal protection under law (para 369).
24. Chandrachud J., in paragraphs 428-440, held that
(a) To determine whether a statute is constitutional, courts should look to effect on the infringement of fundamental
rights.
(b) Article 15 injuncts Parliament from making a law that discriminates only on the basis of sex as it furthers a
formalistic interpretation of the Article.
(c) Grounds of discrimination, both direct and indirect, founded on stereotypical understanding of the role of the
sex, violate Article 15.
25. In paragraph 564, this Court held that decriminalization of Section 377 IPC is a mere "first step" The
constitutional principles on which decriminalization is based apply to "a broad range of entitlements." Further, in
paragraph 606, the Court held that constitutional morality impacts any law which deprives LGBTQIA+ individuals from
"full and equal citizenship".
26. Finally, in paragraph 618, Chandrachud J. held that LGBTQIA+ persons are entitled, like all other citizens, to
the full range of constitutional rights and liberties, to protection against discrimination, and to the equal protection of
laws. The Court further held that the choice of who to partner is intrinsic to the constitutional protection of sexual
orientation.
27. Indu Malhotra, J., in paragraph 637.3, held that the "natural or innate sexual orientation of a person cannot be
a ground for discrimination" and that a classification based on such an intrinsic and core train of an individual is
neither reasonable non based on intelligible differentia.
28. The Court in paragraph 638.2, held that Article 15 includes discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Further, in paragraph 643.5, Malhotra, J., held members of the LGBTQIA+ community are equally entitled to the
enforcement of their fundamental rights under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21.
29. In paragraph 53, this Court while dealing with rights of transpersons, observed that transpersons are entitled to
equal protection of laws in all spheres of State activity, including employment, healthcare, and education as well as
equal civil and citizenship rights, as enjoyed by any other citizen of India.
30. In paragraph 62, the Court held that discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity impairs
equality before law and equal protection of laws. Further, in paragraphs 66 and 83 the Court held that "sex" under
Article 15 includes gender identity and sexual orientation. Any discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference
which has the effect of nullifying equality before the law constitutes discrimination.
31. Finally, in paragraph 119, the Hon'ble Court held-
"119. Therefore, gender identification becomes very essential component which is required for enjoying civil
rights by this community. It is only with this recognition that many rights attached to the sexual recognition as
"third gender" would be available to this community more meaningfully viz. the right to vote, the right to own
property, the right to marry, the right to claim a formal identity through a passport and a ration card, a driver's
licence, the right to education, employment, health and so on.'
[Emphasis supplied]
32. In paragraph 26, this Hon'ble Court has held as under:
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the
form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queen relationships. A household may be a single parent
household for any number of reasons, including the death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the
guardians and caretakers (who traditionally occupy the roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may
change with remarriage, adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be
typical but they are as real as their traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family
unit are equally deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social
welfare legislation. The black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which
are different from traditional ones. The same undoubtedly holds true for women who take on the role of
motherhood in ways that may not find a place in the popular imagination."
[Emphasis supplied]
33. Hence, this Hon'ble Court has held that atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally entitled to the
protection of laws under Article 14 of the Constitution.
34. In view of the aforesaid judgments, the Special Marriage Act inasmuch as it excludes marriage of same-sex and
gender non-conforming couples is discriminatory, manifestly arbitrary, and denies privacy and decisional autonomy to
LGBTQIA+ citizens. Article 14, 15, 19, and 21 rights enure to LGBTQIA+ citizens. Their right to marry a person of their
choice inheres to their fundamental right to dignity and autonomy, akin to other citizens. This Hon'ble Court's
LGBTQIA+ rights jurisprudence entitles the Petitioners to the reliefs prayed for in the instant petition. To uphold its
constitutionality, the Special Marriage Act must be read to include all persons irrespective of their sexual orientation
and gender identity.
11. Article 19 and 21 of the Covfnstitution guarantee all persons the right to marry a person of their choice
including LGBTQIA+ citizens.
in the national interest as they will result in destroying the caste system." It is submitted that recognizing LGBTQIA+
unions will, equally, bring about the constitutional vision of a diverse society that protects its minorities.
in life is founded on individual choice under Article 19:
"61. choice of woman in choosing her partner in life is a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded on
individual choice that is recognised in the Constitution under Article 19, and such a right is not expected to
succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group thinking"
[Emphasis supplied]
the choice of an individual of to marry a person of their choice is an inextricable part of dignity:
"11 the choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there is
erosion of choice. Such a right or choice is not expected to succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group
thinking"."
categorically held that the right to marry a person of one's choice is protected under Article 21:
[DY Chandrachud, J.]
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional compliance) the conditions of a valid
marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be ended or annulled. These remedies are
available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on whether they should accept each other into a
marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to play in determining our choice of partners.
87. The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual will
have a protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside marriage."
39. Further, LGBTQIA+ persons enjoy the full spectrum of constitutional rights. Hence the right to choose a marital
partner extends with equal force to same-sex couples. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Johar's case (cited supra) has
held that:
[Dipak Misra, CJI (as he was then)]
255. "The LGBT community possess the same human, fundamental and constitutional rights as other citizens
do since these rights inhere in individuals as natural and human rights. We must remember that equality is the
edifice on which the entire non-discrimination jurisprudence rests."
[R.F. Nariman, J.]
369. We may conclude by stating that persons who are homosexual have a fundamental right to live with
dignity, which, in the larger framework of the Preamble of India, will assure the cardinal constitutional value of
fraternity that has been discussed in some of our judgments. We further declare that such groups are entitled to
the protection of equal laws, and are entitled to be treated in society as human beings without any stigma being
attached to any of them."
[DY Chandrachud J.]
618.2. Members of the LGBT community are entitled, as all other citizens, to the full range of constitutional
rights including the liberties protected by the Constitution;"
40. There is no difference between persons who defy social conventions to enter into inter-religious and inter-caste
marriages and those who choose a same-sex partner. Society may disapprove of inter-caste and inter-religious
marriages but Courts have a constitutional mandate to enforce the constitutional right of choice of marital partner
under Article 21, and non-discrimination under Article 14. A statute which inhibits LGBTQIA+ persons from marrying a
partner of their choice violates Articles 19 and 21. Therefore, when a uniform, secular, civil legislation governing
marriage, such as the SMA, does not extend to LGBTQIA+ couples, it violates Articles 19 and 21.
41. In Johar (cited supra), it was held that:
"561.6 Sexual orientation implicates negative and positive obligations on the state. It not only requires the state
not to discriminate, but also calls for the state to recognise rights which bring true fulfilment to same-sex
relationships
42. The right to choose a marital partner places a positive obligation on the State to be fulfilled through recognition
under its marriage laws. The Petitioners seek their right to access the institution that provides legal rights to their love
and companionship in the same way as all couples do.
43. Failure to recognize same-sex marriages under the SMA also denies LGBTQIA+ persons the fundamental right
to marry a person of one's choice. The impugned legislation violates Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution, and ought
to be read to include all persons regardless of their gender identity and sexual orientation to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality.
111. Article 21 The impugned statute violates the right to dignity and decisional autonomy of LGBTQIA+
persons
44. The constitutional protection of choice of partner flows from the right to decisional autonomy.
45. The right to choose a marital partner is an intrinsic part of dignity. In Shakti Vahini V. Union of India, (2018) 7
"45. The choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there is
erosion of choice. True it is, the same is bound by the principle of constitutional limitation but in the absence of
such limitation, none, we mean, no one shall be permitted to interfere in the fructification of the said choice. If the
right to express one's own choice is obstructed, it would be extremely difficult to think of dignity in its sanctified
completeness. When two adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they consummate their
relationship; they feel that it is their goal and they have the right to do so. And it can unequivocally be
stated that they have the right and any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation..."
[Emphasis supplied]
46. The ability to make decisions on matters close to one's life, family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation
are all integral to the dignity of the individual. The 9-judge bench decision in Puttaswamy, cited supra has elucidated
this in the following way:
"298. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has both an intrinsic and instrumental
value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity is an entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its
instrumental facet, dignity and freedom are inseparably intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to achieve the
other. The ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the realisation of the full value of life and
liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is a subset. All liberties may not be exercised in privacy. Yet
others can be fulfilled only within a private space. Privacy enables the individual to retain the autonomy of the body
and mind. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life When
these guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects all those elements which are
crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of
the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to determine how freedom shall
be exercised.
(R.F. Nariman, J.)
"479 .As case law, both in the US and India show, this concept has travelled far from the mere right to be let
alone to recognition of a large number of privacy interests, which apart from privacy of one's home and protection
from unreasonable searches and seizures have been extended to protecting an individual's interests in making vital
personal choices such as the right to abort a foetus: rights of same sex couples-includina the right to marrv:
rights as to procreation, contraception, general family relationships, child-bearing, education, data protection, etc."
[Emphasis supplied]
47. This view has been affirmed by another constitution bench of the Supreme Court, in Common Cause (A Regd.
48. Sex and gender are primarily psychological rather than biological phenomena or attributes. Each person's self-
defined sexual orientation and gender identity is integral to their personality and is one of the most basic aspects of
49. Excluding same-sex marriage from the SMA violates constitutional guarantees of dignity and decisional
autonomy guaranteed in Article 21 to LGBTQIA+ persons. To give a relationship the respect and sanctity of societal
and legal recognition is an aspect of dignity. To be denied the right to elevant a relationship to the status of marriage
is a blow to the dignity of any individual and violates their rights under Article 21.
IV. Article 15 Excluding LGBTQIA+ persons from the SMA discriminates based on their (i) their sexual
orientation, and (ii) the sex of their partner.
A. Denying same-sex and gender non-conforming couples the right to marry discriminates on the basis of
sexual orientation
50. National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (cited supra) ["NALSA"], (paragraph 62-63) held that
"discrimination on the ground of "sex" under Articles 15 and 16, includes discrimination on the ground of gender
identity and sexual orientation."
51. Following NALSA, Johar (cited supra) held that sexual orientation is a protected characteristic under Article 15.
All persons have a right not to be discriminated against based on their sexual orientation:
[Indu Malhotra J.]
"638.2. The term "sex", as it occurs in Article 15 has been given an expansive interpretation by this Court in
National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India [National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (2014) 5
Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also
includes their "sexual identity and character". The J.S. Verma Committee [ Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law (2013).] had recommended that "sex" under Article 15 must include "sexual
orientation":
"65. Further, we are clear that Article 15(c) of the Constitution of India uses the word "sex" as including
sexual orientation.
The prohibition against discrimination under Article 15 on the ground of "sex" should therefore
encompass instances where such discrimination takes place on the basis of one's sexual orientation."
[Emphasis Supplied]
52. Johar further held that "while assessing whether a law infringes a fundamental right, it is not the intention of
the lawmaker that is determinative, but whether the effect or operation of the law infringes fundamental rights" (para
428).
53. The object of the SMA is to provide a uniform, civil and secular marriage law for all citizens. However, by
recognizing marriages only between opposite sex couples, the effect of the law is to deny same-sex and gender non-
conforming couples the right to marry a person of their choice, solely on grounds of their sexual orientation and gender
identity.
54. Excluding the Petitioners from marriage renders them strangers in law, even when they have been in
committed, long term relationships identical to those of opposite sex couples who can marry under the SMA. Further,
excluding same sex couples from the bundle of rights available to married couples discriminates against LGBTQ
couples solely on the ground of sexual orientation.
B. Denying same-sex and gender non-conforming couples the right to marry is discrimination on the basis
of sex
55. Sex discrimination : The SMA discriminates against same sex couples based on the sex of their partner,
prohibited under Article 15. Had Supriyo Chakraborty wanted to marry a woman, for example, the Respondent State
would not have objected. However, as their respective partner is of the same sex as them, the Respondents have
refused to recognize their marriage. Hence, the discrimination is based on the sex of the partner, and is
constitutionally barred under Article 15 of the Constitution.
56. Sex stereotyping : By presuming that men only want to marry women and vice-versa, the SMA perpetuates
stereotypes based on sex and gender. Article 15 prohibits discrimination based on sex stereotypes. In Johar, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:
"438. A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A discrimination will not survive
constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the
grounds prohibited in Article 15(1). If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or indirect is founded on a
stereotypical understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the discrimination
which is prohibited by Article 15 on the grounds only of sex. If certain characteristics grounded in stereotypes, are
to be associated with entire classes of people constituted as groups by any of the grounds prohibited in Article 15
(1), that cannot establish a permissible reason to discriminate. Such a discrimination will be in violation of the
constitutional guarantee against discrimination in Article 15(1). That such a discrimination is a result of grounds
rooted in sex and other considerations, can no longer be held to be a position supported by the intersectional
understanding of how discrimination operates. This infuses Article 15 with true rigour to give it a complete
constitutional dimension in prohibiting discrimination.
440. Any ground of discrimination, direct or indirect, which is founded on a particular understanding of the role
of the sex, would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which is prohibited by Article 15 on the grounds
only of sex."
V.
Article 14 The impugned statute (a) denies LGBTQIA+ persons the equal protection of laws (b) are
manifestly arbitrary and (c) fail the rational nexus test.
A. Non-recognition of same-sex and gender non-conforming marriage denies LGBTQIA+ persons equal
protection of the laws
57. Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality before the law and the equal protection of laws. Johar held
that LGBTQIA+ couples are guaranteed the right to equality:
[Indu Malhotra, J.]
561.7.. The law cannot discriminate against same sex relationships. It must also take positive steps to achieve
equal protection."
[DY Chandrachud, J.]
618.4 Members of the LGBT community are entitled to the benefit of an equal citizenship, without
discrimination, and to the equal protection of law..."
58. Johar further held [paragraph 561.6 and 561.7] that sexual orientation places a positive and negative
obligation on the State. The negative obligation includes non-discrimination under Article 15 of the Constitution, while
the positive obligation calls for the State to "take positive steps to achieve equal protection" and to "recognise rights
which bring true fulfilment to same sex relationships." The right to choose a marital partner is a positive obligation of
the State to be fulfilled through its existing marriage laws.
Non-recognition of same-sex and gender-non conforming marriage causes prejudice to LGBTQIA+ persons and denies
them rights under social welfare and beneficial legislations
59. Further, the institution of marriage is a bundle of rights that married couples enjoy and which the State
protects. These rights include succession, maintenance, joint ownership of assets, public employment, pension, and
health decisions. Through marriage, couples become a family with all the rights family members enjoy in matters of
employment, succession, taxation etc. The status of marriage also provides private entitlements that same sex and
gender non-conforming couples are excluded from accessing. In fact, marriage allows a couple to found a family,
inasmuch as extant laws allow adoption, surrogacy and assisted reproductive technologies (ART) only to married
1321, Para 44, 45) Table on illustrative bundle of rights enjoyed by married couples and their children, is annexed and
marked as Annexure A.
60. The Respondent-Union, in their counter affidavit at paras 15 to 19, has admitted that marriage, as a legal
institution, has consequences under various legislative enactments. It is the Union's stand that marriage goes beyond
the mere private lives of spouses and "necessarily brings with it the right to adopt and other ancillary rights". The
Union in its counter has further stated as under-
19 The parties entering into marriage created an institution having its own public significance as it a social
institution from which several rights and liabilities flow. Seeking declaration for solemnization/registration of
marriage has more ramifications than simple legal recognition..."
61. The Union also admits that in addition to rights and recognition, marriage bestows duties and obligations on
spouses.
62. The COVID-19 pandemic brought home to the Petitioners the many ways in which they are excluded from the
protections that marriage offers a couple. Petitioners cannot make health decisions for each other or their families.
Supriyo and Abhay have had to write their will and to inform their families that they have done so, to ensure that they
inherit each other's assets when they die. Same-sex couples always fear that their wills may be challenged in probate
proceedings if their legal heirs do not respect and acknowledge their relationship. Supriyo found it difficult to obtain
something as simple as address proof, despite living together in a house that Abhay owns.
Further, the status of being married, that results in social acceptance and respect, is also a benefit that the
State accords to a couple. It leads to self-respect, dignity, and helps nurture and sustain relationships by affirming
that the couple is part of the social fabric.
64. The right to family, love, companionship, and commitment is available to all persons and excluding same sex
couples from this bundle of rights discriminates against them. Excluding same sex couples from the SMA gives legal
sanction to historical and social stigma faced by same-sex and gender non-conforming couples. Denying same-sex
couples the right to marry violates their right to equality before the law and denial of equal protection of laws
guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
B. It is manifestly arbitrary to exclude LGBT couples from the framework of the SMA
65. A statute is manifestly arbitrary if the provisions are irrational or without adequate determining principles, or if
it
66. A law may become arbitrary with the passage of time. As held in Satyawati Sharma V. Union of India, (2008) 5
"32. It is trite to say that legislation which may be quite reasonable and rationale at the time of its enactment
may with the lapse of time and/or due to change of circumstances become arbitrary, unreasonable and violative of
the doctrine of equity and even if the validity of such legislation may have been upheld at a given point of time, the
Court may, in subsequent litigation, strike down the same if it is found that the rationale of classification has
become non-existent."
67. Shayara Bano (CB, cited supra) held that even in spheres of marriage, if a law - even a personal law - is
manifestly arbitrary or violates the principles of equality, it is the duty of the Courts to step in. [paragraph 56-58].
68. Excluding same-sex couples from the SMA is manifestly arbitrary. There is no fair or reasonable justification to
exclude LGBT couples from the regime of marriage, particularly when sexual orientation is a protected constitutional
ground under Article 15.
69. Excluding a same sex or gender non-conforming couple from the regime of marriage is as unconstitutional as a
law that made inter-caste or inter-faith marriages illegal.
C. Excluding LGBTQ couples from the SMA fails the rational nexus test
70. To be permissible under Article 14 a classification must satisfy two conditions, (i) it must be founded on an
intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the
group, and (ii) that differentia must have a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the statute in
71. Section 4 of the SMA contemplates marriage between a man and a woman and "bride" and "bridegroom".
Contrary to what the Union contends, no Indian statute refers to a "biological man" or "biological woman". Matrimonial
statutes do not require an opposite sex couple to prove that they are a "biological" man and woman before they may
marry.
72. The impugned statutes create two classes of citizens-opposite-sex couples, and LGBTQ couples. The exclusion
of LGBTQ couples from the statutory institution of marriage fails the rational nexus test.
73. There is no constitutionally valid, intelligible differentia between LGBTQIA+ and non-LGBTOIA+ persons. The
classification in the present case is based only on the sexual orientation and gender identity of the parties to a
marriage, which is constitutionally impermissible.
The object of the SMA is to provide for civil and uniform marriage
74. The Special Marriage Act, 1954, was introduced to provide a civil form of marriage for couples who cannot or
choose not to marry under their personal law. The preamble of the SMA reads-
An Act to provide a special form of marriage in certain cases, for the registration of such and certain other
marriages and for divorce.
75. The SMA provides a mode of marriage outside the personal law regime. No issues of personal law arise for
consideration.
76. Section 4 of the SMA provides conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages, as under-
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages. -Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force relating to the solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two
persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the following conditions are fulfilled,
namely:-
(a) neither party has a spouse living;
(b) neither party-
(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such
an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or
(iii) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity;
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship : Provided that where a custom governing at
least one of the parties permits of a marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized,
notwithstanding that they are within the degrees of prohibited relationship; and
(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, both parties are citizens of India
domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends.
Explanation. this section, "custom", in relation to a person belonging to any tribe, community, group or
family, means any rule which the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf as applicable to members of that tribe, community, group or family:
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of any tribe, community, group
or family, unless the State Government is satisfied-
(i)
that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time among those members;
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and
(iii) that such rule, if applicable only to a family, has not been discontinued by the family.
77. Nothing in Section 4 of the SMA justifies excluding LGBTQ couples from solemnizing a special marriage.
OnLine Del 725 has held that "Special Marriage Act was enacted to enable a special form of marriage for any Indian
national, professing different faiths, or desiring a civil form of marriage. (Para 9).
79. Thereafter in MV A, (2018) 248 DLT 466, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court summarized the position of law on the
application of personal law to the marriages registered/solemnized under the SMA, as under-
"10. Summary of Principles
10.1 The Special Marriage Act, 1954 provides a special form of marriage, its registration and divorce. A marriage
between any two persons belonging to any religion or creed may be solemnized under this Act. Being a secular
Act,
it
plays a key role in liberating individuals from the traditional requirements of marriage. It provides for a civil law
of marriage that would enable individuals to get married outside of their respective community mandates.
10.2. The Special Marriage Act 1954 is not concerned with the religion of the parties to an intended marriage.
Under the Act any person, whichever religion he or she professes, may marry either within his or her community or
in a community other than his or her own, provided that the intended marriage in either case is in accord with the
conditions for marriage laid down in the Act. Is all this relevant here?
10.3. No religious rituals or ceremonies are required from the marriage to be completed under the Special
Marriage Act. It is up to the parties to decide whether they want to do marriage rituals or not. The marriage
solemnized under Special Marriage Act is registered and a Certificate of Marriage is given to the parties. The
Certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and witnesses which is deemed to be conclusive evidence
of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been solemnized.
10.4. The Special Marriage Act provides an option of turning an existing religious marriage solemnized in any
other form under any other law into a civil marriage by registering it under its provisions, provided that it is in
accord with the condition for marriage laid down under the Act. This provision of subsequent registration enables
parties to avail secular and uniform remedies despite the solemnization of marriage through performance of
religious ceremonies under one's own personal laws. This aids them in overcoming the constraints or discrimination
faced in their own personal laws.
10.5. The unique feature of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is compulsory registration of marriage under the Act
which protects the interest of the parties and the children born out of wedlock.
10.6. The Registration Certificate of the marriage between the parties is conclusive evidence of the fact that their
marriage was solemnised under the Special Marriage Act. Therefore, evidence with regard to the fact that their
marriage was actually solemnised under any other Act at any other time, cannot be allowed. There can be no issue
that the Special Marriage Act would apply.
10.7. When a person solemnizes marriage under this law then the marriage is not governed by personal laws but
by Special Marriage Act. The rights and duties arising out of marriage are governed by the Special Marriage Act and
the succession is governed by Indian Succession Act. 1925, and not by the personal laws.
10.8. Having married under the Special Marriage Act, if a person contracts a second marriage, he shall be
deemed to have committed an offence under Section 494 or 495 IPC."
[Emphasis supplied]
80. Furthermore, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Abdur Rahim Undre (Dr.) V. Padma Abdur Rahim Undre, 1982
irrespective of caste, creed or religion, as under-
"23. It can safely be said that Special Marriage Act is in reality an Indian Marriage Act. which applies to all
Indian Communities irrespective of caste, creed or religion. The concept of marriage under the said Act, is
monogamous, that is union for life, dissoluble by judicial authorities. Under the said law all modern matrimonial
reliefs are made available to both the spouses in the event of break down of marriage on an application to the Court
of competent jurisdiction. Even the religious marriages can be registered under the said Act. On such registration
the religious marriage can be converted into secular marriage. In this context it is also pertinent to note that
between 1954 to 1969 two Indian citizens domiciled in India could have married under Special Marriage Act-even
outside India. A marriage which is monogamous in form continues to be so, where-as original religious marriage
can be converted into a secular marriage. However, a secular marriage cannot be converted into religious marriage.
Therefore if there is in the field an Indian enactment which is applicable to all the citizens of India irrespective of
their religion, then so far as secular marriages are concerned the said law will become lex domicilli of India for the
purposes of matrimonial reliefs. Such an interpretation will be in tune with Article 44 as well as the preamble of the
Constitution. It cannot also be forgotten that the establishment of a secular society is the aim and goal of Indian
Constitution. Therefore in the area and field which is secular or non-religious laws will have to be common for all
citizens of India, and that is what has been done, though to limited extent by enacting Special Marriage Act. The
said Act at least leaves a choice open which is available to all the citizens of India irrespective of their caste, creed
or religion. In Mohammedan Law Marriage is a Civil Contract. Hence so far as relationship flowing from contract of
marriage is concerned, including its dissolution, the area and field is secular in nature.
24. In this context it will have to be remembered that if two interpretations are reasonably possible regarding
the provisions of law, then the law will have to be interpreted and applied in the perspective of Part IV of the
Constitution, which deals with directive principles of the State policy and benefit of reasonable doubt of law and
fact, if there be such doubt must go to the weaker section, in the present case to women (See AIR 1978 SC 474).
In this context a reference also could usefully be made to the decision of Karnataka High Court in AIR 1976 Kant
200, Raj Mohammad V. Saheeda, wherein E.S. Vyankataramayya J. (as he then was), has observed that our notions
of law will have to be altered in such a way as to bring them in conformity with modern social conditions."
[Emphasis supplied]
81. As held in Mv. A (cited supra), the object of the SMA is to "liberate individuals from the traditional marriage."
The SMA's object is to remove any forms of constraints on marriage on external considerations such as religion, caste,
creed etc. The exclusion of LGBTQ couples from the SMA has no rational nexus with the object of the legislation.
There is no intelligible differentia between LGBT and opposite-sex couples
82. Further, classifying couples based on their sexual orientation or gender identity is unreasonable because there
is no intelligible differentia between LGBTQ and opposite-sex couples. In this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
"14. It is true that a classification need not be made with mathematical precision but, if there be little or no
difference between the persons or things which have been grouped together and those left out of the
group, in that case, the classification cannot be said to be a reasonable one."
83. It is clear from the decisions in Johar and NALSA, that classification based solely on sexual orientation or
gender identity is neither reasonable nor has an intelligible differentia. In Johar, the Constitution Bench held as under
(637.3):
the natural or innate sexual orientation of a person cannot be a ground for discrimination. Where a legislation
discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an individual, it cannot form a reasonable classification
based on an intelligible differentia."
84. When the basis of the classification itself is discriminatory in its effect, the exclusion of LGBTQ couples under
the SMA fails the first part of the rational nexus test.
85. Further, Johar (paragraph 230 and 231) held that with the passage of time and evolution of the society,
procreation is not the only reason for which people choose to come together for marriage. But even otherwise, non-
LGBT couples may have children who are biologically related to only one or even neither parent.
recognized the changing concept of "family" as under-
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the
form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queer relationships. A household may be a single parent
household for any number of reasons, including the death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly,
the guardians and caretakers (who traditionally occupy the roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may
change with remarriage, adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be
typical but they are as real as their traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family
unit are equally deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social
welfare legislation. The black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which
are different from traditional ones...
[Emphasis supplied]
87. The contention of the Union of India that the legislative intent behind the impugned statutes is the conception
of a so-called "Indian family unit" including a "biological man" and "biological woman" and the "children born of their
union" militates against the aforesaid finding of the Supreme Court. Rather, marriage furnishes an emotional
satisfaction that may not be found in any other relationships [Johan (paragraph 230 and 231)]. Other couples who are
unable to bear children, such as older couples or infertile couples, are not excluded from the institution of marriage.
88. Therefore, there is no rational basis for making a distinction between LGBTQ couples and opposite sex couples.
Non does the Union identify any such intelligible differentia other than to say that marriage as an institution provides
for rights, obligations and privileges and that there is a "normative basis" for such exclusions. Not only is the
assumption of "normative basis" historically inaccurate, as there are numerous recorded instances of same-sex
marriages, but even otherwise, our Constitution does not countenance that discrimination should continue merely
because it has been sanctioned historically.
VI. Recognizing marriage of LGBTQ couples upholds constitutional morality
A. This Hon'ble Court has a duty to uphold constitutional morality over social morality
89. This Hon'ble Court in Johar has held that "decriminalisation is a first step" in protecting the rights of the
LGBTQIA+ community. The constitutional principles on which discrimination is based apply to a broader range of
has held that the constitutional role of the judiciary also mandates taking a perspective on individual rights at a higher
pedestal than majoritarian aspirations. To that extent we (sic) play a counter-majoritarian role." (Paragraph 86) This
Hon'ble Court has the responsibility to protect constitutional morality over social morality.
90. In their counter affidavit, the Union of India argues that-
"11. It is submitted that by and large the institution of marriage has a sanctity attached to it and in major parts
of the country, it is regarded as a sacrament. In our country, despite statutory recognition of the relationship of
marriage between a biological man and a biological woman, marriage necessarily depends upon age-old
custom, rituals, practices, cultural ethos and societal values."
[Emphasis supplied]
"19 Living together as partners and having sexual relationship by same sex individuals [which is
decriminalised now] is not comparable with the Indian family unit concept of husband, a wife and children which
necessarily presuppose a biological man as a "husband", a biological woman as a "wife" and the children born out of
the union between the two - who are reared by the biological man as father and the biological woman as mother."
[Emphasis supplied]
"42. It is submitted that the principles of legitimate state interest as an exception to life and liberty under Article
21 would apply to the present case. It is submitted that the statutory recognition of marriage as a union
between a "man" and a "woman" is intrinsically linked to the recognition of heterogeneous institution of
marriage and the acceptance of the Indian society based upon its own cultural and societal values which
are recognized by the competent legislature."
[Emphasis supplied]
91. The Union has also sought to enforce social morality within legislations-
"45. considerations of societal morality are relevant in considering the validity of the legislature and further,
that it is for the legislature to judge and enforce such societal morality and public acceptance based on Indian
ethos."
[Emphasis supplied]
92. In sum, the Union's argument is that social morality does not allow for same-sex marriage.
93. This Hon'ble Court has held that public opinion may run counter to the rule of law and constitutionalism. The
morality that the public perceives, the Constitution may not conceive of The individual autonomy and also individual
orientation cannot be atrophied unless the restriction is regarded as reasonable to yield to the morality of the
94. It is respectfully submitted that this Hon'ble Court has the constitutional duty to protect minorities from
arbitrary and unreasonable discrimination predicated on popular ideas of the notion of marriage. Marriage as an
institution is the only system of developing and continuing familial relationships based not on bonds of blood but on
choice and emotional companionship. [Johar, paragraph 230]
95. LGBTQ couples cannot be excluded from the institution of marriage on the ground that a perceived "Indian
family unit concept" does not consider them a family. This Hon'ble Court has recognized queer families as part of the
changing concept of "family", both in law and in society [Deepika Singh (supra)].
96. To deny LGBTQ couples the recognition of marriage and the rights and benefits that flow from marriage, is to
deny them basic emotional actualisation under the garb of societal norms, as opposed to constitutional morality and
norms that recognises right to marry a person of choice under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. [Laxmibai
Chandaragi (supra), paragraph 12] Such reliance on societal norms to deny the right of marriage to LGBTQ couples
is
no different from the argument that has in the past denied right of marriage to inter-caste, and inter-religious couples
and must be rejected at the threshold. [Shafin Jahan (supra), paragraphs 52, 86].
97. This Hon'ble Court in Johar has held as under-
[Dipak Misra, CJI]
131.
The Court has to be guided by the conception of constitutional morality and not by the societal
morality.
133.
It needs no special emphasis to state that whenever the constitutional courts come across a situation
of transgression or dereliction in the sphere of fundamental rights, which are also the basic human rights of a
section, howsoever small part of the society, then it is for the constitutional courts to ensure, with the aid of
judicial engagement and creativity, that constitutional morality prevails over social morality.
134. In the garb of social morality, the members of the LGBTQIA+ community must not be
outlawed or given a stepmotherly treatment of malefactor by the society. If this happens or if such a
treatment to the LGBTQIA+ community is allowed to persist, then the constitutional courts, which are
under the obligation to protect the fundamental rights, would be failing in the discharge of their duty
[Emphasis supplied]
[R.F. Nariman, J, opinion]
"268.5. Constitutional morality embraces within its sphere several virtues, foremost of them being the
espousal of a pluralistic and inclusive society. The concept of constitutional morality urges the organs of the
State, including the Judiciary, to preserve the heterogeneous nature of the society and to curb any attempt by
the majority to usurp the rights and freedoms of a smaller or minuscule section of the populace. Constitutional
morality cannot be martyred at the altar of social morality and it is only constitutional morality that can be
allowed to permeate into the Rule of Law. The veil of social morality cannot be used to violate fundamental rights
of even a single individual, for the foundation of constitutional morality rests upon the recognition of diversity
that pervades the society.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
608. LGBTQIA+ individuals living under the threats of conformity grounded in cultural morality have been
denied a basic human existence. They have been stereotyped and prejudiced. Constitutional morality requires
this Court not to turn a blind eye to their right to an equal participation of citizenship and an equal enjoyment of
living. Constitutional morality requires that this Court must act as a counter-majoritarian institution which
discharges the responsibility of protecting constitutionally entrenched rights, regardless of what the majority
may believe. Constitutional morality must turn into a habit of citizens. By respecting the dignity of LGBTQIA+
individuals, this Court is only fulfilling the foundational promises of our Constitution." [See also paragraph
268.5, 352 and 606]
B. The Constitution is a living document and ought to adapt to changing social realities
98. Even otherwise, Petitioners submit that notions of marriage equality are not opposed to social morality. They
and their families are all part of society. Supriyo and Abhay come from middle-class families. Supriyo comes from
Ashoknagar, a small town 30 kms away from Kolkata, and when his parents threw a wedding reception after his and
Supriyo's marriage, the entire neighborhood was in attendance. In Johar, this Hon'ble Court recorded that LGBTQ
persons constitute 7-8 percent of India's population - that is about 10.71 crore citizens. They, their parents and
children are all impacted by the lack of marital protections.
99. Social morality has changed with time. The Constitution is a living, transformative document and its ongoing
interpretation has changed the national polity, perhaps even more than our Founders dreamt of
"19. The Constitution is not an ephemeral legal document embodying a set of legal rules for the
passing hour. It sets out principles for an expanding future and is intended to endure for ages to come
and consequently to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs. Therefore, a purposive rather than
a strict literal approach to the interpretation should be adopted. A constitutional provision must be construed
not in a narrow and constricted sense but in a wide and liberal manner so as to anticipate and take account of
changing conditions and purposes so that a constitutional provision does not get fossilised but remains flexible
enough to meet the newly emerging problems and challenges."
[Emphasis supplied]
101. In Johar, this Hon'ble Court has has also considered the transformative nature and role of Constitution itself,
as under-
[D.Y. Chandrachud J.]
268.4. The primary objective of having a constitutional democracy is to transform the society progressively
and inclusively. Our Constitution has been perceived to be transformative in the sense that the interpretation of
its provisions should not be limited to the mere literal meaning of its words; instead they ought to be given a
meaningful construction which is reflective of their intent and purpose in consonance with the changing times.
Transformative constitutionalism not only includes within its wide periphery the recognition of the rights and
dignity of individuals but also propagates the fostering and development of an atmosphere wherein every
individual is bestowed with adequate opportunities to develop socially, economically and politically.
Discrimination of any kind strikes at the very core of any democratic society. When guided by transformative
constitutionalism, the society is dissuaded from indulging in any form of discrimination so that the nation is
guided towards a resplendent future."
102. Specially addressing the rights of the LGBTQIA+ community, this Hon'ble Court has held that-
615 In addressing LGBTQIA+ rights, the Constitution speaks-as well-to the rest of society. In recognising
the rights of the LGBTQIA+ community, the Constitution asserts itself as a text for governance which promotes true
equality. It does so by questioning prevailing notions about the dominance of sexes and genders. In its
transformational role. the Constitution directs our attention to resolving the polarities of sex and
binarities of gender. In dealing with these issues we confront much that polarises our society. Our ability
to survive as a free society will depend upon whether constitutional values can prevail over the impulses
of the time."
[Emphasis supplied]
OnLine 791 (para 7)]. In Satyawati Sharma (supra), this Hon'ble Court held that legislation may become arbitrary and
violate the doctrine of equality with the passage of time. even if at the time of enactment. thev would not have
violated equality before the law.
104. In the progressive march towards securing equality, equal protection of law, and dignity of women,
constitutional courts have not shied away from reforming personal and criminal laws governing marriage and
(rights of Christian daughters to inherit at par with sons, as Indian Succession Act, 1925 will apply): Githa Hariharan
V.
cannot be dissolved by consent under traditional Hindu Law).
105. Table on Indicative changes made to personal laws, civil uniform marital laws, and customs through
legislations and precedents, is annexed and marked as Annexure B.
106. Societal reality indicates the need to legally recognize non-traditional familial relationships, as held by this
(Paragraph 45).
107. This Hon'ble Court in Deepika Singh (supra) has recognized that familial relationships may take the different
forms, including queen relationships, and they all need and deserve the protection of law. When Supriyo and Abhay
decided to commemorate their relationship with a wedding-cum-commitment ceremony, their parents welcomed their
marriage as a natural progression of their relationship. Like any of our parents, Supriyo and Abhay's parents were
overjoyed to go from being "Aunty" and "Uncle" to "Mama-Papa" and "Ma-Baba". Petitioners are a family as Indian as
any other.
VII. Finding that impugned matrimonial statutes allow LGBTQ couples to marry will save them from the
vice of unconstitutionality
A. This Court has the power to read the impugned matrimonial statues in a gender-neutral manner
108. If a statute appears to violate the Constitution, then this Hon'ble Court may either declare it unconstitutional,
or read it expansively to save its constitutionality. This is particularly true of statutes which are intended to confer
109. The present batch of petition provides a fit case for this Hon'ble Court to read the impugned matrimonial
legislations expansively to include LGBTQ couples, rather than declare them unconstitutional. A 9-judge bench of this
Hon'ble Court in Sea Customs Act, S.20(2), In re, AIR 1963 SC 1760, recognized the need for adopting liberal
construction of statutes-
36. We recognise that a broad and liberal spirit must inspire those whose duty it is to interpret an organic
instrument which sets up a constitutional machinery, a machinery meant to control the life of a nation, to embody
its ideals, and facilitate the realisation of such ideals for the present and the future;
110. Thus, this Hon'ble Court ought to apply a liberal and harmonious construction of the Special Marriage Act, and
other impugned matrimonial statutes, to save them from the vice of unconstitutionality. If reading the provisions of
the SMA as having gendered terminology (applying only to a "bride" and "bridegroom" or "husband" and "wife")
violates the right of LGBTQ persons to marry a person of their choice as guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution, then the SMA ought to be read expansively to include LGBTQ couples to save the statute from the vice of
unconstitutionality. It is settled law that if a literal reading of a statute results in the violation of a fundamental rights
of
citizens, constitutional courts have the power to read the said provisions so as to conform to the constitutional
B.
The impugned matrimonial statues can be read in a gender-neutral manner qua LGBTQ couples
111. The Union in its counter affidavit has taken the stand that "the legislative understanding of marriage in the
Indian statutory and personal law regime is very specific viz. a marriage between a biological man and a biological
woman only." The Union further submits that any other interpretation except treating 'husband' as a biological man
and
a 'wife' as a biological woman will make all statutory provisions "unworkable apart from being completely contrary
to the consistent legislative policy which is based upon the considered opinions of law makers which are based on
cultural ethos and social values in each country."
112. As stated hereinabove, it is trite law that constitutional morality trumps social morality. This Hon'ble Court
plays a counter-majoritarian role in protecting constitutional morality, even though it may run counter to public
opinion. Thus, the argument that interpreting statutory provisions in a gender-neutral manner is contrary to "cultural
ethos and social values" has no basis in law.
Matrimonial statues can be read in a gender-neutral manner qua LGBTQ couples
113. If this Hon'ble Court grants declaratory relief in the present batch of petitions, the gendered provisions of the
impugned matrimonial statues are workable and can be read in a gender-neutral manner qua LGBTQ couples. All
provisions are capable of beina read in context of LGBTQ couples without violence to the language. intent or scope of
the impugned legislations.
114. Many provisions, such as those relating to degrees of prohibited relationships, will continue to apply as is to
LGBTQ couples. Many matrimonial reliefs such as maintenance, restitution of conjugal rights, judicial separation and
divorce are already gender neutral in that they are available to husbands and wives on the same grounds. Hence, they
present no difficulty in their application to LGBTQ couples.
115. Where these matrimonial reliefs are available only to wives, these can be read in a gender-neutral manner in
their application to LGBTQ couples. Thus, for example, the relief of divorce on grounds that the husband has been
convicted of rape would apply against either husband or a transman in a petition under Section 27 (1A) (i) of the SMA.
Similarly, either spouse of an LGBTQ couple could apply for maintenance under Section 36 or 37 SMA. Section 31 (1)
(iiia) provides that where the wife is the Petitioner, she may move the petition wherever she resides. This provision
can apply to either spouse in an LGBTQ marriage.
116. A table on the proposed workability of the Special Marriage Act, is hereto annexed and marked as Annexure
C.
Other statutory provisions can also be read in a gender-neutral manner
117. Further, the Union admits that recognizing marriage also ensures certain rights, duties and privileges under
other statutory laws, which are denied to LGBTQ couples. The Unions argue that such other statutory provisions will be
unworkable if same-sex and gender non-conforming marriage is recognized by this Hon'ble Court.
118. It is submitted that once this Hon'ble Court grants declaratory relief recognizing same-sex and gender non-
conforming marriage, Article 141 of the Constitution mandates that all other related statutory provisions will be
interpreted in a gender-neutral manner in their application to LGBTQ couples.
119. For opposite-sex couples, they can continue to be read in the same manner as they currently stand.
120. Other statutory provisions can be construed as under-
i. PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 DV Act"]
a. The preamble of the DV Act reads as under-
An Act to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the Constitution
who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family and formatters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
[Emphasis supplied]
b. Section 2 (f) of the DV Act defines "domestic relationship" as under-
"domestic relationship" means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any point of time,
lived together in a shared household, style="margin-left: 72pt; text-indent: 18pt; >when they are
related by consanguinity, marriage, or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption
or are family members living together as a joint family;
[Emphasis supplied]
C. Section 2 (s) of the DV Act defines "shared household" as under-
"shared household" means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a
domestic relationship either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a household whether
owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent, or owned or tenanted by
either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved person or the respondent or both jointly or singly
have any right, title, interest or equity and includes such a household which may belong to the joint family
of which the respondent is a member, irrespective of whether the respondent or the aggrieved person has
any right, title or interest in the shared household
d. The objective of the DV Act is the protection of women from domestic violence at their homes, which need not
necessarily arise from their marital relationship or a relationship in the nature of marriage. It is not the
intention of the DV Act to be applicable only to married women. For instance, the DV Act applies to an
unmarried woman in a domestic relationship.
e. The DV Act also recognizes that the perpetrator of violence need not be the husband alone. In Hiralal P.
Section 2(q) of the DV Act which defined "respondent", deleted the words "adult male" prefixing "person" to
allow for a gender-neutral application of the Act. Thus, the DV Act, already envisages a situation of domestic
violence where the aggrieved person and the Respondent are both women, and other provisions of the Act are
construed accordingly.
f. Notably, recently Bombay High Court in Vithal Manik Khatri V. Sagar Sanjay Kamble @ Sakshi Vithal Khatri,
W.P. No. 4037/2021 (Judgement dated 16.03.2023), held that the expression "aggrieved person" under
Section 2(a) of the DV Act "needs to be interpret in the broadest possible terms." In doing so, the Bombay
High Court held that the term "aggrieved person" would include a transgender person who has performed
surgery to change their gender to female. The Bombay High Court was pleased to holder as under-
"11. On perusal of paragraphs 105 and 129 [of NALSA judgement], there is no manner of doubt that
transgender persons or either a male or female who has performed a sex change operation are entitled to
gender to their choice. The object and purpose of the provisions of the Domestic Violence Act 2005 is to
provide more effective protection of the right of the women guaranteed who is victims of violence of any
kind that occurs within the family. Domestic violence has been recognized human rights issue and a serious
deterrent to development-The Vienna Accord of 1994, the Beijing Declaration, and the Platform for Action
(1995). The need to pass legislation like the protection of women from domestic violence Act was found
necessary as the existing civil law was inadequate to address a woman who was and is subjected to cruelty
by their husband and their family relatives in recognition of their fundamental rights guaranteed under
Article 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, while interpreting the definition of
aggrieved persons in tune with the object and purpose of the Act, such definition needs to be
interpreted with the broadest possible terms. The word 'woman' in section 2(a) is no more
limited to the binary of women and men and includes the transgender person also who has
changed her sex in tune with her gender characteristics. Therefore, in my opinion, the
Transgender who has performed surgery to change gender to a female, needs to be termed as an
aggrieved person within the meaning of Section 2(a) of the Domestic Violence Act, 2005. It is,
therefore, held that a person who has exercised his right to decide the self-identified gender of
women is an aggrieved person within the meaning of Section 2(a) of the Domestic Violence Act,
2005."
[Emphasis supplied]
g. The DV Act does not create a criminal offence but rather provides civil reliefs that are adjudicated by a
criminal court. It is a quasi-criminal statute. Hence, interpretation of the DV Act is not limited by the rule of
statutory interpretation that criminal statutes ought to be strictly construed. [Kunapareddy V. Kunapareddy
h. Thus, the DV Act would continue to be applicable as it stands to today to an opposite-sex couple. Qua an
LGBTQ couple, an "aggrieved person" under Section 2(a) will have to be interpreted in a gender-neutral
manner insofar as a LGBTQ couple is concerned. Hence, either spouse or partner of an LGBTQ couple may be
an 'aggrieved person'.
ii. SECTION 125, CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE ["CrPC"]
i. Section 125 of the CrPC provides for maintenance of wives, children and parents. The only gendered provision
that remains today is the part of the provision applicable to maintenance of wives.
a gender-neutral manner, allowing parents to claim maintenance from their daughters as well as their sons.
k. To the extent that Section 125 CrPC applies to maintenance of wives, the Section assumes, based on a
stereotype, that a wife is necessarily married to a husband. If this Court recognizes marriage equality, that
assumption would no longer apply. In cases involving LGBTQ couples, S. 125 CrPC can then be construed to
provide for maintenance to "spouses" rather than only to "wives". The Section would continue to apply to
opposite-sex couples as it currently stands.
iii. PENAL PROVISIONS
I. It is submitted that Sections 376B, 498, 498A, 304B, IPC; Sections 113A and 113B Evidence Act; and
provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, are guided by a state policy of granting additional
safeguards to women in society, not only in the context of oppressive practices within an opposite-sex
relationship/marriage, but also in the context of an unjust patriarchal society at large. These protective
provisions are also in line with the constitutional mandate under Article 15(3) of the Constitution to provide
special safeguards for women.
m. Furthermore, it is trite law that penal provisions must be construed strictly. Hence the afore-mentioned
provisions being criminal offences will not be affected by the grant of declaratory relief by this Hon'ble Court.
The afore-mentioned provisions would not apply to LGBTQ couples.
iv. MUSLIM LAW
n. The Union has voiced concerns regarding the workability of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act,
1937 and the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986, following a declaration by this Court
on the rights of LGBTQ couples to marry. These statutes apply only where the marriage has been solemnized
under Muslim personal law.
O. However, at the outset, it may be noted that the reference to this Hon'ble Constitution Bench vide Order dated
13.03.2023 specifically states that:
"3. The submissions involve the interplay between constitutional rights on the one hand and specific
legislative enactments including the Special Marriage Act 1954, the Foreign Marriage Act 1969
the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, the Citizenship Act and the Transgender Persons Protection of
Rights Act 2019 on the other.
.One of the issues raised before the Court relates to the rights of transgender couples to marry, as
a
natural incident of their constitutional entitlements.
Having due regard to the broader context of the petitions before this Court and the inter relationship
between the statutory regime and constitutional rights, we are of the considered view that it would be
appropriate if the issues raised are resolved by a Bench of five Judges of this Court in view of the provisions
of Article 145(3) of the Constitution."
[Emphasis supplied]
p. Hence, the question of workability of statutes applicable to Muslims under their personal laws does not arise
before the Court at present. It is respectfully submitted that this Court is not called upon to look into the
workability of, or impact on, personal laws which are not under challenge before it nor the subject matter of
the reference.
q. Further, this Hon'ble Court has time and again interpreted aspects of personal law [see for example Mary Roy
(equal rights of daughters as coparceners under Hindu Succession Act); Amardeep Singh V. Harveen Kaur,
dissolved by consent under traditional Hindu Law)]. The interpretation of one statute does not ipso facto result
in other matrimonial statutes being interpreted differently. All matrimonial law statutes, as well as uncodified
law, are usually interpreted on their own terms, given their statutory provisions and legislative history, etc.
r. Hence, this Hon'ble Court's judgement would have no impact on the Sharia. An LGBTQ Muslim may choose to
solemnize a same-sex or gender non-conforming marriage under the SMA, whether to a Muslim or a non-
Muslim. Thereupon the provisions of the SMA and other statutes would be construed accordingly.
V. BENEFICIAL PROVISIONS IN ANNEXURE A
121. The beneficial statutes mentioned in Annexure A will apply to LGBTQ couples and their families, as they apply
to opposite-sex couples and their families.
VIII. There is growing international consensus recognizing same-sex and gender non-conforming
marriages, and the same is in line with India's international obligations
A. India has an international obligation to recognize marriage equality
122. Over and above its constitutional obligations, India also has an international obligation to uphold and protect
the rights of the LGBTQIA+ community. International law recognizes a person's rights to marry a partner of their
choice and to found a family, which is not limited or restricted in any manner by their sexual orientation and/or gender
identity.
123. India has ratified and is party to two major international conventions, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). This Hon'ble Court has time and
again held that the fundamental rights enshrined in Part 111 of our Constitution are in consonance with the UDHR and
the ICCPR; and further that it is a generally recognised principle in a national legal system that in the event of
20
doubt, the national rule is to be interpreted in accordance with the State's international obligations1.
124. Article 16 of the UDHR provides as under-
Article 16
1. Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry
and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
3. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State.
125. Article 23 of the ICCPR provides as under-
Article 23
1. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State.
2. The right of men and women of marriageable age to marry and to found a family shall be recognized.
3. No marriage shall be entered into without the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
4. States Parties to the present Covenant shall take appropriate steps to ensure equality of rights and
responsibilities of spouses as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. In the case of dissolution,
provision shall be made for the necessary protection of any children.
126. Jurisprudence developed by this Hon'ble Court has also recognized the Yogyakarta Principles, i.e. the
Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.
This Hon'ble Court in NALSA (cited supra) had held that-
"60. the international conventions, including Yogyakarta Principles, which we have found not inconsistent with
the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the Indian Constitution, must be recognised and followed, which
has sufficient legal and historical justification in our country."
127. The Yogyakarta Principles "conform to our constitutional view of the fundamental rights of the citizens of India
and persons who come to this Court", and hence, must be recognized to enable LGBTQ couples to participate in the
institution of marriage. [Johar, per Nariman, J. (paragraph 355)]
128. The Yogyakarta Principles were adopted in 2007 as a coherent and comprehensive identification of the
obligation of States to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights of all persons regardless of their sexual orientation
or gender identity. The Yogyakarta Principles specifically iterate an obligation to ensure that irrespective of gender
identity, sexual orientation, gender expression or sex characteristics, all persons have the right to universal enjoyment
of human rights, right against non-discrimination, right to recognition before the Law, right to found a family and
participate in cultural life of a community, right to economic, social and cultural rights, right to expression, opinion and
forming association etc.
129. Principle 24 provides for the right to found a family, as under-
Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Families exist in
diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or gender
identity of any of its members.
States shall:
A. Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure the right to found a family,
including through access to adoption on assisted procreation (including donor insemination), without
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity;
B. Ensure that laws and policies recognise the diversity of family forms, including those not defined by descent or
marriage, and take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that no family may
be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or genden identity of any of its members,
including with regard to family-related social welfare and other public benefits, employment, and immigration;
C. Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that in all actions or decisions
concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law,
administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration,
and that the sexual orientation or gender identity of the child or of any family member or other person may
not be considered incompatible with such best interests;
D. In all actions or decisions concerning children, ensure that a child who is capable of forming personal views
can exercise the right to express those views freely, and that such views are given due weight in accordance
with the age and maturity of the child;
E. Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that in states that
recognise same-sex marriages or registered partnerships, any entitlement, privilege, obligation
or
benefit available to different-sex married on registered partners is equally available to same-sex
married on registered partners:
F.
Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that any obligation,
entitlement. privilege, obligation or benefit available to different-sex unmarried partners is equally
available to same-sex unmarried partners;
G. Ensure that marriages and other legally-recognised partnerships may be entered into only with the
free and full consent of the intending spouses or partners.
[Emphasis supplied]
B. There is an increasing international judicial consensus around sexual orientation equality, including
recognizing same-sex marriages
130. Countries around the world have increasingly begun to recognize rights of the LGBTQIA+ community,
including the right to marry a person of one's choice. In Johar, this Hon'ble Court has recognized that-
(DY Chandrachud, J.)
5 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to another and that we must
therefore look at comparative law-making allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight
of
international opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental rights for same sex
couples reflects a growing consensus towards sexual orientation equality. We feel inclined to concur with the
accumulated wisdom reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees contained
within the Indian Constitution, but to provide a sound and appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about
those guarantees.
131. At present, more than 30 countries have legalized same-sex marriage. Notably, inter alia Austria, Brazil, Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Slovenia, South Africa, Nepal, Taiwan, United States of America, Ecuador, Argentina, Brazil,
Colombia, Uruguay, have granted legal recognition to same-sex marriage by way of judicial pronouncements.
132. Table on Legal Status of Same-sex Unions across the world, is annexed and marked as Annexure D.
133. The US Supreme Court, in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015) (9-judge bench), read a right to same-
sex marriage into the equality clause. It was held that the Constitution entitles same-sex couples to civil marriage "on
the same terms and conditions as opposite-sex couples." Justice Anthony Kennedy speaking for the majority held
that:
"The right to marry is a fundamental right inherent in the liberty of the person, and under the Due Process and
Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment couples of the same-sex may not be deprived of that right
and that liberty"
134. Justice Kennedy further held as under:
"This analysis compels the conclusion that same-sex couples may exercise the right to marry. The four principles
and traditions to be discussed demonstrate that the reasons marriage is fundamental under the Constitution apply
with equal force to same-sex couples.
135. The US Supreme Court further held that:
"No union is more profound than marriage, for it embodies the highest ideals of love, fidelity, devotion, sacrifice,
and family. In forming a marital union, two people become something greater than once they were. As some of the
petitioners in these cases demonstrate, marriage embodies a love that may endure even past death. It would
misunderstand these men and women to say they disrespect the idea of marriage. Their plea is that they do respect
it, respect it SO deeply that they seek to find its fulfillment for themselves. Their hope is not to be condemned to
live in loneliness, excluded from one of civilization's oldest institutions. They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the
law. The Constitution grants them that right"
held that same-sex married couples cannot be treated differently than opposite-sex married couples. Thus, the court
held relevant state laws to be unconstitutional to the extent that they treated same-sex couples differently from
opposite-sex couples.
137. On 12.06.2019, Ecuador's Constitution Court (10-18-CN/19) ruled to overhaul the country's laws and hold
that legislation prohibiting same sex marriage was discriminatory and unconstitutional, and that same-sex couples
enjoy equal rights.
138. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights, in 2018, issued an advisory opinion (Advisory Opinion OC-24/17)
to Costa Rica that signatories of the American Convention on Human Rights are obliged to make same-sex marriage
legal. It was held that:
"States must ensure access to all the legal institutions that exist in their domestic laws to guarantee the
protection of all the rights of families composed of same sex couples, without discrimination in relation to families
constituted by heterosexual couples.
139. The ECtHR in Oliari V. Italy, 2015 ECHR 176, held that gay couples are equally capable of entering into stable
and committed relationships in the same way as heterosexual couples. It further affirmed the view that same sex
couples are in need of legal recognition and protection of their relationship.
140. In Oliari, the ECtHR further noted that there exists a clear gap between the social reality of the applicants
(same sex couples), who openly live their relationship, such as the Petitioners in the present case, and the law, which
fails to formally recognize same sex partnerships. In doing so, the State authorities have overstepped their margin of
appreciation and failed to fulfil their positive obligation to ensure that the applicants have available specific legal
framework providing for the recognition and protection of their same sex unions.
141. Most recently in Case of Fedotova V. Russia, Applications nos. 40792/10, 30538/14 and 43439/14, the Grand
Chamber of the ECtHR dealt with the importance and need for recognition and protection of same-sex marriage as
under-
(Majority opinion 14 : 3)
200. The Court accepts that gaining official recognition for their relationship has an intrinsic value for the
applicants. Such recognition forms part of the development of both their personal and their social identity
201. The Court has already held that partnerships constituting an officially recognised alternative to marriage
have an intrinsic value for same-sex couples irrespective of the legal effects, however narrow or extensive, that they
produce. Accordingly, official recognition of same-sex couples confers an existence and a legitimacy
on
them vis--vis the outside world.
202. Beyond the essential need for official recognition, same-sex couples, like different-sex couples, have "basic
needs" for protection. Indeed, the recognition and the protection of a couple are inextricably linked. The Court has
held on a number of occasions that same-sex couples are in a relevantly similar situation to different-sex couples as
regards their need for formal acknowledgment and protection of their relationship.
203. In the present case, the Court can only conclude that in the absence of official recognition, same-sex
couples are nothing more than de facto unions under Russian law. The partners are unable to regulate
fundamental aspects of life as a couple such as those concerning property, maintenance and inheritance
except as private individuals entering into contracts under the ordinary law, rather than as an officially
recognised couple. Non are they able to rely on the existence of their relationship in dealings with the
judicial or administrative authorities. Indeed the fact that same-sex partners are required to apply to
the domestic courts for protection of their basic needs as a couple constitutes in itself a hindrance to
respect for their private and family life
[Emphasis supplied]
142. The Constitutional Court of Austria ruled on 04.12.2017 (G-258-259 of 2017) that denial of marriage equality
was discriminatory, legalizing same-sex marriage, and held as under:
"The distinction in the law between opposite-sex and same-sex relationships as two different legal institutions
thus violates the principle of equality, which forbids any discrimination of individuals on grounds of personal
characteristics, such as their sexual orientation."
143. Recently on 08.07.2022, the Constitutional Court of Slovenia (6 3) (Decision No. U-1-486/20, Up-572/18)
legalized same-sex marriage and adoption by same-sex couples. It was held that Slovenia's statutory provisions
allowing for only opposite-sex marriages and adoptions violated a constitutional prohibition against discrimination. It
was held that such discrimination cannot be justified by the traditional meaning of marriage as a union of husband
and wife, non can it be justified by the special protection of the family.
144. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT 60/04, and Lesbian
and Gay Equality Project V. Minister of Home Affairs, Case CCT 10/05, held that same-sex couples have a
constitutional right to marry at par with entitlements and responsibilities enjoyed by heterosexual couples. The
Constitutional Court of South Africa held as under:
"81 A law that creates institutions which enable heterosexual couples to declare their public commitment to
each other and achieve the status, entitlements and responsibilities that flow from marriage, but does not provide
any mechanism for same-sex couples to achieve the same, discriminates unfairly against same-sex couples. It gives
to the one and not to the other. The instruments created by the legal system exclude from their reach persons
entitled to be protected by them.
145. The Supreme Court of Nepal in Sunil Babu Pant V. Nepal Government, (2008) 2 NJA LJ 262, in relation to
same-sex marriages, have held as under:
"Looking at the issue of same sex marriage, we hold that it is an inherent right of an adult to have marital
relation with another adult with his/her free consent and according to her/his will.'
146. The Taiwan Constitutional Court ruled in 2017 (Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 748) that marriage could not
be restricted to opposite-sex couples, and held as under:
"The current provisions of the Marriage Chapter do not allow two persons of the same sex to create a union of
intimate and exclusive nature for the purpose of living a common life. This is obviously a gross legislative flaw. To
such extent, the provisions of the Marriage Chapter are incompatible with the spirit and meaning of the freedom of
marriage as protected by Article 22 of the Constitution."
147. Thus, it may be seen that constitutional courts around the world have leaned in favour of recognizing marriage
equality.
148. The growing international consensus towards development of LGBT rights provides a confirmation for this
Hon'ble Court to recognize marriage equality. As held by this Hon'ble Court in Johar, in the march of civilisation across
the spectrum of a compassionate global order, India cannot be left behind [Para 564].
DRAWN BY:
SETTLED BY:
Govind
Manoharan,
Advocate
Mukul
Rohatgi, Senior Advocate
Shristi Borthakur, Advocate
FILED BY
Priya Puri AOR
ANNEXURE A - TABLE ON ILLUSTRATIVE BUNDLE OF RIGHTS ENJOYED BY MARRIED COUPLES AND THEIR
CHILDREN
Matrimonial Rights and Remedies
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Right to Maintenance
and Alimony
order/decree of maintenance may be enforced like a decree of a civil court
through the provisions which are available for enforcing a money decree, viz. civil
detention, attachment of property, etc.
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the wife
or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the
applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as,
having regard to the respondent's own income and other property, if any, the
income and other property of the applicant, the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case, it may seem to the court to be just, and any such
payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the immovable property
of the respondent.
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is, a change in the circumstances of either
party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may at the
instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner
as the court may deem just.
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has
not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he has had sexual
intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may at the instance of the other
party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may
deem just.
The Special Marriage Act. 1954
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any court exercising
jurisdiction under Chapter V or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any
decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on application made to it for the
purpose, order that the husband shall secure to the wife for her maintenance and
support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband's property, such gross sum or
such monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life,
as, having regard to her own property, if any, her husband's property and ability
the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may seem to
the court to be just.
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of
either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may,
at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such
manner as it may seem to the court to be just.
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order has
been made under this section has remarried or is not leading a chaste life, it
may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify or rescind any such order and
in such manner as the court may deem just.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
40. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any Court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on an application made to it for the purpose by either the
wife or the husband, order that the defendant shall pay to the plaintiff for her or
his maintenance and support, such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum,
for a term not exceeding the life of the plaintiff as having regard to the
defendant's own income and other property, if any, the income and other
property of the plaintiff, the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of
the case, it may seem to the Court to be just, and any such payment may be
secured, if necessary, by a charge on the movable or immovable property of the
defendant.
(2) The Court if it is satisfied that there is change in the circumstances of either
party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the
instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner
as the Court may deem just.
(3) The Court if it is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has
not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he had sexual
intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may, at the instance of the other
party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the Court may
deem just.
The Divorce Act, 1869
37. Power to order permanent alimony.- Where a decree of dissolution of
the marriage or a decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the
District Court may order that the husband shall], to the satisfaction of the Court,
secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum of money for
any term not exceeding her own life, as, having regard to her fortune (if any), to
the ability of the husband, and to the conduct of the parties, it thinks
reasonable; and for that purpose may cause a proper instrument to be executed
by all necessary parties.
Power to order monthly or weekly payments.-In every such case the Court
may make an order on the husband for payment to the wife of such monthly or
weekly sums for her maintenance and support as the Court may think
reasonable:
Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes unable to make
such payments, it shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order,
or temporarily to suspend the same as to the whole or any part of the money so
ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order wholly or in part, as to
the Court seems fit.
2.
Right in respect of
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
joint property
27. Disposal of property.- In any proceeding under this Act, the court may
make such provisions in the decree as it deems just and proper with respect to
any property presented, at or about the time of marriage, which may belong
jointly to both the husband and the wife.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
42. Disposal of joint property.- In any suit under this Act the Court may
make such provisions in the final decree as it may deem just and proper with
respect to property presented at or about the time of marriage which may belong
jointly to both the husband and wife.
3.
Restitution
of
Conjugal Rights
has held that this remedy serves a social purpose as an aid to the prevention of
break-up of marriage and is not violative of either Articles 14 or 21 of the
Constitution.
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
9. Restitution of conjugal rights.- When either the husband or the wife has,
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other aggrieved
party may apply, by petition to the district court, for restitution of conjugal rights
and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such
petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be
granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation.-Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse
for withdrawal from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be
on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
The Special Marriage Act, 1954
22. Restitution of conjugal rights. - When either the husband or the wife has,
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the
aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district court for restitution of
conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements
made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application
should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation.-Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse
for withdrawal from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be
on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act. 1936
36. Suit for restitution of conjugal rights.- Where a husband shall have
deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with his wife, or where a wife
shall have deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with her husband,
the party so deserted or with whom cohabitation shall have so ceased may sue
for the restitution of his or her conjugal rights and the Court, if satisfied of the
truth of the allegations contained in the plaint, and that there is no just ground
why relief should not be granted, may proceed to decree such restitution of
conjugal rights accordingly.
The Divorce Act, 1869
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights.- - When either the husband or
the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other,
either wife or husband may apply, by petition to the District Court, for restitution
of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the
statements made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the
application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights
accordingly.
4.
Right to sue third
This Hon'ble Court in Pinakin Mahipatray Rawal V. State of Gujarat, (2013) 10
party who attempts
to alienate affection
"17. Action for alienation of affection lies for all improper intrusions or assaults
of one's spouse
on the marriage relationship by another, whether or not associated with
"extramarital sex", his or her continued overtures or sexual liaisons can be
construed as something akin to an assumption of risk that his/her conduct will
injure the marriage and give rise to an action. But all the same, a person is not
liable for alienation of affection for merely becoming a passive object of affection.
The liability arises only if there is any active participation, initiation or
encouragement on the part of the defendant. Acts which lead to the loss of
affection must be wrongful, intentional, calculated to entice the affection of one
spouse away from the other, in order to support a cause of action for alienation of
affection. For proving a claim for alienation of affection it is not necessary for a
party to prove an adulterous relationship."
11. Right of spouse and children for maintenance
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Right to maintenance
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.- (1) If any
of wife and children
person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain-
under Section 125 of
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
the
Criminal
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to
Procedure Code
maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order
such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such
child, father or mother, at such monthly rate, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child
referred to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if
the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child,
if
married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding
regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order
such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife
or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the
Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the
Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim
maintenance and expenses for proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far
as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the service of
notice of the application to such person. Explanation.-For the purposes of this
Chapter,
(a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act,
1875 (9 of 1875), is deemed not to have attained his majority;
(b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce
from, her husband and has not remarried.
(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and
expenses for proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so
ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the
order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for
levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may
sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each month's allowance for
the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the
case may be, remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if
sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due
under this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount
within a period of one year from the date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her
living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider
any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section
notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so
doing.
Explanation.-If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps
a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live
with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the
interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, from her
husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient
reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living separately by
mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this
section is living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live
with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual consent, the
Magistrate shall cancel the order.
111. Rights in case of succession and intestate succession
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Rights in case of
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956
intestate succession
8. General rules of succession in the case of males.- The property of a male
Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the provisions of this Chapter-
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in Class I of the
Schedule;
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of Class I, then upon the heirs, being the
relatives specified in Class U of the Schedule;
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon the agnates of
the deceased; and
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the deceased.
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.- Among the heirs
specified in the Schedule, those in Class I shall take simultaneously and to the
exclusion of all other heirs; those in the first entry in Class II shall be preferred
to those in the second entry: those in the second entry shall be preferred to
those in the third entry; and so on in succession.
10. Distribution of property among heirs in Class I of the Schedule.- The
property of an intestate shall be divided among the heirs in Class I of the
Schedule in accordance with the following rules:
Rule 1.- The intestate's widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the
widows together, shall take one share.
Rule 2.- The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall
each take one share.
Rule 3.- The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased
daughter of the intestate shall take between them one share.
Rule 4.- The distribution of the share referred to in Rule 3-
(i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased son shall be so made that
his widow (or widows together) and the surviving sons and daughters get equal
portions; and
(ii) the branch of his predeceased sons gets the same portion; (ii) among the
heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased daughter shall be so made that the
surviving sons and daughters get equal portions.
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 8)
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS 11
Class /
Son; daughter; widow; mother; son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-
deceased son; son of a pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased
daughter; widow of a pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-
deceased son; daughter of a predeceased son of a pre-deceased son; widow of a
pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased daughter of a
predeceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a predeceased
daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased son of a predeceased daughter; daughter
of a pre-deceased daughter of a predeceased son.
SC 471, held:
"15. In the instant case, it is admitted by the second defendant that the
settlement deed dated 22.03.1980 (Ex.P-1) is, in fact, a gift-deed which was
executed by the first defendant in favour of the second defendant 'out of love
and affection' and by virtue of which the second defendant was given a portion of
the joint family property. It is well-settled that a Hindu father or any other
managing member of a HUF has power to make a gift of ancestral property only
for a 'pious purpose" and what is understood by the term 'pious purpose" is a gift
for charitable and/or religious purpose. Therefore, a deed of gift in regard to the
ancestral property executed 'out of love and affection" does not come within the
scope of the term 'pious purpose'. It is irrelevant if such gift or settlement was
made by a donor, i.e. the first defendant, in favour of a donee who was raised by
the donor without any relationship, i.e. the second defendant. The gift deed in
the instant case is not for any charitable or religious purpose."
The Indian Succession Act. 1925
Part V Intestate Succession
Chapter 11 : Rules in cases of intestates other than Parsis
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and
kindred only, or widow and no kindred.- Where the intestate has left a
widow-
(a) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one-third of his property shall
belong to his widow, and the remaining two-thirds shall go to his lineal
descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(b) save as provided by Section 33-A], if he has left no lineal descendant, but
has left persons who are of kindred to him, one-half of his property shall belong
to his widow, and the other half shall go to those who are of kindred to him, in
the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(c) if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his property shall
belong to his widow.
33-A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal
descendants.- (1) Where the intestate has left a widow but no lineal
descendants and the nett value of his property does not exceed five thousand
rupees, the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.
(2) Where the nett value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand
rupees, the widow shall be entitled to five thousand rupees thereof and shall
have a charge upon the whole of such property for such sum of five thousand
rupees, with interest thereon from the date of the death of the intestate at 4 per
cent per annum until payment.
(3) The provision for the widow made by this section shall be in addition and
without prejudice to her interest and share in the residue of the estate of such
intestate remaining after payment of the said sum of five thousand rupees, with
interest as aforesaid, and such residue shall be distributed in accordance with
the provisions of Section 33 as if it were the whole of such intestate's property.
(4) The nett value of the property shall be ascertained by deducting from the
gross value thereof all debts, and all funeral and administration expenses of the
intestate, and all other lawful liabilities and charges to which the property shall
be subject.
(5) This section shall not apply-
(a) to the property of-
(i) any Indian Christian,
(ii) any child or grandchild of any male person who is or was at the time of his
death an Indian Christian, or
(iii) any person professing the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion the
succession to whose property is, under Section 24 of the Special Marriage Act,
1872, regulated by the provisions of this Act;
(b) unless the deceased dies intestate in respect of all his property.
35. Rights of widower.- A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in
respect of her property, if she dies intestate, as a widow has in respect of her
husband's property, if he dies intestate.
37. Where intestate has left child or children only. - Where the intestate
has left surviving him a child or children, but no more remote lineal descendant
through a deceased child, the property shall belong to his surviving child, if there
is only one, or shall be equally divided among all his surviving children.
Chapter 111 : Special Rules for Parsi Intestates
51. Division of intestate's property among widow, widower, children and
parents.- (1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the property of which
a Parsi dies intestate shall be divided,-
(a) where such Parsi dies leaving a widow or widower and children, among the
widow or widower. and children so that the widow or widower and each child
receive equal shares;
(b) where such Parsi dies leaving children, but no widow or widower, among the
children in equal shares.
(2) Where a Parsi dies leaving one or both parents in addition to children or
widow or widower and children, the property of which such Parsi dies intestate
shall be so divided that the parent or each of the parents shall receive a share
equal to half the share of each child.
54. Division of property where intestate leaves no lineal descendant but
leaves a widow or widower or a widow or widower of any lineal
descendant. Where a Parsi dies without leaving any lineal descendant but
leaving a widow or widower or a widow or widower of a lineal descendant, the
property of which the intestate dies intestate shall be divided in accordance with
the following rules, namely,-
(a) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower but no widow or widower of a lineal
descendant, the widow or widower shall take half the said property;
(b) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower and also a widow or widower of
any lineal descendant, his widow or her widower shall receive one-third of the
said property and the widow or widower of any lineal descendant shall receive
another one-third or if there is more than one such widow or widower of lineal
descendants, the last mentioned one-third shall be divided equally among them.
(c) if the intestate leaves no widow or widower, but one widow or widower of a
lineal descendant, such widow or widower of the lineal descendant shall receive
one-third of the said property or, if the intestate leaves no widow or widower but
more than one widow or widower of lineal descendants, two-thirds of the said
property shall be divided among such widows or widowers of the lineal
descendants in equal shares;
(d) the residue after the division specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause
(c) has been made shall be distributed among the relatives of the intestate in
the order specified in Part | of Schedule 11; and the next-of-kin standing first in
Part I of that Schedule shall be preferred to those, standing second, the second
to the third and so on in succession, provided that the property shall be so
distributed that each male and female standing in the same degree of
propinquity shall receive equal shares;
(e) if there are no relatives entitled to the residue under clause (d). the whole of
the residue shall be distributed in proportion to the shares specified among the
persons entitled to receive shares under this section.
Muslim Law
This Hon'ble Court in Jamil Ahmad V. Vth Addl. Distt. Judge, Moradabad, (2001)
11. The property (both movable as well as immovable) left by a deceased
Muslim is called matruka. The scheme of distribution of matruka among the heirs
of a deceased Muslim is that first that part of the matruka which is covered by a
will of the deceased, if there is a valid will (subject to a maximum of 1/3rd of the
total matruka provided it is not in favour of an heir) will be separated and given
to the legatee. The balance of matruka alone is distributable among the heirs and
in the proportion ordained under the Mohammedan Law.
IV. Right of married couples to be parents together
S. NO.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
1.
Only married couples
The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956
are entitled to adopt
7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption. - Any male Hindu who is of
as a couple
sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or a daughter in
adoption:
Provided that, if he has a wife living, he shall not adopt except with the consent
of his wife unless the wife has completely and finally renounced the world or has
ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be of unsound mind.
Explanation. If a person has more than one wife living at the time of adoption,
the consent of all the wives is necessary unless the consent of any one of them is
unnecessary for any of the reasons specified in the preceding proviso.
8. Capacity of a female Hindu to take in adoption.-
Any female Hindu who is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to
take a son or daughter in adoption:
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or daughter
except with the consent of her husband unless the husband has completely and
finally renounced the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.
14. Determination of adoptive mother in certain cases.- (1) Where a Hindu
who has a wife living adopts a child she shall be deemed to be the adoptive
mother.
(2) Where an adoption has been made with the consent of more than one wife,
the seniormost in marriage among them shall be deemed to be the adoptive
mother and the others to be stepmothers.
(3) Where a widower or a bachelor adopts a child, any wife whom he
subsequently marries shall be deemed to be the stepmother of the adopted
child.
(4) Where a widow or an unmarried woman adopts a child, any husband whom
she marries subsequently shall be deemed to be the stepfather of the adopted
child.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
57. Eligibility of prospective adoptive parents.- (1) The prospective
adoptive parents shall be physically fit, financially sound, mentally alert and
highly motivated to adopt a child for providing a good upbringing to him.
(2) In case of a couple, the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be
required.
(3) A single or divorced person can also adopt, subject to fulfilment of the
criteria and in accordance with the provisions of adoption regulations framed by
the Authority.
(4) A single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child.
(5) Any other criteria that may be specified in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority.
The Adoption Regulations, 2022
5. Eligibility criteria for prospective adoptive parents.-(1 The prospective
adoptive parents shall be physically, mentally, emotionally and financially
capable, they shall not have any life threatening medical condition and they
should not have been convicted in criminal act of any nature or accused in any
case of child rights violation.
(2) Any prospective adoptive parent, irrespective of their marital status and
whether or not they have biological son or daughter, can adopt a child subject to
the following, namely: -
(a) the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be required, in case of
a married couple;
(b) a single female can adopt a child of any gender;
(c) a single male shall not be eligible to adopt a girl child.
(3) No child shall be given in adoption to a couple unless they have at least two
years of stable marital relationship except in the cases of relative or step-parent
adoption.
Office Memorandum issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority
bearing S. No. CARAICA013/1/2022 Administration dated 16 June 2022
2. The cases of single PAPs engaged in live-in relationship have been discussed
in the Steering Committee of Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) during
its 31st Meeting held on 18th April, 2022. It has been decided to go with the
earlier decision of 14th Steering Committee Meeting held on 10th May, 2018 that
the cases of single PAP in a live-in relationship with a partner will not be
considered eligible to adopt a child and their registration from concerned
agencies/authorities will not be considered for approval.
3. The decision has been taken in line with Regulation 5(3) of the Adoption
Regulations, 2017. The authority would like the children to be placed only with
the stable family and single applicant in a live-in relationship cannot be
considered as stable family.
2.
Couples need to be
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-(h
married to avail
"couple" means the legally married Indian man and woman above the age of 21
surrogacy under the
years and 18 years, respectively;
Surrogacy
(Regulation)
Act.
2021
3.
Couples need to be
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-(e)
married to avail
"commissioning couple" means an infertile married couple who approach an
assisted reproductive
assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted reproductive technology bank
technology under the
for obtaining the services authorised of the said clinic or bank;
Assisted Reproductive
Technology
(Regulation)
Act,
2021
V. Right to compensation of spouse and children in case of accidental death
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Entitlement
to
5.
Liability in case of death.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
compensation under
Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855) or any other enactment or rule of law in
the Carriage by Air
force in any part of India, the rules contained in [the First Schedule, the Second
Act, 1972
Schedule and the Third Schedule] shall, in all cases to which those rules apply,
determine the liability of a carrier in respect of the death of a passenger.
(2) The liability shall be enforceable for the benefit of such of the members of the
passengers family as sustained damage by reason of his death.
Explanation.- In this sub-section, the expression "member of a family" means
wife or husband, parent, step-parent, grand-parent, brother, sister, half-brother,
half-sister, child, step-child and grandchild:
Provided that in deducing any such relationship as aforesaid any illegitimate
person and any adopted person shall be treated as being, or as having been, the
legitimate child of his mother and reputed father or, as the case may be, of his
adopters.
(3) An action to enforce the liability may be brought by the personal
representative of the passenger or by any person for whose benefit the liability is
under subsection (2) enforceable, but only one action shall be brought in India in
respect of the death of any one passenger, and every such action by whomsoever
brought shall be for the benefit of all such persons so entitled as aforesaid as
either are domiciled in India or not being domiciled there express a desire to
take the benefit of the action.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the amount recovered in any
such action, after deducting any costs not recovered from the defendant, shall be
divided between the persons entitled in such proportion as the Court may direct.
2.
Entitlement
to
compensation under
680, has held that upon the death of a person in a motor vehicle accident their
the
Motor
Vehicles
spouse is entitled to inter alia compensation under the head of loss of consortium
Act, 1988
of Rs. 50,000/-. The head of loss of consortium attempts to compensate for the
loss of spouse's affection, comfort, solace, companionship, society, assistance,
protection, care and sexual relations during the future years.
3.
Entitlement
to
1-A. Suit for compensation to the family of a person for loss occasioned
compensation
under
to it by his death by actionable wrong.- Whenever the death of a person
the Fatal Accidents
shall be caused by wrongful act, neglect or default, and the act, neglect or
Act, 1855
default is such as would (if death had not ensued) have entitled the party injured
to maintain an action and recover damages in respect thereof, the party who
would have been liable if death had not ensued, shall be liable to an action or
suit for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person injured, and although
the death shall have been caused under such circumstances as amount in law to
felony or other crime.
Every such action or suit shall be for the benefit of the wife, husband, parent and
child, if any, of the person whose death shall have been so caused, and shall be
brought by and in the name of the executor, administrator, or representative of
the person deceased; and in every such action the court may give such damages
as it may think proportioned to the loss resulting from such death to the parties
respectively, for whom and for whose benefit such action shall be brought; and
the amount so recovered, after deducting all costs and expenses, including the
costs not recovered from the defendant, shall be divided amongst the before-
mentioned parties, or any of them, in such shares as the court by its judgement
or decree shall direct.
4.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject
compensation in case
or context,-
of employment injury
(6-A) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a deceased insured
under the Employees'
person, namely:
State Insurance Act,
(i) a widow, a legitimate or adopted son who has not attained the age of twenty-
1948
five years, an unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter;
(i-a) a widowed mother;
(ii) If wholly dependant on the earnings of the insured person at the time of his
death, a legitimate or adopted son or daughter who has attained the age of
twenty-five years and is infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependant on the earnings of the insured person at the
time of his death,-
(a) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(b) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter
legitimate or adopted or illegitimate if married and a minor or if widowed and a
minor,
(c) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(d) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is alive,
or
(g) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the insured person is alive;
46. Benefits.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the insured persons
their dependants or the persons hereinafter mentioned, as the case may be, shall
be entitled to the following benefits, namely-
(a) periodical payments to any insured person in case of his sickness certified by
a duly appointed medical practitioner or by any other person possessing such
qualifications and experience as the Corporation may, by regulations, specify in
this behalf] (hereinafter referred to as sickness benefit);
(b) periodical payments to an insured woman in case of confinement or
miscarriage or sickness arising out of pregnancy, confinement, premature birth of
child or miscarriage, such woman being certified to be eligible for such payments
by an authority specified in this behalf by the regulations (hereinafter referred to
as maternity benefit);
(c) periodical payments to an insured person suffering from disablement as a
result of an employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act and
certified to be eligible for such payments by an authority specified in this behalf
by the regulations (hereinafter referred to as disablement benefit);
(d) periodical payments to such dependants of an insured person who dies as a
result of an employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act, as are
entitled to compensation under this Act (hereinafter referred to as dependants'
benefit);
(e) medical treatment for and attendance on insured persons (hereinafter
referred to as medical benefit); and
(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the family of an insured person
who has died, towards the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured
person, or, where the insured person did not have a family or was not living with
his family at the time of his death, to the person who actually incurs the
expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured person (to be known as
[funeral expenses):
Provided that the amount of such payment shall not exceed such amount as may
be prescribed by the Central Government and the claim for such payment shall
be made within three months of the death of the insured person or within such
extended period as the Corporation or any officer or authority authorised by it in
this behalf may allow.
52. Dependant's benefit.- (1) If an insured person dies as a result of an
employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act (whether or not he
was in receipt of any periodical payment for temporary disablement in respect of
the injury) dependants' benefit shall be payable at such rates and for such period
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government
to his dependants specified in sub-clause (i), sub-clause (i-a) and sub-clause (ii)
of clause (6-A) of Section 2.
(2) In case the insured person dies without leaving behind him the dependants
as aforesaid. the dependants' benefit shall be paid to the other dependants of
the deceased at such rates and for such period and subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
VI. Right to compensation of spouse and children in case of death, under various labour laws
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Entitlement to Death
2. Definitions. - In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,-
Gratuity under the
(h) "family", in relation to an employee, shall be deemed to consist of-
Payment of Gratuity
(i) in the case of a male employee, himself, his wife, his children, whether
Act, 1972
married or unmarried, his dependent parents and the dependent parents of his
wife and the widow and children of his predeceased son, if any,
(ii) in the case of a female employee, herself, her husband, her children, whether
married or unmarried, her dependent parents and the dependent parents of her
husband and the widow and children of her predeceased son, if any:
Explanation.-Where the personal law of an employee permits the adoption by
him of a child, any child lawfully adopted by him shall be deemed to be included
in his family, and where a child of an employee has been adopted by another
person and such adoption is, under the personal law of the person making such
adoption, lawful, such child shall be deemed to be excluded from the family of
the employee;
4. Payment of gratuity.- (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the
termination of his employment after he has rendered continuous service for not
less than five years,-
(a) on his superannuation, or
(b) on his retirement or resignation, or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease:
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be
necessary where the termination of the employment of any employee is due to
death or disablement:
Provided further that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to
him shall be paid to his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his
heirs, and where any such nominees or heirs is a minor, the share of such minor,
shall be deposited with the controlling authority who shall invest the same for
the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution, as may be
prescribed, until such minor attains majority.
6. Nomination.- (1) Each employee, who has completed one year of service,
shall make, within such time, in such form and in such manner, as may be
prescribed, nomination for the purpose of the second proviso to sub-section (1)
of Section 4.
(2) An employee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity
payable to him under this Act amongst more than one nominee.
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the
nomination shall be made in favour of one or more members of his family, and
any nomination made by such employee in favour of a person who is not a
member of his family, shall be void.
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the employee has no family, the
nomination may be made in favour of any person or persons but if the employee
subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith become invalid
and the employee shall make, within such time as may be prescribed, a fresh
nomination in favour of one or more members of his family.
2.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires-
compensation under
(g) "family" means-
the
Employees
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether married or
Provident
Fund
unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's widow and children:
Scheme, 1952
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the personal
law governing him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses
belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be deemed to be a part
of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member
subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to the Commissioner that
she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children, whether married
or unmarried, her dependant parents, her husband's dependant parents and her
deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner expresses her
desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependant
parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of the member's family for the
purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member subsequently cancels in writing any
such notice;
Explanation.-In either of the above two cases, if the child of a Member or, as the
case may be, the child of a deceased son of the Member has been adopted by
another person and if, under the personal law of the adopter, adoption is legally
recognised such a child shall be considered as excluded from the family of the
Member;
61. Nomination.-(1 Each member shall make in his declaration in Form 2, a
nomination conferring the right to receive the amount that may stand to his
credit in the Fund in the event of his death before the amount standing to his
credit has become payable, or where the amount has become payable before
payment has been made.
(2) A member may in his nomination distribute the amount that may stand to
his credit in the Fund amongst his nominees at his own discretion.
(3) If a member has a family at the time of making a nomination, the
nomination shall be in favour of one or more persons belonging to his family. Any
nomination made by such member in favour of a person not belonging to his
family shall be invalid:
Provided that a fresh nomination shall be made by the member on his marriage
and any nomination made before such marriage shall be deemed to be invalid.
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the member has no family, the
nomination may be in favour of any person or persons but if the member
subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith be deemed to be
invalid and the member shall make a fresh nomination in favour of one or more
persons belonging to his family.
(4-A) Where the nomination is wholly or partly in favour of a minor, the member
may, for the purposes of this Scheme, appoint a major person of his family, as
defined in clause (g) of Paragraph 2, to be the guardian of the minor nominee in
the event of the member predeceasing the nominee and the guardian so
appointed:
Provided that where there is no major person in his family, the member may, at
his discretion, appoint any other person to be a guardian of the minor nominee.
(5) A nomination made under sub-paragraph (1) may at any time be modified by
a member after giving a written notice of his intention of doing so in Form
annexed hereto. If the nominee predeceases the member, the interest of the
nominee shall revert to the member who may make a fresh nomination in
respect of such interest.
(6) A nomination or its modification shall take effect to the extent that it is valid
on the date on which it is received by the Commissioner.
70. Accumulations of a deceased member-To whom payable.- the death
of a member before the amount standing to his credit has become payable or
where the amount has become payable before payment has been made-
(i) if a nomination made by the member in accordance with Paragraph 61
subsists, the amount standing to his credit in the Fund or that part thereof to
which the nomination relates, shall become payable to his nominee or nominees
in accordance with such nomination; or
(ii) if no nomination subsists or if the nomination relates only to a part of the
amount standing to his credit in the Fund, the whole amount or the part thereof
to which the nomination does not relate, as the case may be, shall become
payable to the members of his family in equal shares:
Provided that no share shall be payable to-
(a) sons who have attained majority;
(b) sons of a deceased son who have attained majority;
(c) married daughters whose husbands are alive;
(d) married daughters of a deceased son whose husbands are alive;
if there is any member of the family other than those specified in clauses (a),
(b), (c) and (d):
Provided further that the widow or widows, and the child or children of a
deceased son shall receive between them in equal parts only the share which
that son would have received if he had survived the member and had not
attained the age of majority at the time of the member's death.
(iii) in any case, to which the provisions of clauses (i) and (ii) do not apply the
whole amount shall be payable to the person legally entitled to it.
Explanation. -For the purpose of this paragraph a member's posthumous child, if
born alive, shall be treated in the same way as a surviving child born before the
member's death.
3.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the
compensation under
subject or context-
the
Employees
(d) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a deceased employee,
Compensation
Act,
namely-
1923
(i) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried legitimate or
adopted daughter, or a widowed mother; and
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of his death,
a son or a daughter who has attained the age of 18 years and who is infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of
his death-
(a) a widower,
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter
legitimate or illegitimate or adopted if married and a minor or if widowed and a
minor,
(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is
alive, or
(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the employee is alive;
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (ii) and items (f) and (g) of sub-
clause (iii), references to a son, daughter or child include an adopted son,
daughter or child respectively;
8. Distribution of compensation.- (1) No payment of compensation in respect
of a employee whose injury has resulted in death, and no payment of a lump
sum as compensation to a woman or a person under a legal disability, shall be
made otherwise than by deposit with the Commissioner, and no such payment
made directly by an employer shall be deemed to be a payment of
compensation:
Provided that, in the case of a deceased employee, an employer may make to
any dependant advances on account of compensation of an amount equal to
three months' wages of such employee and so much of such amount as does not
exceed the compensation payable to that dependant shall be deducted by the
Commissioner from such compensation and repaid to the employer.
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than ten rupees which is payable as
compensation may be deposited with the Commissioner on behalf of the person
entitled thereto.
(3) The receipt of the Commissioner shall be a sufficient discharge in respect of
any compensation deposited with him.
(4) On the deposit of any money under sub-section (1), as compensation in
respect of a deceased employee the Commissioner shall, if he thinks necessary,
cause notice to be published or to be served on each dependant in such manner
as he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants to appear before him on such date
as he may fix for determining the distribution of the compensation. If the
Commissioner is satisfied after any inquiry which he may deem necessary, that
no dependant exists, he shall repay the balance of the money to the employer by
whom it was paid. The Commissioner shall, on application by the employer,
furnish a statement showing in detail all disbursements made.
(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a deceased employee shall, subject to
any deduction made under sub-section (4), be apportioned among the
dependants of the deceased employee or any of them in such proportion as the
Commissioner thinks fit, or may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be
allotted to any one dependant.
(6) Where any compensation deposited with the Commissioner is payable to any
person, the Commissioner shall, if the person to whom the compensation
is
payable is not a woman or a person under a legal disability, and may, in other
cases, pay the money to the person entitled thereto.
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is payable to a
woman or a person under a legal disability, such sum may be invested, applied
or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of the woman, or of such person during his
disability, in such manner as the Commissioner may direct; and where a half-
monthly payment is payable to any person under a legal disability, the
Commissioner may, of his own motion or on an application made to him in this
behalf, order that the payment be made during the disability to any dependant
of the employee or to any other person, whom the Commissioner thinks best
fitted to provide for the welfare of the employee.
(8) Where, an application made to him in this behalf or otherwise, the
Commissioner is satisfied that, on account of neglect of children on the part of a
parent or on account of the variation of the circumstances of any dependant or
for any other sufficient cause, an order of the Commissioner as to the distribution
of any sum paid as compensation or as to the manner in which any sum payable
to any such dependant is to be invested, applied or otherwise dealt with, ought
to be varied, the Commissioner may make such orders for the variation of the
former order as he thinks just in the circumstances of case:
Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be made unless such
person has been given an opportunity of showing cause why the order should not
be made, or shall be made in any case in which it would involve the repayment
by a dependant of any sum already paid to him.
(9) Where the Commissioner varies any order under sub-section (8) by reason of
the fact that payment of compensation to any person has been obtained by
fraud, impersonation or other improper means, any amount so paid to or on
behalf of such person may be recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in
Section 31.
4.
Entitlement
for
9. Benefits to the family on death of an eligible subscriber.-During the
pension upon death
receipt of pension, if an eligible subscriber dies, his spouse shall be only entitled
of spouse under the
to receive fifty per cent. of the pension received by such eligible subscriber, as
Pradhan
Mantri
family pension and such family pension shall be applicable only to the spouse.
Shram Yogi Maan-
dhan Yojana, 2019,
5.
Entitlement
for
16.A. Family Pension and Gratuity: Where a Judge dies before retirement
pension to Judges
his/her family shall be only entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension
under Supreme Court
received by such eligible subscriber, as family pension and such family pension
Judges (Salaries and
shall be applicable only to the family members.
Condition of Service)
Act, 1958
6.
Entitlement
for Rule 50 : Family Pension: During the receipt of pension, if the Government
pension
by
the
servant dies, his widow, children, dependant parents and dependant siblings
Ministry of Personnel,
shall be only entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension received by such
Public Grievances and
eligible subscriber, as family pension and such family pension shall be applicable
Pensions under CCA
only to the widow, children, dependant parents and dependant siblings.
(CCS) Rules 2021
6.
Entitlement to the
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936
amounts standing in
25-A. Payment of undisbursed wages in cases of death of employed
credit
upon
an
person.- (1) Subject to the other provisions of the Act, all amounts payable to
employee's death
an employed person as wages shall, if such amounts could not or cannot be paid
under the Payment of
on account of his death before payment or on account of his whereabouts not
Wages Act, 1936
being known,-
(a) be paid to the person nominated by him in this behalf in accordance with the
rules made under this Act; or (b)where no such nomination has been made or
where for any reasons such amounts cannot be paid to the person so nominated,
be deposited with the prescribed authority who shall deal with the amounts so
deposited in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1), all amounts
payable to an employed person as wages-
(a) are paid by the employer to the person nominated by the employed person;
or
(b) are deposited by the employer with the prescribed authority,
(c) the employer shall be discharged of his liability to pay those wages.
The Payment of Wages (Nomination) Rules, 2009
2. Definitions.- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(b) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an employed person,
namely:
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor child dependant upon the employed person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed person and
who is receiving education, till he or she attains the age of twenty-one years;
(iv) an unmarried daughter;
(v.) a son or daughter who is inform by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury and is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed
person, so long as the infirmity continues;
3. Procedure for nomination.-(1 Every employed person shall make a
declaration in Form-1, nominating a person conferring the right to receive the
amount that may stand in his credit at the event of his death before that amount
standing to his credit has become payable or where the amount has become
payable, before payment has been made.
(2) If an employed person has a family at the time of making nomination, the
nomination shall be in favour of the spouse or the spouse in preference followed
by one more members of his family:
Provided that nominated made by an employed person having a family in favour
of a person other than member of his family shall be invalid:
Provided further that a fresh nomination towards his/her spouse shall be made
by the employed person on his marriage and any nomination made before such
marriage shall be deemed to be invalid.
VII. Extension of medical benefits to spouse and/or children under various labour laws
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Entitlement to extend
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject
medical benefits to
or context,-
spouse under the
(1) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an insured person,
Employees'
State
namely:
Insurance Act, 1948
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the insured person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person and
who
(a) receiving education, till he or she attains the age of twenty-one years,
(b) an unmarried daughter;
(iv) a child who is infirm by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or
injury and is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person, so long as
the infirmity continues;
(v) dependant parents, whose income from all sources does not exceed such
income as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(vi) in case the insured person is unmarried and his or her parents are not alive,
a minor brother or sister wholly dependant upon the earnings of the insured
person;
56. Medical benefit.- (1) An insured person or (where such medical benefit is
extended to his family) a member of his family whose condition requires medical
treatment and attendance shall be entitled to receive medical benefit.
(2) Such medical benefit may be given either in the form of outpatient treatment
and attendance in a hospital or dispensary, clinic or other institution or by visits
to the home of the insured person or treatment as inpatient in a hospital or other
institution.
(3) A person shall be entitled to medical benefit during any period for which
contributions are payable in respect of him or in which he is qualified to claim
sickness benefit or maternity benefit or is in receipt of such disablement benefit
as does not disentitle him to medical benefit under the regulations:
Provided that a person in respect of whom contribution ceases to be payable
under this Act may be allowed medical benefit for such period and of such nature
as may be provided under the regulations:
Provided further that an insured person who ceases to be in insurable
employment on account of permanent disablement shall continue, subject to
payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, to receive medical benefit till the date on which he would
have vacated the employment on attaining the age of superannuation had he not
sustained such permanent disablement:
Provided also that an insured person who has attained the age of
superannuation, a person who retires under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme or
takes premature retirement, and his spouse shall be eligible to receive medical
benefits subject to payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Explanation.-In this section, "superannuation", in relation to an insured person,
means the attainment by that person of such age as is fixed in the contract or
conditions of service as the age on the attainment of which he shall vacate the
insurable employment or the age of sixty years where no such age is fixed and
the person is no more in the insurable employment.
2.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions. In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires-
withdraw
non-
(g) "family" means-
refundable advances
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether married or
from Provident Fund
unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's widow and children:
for treatment
of
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the personal
spouse under the
law governing him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses
Employees Provident
belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be deemed to be a part
Fund Scheme, 1952
of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member
subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to the Commissioner that
she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children, whether married
or unmarried, her dependant parents, her husband's dependant parents and her
deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner expresses her
desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependant
parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of the member's family for the
purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member subsequently cancels in writing any
such notice;
Explanation.-In either of the above two cases, if the child of a Member or, as the
case may be, the child of a deceased son of the Member has been adopted by
another person and if, under the personal law of the adopter, adoption is legally
recognised such a child shall be considered as excluded from the family of the
Member;
68-J. Advance from the Fund for illness in certain cases.-(1) A member
may be allowed non-refundable advance from his account in the Fund in cases
of-
(a) hospitalisation lasting for one month or more, or
(b) major surgical operation in a hospital, or
(c) suffering from T.B., leprosy, paralysis, cancer, mental derangement on heart
ailment and having been granted leave by his employer for treatment of the said
illness.
(3) A member may be allowed non-refundable advance from his account in the
fund for the treatment of a member of his family who has been hospitalised, or
requires hospitalisation, for one month or more-
(a) for a major surgical operation, or
(b) for the treatment of T.B., leprosy, paralysis, cancer, mental derangement or
heart ailment:
(4) The amount advanced under this paragraph shall not exceed the member's
basic wages and dearness allowance for six months or his own share of
contribution with interest in the Fund, whichever is less.
(6) No advance shall be granted to the member under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-
paragraph (3) unless he produces a self-declaration to that effect.
VIII. Miscellaneous Benefits
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Privilege accorded to
122. Communications during marriage. No person who is or has been
communications
married, shall be compelled to disclose any communication made to him during
during
marriage
marriage by any person to whom he is or has been married; non shall he be
under
the
Indian
permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person who made it,
Evidence Act, 1872
or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married
persons, or proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime
committed against the other.
2.
Right to receive
9. Restrictions on removal and transplantation of human organs or
bodily organs or
tissues or both.- (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), no human
tissues or both under
organ or tissue or both] removed from the body of a donor before his death shall
the Transplantation of
be transplanted into a recipient unless the donor is a near relative of the
Human Organs and
recipient.
Tissues Act, 1994
3.
Tax benefits in case
80-C. Deduction in respect of life insurance premia, deferred annuity,
of payments made on
contributions to provident fund, subscription to certain equity shares or
behalf of spouse or
debentures, etc.- (1) In computing the total income of an assessee, being an
child for annuity,
individual or a Hindu undivided family, there shall be deducted, in accordance
provident
fund,
with and subject to the provisions of this section, the whole of the amount paid
savings, etc. under
or deposited in the previous year, being the aggregate of the sums referred to in
the Income Tax Act,
sub-section (2), as does not exceed one hundred and fifty thousand rupees.
1961
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be any sums paid or deposited
in the previous year by the assessee-
(i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the life of persons specified in sub
-section (4);
(ii) to effect or to keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity, not being an
annuity plan referred to the clause (xii), on the life of persons specified in sub-
section (4);
Provided that such contract does not contain a provision for the exercise by the
insured of an option to cash payment in lieu of the payment of the annuity;
(iii) by way of deduction from the salary payable by or on behalf of the
Government to any individual being a sum deducted in accordance with the
conditions of his service, for the purpose of securing to him a deferred annuity or
making provision for his spouse or children, in so far as the sum so deducted
does not exceed one-fifth of the salary;
(v) as contribution to any provident fund set up by the Central Government and
notified by it in this behalf in the Official Gazette, where such contribution is to
an account standing in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4);
(viii) as subscription, in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4), to]
any such security of the Central Government or any such deposit scheme as that
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(x) as a contribution, in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4), for
participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan, 1971 (hereafter in this section
referred to as the Unit-linked Insurance Plan) specified in Schedule 11 of the Unit
Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);
(xi) as a contribution in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4) for
participation in any such unit-linked insurance plan of the LIC Mutual Fund
referred to in clause (23-D) of Section 10, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(xvii) as tuition fees (excluding any payment towards any development fees or
donation or payment of similar nature), whether at the time of admission or
thereafter,-
(a) to any university, college, school or other educational institution situated
within India;
(b) for the purpose of full-time education of any of the persons specified in sub-
section (4);
(4) The persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be the following, namely: -
(a) for the purposes of clauses (i), (v.), (x) and (xi) of that sub-section,-
(i) in the case of an individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any child
of such individual, and
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, any member thereof;
(b) for the purposes of clause (ii) of that subsection, in the case of an individual,
the individual, the wife or husband and any child of such individual;
(ba) for the purposes of clause (viii) of that subsection, in the case of an
individual, the individual or any girl child of that individual, or any girl child for
whom such person is the legal guardian, if the scheme so specifies;
(c) for the purposes of clause (xvii) of that subsection, in the case of an
individual, any two children of such individual.
4.
Pension
ANNEXURE B - TABLE ON INDICATIVE CHANGES MADE TO PERSONAL LAWS CIVIL UNIFORM MARITAL
LAWS, AND CUSTOMS THROUGH LEGISLATIONS AND PRECEDENTS
DATE
PARTICULARS
4 December, 1829
Bengal Sati Regulation-Abolition of Sati in India
1846
Indian Penal Code- Made sexual intercourse between the husband and a wife,
who is below 10 years, an offence.
26 July, 1856
Hindu Widows' Remarriage Act, 1856- Legalized the remarriage of Hindu widows
throughout India.
1866
The Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866- provided for the dissolution of a
marriage if one party changed his or her faith and the other did not.
1870
Female Infanticide Prevention Act, 1870.
1872
Special Marriages Act, 1872- Set the minimum age of 14 years for marriage
of
girls. Repealed by the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
24 February, 1874
Married Women's Property Act, 1874- Females had unrivalled powers
of
disposition over her separate property. But Hindu women were outside its
purview, making it a futile change.
1891
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1891- The age of consent to sexual intercourse
was raised from 10 years to 12 years.
28 September, 1916
The Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916 - To allow transfer of property in the
favour of persons not existing at the time of such transfer.
28 September, 1929
The Child Marriage Restraint Act of 1929 (Sarda Act)- To eradicate child
marriage. Set the age for girls at 14 years and boys at 18 years.
25 July, 1930.
The Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930- It ruled that a Hindu's earnings from a
learned profession for which he had been trained at the expense of joint family
funds were not family property.
14 April, 1937
The Hindu Women Rights to Property Act, 1937- Conferred rights of succession
on widows. (only life estate)
1937
Arya Marriages Validation Act 1937 was passed to ensure that marriages
performed in the manner of the Arya Samaj community which simplified
ceremonies would also be considered as a valid marriage. This Act permitted
inter-caste marriages categorized as anuloma and patriloma depending on
whether the woman or man was of a higher caste. This permitted class of inter-
caste marriages were under the auspices of the Arya Samaj.
8 April, 1938
Hindu Women's Rights to Property (Amendment) Act, 1938-Amended to exclude
a widow's interest in any agricultural land.
1946
Hindu Marriage Removal of Disabilities Act, 1946 - validated inter- sub-caste
marriages
1949
Article 17, Constitution of India - Removal of Untouchability.
1949
Hindu Marriage Validity Act, 1949 permitted performance of both forms of inter-
castes marriage, i.e., rituals of both castes.
1955
Hindu Marriage Act (changes made to customs)
Removed the necessity that
marriage had to be performed within the same caste.
Monogamy was made a rule.
Divorce provisions were created
1956
S. 14 of Hindu Succession Act - Removed the disability of women to hold
property. It converted the limited estate of a female owner to an absolute estate.
1956
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act - woman was eligible to claim one-third of
the joint income of her husband and herself in case of divorce.
1956
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act-
gave mother guardianship rights if the father neglected the child.
mother was also granted the right to be the lawful guardian of illegitimate
children.
1961
Dowry Prohibition Act 1961.
27 May, 1976
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976- Brought about an array of changes to
HMA including divorce by mutual consent which departed from the irreversible
nature of a Hindu marriage and demolished the notion that the marriage was a
sacrament that could not be dissolved. These amendments also included the
ability of a divorcee to immediately marry, as opposed to the one year waiting
period in place prior to this.
1978
Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act- Age limit for both girls and boys
were raised to 18 and 21 years respectively. The Act penalized an adult male for
marrying a minor girl. (S.4).
11 September, 1989
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
1983
Criminal Law (second amendment) Act of 1983- S. 113A in Indian Evidence Act
which brought in a presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
This was introduced because there was an increase in the number of dowry
deaths, a matter of serious concern.
1985
One of the most significant reforms came in 1985, when the Supreme Court
delivered its judgement in Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum AIR 1985
SC 945. A five-judge Bench led by Justice YV Chandrachud directed Mohd.
Ahmad Khan to provide maintenance to his divorced wife, despite this not being
required by Muslim personal law.
19 November, 1986
Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act of 1986- Led to addition of Sections 113B
and 304B to IPC.
1999
Court progressively interpreted Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act, 1956 to recognize the right of a Hindu mother as a natural guardian of her
minor son/unmarried daughter.
2002
Court was concerned with the issue of whether only Brahmins could be ordained
as priests in certain temples in Kerala. Longstanding usage and custom were
cited in support of this claim. The court negatived the plea and held that
customs are subject to constitutional rights.
2005
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005- Section 3 of the Act
specifically incorporates all forms of harassment, injury and harm inflicted to
coerce a woman to meet an unlawful demand for dowry.
2005
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act amended Section 6 of the Hindu Succession
Act, to provide for equal rights of daughters in the coparcenary property of a
Hindu Undivided Family.
2006
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006-
Repealed the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.
The Act made the child marriage voidable at the option of the contracting party
to the marriage, who was a child. (S.3)
Allows for maintenance and residence for the girl till her remarriage from the
male contracting party or his parents. (S.4)
2006
familial or customary intervention can be permitted to prevent the right to choice
of marital partner, irrespective of caste of the partner. The decision stated
that: "The caste system is a curse on the nation and the sooner it is destroyed
the better. In fact, it is dividing the nation at a time when we have to be united
to face the challenges before the nation unitedly. Hence, inter-caste marriages
are in fact in the national interest as they will result in destroying the caste
system"
2017
declared the custom of a Muslim man uttering the word "talaq" three times to
divorce his wife as unconstitutional in 2017.
2018
public interest litigation concerned with honor killings of relationships of love and
marriage that defied customs in Haryana, Punjab and Western UP. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that customs that violate the constitutional right to dignity
and choice cannot be upheld.
21 February, 2019
The Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019 - Leprosy is no more a ground for
divorce, as it is curable now. Changes made to Divorce Act, 1869; Dissolution
of
Muslim Marriages Act, 1939; Special Marriage Act, 1954; Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 and Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
2019
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that since custom, usages and personal law
have a significant impact on the civil status of individuals, they cannot be
granted constitutional immunity merely because they may have some
associational features with religion.
2019
Madras High Court interpreted the word "bride" to include a transgender person.
2020
that the 2005 Amendment to the Hindu Succession Act is retroactive in nature
and the right of daughters in the coparcenary property is a birth right, equal to
that of sons and inheres equally in daughters born before the Amendment as
well.
2021
Court held that family or community sanction was not necessary once two adult
individuals consent to a wedlock.
2022
X. V. Principal Secretary Health and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of NCT
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Rules to include within its ambit unmarried
women.
2022
recognized that family units may manifest in atypical ways and has upheld the
need to legally recognize these non-traditional manifestations of familial
relationships.
ANNEXURE C - TABLE ON THE PROPOSED WORKABILITY OF THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT 1954
S. No
Section
Comment on Workability
1.
2(b) "degrees of prohibited relationship"- man
Workable-prohibited degrees can be maintained
and any of the persons mentioned in Part I of the
in same- sex relationships. For instance, in a
First Schedule and a woman and any of the
marriage between two men, both men should not
persons mentioned in Part 11 of the said Schedule
be within degrees of relationship mentioned in Part
are within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
11.
- Gender Neutral
2.
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-
- Workable-only prescribes minimum age for each.
one years and
As long as the minimum age is met by the
the female the age of eighteen years
spouses, section is unaffected.
3.
12 2(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any
- Workable. Section in its present form can be
form which the parties may choose to adopt :
made applicable to same-sex couples.
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding
on the parties unless each party says to the other
in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the
three witnesses and in any language understood by
the parties, - "1, (A), take the (B),
to be my lawful wife (or husband)"
4.
15 (a) ceremony of marriage has been performed
- Workable - "as husband and wife" can be read
between the parties and they have .been living
to mean "as spouses". This is not repugnant to
together as husband and wife ever since
the context.
5.
22. Restitution of conjugal rights. -When
- Workable - "either the husband or the wife"
either the husband or the wife has, without
can be read to mean "either spouse". This is not
reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of
repugnant to the context.
the other, the aggrieved party may apply by
petition to the district court for restitution of
conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of
the truth of the statements made in such petition,
and that there is no legal ground why the
application should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
6.
23. Judicial separation.- (1) A petition for
- Workable - "either by the husband or the wife"
judicial separation may be presented to the district
can be read to mean "by either of the spouses."
court either by the husband or the wife
This is not repugnant to the context.
7.
27. Divorce.- [(1)] Subject to the provisions of
Workable - "either by the husband or the wife"
this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a
can be read to mean "by either of the spouses."
petition for divorce may be presented to the district
This is not repugnant to the context.
court either by the husband or the wife
8.
27 (1A) A wife may also present a petition for
Workable. Can be retained as it is only to apply to
divorce to the district court on the ground, (i)
different -sex couples.
that her husband has, since the solemnization of
- Provision would also be applicable against a trans
the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or
husband.
bestiality
9.
31. Court to which petition should be made.
- Workable. This additional protection granted to
2 [(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter
women remains unaffected. In a situation where
VI shall be presented to the district court within
simultaneously two jurisdictions are invoked by a
the local limits of whose original civil jurisdiction-
same-sex couple, it can be resolved on a case-to-
(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where
case basis.
she is residing on the date of presentation of the
petition; or
10.
Sections 36, 37-Alimony pendente lite,
-
Workable. Gendered provisions in favor of wives
Permanent Alimony and maintenance
in heterosexual provision may be maintained, and
may be read in a gender-neutral manner in case of
a LGBT couple.
11.
Second Schedule uses "widow" and "widower"
- Workable. Can be made available to same-sex
couples by amending forms to provide for both
entries to read "widow (er)".
12.
Third and Fourth Schedules use "bride" and
- Workable. Can be made available to same-sex
"bridegroom"
couples by amending declarations to provide for
"bride (groom)".
ANNEXURE D - TABLE ON LEGAL STATUS OF SAME-SEX UNIONS ACROSS THE WORLD
[NOTE : Data updated till 04.04.2023]
MARRIAGE
COLOUR CODE
Blue : Recognition of same- sex marriage in certain parts of the nation
Green : Nationwide recognition of same -sex marriage
SL. NO.
COUNTRY
DATE OF LEGALIZATION
NOTES
1.
Netherlands
1 April 2001
First country in the world to legalize same-
sex marriage. Not legal in the associated
states of Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao and St.
Maarten.
2.
Belgium
1 June 2003
-
3.
Spain
3 July 2005
4.
Canada
20 July 2005
Legal in some provinces and territories since
2003, on account of court rulings.
5.
South Africa
30 November 2006
The Constitutional Court of South Africa, in
Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT
60/04, held that same-sex couples have a
constitutional right to marry at par with
entitlements and responsibilities enjoyed by
heterosexual couples. The Court gave the
Parliament one year to rectify the inequality
in the marriage statutes. Consequently, the
Civil Union Act, 2006 came into force,
allowing two people regardless of gender to
enter into marriage or civil partnership.
6.
Norway
1 January 2009
First Scandinavian country to legalize same-
sex marriage.
7.
Sweden
1 May 2009
-
8.
Portugal
5 June 2010
-
9.
Iceland
27 June 2010
-
10.
Argentina
22 July 2010
First South-American country to legalize
same-sex marriage.
11.
Denmark
15 June 2012
Legalized in associated states of Greenland in
2016 and Faroe Islands in 2017.
12.
Brazil
16 May 2013
-
13.
France
18 May 2013
-
14.
Uruguay
5 August 2013
-
15.
New Zealand
19 August 2013
First country in Asia-Pacific region to legalize
same-sex marriage. Except in the territory of
Tokelau, associated states of Niue and the
Cooks Island.
16.
Luxembourg
1 January 2015
-
17.
United
States
of
26 June 2015
Except in some Caribbean territories and
America
American Samoa.
In Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015),
the US Supreme Court struck down all state
bans on same-sex marriage, legalized it in all
fifty states, and required states to honour out
-of-state same-sex marriage. Respect for
Marriage Act was signed into law on 13
December 2022, requiring the US Federal
Government and all US states and territories
to recognize the validity of same-sex and
interracial marriages in the United States.
18.
Ireland
16 November 2015
-
19.
Colombia
28 April 2016
Constitutional Court of Colombia in Decision
SU-214/2016 ruled that same-sex marriage
is a legitimate and valid way to materialize
constitutional principles and values. The
decision took immediate effect, legalizing
same-sex marriage in the country.
20.
Finland
1 March 2017
-
21.
Malta
1 September 2017
-
22.
Germany
1 October 2017
First European country to legalize same-sex
marriage.
23.
Australia
9 December 2017
-
24.
Austria
1 January 2019
Decision of the Constitutional Court in G-258-
259 of 2017, holding that there can be no
distinction in law between opposite-sex
couples and same-sex couples; decision took
effect on 01 January 2019.
25.
Taiwan
24 May 2019
Decision of the Constitutional Court in
Judicial Yuan Interpretation no. 748/2017,
holding that current provisions of the
Marriage Chapter that do not allow for same-
sex couples to create permanent
relationships are incompatible with the
Constitution.
26.
Ecuador
8 July 2019
Decision of the Constitutional Court in 10-18-
CN/19 upholding the right of same-sex
couples of marry; decision took effect upon
publication on 08 July 2019.
27.
United Kingdom
13 January 2020
Except in Bermuda, Anguilla, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos.
28.
Costa Rica
26 May 2020
First country in Central America to recognize
and perform same-sex marriage. 2018 ruling
of the Supreme Court of Justice holding that
ban/exclusion of same-sex marriage is
unconstitutional. This was followed by
Advisory Opinion of Inter-American Court of
Human Rights (OC-24/17) stating that
signatories of the American Convention of
Human Rights are obliged to make same-sex
marriage legal.
29.
Switzerland
01 July 2022
-
30.
Slovenia
09 July 2022
First post-communist country to legalize
same-sex marriage. On 08.07.2022, the
Constitutional Court of Slovenia (6 : 3)
(Decision No. U-1-486/20, Up-572/18)
legalized same-sex marriage and adoption by
same-sex couples. Parliament was given 06
months to pass appropriate legislation.
Parliament thereafter made necessary
amendments to the Family Code.
31.
Mexico
2015 ruling of the Supreme Court of Justice
held that ban on same-se marriage violates
the Constitution of Mexico. As of December
2022, all 32 states of Mexico have passed
individual legislations to legalize same-sex
marriage.
CIVIL UNIONS AND REGISTERED PARTNERSHIPS
COLOUR CODE
Yellow : Recognition of unregistered cohabitation.
Pink : Recognition of civil union and registered partnership.
Purple : Judicial decisions recognizing civil union.
Orange : Limited recognition/protections for same-sex couples.
Brown : [applicable to EU countries only] bound by CJEU decision in Case C-673/16- Relu Adrian Coman V.
Inspectoratul General pentru Imigrari, to grant full residency rights and freedom of movement to spouses in a
same-sex marriage, where at least one partner is an EU citizen.
SL. NO.
COUNTRY
DATE OF LEGALIZATION
NOTES
1.
Israel
1994
Unregistered cohabitation since
1994, making it the first Asian
country to recognize same-sex
unions;
Same-sex marriages performed
outside of Israel recognized since
2006.
2.
Czech Republic
1 July 2006
Bill for legalization of same-sex
marriage is presently pending in
the Parliament.
3.
Hungary
2009
-
4.
Liechtenstein
2011
-
5.
Croatia
2014
Unregistered cohabitation since
2003,
Life Partnership Act passed in
2014.
6.
Andorra
2 June 2014
-
7.
Greece
2015
-
8.
Chile
22 October 2015
-
9.
Cyprus
December 2015
-
10.
Estonia
1 January 2016
-
11.
Italy
May 2016
Decision of the ECtHR in Oliari V.
Italy, 2015 ECHR 176, held that
Italy violated the European
Convention on Human Rights by
not recognizing same-sex
couples' right to family life.
12.
Aruba (Netherlands)
October 2016
-
13.
Slovenia
24t th February 2017
-
14.
India
06 September 2018
Ruling of the Supreme Court in
Navtej Singh Johan V. UOI,
homosexuality. Since then, High
Courts across the country have
stepped in to provide protection
to same-sex couples.
15.
San Marino
11 th February 2019
-
16.
Bolivia
09 December 2020
2020 ruling of the Constitutional
Court directing Civil Registry to
register same-sex couples as
"free unions".
Bolivia is signatory to the
American Convention on Human
Rights. Hence, it is bound by
Advisory Opinion of Inter-
American Court of Human Rights
(OC-24/17) to legalize same-sex
marriage.
17.
Veracruz
22 May 2020
-
18.
Monaco
27 June 2020
Law allowed for both same-sex
and opposite-sex couples to enter
into "cohabitation agreements"
19.
Cayman Islands (UK)
4th September 2020
-
20.
Japan
No formal recognition of same-
sex marriage or civil unions.
However, municipalities issue
"partnership certificates" for
limited purposes such as hospital
visits, renting of apartments, etc.
In November 2022, Tokyo, the
largest municipality in Japan,
began issuing partnership
certificates.
21.
Montenegro
15 July 2021
-
22.
Republic of South Korea
A recent court ruling for the first
time recognized same-sex unions
to hold that the government
health insurance scheme should
offer spousal coverage to same-
sex couples.
23.
Latvia
June 2022
2020 ruling of the Constitutional
Court of Latvia holding that the
state is required to protect same-
sex couples at par with married
opposite-sex couples. As of June
2022, same-sex relationships can
be registered with the
Administrative District Court.
24.
Poland
-
-
25.
Slovakia
-
-
26.
Romania
-
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1020 OF 2022
In the Matter of:
Parth Phiroze Mehrotra & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ors
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION 1
11. BRIEF FACTS 4
111. RELIEF SOUGHT 5
IV. LEGAL SUBMISSIONS 6
A. Depriving LGBTQ+ individuals of the right to marry violates Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(a) and 21 of the
Constitution 6
a. Article 14 6
b. Article 15 9
C. Article 19(1)(a) 11
d. Article 21 13
i. The rights of autonomy, agency and choice 14
ii. The right to a life of dignity 15
iii. The right to privacy 15
iv. The right to health 17
B. The right to marry a person of one's choice is itself a Fundamental Right under the Constitution 20
C. The Act is unconstitutional if it is interpreted to exclude access to LGBTQ+ individuals 24
D. Recognition of marriage equality for the LGBTQ+ community -consistent with international law 26
E. Recognition of marriage equality for the LGBTQ+ community is not a matter which needs to be left to the
legislature 30
F. A traditional and discriminatory view of marriage cannot be allowed to be perpetuated for its own sake 31
G. Recognition of same-sex marriage around the world 32
H. The petition involves substantial questions of law as to the interpreation of our Constitution 36
FILED BY
[KARANJAWALA & CO.]
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 01.03.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1020 OF 2022
In the Matter of:
Parth Phiroze Mehrotra & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ors
Respondents.
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
I. INTRODUCTION
149. The Petitioners herein are both members of the LGBTQ+ community who contend that the manner in which
the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("the Act") is being interpreted, wherein the LGBTQ+ community is denied access to
the civil institution of marriage based on sexual orientation and gender identity, is violative of the fundamental rights
enshrined in Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(a) and 21 of the Constitution. Denying members of the LGBTQ+ community the
access to marriage not only causes grave injury to the community, but Indian society as a whole. Thus, the Petitioners
seek to assert the fundamental right of the members of the LGBTQ+community to marry any person of their choice.
150. The Petitioners, in the interest of the LGBTQ+ community, have approached this Hon'ble Court by way of a
Public Interest Litigation to seek a declaration that the Act be interpreted as neutral to gender identity and sexual
orientation so that any two persons may solemnize their marriage under the Act. It is submitted that this Hon'ble
Court ought to read down any gender or sexuality-based restrictions contained in the Act and declare that it applies to
any two persons who wish to marry, regardless of sex as long as they are above the permitted marriageable age and
meet the other conditions prescribed in Section 4 of the Act. The Petitioners further seek a writ of mandamus or any
other appropriate directions to the concerned Marriage Officer under the Act to allow them to solemnize their marriage
to each other.
151. In a nutshell, the Petitioners submit that this Hon'ble Court has expressly declared and enunciated two
principles which were always inherent in our Constitutional fabric:
a. First, that our Constitution protects and safeguards the rights of LGBTQ+ individuals.
protects non-binary individuals and that the protections envisaged under Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21
cannot be restricted to the biological sex of "male" or "female" (Paras 61-82).
this Hon'ble Court has held that sexual orientation is a facet of a person's privacy which is a fundamental right
under our Constitution. (Paras 144, 146, 323, 645 and 647). The Hon'ble Court observed that "[s]exual
orientation is an essential attribute of privacy. Discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual
orientation is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality demands that the
sexual orientation of each individual in society must be protected on an even platform. The right to privacy
and the protection of sexual orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15
and 21 of the Constitution." (Para 144)
held that homosexuality is based on a sense of identity and is as much ingrained, inherent and innate as
heterosexuality (Para 155) and that homosexuals have the fundamental right to live with dignity, are
"entitled to the protection of equal laws, and are entitled to be treated in society as human beings without any
stigma being attached to any of them." (Para 369) The Hon'ble Court unequivocally held that the LGBTQ+
community possesses "the same human, fundamental and constitutional rights as other citizens." (Para 255)
b. Second, this Hon'ble Court has recognized that the right to marry a person of one's choice is a fundamental right.
right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution" (Para 86) and that
"neither the State non the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide
on these matters." (Para 84)
adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they consummate their relationship; they feel that it
is their goal and they have the right to do SO. And it can unequivocally be stated that they have the right and
any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation." (Para 45) This Hon'ble Court further observed
that "[w]hen two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a manifestation of their choice
which is recognised under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution." (Para 43) Pertinently the decisions in
Shafin Jahan (supra) and Shakti Vahini (supra) have been cited with approval in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) in
the context of same sex relations, emphasizing that "organisation of intimate relations is a matter of complete
personal choice especially between consenting adults." (Ref. Para 119, 245, 255, 334-335, 479-481,
561.5, 618.3 and 640.2.4).
152. The Petitioners respectfully submit, after the express enunciation of the two aforementioned legal principles
and after the landmark judgments of this Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra), Puttaswamy (supra), Navtej Singh Johar
(supra), Shafin Jahan (supra) and Shakti Vahini (supra), it cannot be contended that the right to marry and choose
one's own partner can be denied to members of the LGBTQ+ community. A refusal of such a right to LGBTQ+
individuals, including the Petitioners, would be wholly unconstitutional.
153. However, the Act limits access to marriage to a couple comprising one male and one female. Section 4 of the
Act states that [N]otwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to the
solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act." Thus, as per the
Act "any two persons" are permitted to solemnize a marriage under the law subject to certain conditions. However,
the conditions prescribed for solemnization suggest that males can only marry females. The conditions enumerated
under Section 4 are as follows : Section 4(a) states that neither of the parties to the marriage shall already have a
living spouse and Section 4(b) states that the parties shall give consent and shall be of sound mind. Pertinently,
Section 4(c) states that "the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen
years" and thus, prescribes minimum marriageable age for a 'male' as 21 years and for a 'female' as 18 years. The
use, in Section 4(c) of the words 'male' and 'female', as well as the use of gendered language such as the terms
'husband/wife' and 'bride/bridegroom' in other sections of the Act, limit the access to marriage to a couple comprising
one 'male' and one 'female'. Such limiting of access is violative of the fundamental rights of LGBTQ+ individuals and is
unconstitutional.
154. The Act was meant to be a secular legislation, intended to free the institution of marriage from bondages of
religious dogmas and practices, to provide access to civil marriage independent of any impediment which may exist in
the form of customary beliefs and laws. The Act was meant to embody the true democratic principle that one's
fundamental right to marriage should not be affected by religion and custom. It would be wholly incorrect if the
provisions of the Act are interpreted in a manner inconsistent with Part III of the Constitution particularly with Articles
14, 15, 19 and 21. Thus, the Petitioners submit that for the Act to be constitutional, its provisions must be read in a
manner neutral to gender identity and sexual orientation.
11. BRIEF FACTS
155. The Petitioners, Mr. Parth Phiroze Mehrotra (Petitioner No. 1) and Mr. Uday Raj Anand (Petitioner No. 2), both
members of LGBTQ+ community, met each other while studying at the Sardar Patel Vidayalaya, New Delhi in Class VI.
While Petitioner No. 2's orientation was known to their friends at school during their high school years, Petitioner No. 1
was not yet out of the closet. Neither of them had, at this time, declared their sexual orientation to their families,
fearing the repercussions of such a revelation, as there is a deep and abiding stigma related to being homosexual in
this country, which often drives people to hide their true selves, even from those closest to them. It bears mention
that both Petitioners' families have been very supportive of them, and they did not eventually face negative reactions
from their families when they eventually disclosed to them their sexual orientation.
156. After graduating from school in 2005, the Petitioners started a romantic relationship with each other, one that
they kept private for several years in the beginning. Today, they have been together for seventeen (17) years and
have stood steadfastly by each other through life's ups and downs, health and sickness, through the best and through
the worst. Needless to say, were the legal right and framework available to them, the Petitioners would have been
married to each other years ago.
157. One aspect of family life that the Petitioners always aspired towards was the opportunity to have children.
Both the Petitioners being from close families and having grown up with the love of siblings, cousins and
grandparents, family has always been central to their lives. An apprehension that both Petitioners harboured, however,
was whether their children, as children being raised by a same sex-couple, would face discrimination or teasing and
bullying and as such, they struggled with the decision for years. With the support and encouragement of their families,
however, they made the decision to start a family. Through the single father surrogacy route, the Petitioners were able
to have two sons, who are now two years of age.
158. When they were born, both the Petitioners took extensive leave from work to stay home with them, and for
the first few months the mothers of both the Petitioners moved into their home with them to help take care of the
babies. The children are now in playschool, and they love reading, dancing and playing with dogs. The families of both
Petitioners have been immensely loving and supportive, and the children are very close to them, meeting their
grandparents several times a week; they also have cousins close to their age with whom they love to play, adoring
aunts and uncles and a doting great grandmother. They are in every measure a typical, loving family; they are simply
not granted the recognition and protection of one by law, being a same sex couple.
159. Both children have the legal relationship of a child and parent only with Petitioner No. 2. As such, in the eyes
of
the law, Petitioner No. 1 has no legally recognised relationship with his children, a circumstance which causes not
only immense anguish, but also significant practical problems. This situation is particularly paradoxical given the fact
that the Petitioner No. 1 is the primary care giver for both the children. Not only does Petitioner No. 1 have no
enforceable parental rights with regards to his own children, they have no rights as natural heirs qua him. The
practical problems this brings up range from day-to-day complications such as none of their paperwork having his
name as a parent in the present day, to far reaching and deeply personal issues such as the children not having the
rights granted to any other child of a parent, such as the right to someday make end of life decisions qua Petitioner
No. 1. These are only some of the problems which the Petitioners face on a daily basis as a result of not being able to
solemnize their marriage and enjoy the benefits which all married couples and families enjoy.
160. Had the Petitioners, as a same sex couple, enjoyed the legal right to marriage, available to any other citizen of
this country, they would not face untold practical difficulties, both vis--vis each other and their children. Denial of
such rights, therefore, gravely impacts not only the couple in question, but their children and families as well, leading
to a significant depravation of their fundamental rights. Today, to solemnize one's marriage under the Act, the online
forms which the parties have to fill in predicate solemnization of marriage on their being one "male" and one "female"
and thus deny access to the Petitioners to this civil institution. It is with the hope of correcting this injustice and
securing for themselves, as well as for others in their position, the basic rights enjoyed by every citizen of this country,
that the Petitioners approached this Hon'ble Court by way of a Public Interest Litigation.
111. RELIEF SOUGHT
161. The Petitioners pray for a declaration that, the provisions of Section 4(c) and any other similar provisions of
the Act be declared unconstitutional to the extent that they are interpreted as requiring one "male" and one "female,"
for the solemnization of a marriage; the Petitioners humbly contend that those provisions are unconstitutional, unless
read as neutral to gender identity and sexual orientation. In the alternative, the Petitioners pray for a declaration, by
the reading down of any restrictions, confirming that the provisions of the Act apply, regardless of sex, to any two
persons who wish to marry. The Petitioners further pray that this Hon'ble Court uphold non-discriminatory access to
the Special Marriage Act, which provides that "a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this
Act", by invalidating any preconditions for marriage that are based on sex or gender. The Petitioners further seek a
writ of mandamus or any other appropriate directions to the concerned Marriage Officer under the Act, to allow them to
solemnize their marriage to each other.
IV. LEGAL SUBMISSIONS
162. The Petitioners humbly pray that this Hon'ble Court grant their petition and in support of the aforementioned
relief have set out their legal submissions as summarized in the paragraphs below.
A. DEPRIVING LGBTQ+ INDIVIDUALS OF THE RIGHT TO MARRY VIOLATES ARTICLES 14, 15, AND
21 OF THE CONSTITUTION
a. ARTICLE 14
1 Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees every person equality before the law and equal protection of law;
Article 14 guarantees, consequently that no person shall be denied equality before law or equal protection of the law
within the territory of India. In denying members of the LGBTQ+ community the right to marry a person of their
choice however, a right which has been extended to all binary gendered heterosexual persons, the State is violating its
duty to ensure that every person is granted equality before law, and such action is thereby violative of Article 14. In
NALSA (supra) this Hon'ble Court held that "[d]iscrimination on the ground of sexual orientation or gender identity..
impairs equality before law and equal protection of law and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India. (Para 62).
164. The State failing to provide laws and a legal framework to permit and facilitate members of the LGBTQ+
community to marry a person of their choice is similarly violative of Article 14, as the State is duty bound to ensure
that every person is granted equality before law and equal treatment under the law. All heterosexual binary gendered
persons have the freedom to marry a person of their choice, in accordance with the provisions of a number of laws
(such as the Special Marriage Act, Hindu Marriage Act, Foreign Marriage Act, etc.). Members of the LGBTQ+
community, however, have been denied this right, as restrictions in the statutory framework are unconstitutionally
interpreted as excluding this community; as such, they are not being granted the rights assured to them by Article 14.
In Navtej Singh Johar (supra) this Hon'ble Court held that:
"369. We may conclude by stating that persons who are homosexual have a fundamental right to live with
dignity, which, in the larger framework of the Preamble of India, will assure the cardinal constitutional value of
fraternity that has been discussed in some of our judgments [See (1) Nandini Sundar V. State of Chhattisgarh
of equal laws, and are entitled to be treated in society as human beings without any stigma being attached to any
of them. We further declare that Section 377 insofar as it criminalises homosexual sex and transgender sex
between consenting adults is unconstitutional."
[Emphasis Supplied]
165. Article 14 guarantees that "[T]he State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India". Accordingly, should the State make any law leading to a distinction
amongst the people, in order to be constitutionally valid, such classification would have to satisfy two criteria (a) there
must exist an intelligible differentia between the individuals or groups that are subjected to differential treatment, and
(b) a rational nexus between that differentia and the State's purpose in framing the law. The failure to permit the
members of LGBTQ+ community the right to marry under the Act, solely based on the classification of gender identity
and sexual orientation, fails the classification test.
166. The provisions of the Act, especially Section 4(c) of the Act which require a couple comprising of one 'male'
and one 'female' to solemnize a marriage is in blatant violation of the tenets of Article 14, as such a classification
based on the gender identity or sexual orientation has neither any intelligible differentia nor any rational nexus with
the object of the law.
a. Article 14 prohibits classifications that are devoid of an intelligible differentia between the individuals or groups
that are subjected to differential treatment. There stands no intelligible differentia in allowing binary-gendered
heterosexuals to marry under the Act, while simultaneously denying LGBTQ+ individuals that same right solely
because of their gender identity and sexual orientation. Further, the Act allows "any two persons" to solemnize
marriage under its provisions. There exists no intelligible differentia for considering the binary gendered
heterosexual couple as "any two persons" and not two members of the LGBTQ+ community as "any two persons"
on a restricted reading and interpretation of Section 4(c) of the Act. A classification based on the gender identity
and sexual orientation in matters of solemnization of marriage is patently devoid of intelligible differentia and in
Court held that-
"637.3. Section 377 operates in a vastly different manner for two classes of persons based on their "sexual
orientation" i.e., the LGBT persons and heterosexual persons. Section 377 penalises all forms of non penile-
vaginal intercourse. In effect, voluntary consensual relationships between LGBT persons are criminalised in
totality. The import and effect of Section 377 is that while a consensual heterosexual relationship is permissible,
a consensual relationship between LGBT persons is considered to be "carnal", and against the order of nature.
Section 377 creates an artificial dichotomy. The natural or innate sexual orientation of a person cannot be a
ground for discrimination. Where a legislation discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an
individual, it cannot form a reasonable classification based on an intelligible differentia.
637.5. A person's sexual orientation is intrinsic to their being. It is connected with their individuality, and
identity. A classification which discriminates between persons based on their innate nature, would be violative of
their fundamental rights, and cannot withstand the test of constitutional morality."
[Emphasis Supplied]
b. Article 14 prohibits any classifications that are devoid of a rational nexus between that differentia and the object
of the law in question. The Act was enacted with the object and purpose of providing a progressive and secular
legal framework for any two persons to solemnize their marriage under the law, irrespective of societal prejudices
and archaic beliefs. However, creating an artificial classification on the basis of sexual orientation and gender
identity in order to comply with outdated and unscientific heteronormative values and binary notions of gender,
defeats the purpose of the Act. Therefore, such a classification acts in contravention of the object and purpose of
the Act, let alone yielding any rational nexus between the classification and object of the law in question. To
exclude members of the LGBTQ+ community would not only run contrary to the object of the Act but would also
defeat the right of choice which has been held to be the constitutional entitlement of every individual by this
Hon'ble Court in Shakti Vahini (supra) (Para 45).
167. The Act is the solely available secular and neutral law for a couple to solemnise their marriage; exclusion of
members of the LGBTQ+ community from such a law, therefore, renders them unable to solemnize a legal marriage.
Such arbitrary distinction, based on gender identity or sexual orientation, leads to a total exclusion of the sexual
minority from the institution of marriage, which is the foundational element of family and, thus unfairly discriminates
against members of the LGBTQ+ community. Such arbitrary exclusion of members of the LGBTQ+ community is based
on unscientific, archaic and moral notions surrounding marriage and sexuality. To make marriage conditional upon
considerations of gender and sexuality is manifestly arbitrary. Reliance may be placed on Navtej Singh Johar (supra)
wherein it was held that-
"268.15. Section 377 IPC, SO far as it criminalises even consensual sexual acts between competent adults, fails
to make a distinction between non-consensual and consensual sexual acts of competent adults in private space
which are neither harmful non contagious to the society. Section 377 IPC subjects the LGBT community to societal
pariah and dereliction and is, therefore, manifestly arbitrary, for it has become an odious weapon for the
harassment of the LGBT community by subjecting them to discrimination and unequal treatment. Therefore, in view
Section 377 IPC is liable to be partially struck down for being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
[Emphasis Supplied]
168. The failure to permit the members of the LGBTQ+ community to solemnize a marriage under law, not only
deprives LGBTQ+ individuals, including the Petitioners, from the right to marry but also from several legal benefits
otherwise available to binary heterosexual couples. Same-sex couples upon being denied the right to marry are also
being stripped from legal benefits such as alimony and maintenance; property and succession; protection of spousal
privilege under the Indian Evidence Act 1872; benefits under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act 1994;
economic benefits under the Income Tax Act 1961, Employment Provident Fund Scheme 1952, Payment of Gratuity
Act 1972 and Workmen's Compensation Act 1923, etc. Therefore, the denial of right to marry deprives the members of
the LGBTQ+ individuals including the Petitioners of their fundamental right to "equal protection of the laws" as
guaranteed under Article 14.
169. Additionally, there are untold practical difficulties which arise for same-sex couples, including the Petitioners,
in matters of operation of bank accounts, applications for visas, matters of life insurance and health insurance, the
ability to take end of life decisions, and availing of any benefits regularly available to spouses such as memberships to
clubs, participation in family schemes, etc.
170. As a result of the inability of the Petitioners to get married to each other, Petitioner No. 1 does not have the
legal relationship of a parent and child with his two children in whose up bringing he plays an equal role to Petitioner
No. 2. Not only does Petitioner No. 1 have no enforceable parental rights with regards to his own children, they
have
no rights as natural heirs qua him. The practical problems this brings up range from day-to-day complications such as
none of their paperwork having his name as a parent in the present day, to far reaching and deeply personal issues
such as the children not having the rights granted to any other child of a parent, such as the right to someday make
end of life decisions qua Petitioner No. 1.
b. ARTICLE 15
171. Article 15(1) provides that "[T]he state shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them". Thus, the State is prohibited, by the provisions of Article 15, from
discriminating against any citizen of India, only on the grounds of 'sex', which extends to gender identity and sexual
orientation. In denying members of the LGBTQ+ community the right to marry a person of their choice, based solely
on their sexual orientation and gender identity however, while binary gendered heterosexual persons are granted such
rights, is clearly discrimination of the grounds of 'sex' and, therefore, blatantly violative of Article 15. Reliance in this
regard can be placed on Navtej Singh Johan (supra) wherein this Hon'ble Court held that-
"638.2. The term "sex", as it occurs in Article 15 has been given an expansive interpretation by this Court in
National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India [National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (2014) 5
488)
"66.
Both gender and biological attributes constitute distinct components of sex. The biological
characteristics, of course, include genitals, chromosomes and secondary sexual features, but gender attributes
includes one's self-image, the deep psychological or emotional sense of sexual identity and character. The
discrimination on the ground of sex under Articles 15 and 16, therefore, includes discrimination on the ground of
gender identity. The expression "sex" used in Articles 15 and 16 is not just limited to biological sex of male or
female, but intended to include people who consider themselves neither male nor female."
Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also
includes their "sexual identity and character". The J.S. Verma Committee [ Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law (2013).] had recommended that "sex" under Article 15 must include "sexual
orientation"
[Emphasis Supplied]
172. The restricted access of the Act allows solemnization of marriage on only a stereotypical understanding of sex
and gender roles, wherein genden exists only in two forms i.e., male and female. The denial of same-sex marriage
stems from an outdated understanding of gender and the stereotypical belief that males and females can only marry
each other. Such genden stereotypes are grounded in the belief that gender exists only in two forms and thus,
practically negates the existence of other forms of gender and non-heterosexual orientations. However, the
stereotypical understanding of sex and gender is unscientific and, thus, cannot be a basis for any reasonable
classification between individuals of different sexual orientation and gender identity. In Navtej Singh Johar (supra),
this Hon'ble Court held that:
"438. A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A discrimination will not survive
constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the grounds
prohibited in Article 15(1). If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or indirect is founded on a stereotypical
understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which is prohibited
by
Article 15 on the grounds only of sex. If certain characteristics grounded in stereotypes, are to be associated with
entire classes of people constituted as groups by any of the grounds prohibited in Article 15(1), that cannot
establish a permissible reason to discriminate. Such a discrimination will be in violation of the constitutional
guarantee against discrimination in Article 15(1). That such a discrimination is a result of grounds rooted in sex and
other considerations, can no longer be held to be a position supported by the intersectional understanding of how
discrimination operates. This infuses Article 15 with true rigour to give it a complete constitutional dimension in
prohibiting discrimination.
[Emphasis Supplied]
173. Depriving the Petitioners of the joy and security that the institution of marriage offers not only them, but also
the children they are raising together, is direct "discrimination" against the Petitioners on the basis of their sexual
orientation and is a violation of their fundamental rights envisaged under Article 15.
C. ARTICLE 19(1)(a)
174. Article 19(1)(a) guarantees every citizen of India the right to freedom of speech and expression, which
includes a full expression of gender identity and sexual orientation. Denying members of the LGBTQ+ community the
right to marry a person of their choice, and thereby denying them the opportunity to express their gender identity and
sexual orientation, is consequently violative of the tenets of Article 19(1)(a). In NALSA (supra) this Hon'ble Court
observed that:
"72. Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal identity, gender expression and presentation
and, therefore, it will have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. A transgender's
personality could be expressed by the transgender's behaviour and presentation. State cannot prohibit, restrict or
interfere with a transgender's expression of such personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often the
State and its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest the innate character and identity of such
persons. We, therefore, hold that values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy and personal integrity are fundamental
rights guaranteed to members of the transgender community under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India and
the State is bound to protect and recognise those rights.
[Emphasis Supplied]
175. Further, in Navtej Singh Johar (supra), this Hon'ble Court held that "[t]o deny the members of the LGBT
community the full expression of the right to sexual orientation is to deprive them of their entitlement to full
citizenship under the Constitution." (Para 467) This Hon'ble Court observed that:
"641.1. Article 19(1)(a guarantees freedom of expression to all citizens. However, reasonable restrictions can be
imposed on the exercise of this right on the grounds specified in Article 19(2). LGBT persons express their sexual
orientation in myriad ways. One such way is engagement in intimate sexual acts like those proscribed under Section
1517] Owing to the fear of harassment from law-enforcement agencies and prosecution, LGBT persons tend to stay
"in the closet". They are forced not to disclose a central aspect of their personal identity i.e. their sexual orientation,
both in their personal and professional spheres to avoid persecution in society and the opprobrium attached to
homosexuality. Unlike heterosexual persons, they are inhibited from openly forming and nurturing fulfilling
relationships, thereby restricting rights of full personhood and a dignified existence. It also has an impact on their
mental well-being."
[Emphasis Supplied]
176. The right to marry a person of one's own choice is an integral part of the freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed to all citizens under Article 19(1)(a). The freedom to form and nurture a relationship with a person of your
choice is one of the many facets of the freedom of speech and expression. Accordingly, members of LGBTQ+
community have the liberty to express their sexual orientation and genden identity in order to nurture a relationship
with a person of their own choice. Denying members of the LGBTQ+ community the right and freedom to marry a
person of their choice, as every other citizen of the country enjoys, therefore, is violative of their rights enshrined in
Article 19(1)(a).
177. The Petitioners submit that the freedom of speech and expression envisaged under Article 19(1)(a)
is
unrestricted except for reasonable restrictions which may be imposed under Article 19(2). While Article 19(2) tolerates
reasonable limitations on account of "decency or morality", this Hon'ble Court has held that these cannot be used to
curb the fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression of members of the LGBTQ+ community. In Navtej
Singh Johan (supra), this Hon'ble Court held that:
"268.16. An examination of Section 377 IPC on the anvil of Article 19(1)(a) reveals that it amounts to an
unreasonable restriction. for public decency and morality cannot be amplified beyond a rational or logical limit and
cannot be accepted as reasonable grounds for curbing the fundamental rights of freedom of expression and choice
of the LGBT community. Consensual carnal intercourse among adults, be it homosexual or heterosexual, in private
space, does not in any way harm the public decency or morality. Therefore, Section 377 IPC in its present form
violates Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
178. This Hon'ble Court has also held that the morality that is conceived of under the Constitution is "constitutional
morality", as observed in Navtej Singh Johar (supra):
"161. Autonomy is individualistic. It is expressive of self-determination and such self-determination includes
sexual orientation and declaration of sexual identity. Such an orientation or choice that reflects an individual's
autonomy is innate to him/her. It is an inalienable part of his/her identity. The said identity under the constitutional
scheme does not accept any interference as long as its expression is not against decency or morality. And the
morality that is conceived of under the Constitution is constitutional morality.
"
[Emphasis supplied]
179. Thus, a denial of the freedom of speech and expression to members of the LGBTQ+ community, under the
guise of public decency and morality, is untenable. Similarly, a restrictive reading of the Act in order to allow
solemnization of a marriage only between a male and a female cannot be imposed, under the pretext of public decency
and morality, as it forces LGBTQ+ individuals to be dishonest with their own identities as well as excludes them
entirely from the institution of marriage. Further, the condition cannot be advanced as a reasonable restriction to
maintain morality because morality can only act as a reasonable restriction if it is conceived out of the Constitution,
unlike the present case.
180. The lack of access for the members of the LGBTQ+ community, including the Petitioners, to the institution of
marriage deprives them of the ability to publicly express their long-term commitment to each other and is violative of
their fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression as envisaged under Article 19(1)(a) of our Constitution.
d. ARTICLE 21
181. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees that "[N]o person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except according to procedure established by law." Article 21, being the ark over all other rights, ensures that every
person enjoys the right to life and Personal Liberty, which extends to the right to sexual autonomy, the right to choose
one's own partner, the right to dignity, the right to privacy and the right to health. It is undisputed that Article 21
guarantees these essential fundamental rights to every person, including members of the LGBTQ+ community.
Reliance in this regard can be placed on the decision of this Hon'ble Court in case of Navtej Singh Johan (supra)
(640.1) Thus, the conditions imposed to solemnize a marriage under the Act that are based on gender identity and
sexual orientation not only deny the right to marry to members of the LGBTQ+ community but also the right to
dignity, health and privacy as enumerated in Article 21.
i. The rights of autonomy, agency and choice
182. Article 21 ensures that all persons, including members of the LGBTQ+ community have complete autonomy
over their own lives, which extends to the autonomy to choose their own gender identity and sexual orientation.
Gender identity and sexual orientation are innate and inherent to a person and, thus, cannot be interfered with by
State. The arbitrary condition under Section 4(c) of the Act only permits a couple comprising of one "male" and one
"female" to solemnize marriage and, thus, renders the members of the LGBTQ+ community lawless to solemnize
marriage as the Act is the only secular legal framework to solemnize marriage in India. Such denial of right to marry
solely on the ground of sexual orientation and gender identity is patently bad in law and in violation of Article 21.
183. Article 21 guarantees the right to life and personal liberty to every person, which includes the most intimate
decision of choosing one's own partner. The right of a consenting adult to choose a partner of their own choice is an
integral part of the right to life, and, thus, is an absolute right. Neither the State, non any law, can limit access or
restrict such an absolute right, as the right to choose a partner is an intimate and personal decision, which cannot be
dictated. Therefore, the failure to permit members of the LGBTQ+ community the ability to solemnize a marriage with
a partner of their choosing is violative of Article 21. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the observations of this
"479. By criminalising consensual acts between individuals who wish to exercise their constitutionally-protected
right to sexual orientation, the State is denying its citizens the right to intimacy. The right to intimacy emanates
from an individual's prerogative to engage in sexual relations on their own terms. It is an exercise of the individual's
sexual agency, and includes the individual's right to the choice of partner as well as the freedom to decide on the
nature of the relationship that the individual wishes to pursue.
behest of Khap Panchayats and protect persons who enter into marriages that do not have the approval of the
Panchayats. The Court recognised the right to choose a life partner as a fundamental right under Articles 19 and 21
"43. when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a manifestation of their choice
which is recognised under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has the sanction of the
constitutional law and once that is recognised, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot succumb to the
conception of class honour or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely does not have
any legitimacy."
[Emphasis Supplied]
ii. The right to a life of dignity
184. Article 21 guarantees every person the right to dignity which ensures that every person can lead a life of
dignified existence and without fear of persecution. However, members of the LBGTQ community have been deprived
of their autonomy to choose a partner with whom they intend to solemnize a marriage and lead a dignified life. Such
deprivation disables members of the LGBTQ+ community from leading their lives freely with the person of their choice.
They are often forced to keep their sexual orientation and gender identity a secret, for fear of persecution. Such denial,
furthermore, is based solely on the grounds of their orientation and genden identity. Therefore, denying LGBTQ+
individuals including the Petitioners, the right to lead a dignified life and the autonomy to undertake an intimate and
personal decision of their own life is in blatant violation of Article 21. In Navtej Singh Johar (supra) this Hon'ble Court
held that-
"640.2.4. Sexual orientation is innate to a human being. It is an important attribute of one's personality and
identity. Homosexuality and bisexuality are natural variants of human sexuality, LGBT persons have little or no
choice over their sexual orientation. LGBT persons, like other heterosexual persons, are entitled to their privacy, and
the right to lead a dignified existence. without fear of persecution. They are entitled to complete autonomy over the
most intimate decisions relating to their personal life, including the choice of their partners. Such choices must be
protected under Article 21. The right to life and liberty would encompass the right to sexual autonomy. and freedom
of expression.
[Emphasis Supplied]
iii. The right to privacy
185. Article 21 guarantees the right to privacy, which is an integral part of the right to life and personal liberty. The
liberty of a person to marry or not to marry, whom to marry and where to marry are all prospects of one's own
personal life and are safeguarded under the veil of privacy. Accordingly, the liberty and decision of a person to choose
a partner and solemnize a marriage is absolutely a matter of one's personal life and volition. However, the privacy and
liberty of LGBTQ+ individuals have been breached, as the provisions of the Act only permit solemnization of marriage
to couples comprising of one "male" and one "female". Sexual orientation and gender identity are one of the most
intimate and private details of person and, thus, should not even be inquired into, let alone be made a parameter to
validate or invalidate another intimate and private relationship i.e., marriage.
186. Accordingly, the act of violating the privacy and liberty of LGBTQ+ individuals, by curbing their free ability to
marry a person of their choice solely on the grounds sexual orientation or gender identity is in violation of Article 21.
Reliance in this regard can be placed on the decision of this Hon'ble Court in case of Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of
"640.3.1. The right to privacy has now been recognised to be an intrinsic part of the right to life and personal
640. Sexual orientation is an innate part of the identity of LGBT persons. Sexual orientation of a person is an
essential attribute of privacy. Its protection lies at the core of fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15, and
21. [ Ibid, paras 144, 145, 479 and 647.]
640.3.3. The right to privacy is broad-based and pervasive under our constitutional scheme, and encompasses
decisional autonomy, to cover intimate/personal decisions and preserves the sanctity of the private sphere of an
individual. [ Ibid, paras 248, 250, 371 and 403.] The right to privacy is not simply the "right to be let alone", and
has travelled far beyond that initial concept. It now incorporates the ideas of spatial privacy, and decisional privacy
or privacy of choice. [ Ibid, paras 248, 249, 371 and 521.] It extends to the right to make fundamental personal
choices, including those relating to intimate sexual conduct, without unwarranted State interference.
[Emphasis supplied]
187. Further, reliance can be placed on the decision of this Hon'ble Court in case of Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M.,
"84. A marriage can be dissolved at the behest of parties to it, by a competent court of law. Marital status is
conferred through legislation or, as the case may be, custom. Deprivation of marital status is a matter of serious
import and must be strictly in accordance with law. The High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
226 ought not to have embarked on the course of annulling the marriage. The Constitution recognises the liberty
and autonomy which inheres in each individual. This includes the ability to take decisions on aspects which define
one's personhood and identity. The choice of a partner whether within or outside marriage lies within the exclusive
domain of each individual. Intimacies of marriage lie within a core zone of privacy, which is inviolable. The absolute
right of an individual to choose a life partner is not in the least affected by matters of faith. The Constitution
guarantees to each individual the right freely to practise, profess and propagate religion. Choices of faith and belief
as indeed choices in matters of marriage lie within an area where individual autonomy is supreme. The law
prescribes conditions for a valid marriage. It provides remedies when relationships run aground. Neither the State
nor the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on these matters. They
form the essence of personal liberty under the Constitution. In deciding whether Shafin Jahan is a fit person for
Hadiya to marry, the High Court has entered into prohibited terrain. Our choices are respected because they are
ours. Social approval for intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them. Indeed, the Constitution
protects personal liberty from disapproving audiences."
[Emphasis supplied]
iv. The right to health
188. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees the right to health. The right to health is a very crucial facet of the
right to life and personal liberty, as observed by this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johan (supra)-
"640.4.1. The right to health, and access to healthcare are also crucial facets of the right to life guaranteed
[Emphasis Supplied]
189. The Petitioners submit that health is not only related to a disease or infirmity, but also includes physical,
mental and social well-being. Such definition also finds its place in the Preamble of the Constitution of the World
Health Organisation, adopted by the International Health Conference, New York. Further, there have been several
studies which state that marriage has health benefits such as a longer lifespan, fewer heart attacks/strokes, greater
chances of surviving cancer and major operations, etc. However, members of the LGBTQ+ community are deprived of
these mental and social benefits, due to the unscientific stereotypical notions around marriage, which have been
further buttressed by legislations imposing arbitrary conditions. Being unable to live freely with regard to even such
basic and intimate things as the truth of one's identity and the ability to choose one's spouse for fear of persecution
and violence, has grave ramifications of an individual's mental health and wellbeing.
190. Denying LGBTQ+ individuals the right to marry inflicts personal harm. Members of the LGBTQ+ community
live in a hostile environment wherein they are ostracized by general society, and face widespread discrimination,
abandonment, and cruelty. Such an environment has largely originated due to the lack of sensitization and awareness
amongst the general society, further buttressed by arbitrary and discriminatory policies of the State. Such instances
include members of the LGBTQ+ community being denied access to housing by property owners, which has resulted in
them being forced to live in areas that are not adequately resourced or forced evictions that render people homeless.
Further, members of the LGBTQ+ community are discriminated against at their places of work and face professional
hardships, such as difficulties that arise at the time of their hiring, promotions and, thus, are often being forced to
work in an environment of intimidation. Many members of the LGBTQ+ community are mindful of the potential
consequences of revealing their sexual orientation and thus, prefer not to reveal their sexual orientation because of its
potential negative repercussions. Members of the LGBTQ+ community are often subjected to violence in different
forms such as physical violence, sexual violence, homicide, etc. In a number of cases across the country, they are
being forcefully admitted into medical institutions for the purpose of undergoing "corrective" therapies, to allegedly
cure them of homosexuality, which are often cruel, torturous treatments with no basis whatsoever in science or
medicine. They are also often coerced into marriage with a heterosexual person which has a terrible effect on the
physical and mental health not only of the LGBTQ+ individual, but their spouse as well.
191. The Petitioners submit that not being able to marry a partner of their choosing compounds the negative
effects on the health of LGBTQ+ individuals who, in any case, face persecution on a day-to-day basis due to deep
rooted societal prejudices. Therefore, the failure to provide the right to marry to the members of the LGBTQ+
community severely affects their social and mental wellbeing and violates their right to health as guaranteed under
Article 21. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the decision of this Hon'ble Court in case of Navtej Singh Johan V.
"515. The treatment of homosexuality as a disorder has serious consequences on the mental health and well-
being of LGBT persons. The mental health of citizens "growing up in a culture that devalues and silences same sex
desire" is severely impacted. [Ketki Ranade, "Process of Sexual Identity Development for Young People with Same
Sex Desires : Experiences of Exclusion", Psychological Foundations - The Journal (2008).] Global psychiatric expert
Dinesh Bhugra has emphasised that radical solutions are needed to combat the high levels of mental illness among
the LGBT population stating there is a "clear correlation between political and social environments" and how
persecutory laws against LGBT individuals are leading to greater levels of depression, anxiety, self-harm, and
suicide. Even in Britain, gay people are at greater risk of a range of mental health problems, and, it is believed, are
more likely to take their own lives.
"A number of studies this year have highlighted the disproportionate levels of mental illness among LGBT
people. In Britain, one of the world's most legally equal countries for this community, research in the last few
months has revealed that LGBT people are nearly twice as likely to have attempted suicide or harmed
themselves, gay men are more than twice as likely to have a mental illness than heterosexual men, and 4 in 5
transgender people have suffered depression in the last five years." [ Dinesh Bhugra, globally renowned
psychiatrist (article annexed in compilation provided by Mr Chander Uday Singh, learned Senior Counsel).]
He discusses studies from various countries which indicate that in countries where laws continue to discriminate
against LGBT individuals, there are high rates of mental illness. Similarly he states that there have been a series of
studies showing that in America, rates of psychiatric disorders have dropped when State policies have recognised
the equal rights of LGBT individuals."
[Emphasis supplied]
192. Members of the LGBTQ+ community in India lead a life where they are prohibited from having a spouse of
their choice under the law, because of which they are prevented from participating in society like everybody else,
detrimentally impacting their wellbeing and quality of life. It is noteworthy to mention that studies have established
that leading a life of loneliness can be as harmful as smoking 15 cigarettes on a daily basis. Reliance in this regard can
be placed on the study by Julianne Holt-Lunstad, PhD, 'The Potential Public Health Relevance of Social Isolation and
Loneliness Prevalence, Epidemiology, and Risk Factors, Public Policy & Aging Report' Vol. 27, Issue 4, 2017, Pages
127-130, https://doi.org/10.1093/ppar/prx030 (last accessed on 10.11.2022) has stated that-
"Lacking social connection carries a risk that is comparable, and in many cases, exceeds that of other well-
accepted risk factors, including smoking up to 15 cigarettes per day, obesity, physical inactivity, and air pollution
(Holt-Lunstad et al., 2010).
193. The hostile environment which members of the LGBTQ+ community face is further aggravated by the fact that
they are not legally entitled to the same benefits or granted the same protections as gender binary-heterosexual
spouses. Gender binary-heterosexual spouses are granted protections and benefits with regard to alimony and
maintenance, property and succession, among other economic benefits, in addition to legal protections such as the
benefits of laws on domestic violence etc, which are not available to the members of LGBTQ+ community, which has a
cumulative impact on their health and sense of security. Thus, a denial of the right to marry under the present legal
framework provided by the Respondents amounts to a deprivation of the right to health enshrined in Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
194. Thus, depriving the members of the LGBTQ+ community, including the Petitioners, of the ability to solemnize
their marriage and raise their children together as a legal family unit is violative of their rights of autonomy, dignity,
privacy and health as envisaged under Article 21 of the Constitution.
B. THE RIGHT TO MARRY A PERSON OF ONE'S CHOICE IS ITSELF A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT UNDER THE
CONSTITUTION
195. Article 21 guarantees the fundamental right to life and personal liberty to every person, which includes the
right to lead a dignified life. The right to marry a person of one's choice is an integral component of Article 21. This has
been unequivocally laid down by this Hon'ble Court in Shafin Jahan (supra)-
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. This right cannot be taken away except through a law which is substantively and
procedurally fair, just and reasonable. Intrinsic to the liberty which the Constitution guarantees as a fundamental
right is the ability of each individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness Matters of
belief and faith, including whether to believe are at the core of constitutional liberty. The Constitution exists for
believers as well as for agnostics. The Constitution protects the ability of each individual to pursue a way of life or
faith to which she or he seeks to adhere. Matters of dress and of food, of ideas and ideologies, of love and
partnership are within the central aspects of identity. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional compliance)
the conditions of a valid marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be ended or annulled.
These remedies are available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on whether they should accept
each other into a marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to play in determining our choice of
partners.'
[Emphasis supplied]
196. The right to choose a partner based on one's choice is a crucial element of Article 21. Therefore, disallowing
willing and consenting adults from marrying each other is in contravention of Constitutional norms, as has been held
in the case of Shakti Vahini (supra)-
"45. The choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there is
erosion of choice. True it is, the same is bound by the principle of constitutional limitation but in the absence of
such limitation, none, we mean, no one shall be permitted to interfere in the fructification of the said choice. If the
right to express one's own choice is obstructed, it would be extremely difficult to think of dignity in its sanctified
completeness. When two adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they consummate their
relationship: they feel that it is their goal and they have the right to do SO. And it can unequivocally be stated that
they have the right and any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation. The majority in the name of
class or elevated honour of clan cannot call for their presence or force their appearance as if they are the monarchs
of some indescribable era who have the power, authority and final say to impose any sentence and determine the
execution of the same in the way they desire possibly harbouring the notion that they are a law unto themselves or
they are the ancestors of Caesar or, for that matter, Louis the XIV. The Constitution and the laws of this country do
not countenance such an act and, in fact, the whole activity is illegal and punishable as offence under the criminal
law.
[Emphasis supplied]
197. Interference of the State in an individual's right to choose a life partner of their choice is ultra vires the
Constitution of India. The right to choose one's own life partner is an absolute right which must be protected and the
State's role in this sphere of one's personal life must necessarily be limited as has been held in the case of Shafin
Jahan (supra):
"84. A marriage can be dissolved at the behest of parties to it, by a competent court of law. Marital status is
conferred through legislation or, as the case may be, custom. Deprivation of marital status is a matter of serious
import and must be strictly in accordance with law. The High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
226 ought not to have embarked on the course of annulling the marriage. The Constitution recognises the liberty
and autonomy which inheres in each individual. This includes the ability to take decisions on aspects which define
one's personhood and identity. The choice of a partner whether within or outside marriage lies within the exclusive
domain of each individual. Intimacies of marriage lie within a core zone of privacy, which is inviolable. The absolute
right of an individual to choose a life partner is not in the least affected by matters of faith. The Constitution
guarantees to each individual the right freely to practise, profess and propagate religion. Choices of faith and belief
as indeed choices in matters of marriage lie within an area where individual autonomy is supreme. The law
prescribes conditions for a valid marriage. It provides remedies when relationships run aground. Neither the State
non the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on these matters. They
form the essence of personal liberty under the Constitution. In deciding whether Shafin Jahan is a fit person for
Hadiya to marry, the High Court has entered into prohibited terrain. Our choices are respected because they are
ours. Social approval for intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them. Indeed, the Constitution
protects personal liberty from disapproving audiences."
[Emphasis Supplied]
198. The Petitioners submit that LGBTQ+ individuals are entitled to the same fundamental rights and Constitutional
rights as non-LGBTQ individuals and, therefore, making a distinction between them with respect to the fundamental
rights and Constitutional rights guaranteed to them is impermissible and bad in law. In Navtej Singh Johan (supra),
this Hon'ble Court unequivocally held that "[t]he LGBT community possess the same human, fundamental and
constitutional rights as other citizens do since these rights inhere in individuals as natural and human rights." (Para
255).
199. The Petitioners submit that LGBTQ+ individuals possess the same rights as non-LGBTQ+ individuals with
respect to choosing a life partner. The autonomy of all persons, including persons belonging to the LGBTQ+
community, with respect to choosing to a partner of their own choice must necessarily therefore be read into the law
and a framework provided to enable the same. Reliance in this regard can be placed on some passages of the
landmark decision of this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johan (supra) which reaffirms these principles inter-alia citing
Shakti Vahini (supra) and Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M., (supra) with approval-
"119. The question of freedom of choosing a partner is reflective from a catena of recent judgments of this Court
held that a person who has come of age and has the capability to think on his/her own has a right to choose his/her
life partner. It is apposite to reproduce some of the observations made by the Court which are to the following
"52. It is obligatory to state here that expression of choice in accord with law is acceptance of individual
identity. Curtailment of that expression and the ultimate action emanating therefrom on the conceptual
structuralism of obeisance to the societal will destroy the individualistic entity of a person. The social values and
morals have their space but they are not above the constitutionally guaranteed freedom. The said freedom is
both a constitutional and a human right. Deprivation of that freedom which is ingrained in choice on the plea of
faith is impermissible.
the Court, for the protection of this right, issued preventive, remedial and punitive measures to curb the menace of
"1. When the ability to choose is crushed in the name of class honour and the person's physical frame is
treated with absolute indignity, a chilling effect dominates over the brains and bones of the society at large."
behest of Khap Panchayats and protect persons who enter into marriages that do not have the approval of the
Panchayats. The Court recognised the right to choose a life partner as a fundamental right under Articles 19 and 21
43. when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a manifestation of their choice
which is recognised under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has the sanction of the
constitutional law and once that is recognised, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot succumb to the
conception of class honour or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely does not have
any legitimacy."
this Court set aside a Kerala High Court judgment which annulled the marriage of a twenty-four year old woman
with a man of her choice in a habeas corpus petition instituted by her father The Court upheld her right to choose a
life partner as well as her autonomy in the sphere of "intimate personal decisions". The Chief Justice held thus :
"52. expression of choice in accord with law is acceptance of individual identity. Curtailment of that
expression and the ultimate action emanating therefrom on the conceptual structuralism of obeisance to the
societal will destroy the individualistic entity of a person. The social values and morals have their space but they
are not above the constitutionally guaranteed freedom." (emphasis supplied)
One of us (Chandrachud, J.) recognised the right to choose a partner as an important facet of autonomy
:
"84. The choice of a partner whether within or outside marriage lies within the exclusive domain of each
individual. Intimacies of marriage lie within a core zone of privacy, which is inviolable. The absolute right of an
individual to choose a life partner is not in the least affected by matters of faith. Social approval for intimate
personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them. (emphasis supplied)
406, para 87)
"87.
The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual
will have a protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside
marriage."
[Emphasis Supplied]
200. Reference may also be had to Paragraphs 245, 334-335, 479, 561.5, 618.3 and 640.2.4 of the decision in
Navtej Singh Johar (supra).
201. Thus, members of the LGBTQ+ community, including the Petitioners, are entitled to the fundamental right to
marry under our Constitution, as has been explicitly recognized by this Hon'ble Court in the aforesaid judgments. They
must accordingly be given a legal framework which allows them to enforce this fundamental right and solemnize their
marriage.
C. THE ACT IS UNCONSTITUTIO IF IT IS INTERPRETED TO EXCLUDE ACCESS TO LGBTQ INDIVIDUALS.
202. The Act finds its roots in the late 1800s when society moved towards a social transformation demanding the
freedom of two consenting adults to marry, without any bar on the grounds of their religion, caste or faith. The
objective of the Act was to expansively provide access to marriage irrespective of faith enabling "any two persons" to
marry. The predecessor of the Act, i.e.- Special Marriage Act, 1872, was enacted in the wake of the Brahmo Samaj
Movement, 1866 which was the "most influential in the struggle for social reform" and inter-alia "encouraged the
education of women, and campaigned for the remarriage of widows and for legislation to prevent child marriages" (The
Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopaedia, 'Brahmo Samaj', Encyclopaedia Britannica, February 19, 2015).
203. The Act being a progressive legislation, advanced a legal framework which permitted "any two persons" to
solemnize marriage, without deferring to customary beliefs, societal norms or personal laws such as the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955, Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 and the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937.
Thus, the object and purpose of the Act was to provide a legal framework which ensures access to civil marriage,
independent of religion, custom and faith.
204. Section 4 of the Act states that "[N]otwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force relating to the solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this
Act." Thus, as per the Act "any two persons" are permitted to solemnize a marriage under the law subject to certain
conditions. The conditions enumerated under Section 4 are as follows : Section 4(a) states that neither of the parties
to marriage shall have a living spouse; Section 4(b) states that parties shall give consent and be of sound mind;
Section 4(c) states that "the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen
years" and thus, prescribes minimum marriageable age for a 'male' as 21 years and for a 'female' as 18 years. The
use, Section 4(c) of words 'male' and 'female', as well as the use of gendered language such as the terms
'husband/wife' and 'bride/bridegroom' in other sections of the Act, limits the access of marriage only to a couple
comprising of one 'male' and one 'female'. Such limiting of access is violative of the fundamental rights of LGBTQ+
individuals.
205. A restricted reading of the Act, limiting access to the institution of marriage to one 'male' and one 'female'
runs contrary to the object and purpose of the statue, which is to provide a progressive and expansive legal framework
for the solemnization of marriage, keeping in mind the changing times and evolution of society. The object and
purpose of the Act has always been to depart from the conservative, orthodox and traditional customs, in order to
grant citizens a full enjoyment of their fundamental right of marriage. Thus, reading the statute with such a restricted
approach and interpretation is against the basic premise of the Act, as well as the evolution of legal jurisprudence.
206. In order for legislation to remain effective, it must evolve and grow in accordance with the evolving faces and
requirements of society. Therefore, law must be interpreted with a progressive approach, keeping in mind societal
evolution, for its optimum implementation. Importantly, this Hon'ble Court has held that a "changed social context
demands a readjustment of our laws" and that law "must not remain static and its interpretation should keep in mind
the changing social context and advance the cause of social justice" (X V. Principal Secretary, Health and Family
207. In this regard, it is necessary to highlight that the Hon'ble High Court of Madras permitted a couple
comprising of a male and a transgender woman to solemnise a marriage under the provisions of Hindu Marriage Act,
similarly, such gender-neutral interpretations of provisions should be adopted while reading down any gender-based
restrictions placed in the provisions of the Act in order to facilitate the basic right to marry of the members of the
LGBTQ+ community.
208. It is settled law that a statute once considered constitutionally valid, may become unconstitutional over
after this Hon'ble Court has unequivocally held in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) that members of the LGBTQ+ community
have the "same human, fundamental and constitutional rights as other citizens" (Para 255), the Act would be
unconstitutional unless interpreted as being neutral to gender identity and sexual orientation.
209. Further, it is submitted that this Hon'ble Court has regularly interpreted statutes in a manner which preserves
23-28). Thus, in order for the Act to remain consistent with Part 111 of the Constitutional, it should be interpreted as
being neutral to gender identity and sexual orientation, departing from the literal rule of interpretation. Accordingly,
this Hon'ble Court ought to read down any gender or sexuality-based restrictions contained in the Act and declare that
it
applies to any two persons who wish to marry, regardless of sex as long as they are above the permitted
marriageable age and meet the other conditions prescribed in Section 4 of the Act.
D. RECOGNITION OF MARRIAGE EQUALITY FOR THE LGBTQ+ COMMUNITY - CONSISTENT WITH
INTERNATIONAL LAW
210. The Petitioners submit that recognizing marriage equality would be consistent with international law,
the
principles of which are enforceable by the courts of India. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the decision of this
"5. There can be no question that nations must march with the international community and the municipal law
must respect rules of international law even as nations respect international opinion. The comity of nations requires
that rules of international law may be accommodated in the municipal law even without express legislative sanction
provided they do not run into conflict with Acts of Parliament. But when they do run into such conflict, the
sovereignty and the integrity of the Republic and the supremacy of the constituted legislatures in making the laws
may not be subjected to external rules except to the extent legitimately accepted by the constituted legislatures
themselves. The doctrine of incorporation also recognises the position that the rules of international law are
incorporated into national law and considered to be part of the national law. unless they are in conflict with an Act
of Parliament. Comity of nations or no, municipal law must prevail in case of conflict. National courts cannot say yes
if Parliament has said no to a principle of international law. National courts will endorse international law but not if it
conflicts with national law. National courts being organs of the national State and not organs of international law
must perforce apply national law if international law conflicts with it. But the courts are under an obligation within
legitimate limits, to so interpret the municipal statute as to avoid confrontation with the comity of nations or the
well established principles of international law. But if conflict is inevitable, the latter must yield."
[Emphasis Supplied]
211. The provisions of international law are not inconsistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed by the
Constitution of India; rather they are in consonance with them and reinforce them. The Constitutional guarantees
which are consistent with the provisions of International Law include the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles
14, 15, 19 and 21. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the decision of this Hon'ble Court in the case of NALSA V.
down various guidelines to prevent sexual harassment of women in workplaces, and to enable gender equality
relying on Articles 11, 24 and General Recommendations 22, 23 and 24 of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. Any international convention not inconsistent with the fundamental rights
and in harmony with its spirit must be read into those provisions e.g. Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution
to enlarge the meaning and content thereof and to promote the object of constitutional guarantee."
[Emphasis Supplied]
212. The provisions of International law are not inconsistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part 111 of
our Constitution, rather they are in consonance with them and reinforce them.
Fundamental Rights
International Covenants
Principles Being Reinforced
Article 14
Article 1 & 7 of Universal
Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality before
Declaration of Human Rights,
law and equal protection of the laws to all persons.
1948 ("UDHR") and Article 26 of
Article 1 of the UDHR provides that all human beings are
International Covenant on Civil
born equal in dignity and rights. Further, Article 7 of the
and Political Rights ("ICCPR")
UDHR provides that all are equal before the law and are
entitled to equal protection of the law without any
discrimination. Article 26 of the ICCPR also provides that
all persons are entitled to equal protection of the laws
without discrimination.
Articles 15 and 16
Article
2
of
International
Article 15 and 16 of the Constitution prohibit
Covenant on Economic, Social
discrimination on various grounds, including grounds of
and Cultural Rights, 1966
sex. Article 2(2) of the ICESCR also mandates the same.
("ICESCR") and Article 26 of
Article 26 of the ICCPR prohibits discrimination on a
ICCPR
number of grounds including sex.
Article 19(1)(a)
Article 19 of UDHR and Article 19
Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution guarantees to all
of ICCPR
citizens the freedom of speech and expression. Similarly,
Article 19 of the UDHR mandates that everyone has the
right to freedom of opinion and expression, and Article
19(2) of the ICCPR mandates that everyone shall have
the right to freedom of expression.
Article 21
Article 6 & 17 of ICCPR, Article
Article 21 of the Constitution provides the right to life,
12 & 16 of UDHR
and the protection of life and personal liberty to all
persons. This is consistent with Article 6(1) of the ICCPR
which mandates that every human being has the
inherent right to life, Article 12 of the UDHR which
provides that no one shall be subjected to arbitrary
interference with one's privacy, family, home or
correspondences and Article 17 of the ICCPR which
mandates that no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or
unlawful interference with their privacy, family, home or
correspondences.
It is to be noted that Article 21 of the Constitution also
encompasses the right to marry a person of one's choice,
which is consistent with Article 16(1) of the UDHR which
provides the right to marry and found a family.
213. It may be noted that the 2009 Report of the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights obligates all member states, including India, to ensure that these provisions are read to include
sexual orientation and gender identity as a ground on which discrimination against all persons is prohibited. Reliance
in this regard can be placed on Paragraph No. 32 of the said report-
"32. "Other status" as recognized in article 2. paragraph 2. includes sexual orientation. States parties should
ensure that a person's sexual orientation is not a barrier to realizing Covenant rights, for example, in accessing
survivor's pension rights. In addition, gender identity is recognized as among the prohibited grounds of
discrimination; for example, persons who are transgender, transsexual or intersex often face serious human rights
violations, such as harassment in schools or in the workplace."
[Emphasis supplied]
214. The safeguards accorded to the members of the LGBTQ+ community have been further codified by The
Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and
Gender Identity, 2006 which address a broad range of human rights standards and their application to issues of sexual
orientation and gender identity. These have been elaborated and discussed by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA V. Union of
their gender identity or sexual orientation "are entitled to the full enjoyment of all human rights". The Third
Yogyakarta Principle mandates that "[[]]]]]]]]]]]]] of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities shall enjoy legal
capacity in all aspects of life" and "[e]ach person's self-defined sexual orientation and gender identity is integral to
their personality and is one of the most basic aspects of self-determination, dignity and freedom. This Hon'ble Court
has held that the said Yogyakarta Principles consistent with the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution
and consequently they must be recognised and followed (NALSA (supra), Para 60).
215. Thus, this Hon'ble Court must uphold the principles of international law elaborated above as the UDHR, the
ICCPR, the ICESCR and the Yogyakarta Principles are all consistent with the fundamental rights recognized under the
Indian Constitution and hold that all persons including members of the LGBTQ+ community are guaranteed the right
to marry the person of their choice.
E. RECOGNITION OF MARRIAGE EQUALITY FOR THE LGBTQ COMMUNITY IS NOT A MATTER WHICH NEEDS
TO BE LEFT TO THE LEGISLATURE
216. It is submitted that the often-canvassed argument that the recognition of the right to marriage for LGBTQ+
individuals is subject matter beyond the scope of the judiciary and ought to be addressed by the legislature, is a
wholly untenable contention. However, it is essential to appreciate that the prayer of the Petitioners concerns the
violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution and thus is far from being an issue which is beyond
the scope of the judiciary. In fact, it is the essential duty of this Hon'ble Court to safeguard the fundamental rights
guaranteed under the Constitution, not doing the same would be an abdication of its primary constitutional duty.
217. The present petition challenges a majoritarian statute as violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the
members of the LGBTQ+ community and, thus, cannot be relegated to the legislature and dispensed from judicial
review. The present Petition does not involve an issue fit for resolution by a political majority. This Hon'ble Court while
safeguarding the fundamental rights has already held that "[t]he purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature of
guaranteed fundamental rights is to insulate their exercise from the disdain of majorities, whether legislative or
popular." (Puttaswamy (supra), Para 144). Hon'ble Justice R.F. Nariman has aptly crystalized the answer to this
contention in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) as follows:
"352. Another argument raised on behalf of the interveners is that change in society, if any, can be reflected by
amending laws by the elected representatives of the people. Thus, it would be open to Parliament to carve out an
exception from Section 377, but this Court should not indulge in taking upon itself the guardianship of changing
societal mores. Such an argument must be emphatically rejected. The very purpose of the fundamental rights
chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdraw the subject of liberty and dignity of the individual and place such
subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments SO that constitutional morality can be applied by this Court
to give effect to the rights, among others, of "discrete and insular" minorities. [ This phrase occurs in one of the
most celebrated footnotes in the US Supreme Court's constitutional history, namely, Footnote 4 of United States V.
has knocked on the doors of this Court as this Court is the custodian of the fundamental rights of citizens. These
fundamental rights do not depend upon the outcome of elections. And, it is not left to majoritarian governments to
prescribe what shall be orthodox in matters concerning social morality. The fundamental rights chapter is like the
North Star in the universe of constitutionalism in India. Constitutional morality always trumps any imposition of a
particular view of social morality by shifting and different majoritarian regimes."
[Emphasis supplied]
218. Thus, any opposition advanced pertaining to "judicial restraint" in the context of recognition of marriage
equality for LGBTQ+ individuals does not hold water.
219. Further, it is settled law that as far as the enforcement of fundamental rights is concerned, the Constitutional
Para 56-58).
F. A TRADITIONAL AND IISCRIMLNATORY VIEW OF MARRIAGE CANNOT BE ALLOWED TO BE PERPETUATED
FOR ITS OWN SAKE
220. The Petitioners submit that the argument that marriage as an institution has traditionally and historically been
limited to one male and one female cannot by itself be a ground not to recognize an expansive and inclusive version of
the same institution. A wrong committed for years does not make it right. That the institution of marriage and the long
-term commitment it envisages can only exist between a male and female is a fallacy which has been living for years
and, thus, needs to be corrected at some stage. The Supreme Court of the United States of America while upholding
same-sex marriage has rightly held that, "[I]f rights were defined by who exercised them in the past, then received
practices could serve as their own continued justification and new groups could not invoke rights once
denied." (Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015)). Similarly, the right to marry in India cannot be defined in terms
of which group has traditionally had the right to exercise the said right.
221. It is submitted that the years of injustice and denial of fundamental rights suffered by the members of
LGBTQ+ community ought rather to be the cause to rectify such unjust laws and norms prevalent in the society and
not a ground to oppose. This Hon'ble Court while decriminalising consensual sex between same-sex couples has held
that, "[[]]] hundred and fifty-eight years is too long a period for the LGBT community to suffer the indignities of
denial" (Navtej Singh Johar (supra), Para 616). Thus, any opposition advanced on the ground that historically the
institution of marriage has been limited to one male and one female undermines itself as prolonged injustice does not
makes it just.
222. The recognition of marriage equality for the LGBTQ+ community does not devalue the worth of traditional
binary-gendered heterosexual marriages. As observed by the Supreme Court of the United States of America, it is
wholly illogical to believe that state recognition of the love and commitment between same-sex couples will alter the
most intimate and personal decisions of opposite-sex couples. (Ref. Obergefell (supra) at 679). Rather, this argument
fails to appreciate that providing the right to marry to every person will further strengthen the institution of marriage
as it will have more people within its umbrella.
223. The Petitioners submit that popular morality or the theorised behavioural implications for third parties cannot
be held as valid justification for deprivation of Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Constitution. This Hon'ble
Court, while upholding the Constitutional liberties of the LGBTQ+ community held that, "Constitutional morality will
impact upon any law which deprives the LGBT individuals of their entitlement to a full and equal citizenship.
Society cannot dictate the expression of sexuality between consenting adults. That is a private affair. Constitutional
morality will supersede any culture or tradition." (Navtej Singh Johar (supra), Para 606). Therefore, any opposition
based on the theory that recognition of same-sex marriage will diminish the value of marriage as an institution, is
wholly untenable.
G. RECOGNITION OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE AROUND THE WORLD
224. Several democracies across the world have moved towards framing a progressive legal framework which
allows same-sex marriage and civil unions. Till date, thirty three (33) democracies across the world have evolved
towards a progressive legal framework which allows same-sex marriage and civil unions : Netherlands (2001),
Belgium (2003), Canada (2005), Spain (2005), South Africa (2006), Norway (2008), Sweden (2009), Iceland (2010),
Portugal (2010), Argentina (2010), Denmark (2012), Uruguay (2013), New Zealand (2013), France (2013), Brazil
(2013), United Kingdom (2014), Finland (2014), Luxembourg (2015), Ireland (2015). Greenland (2015), United
States of America (2015), Colombia (2016), Germany (2017), Malta (2017), Australia (2017), Austria (2019), Taiwan
(2019), and Ecuador (2019), Costa Rica (2020), Chile (2022), Slovenia (2022), Switzerland (2022) and Mexico
(2022).
225. The members of the LGBTQ+ community in India deserve to be accommodated in society, just like their
counterparts in other democracies, and other heterosexual, gender-binary persons in India. This necessarily requires
our Constitution to be interpreted in a progressive way as was done by the Supreme Court of Canada in the case of
which is accommodative of the realities of modern life. The Court in the said judgment held that-
"22. The reference to "Christendom" is telling. Hyde spoke to a society of shared social values where marriage
and religion were thought to be inseparable. This is no longer the case. Canada is a pluralistic society. Marriage,
from the perspective of the state, is a civil institution. The "frozen concepts" reasoning runs contrary to one of the
most fundamental principles of Canadian constitutional interpretation : that our Constitution is a living tree which,
by way of progressive interpretation. accommodates and addresses the realities of modern life
23. A large and liberal, or progressive, interpretation ensures the continued relevance and, indeed, legitimacy of
Canada's constituting document. By way of progressive interpretation our Constitution succeeds in its ambitious
enterprise, that of structuring the exercise of power by the organs of the state in times vastly different from those
in which it was crafted.
[Emphasis Supplied]
226. Excluding members of the LGBTQ+ community from the institution of marriage has wide ranging negative
consequences and makes the process of their integration within society even more difficult. Reliance in this regard can
be placed on the decision of the Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, [2005]
ZACC 19 wherein it held that-
"[71] The exclusion of same-sex couples from the benefits and responsibilities of marriage, accordingly, is not a
small and tangential inconvenience resulting from a few surviving relics of societal prejudice destined to evaporate
like the morning dew. It represents a harsh if oblique statement by the law that same-sex couples are outsiders,
and that their need for affirmation and protection of their intimate relations as human beings is somehow less than
that of heterosexual couples. It reinforces the wounding notion that they are to be treated as biological oddities, as
failed or lapsed human beings who do not fit into normal society, and, as such, do not qualify for the full moral
concern and respect that our Constitution seeks to secure for everyone. It signifies that their capacity for love,
commitment and accepting responsibility is by definition less worthy of regard than that of heterosexual couples."
[Emphasis supplied]
227. The Petitioners submit that restricting the right to marry to only gender-binary heterosexual couples leads to
members of the LGBTQ+ community being unjustly denied numerous economic and social benefits, rights and
responsibilities which are only made available to gender-binary heterosexual couples. Reliance in this regard can be
placed on the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015)
wherein it held that-
"For that reason, just as a couple vows to support each other, SO does society pledge to support the couple,
offering symbolic recognition and material benefits to protect and nourish the union. Indeed, while the States are in
general free to vary the benefits they confer on all married couples, they have throughout our history made
marriage the basis for an expanding list of governmental rights, benefits and responsibilities. These aspects of
marital status include : taxation: inheritance and property rights; rules of intestate succession; spousal privilege in
the law of evidence: hospital access: medical decision making authority: adoption rights: the rights and benefits of
survivors; birth and death certificates: professional ethics rules; campaign finance restrictions; workers'
compensation benefits: health insurance: and child custody support. and visitation rules. See Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 6-9: Brief for American Bar Association as Amicus Curiae 8-29. Valid marriage under state
law is also a significant status for over a thousand provisions of federal law. See Windsor, 570 U. S., at
(slip op., at 15- 16). The States have contributed to the fundamental character of the marriage right by placing that
institution at the center of SO many facets of the legal and social order.
There is no difference between same- and opposite-sex couples with respect to this principle. Yet by virtue of
their exclusion from that institution, same-sex couples are denied the constellation of benefits that the States have
linked to marriage. This harm results in more than just material burdens. Same-sex couples are consigned to an
instability many opposite-sex couples would deem intolerable in their own lives. As the State itself makes marriage
all the more precious by the significance it attaches to it, exclusion from that status has the effect of teaching that
gays and lesbians are unequal in important respects. It demeans gays and lesbians for the State to lock them out of
a central institution of the Nation's society. Same-sex couples, too, may aspire to the transcendent purposes of
marriage and seek fulfilment in its highest meaning."
[Emphasis supplied]
228. Guaranteeing the right to marry to members of the LGBTQ+ community will not have any adverse effect on
the right to marry that has currently been made available to gender-binary heterosexual couples. Providing members
of the LGBTQ+ community the right to marry will give them the right to exercise their choice, which is essential for
their dignity and a right which ought to be available to them as it is to every other person. Reliance in this regard can
be placed on the decision of the Constitutional Court of Spain in the case of Judgment No. 198 of 2012 wherein it
held that-
"11.
Based on the foregoing and the fact that the passing of Law 13/2005 does not entail a limitation on the
right to marry but, rather, a change in the conditions in which it may be exercised - within a logical equivalence of
legal regimes-, we need to determine whether the challenged regulation prevents heterosexuals from exercising
their right, in the same conditions as before, thereby affecting the essential content of their right : our reply to this
question is negative. An acknowledged right to marry in favour of all persons, irrespective of their sexual
orientation, means that each individual may marry persons of the same or different gender, which means that this
exercise entails full acknowledgement of each one's sexual orientation. This does not affect the essential content of
the right, because the possibility of same-sex persons entering into marriage does not denaturalize or transform
this right, non does it prevent heterosexual couples from freely deciding to marry or not to marry. Heterosexuals are
not now subject to a smaller scope of freedom than was recognised to them before the reform, as holders of the
right to marry. Both under the current and former regulation, they enjoyed a right to marry with no further
limitations than those derived from the legal configuration of applicable requirements to marry, foreseen in the Civil
Code, However, homosexuals now have the choice- which was absent before the legal reform- to marry persons of
their same sex, in such a way that respect for their sexual orientation is reflected in the institution of marriage as
designed. Thus, their individual right to marry also includes respect for their own sexual orientation.
[Emphasis supplied]
229. Similarly, the Constitutional Court of Taiwan in its landmark decision in Case No. 748 (Same-Sex
Marriage Case) dated 24th May 2017 held that permitting same sex marriage will not "alter the social order
established upon the existing opposite-sex marriage. Furthermore, the freedom of marriage for two persons of the
same sex, once legally recognized, will constitute the bedrock of a stable society, together with opposite-sex marriage.
The need, capability, willingness, and longing, in both physical and psychological senses, for creating such permanent
unions of intimate and exclusive nature are equally essential to homosexuals and heterosexuals, given the importance
of the freedom of marriage to the sound development of personality and safeguarding of human dignity. Both types of
union shall be protected by the freedom of marriage under Article 22 of the Constitution. (Para 21).
[Emphasis supplied]
230. Most importantly, denying members of the LGBTQ+ community the right to marry is in clear violation of the
principle of equality. The Constitutional Court of Austria in its decision in the case of G-258-259 of 2017 has held
that:
"2.4. This distinction between two legal institutions can no longer be upheld today without discriminating against
same-sex couples with regard to their sexual orientation. Due to the fact that, according to applicable law,
legislators have separated marriage and registered partnership - and, as a consequence, opposite-sex and same-
sex couples by providing for different institutions for their relationships to be recognized by the state, even if the
provisions governing those institutions have essentially the same legal consequences - it can be seen in a wide
range of relationship arrangements that although registered partnership and marriage are comparable in terms
of
legal relations and legal consequences, those institutions still cover relationships that are basically unequal.
2.5. Against the background of the legal and social discrimination of persons with same-sex sexual orientation
until the recent past (cf. Selected Judgements of the Constitutional Court 19.492/2011), this separation of
relationships that are basically equal in their nature and their meaning for individuals into two different legal
institutions has a discriminating effect, which is the very effect that Art. 7 (1) sentence 2 of the Federal
Constitutional Law prohibits as the most significant content of the principle of equality. From the perspective of
same-sex couples, this separation into different legal institutions makes it clear to the public and to any person that
the relationship between two persons of the same sex embodied in a registered partnership is something different
than marriage between two persons of different sex, although the intentions of both relationships are based on the
same values. Thus. separation into two legal institutions, even if the legal provisions governing them are the same,
expresses that persons with same-sex sexual orientation are not equal to persons with heterosexual orientation. The
resulting discriminating effect is reflected in the fact that on account of the different terms used to designate a
person's civil status ("married" V. "living in a registered partnership"), persons living in a same-sex partnership
have to disclose their sexual orientation even in situations in which it is not and must not be of any significance
and, especially against the historical background of this issue, they are at risk of being discriminated against. Art. 7
(1) sentence 2 of the Federal Constitutional Law is intended to provide protection against such effects.
2.6. The distinction in the law between opposite-sex and same-sex relationships as two different legal
institutions thus violates the principle of equality which forbids any discrimination of individuals on grounds of
personal characteristics, such as their sexual orientation".
[Emphasis supplied]
231. Accordingly, it is submitted that members of LGBTQ+ community in India deserve to be treated similarly as
their counterparts in other democracies. In this regard, it is highlighted that this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johar
V. Union of India, (Supra) has observed that "[i]n the march of civilizations across the spectrum of a compassionate
global order, India cannot be left behind."
H. THE PETITION INVOLVES SUBSTANTIAL QUESTIONS OF LAW AS TO THE INTERPREATION OF OUR
CONSTITUTION
232. The Petitioners humbly submit that the present Petition involves substantial questions of law as to the
interpretation of our Constitution including-
a. Whether the term "sex" used under Article 15 of the Constitution which prohibits discrimination "against any
citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them" would include in its ambit
gender identity and sexual orientation?
b. Whether the right to life and personal liberty envisaged under Article 21 of the Constitution includes the right of
marriage to members of the LGBTQ+ community?
C. Whether the right to equality before law and the equal protection of laws envisaged under Article 14 of the
Constitution includes the right of equal access of LGBTQ+ individuals to the institution of marriage?
d. Whether the freedom of speech and expression envisaged under Article 19 of the Constitution includes the
freedom of LGBTQ+ individuals to express their love and commitment to another by entering into the union of
marriage?
233. Thus, it is submitted that in accordance with Article 145(3) of the Constitution, the present Petition ought to
be heard by a Constitution Bench of five judges of this Hon'ble Court.
234. It is submitted that this Hon'ble Court while interpreting the substantial questions of law raised in the
petition, ought to take into account that the Constitution of India is a living document and must be interpreted
progressively with changing times and evolution of societal norms. (State of West Bengal V. Committee for Protection
235. The Petitioners accordingly pray that this Hon'ble Court depart from the literal rule of interpretation and
interpret the provisions of the Act progressively in a manner which is neutral to gender identity and sexual orientation.
This Hon'ble Court ought to read down any gender or sexuality-based restrictions contained in the Act and declare that
the Act applies to any two persons who wish to marry, regardless of sex as long as they are above the permitted
marriageable age and meet the other conditions prescribed in Section 4 of the Act. The Petitioners humbly submit that
the Act must be interpreted in a manner which makes it consistent with Part III of our Constitution.
FILED BY
[KARANJAWALA & CO.]
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 01.03.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1020 OF 2022
In the Matter of:
Parth Phiroze Mehrotra & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Anr Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS IN REJOINDER ON BEHALF OF MR. SAURABH KIRPAL, Ld. SENIOR ADVOCATE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION
11. WHAT IS THE NATURE OF MARRIAGE?
111. WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE COURT?
A. The Public Private Divide
B. Narusu Appa and Personal Laws
C. Constitutional Obligation of the Court
IV. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AT STAKE
A. What does equality mean?
(i) Non-Discrimination and Intelligible Differentia
(ii) Equality and Dignity
B. Freedom and the Right to Life and Liberty
C. Integrated Proportionality
(i) Is the measure in furtherance of a legitimate aim?
(ii) Is the measure suitable for achieving such an aim?
(iii) Is the measure necessary for achieving the aim?
(iv) Is the measure adequately balanced with the right of the individual?
V. IS GRANTING THE RELIEF PRAYED FOR 'CREATING HAVOC'?
VI. EFFECT ON CHILDREN
FILED BY
KARANJAWALA & CO.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 06.04.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1020 OF 2022
In the Matter of:
Parth Phiroze Mehrotra & Anr
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Anr
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS IN REJOINDER ON BEHALF OF MR. SAURABH KIRPAL, Ld. SENIOR ADVOCATE
1. I INTRODUCTION
236. The Counter Affidavit of the Union states that marriage is a religious and social construct. Therefore, it is
argued by the Union, that the Court has no jurisdiction in ensuring marriage equality22. The exclusive domain is that of
Parliament It is further argued that permitting marriage equality would "create a complete havoc with the delicate
balance of personal laws in the country"24.
237. These arguments are in error in their conception of what the nature of marriage is, what the role of the Court
is and, perhaps most importantly, what the true import of equality under our Constitution is.
11. WHAT IS THE NATURE OF MARRIAGE?
238. It might be possible to argue that marriage commenced as a religious idea of a man and a woman being
bound in a union (though the evidence around this is debatable). However, this idea of marriage has been abandoned
a long time ago 25. The question, it is submitted, is not as to who has the jurisdiction to amend the law (Parliament or
the Courts), but whether marriage can claim a special status as a purely religious institution where the law merely
codifies religious practice. For instance, under Hindu law, marriage is sacrosanct and the marital bond cannot be
undone. The Arthashastra of Kautilya mentions that 'Amoksha Dharmabibahanam' i.e. the Hindu dharmic marriage is
an inviolate, inviolable, indissoluble, interminable, eternal, perpetual union. 26 However, after the enactment of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 which permits divorce, this concept of a legal recognition of an essentially religious concept
is no longer accurate.
239. Certainly, in the secular domain of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, this argument of the Union has even less
force. The debates in Parliament show that the one main purpose of the Act was to permit inter-religious marriages.
27
Such marriages, almost by definition, cannot claim to have any significance in the field of any one religion. The
debates also establish that the enactment was intended to be a secular law, partly in fulfilment of Article 44 of the
Constitution of India, i.e., a Uniform Civil Code. Further, Section 19 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 clearly
establishes the secular nature of the Act by providing that marriage under the Act operates as a deemed severance
from the Hindu Undivided Family (HUF).
240. Marriage, in any event, is not merely a religious concept. It is also a political, economic and above all, a legal
construct. The earlier submissions in the matter have detailed the legal consequences that arise from getting married.
Non-heterosexual couples are denied valuable legal rights when the institution of marriage is denied to them. There is,
therefore, a denial of valuable legal rights to a section of society (non-heterosexual couples) simply because of that
identity.
111. WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE COURT?
A. The Public Private Divide
241. It is not as if the Union is not aware of the legal consequences of its arguments in relation to the nature of
marriage. It clearly spells out in its Counter Affidavit that-
"It is submitted that, while a marriage may be between two private individuals having a profound impact on their
private lives, it cannot be relegated to merely a concept within the domain of privacy of an individual when the
question of formalizing their relationship and the legal consequences flowing therefrom is involved. Marriage, as an
institution in law, has many statutory and other consequences under various legislative enactments. Therefore, any
formal recognition of such human relationship, cannot be regarded as just a privacy issue between two adults.
"28
"It is submitted that the dictum of Navtej Singh Johan supra, does not extend the right to privacy to include a
fundamental right in the nature of a right to marry by two individuals of the same gender in contravention of
prevailing statutory laws. It is submitted that at its very core, the dictum of the judgment stated above, applies to
aspects which would be covered within the personal private domain of individuals [akin to right to privacy] and
cannot include public right in the nature of recognition of same-sex marriage and thereby legitimizing a particular
human conduct."
242. The Union subscribes to the belief that marriage is a public act, rather than a purely private one While this
might be true, the sequitur sought to be drawn by the Union, is fallacious. The Union seems to be arguing that the
Courts can never interfere in any 'public' arrangement between parties.
243. The law has always recognized public actions as being subject to judicial review. There was, at best, a claim
for immunity from review of private actions31 With the passage of time even this distinction is being whittled down.
However, what can be said with absolute legal certainty is, that the submission of the Union that public effects of
private arrangements cannot be the subject of judicial determination, is patently incorrect. For instance, the Courts
have dealt with the legality of euthanasia as well as adultery. Merely because they entail considerable policy
implications does not negate the fact that the right to privacy remains relevant to those issues.
244. Further, Parliament as well as the Courts have interfered to protect the Constitutional rights of the individual
in the domain of marriage. Nowhere is this most apparent than in the rules relating to the end of marriage, i.e.,
divorce. The striking down of the requirement of a Christian woman having to prove grounds in addition to adultery32
as well as the prohibition of the instant Triple Talaq by the Court are instances on this regard.
245. In fact, the argument of the Union is directly contrary to the other argument made by it in the Counter
Affidavit - that personal laws are immune from judicial scrutiny.
B. Narusu Appa and Personal Laws
246. The Union has submitted that the Court will not have jurisdiction to strike down any personal law on the
ground of violation of any fundamental rights. This argument has been made by relying on the decision of the Bombay
High Court in the case of State of Bombay V. Narasu Appa Mali 33. The Counter Affidavit further asserts that this
decision has been affirmed by a Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court in the case of Shayara Bano V. Union of
India  34
247. This contention is palpably incorrect. The Counter Affidavit wrongly states that Hon'ble Mr. Justice Kurian
Joseph agreed with Hon'ble Chief Justice Khehar and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Nazeer on this point. The judgment of Hon'ble
Justice Kurian Joseph35 only notes that as per him, that the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, is
not law relating to divorce and hence not amenable to be tested on the ground of violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution. This conclusion was based on his reading the Act which only made the Shariat law applicable to Muslims
rather than codifying any particular principles of the divorce. He held that "After the 1937 Act, in respect of the
enumerated subjects under Section 2 regarding "marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq", the law that is
applicable to Muslims shall be only their Personal Law, namely, Shariat. Nothing more, nothing less. It is not
a
legislation regulating talaq."
248. It is also interesting to note that the stand of the Union in the present case is in direct opposition to its stand
in the Shayara Bano case. There, the Ld. Attorney General had argued that-
"Personal Law was a part and parcel of "law" within the meaning of Article 13. And therefore any such law
(Personal Law) which was inconsistent with fundamental rights would have to be considered void. It was further
submitted, that the interpretation of the Bombay High Court in Narasu Appa Mali, to the effect that Article 13 of
the
Constitution, would not cover "Personal Laws" warranted reconsideration.
,36
[Emphasis supplied]
249. It might be said that the view of the Court, rather an any argument made by a law officer in Court, would bind
the Union. However, as stated above, this Hon'ble Court in Shayara Bano has not, by majority, held that personal
laws are immune from constitutional scrutiny. In fact, the judgments of Hon'ble Mr. Justice Nariman and Hon'ble Mr.
Lalit state that the Court was not called upon to determine the correctness of the argument.
37
250. It is reiterated that the Petitioners in the present case are seeking recognition of marriage under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954. There is, hence, no question of any bar against judicial review of personal laws arising in the
present case.
C. Constitutional Obligation of the Court
251. The present petitions have been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, in itself a Fundamental
Right which has been called by Dr. Ambedkar as the heart and soul of the Constitution of India and recognised as such
by the Court. 38
252. The law is well settled. When called upon, the Court has a constitutional duty to ensure the protection of
constitutional rights conferred on persons. It cannot shirk this responsibility with reference to any inchoate doctrine of
legislative supremacy. One quote of Hon'ble Nariman J. in the Shayara Bano case will suffice as authority for the
proposition-
"56. And this brings us to the question as to when petitions have been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution
of India, is it permissible for us to state that we will not decide an alleged breach of a fundamental right, but will
send the matter back to the legislature to remedy such a wrong.
57. In Prem Chand Garg V. Excise Commr. 34, this Court held : (SCR p. 888 : AIR pp. 998-99, para 2)
"2. Article 32(1) provides that the right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the
enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed, and clause (4) lays down that this right shall not
be suspended except as otherwise provided for by this Constitution. The
fundamental
right
to
move
this
Court can, therefore, be appropriately described as the cornerstone of the democratic edifice raised by the
Constitution. That is why it is natural that this Court should in the words of Patanjali Sastri, J. regard itself "as
the protector and guarantor of fundamental rights", and should declare that 'it cannot, consistently with the
responsibility laid upon it, refuse to entertain applications seeking protection against infringements of such
rights'. (Vide Ramesh Thappar V. State of Madras 35, SCR at p. 697 : AIR p. 126, para 5). In discharging the
duties assigned to it, this Court has to play the role "of a sentinel on the qui vive" (vide State of Madras V. V.G.
Row 36, SCR at p. 597 AIR p. 199, para 13) and it must always regard it as its solemn duty to protect the said
fundamental rights zealously and vigilantly (vide Daryao V. State of U.P. 37, AIR p. 1461, para 8 SCR at p.
582) 1,39
[Emphasis supplied]
IV. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AT STAKE
A. What does equality mean?
253. Finally, the Union argues there is no violation of the constitutionally guaranteed right to equality40 or indeed
under any other right conferred by Part III of the Constitution of India41
(i) Non-Discrimination and Intelligible Differentia
254. The Counter Affidavit argues that there is no violation of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India. As
regards Article 14, the Counter Affidavit states that there is an intelligible differentia qua the two classes - same sex
and heterosexual couple. The Counter Affidavit then posits that this differentiation has a rational nexus sought to be
achieved by the legislation, namely 'ensuring social stability via recognition of marriage'
42
255. This argument is flawed for multiple reasons. Firstly, if the object of the legislation is to ensure social stability
via recognition of marriage, it is not clear (or indeed explicitly argued), as to how failure to recognise same sex
marriage would upset social stability. On the contrary, it would ensure that even non-traditional marriages are held
together by the bounds of law and would thus result in greater stability.
256. Secondly, the argument erroneously applies the traditional classification test. After the development of the
law, it is clear that any breach of Article 14 has to fulfil, at the very least, the requirement of proportionality and
reasonableness 4 After the recognition of non-binary genders in NALSA4 only permitting marriage between a 'man'
43
and a 'woman' excludes all persons who identify as belonging to the third gender from the possibility of forming a
marital bond, irrespective of the gender of their chosen partner. This amounts to a prima facie exclusion of an entire
class of persons from legally accessing the institution of marriage-an exclusion that is manifest on the face of the
gendered language in the marriage laws, rather than merely their impact based on social realities-is patently
unreasonable.
45
257. Finally, the Article 14 test has now been expanded to cover cases of manifest arbitrariness. It is submitted
that in the absence of any cogent explanation as to why marriage equality cannot be permitted, allowing a legal
privilege solely to one class of persons, while denying it to others, would be manifestly arbitrary. This is particularly so
as non-traditional couples face enhanced social stigma and are therefore more in need of protection of the law by way
of recognition of their marriages.
258. As regards Article 15, the argument of the Union is slightly difficult to follow46 In substance, it is argued that
marriages are a certain sub-set of legally recognised relationships even among heterosexual relationships (e.g., live in
relationships are excluded). Therefore, it is argued that there is no violation of Article 15 because the discrimination is
not on the grounds only of sex.
259. This argument is puzzling. Firstly, heterosexuals can choose to get married should they wish to, an option that
is not available to non-heterosexual people. Live-in relationships for heterosexual people, is a matter of choice, not a
compulsion as it is currently for same sex couples. Secondly, the argument fails to recognise that the judgment in
Navtej Singh Johar (supra) has recognised that sexuality forms part of the term 'sex' within the meaning of Article 15
of the Constitution of India47 Therefore, failure to permit marriage on the ground of sexuality is a violation of Article
15. Finally, to argue that Article 15 is applied only in the event the discrimination is only based on sex, is to apply a
test which has subsequently substantially expanded. Thus, in Navtej Singh Johan (supra), this Court has applied the
impact test 48 and held that if legislation results in stereotyping a particular class of people, it would violate Article 15
of the Constitution of India49
(ii) Equality and Dignity
260. The right to equality, asserted in the present case, has an instrumental as well as an intrinsic worth. The
instrumental values are directly hit by the equality provisions contained in Article 14 and 15 of the Constitution of
India. The intrinsic worth, particularly in the context of human dignity, is covered by Article 21 of the Constitution of
India.
261. It is submitted that anti-discrimination law is also a facet of human dignity. The Court has held that human
dignity is a constitutionally protected Fundamental Right As the Court noted, "So fundamental is dignity that it
permeates the core of the rights guaranteed to the individual by Part 111. Dignity is the core which unites the
fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve for each individual the dignity of existence. Privacy
with its attendant values assures dignity to the individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed with dignity can
liberty be of true substance. Privacy ensures the fulfilment of dignity and is a core value which the protection of life
and liberty is intended to achieve.
262. The content of the concept of dignity has been elaborated in academic writings as well as judicial
52
pronouncements. One essential feature of what actually constitutes dignity is its use as an "expressive norm"
Certain legal acts (or omissions) do not merely have a consequential effect; "[r]ather than emphasize the effect
(psychological or social) produced by the classification, expressive theories 'claim that sometimes it is wrong to
classify because of what one expresses- regardless of whether the person or people affected feel demeaned,
stigmatized, or degraded'. 53 The Courts, both international and municipal55, have held that this expression of
stigma is an affront to dignity.
2 Failing to recognise marriage equality is also the result of the State expressing its moral disapproval. In the
case of the Counter Affidavit filed by the Court, this is more or less, explicitly stated5666 This moral expression is an
affront to human dignity and is therefore violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The State is, by its failure
to permit any form of legal recognition of a same-sex relationship, expresses its opprobrium and inevitably implies
that such relationships are not worthy of legal sanction or protection.
264. This negative expression stigmatizes a particular class of relationships (i.e., all relationships other than those
between a biological man and a biological woman), and is hence, violative of the right to dignity of the two individuals
in such a relationship. In other words, discrimination between these two sets of relationships, creates a preferred class
of relations and inevitably a 'second class of relations. To this second class of citizens, the State conveys its social,
moral and legal disapproval. This is a clear breach of the dignity of those who belong to that class.
B. Freedom and the Right to Life and Liberty
265. The Counter Affidavit also urges that failure to recognise marriage between non-heterosexual couples will not
violate their rights under Articles 1957 and 2158
266. As regards the argument based on Article 19, the Union submits that there is no right to have an association
recognised by law, and hence, there is no violation of Article 19 (1)(c). This argument neglects to note several
important features. First, as regards Article 19 (1)(c), recognition of a marriage is not a voluntary exercise which has
no legal consequences. Indeed, marriage is a distinct legal right conferred as result of the association. To prohibit that
denudes any effective right to association. This would be akin to arguing that any two persons have a right to come
together to start a business, but would be disentitled to seek recognition as a partnership or a company. Secondly, the
argument also does not deal with the effect the failure to recognise marriage equality has on the rights conferred by
Article 19 (1)(a) of the Constitution of India. In this regard, reference may be had to the written submissions filed in
the case at Paragraphs 42 and 43.
267. In relation to Article 21, the Counter Affidavit submits that there is no fundamental right of privacy or dignity
to have a marriage recognised. It then proceeds to state that even if such a right exists, it can be curtailed on the
ground of a "legitimate state interest". This legitimate state interest is defined to be "the recognition of
59
heterogeneous institution of marriage and the acceptance of the Indian society based upon its own cultural and
societal values" 60 It is submitted that this amounts to an argument which seeks to lift itself by its own bootstraps.
There is no elaboration on what the state interest in recognising only heterosexual marriages is, other than seeking to
have a legal regime that only recognises heterosexual marriages. Inasmuch as the argument implies that cultural and
societal values are a legitimate state interest, there is no discussion of the deleterious impact the failure to recognise
marriage equality has on non-heterosexual couples.
C. Integrated Proportionality
268. In the present case, failure to recognise marriage equality results in a violation of Articles 14, 19 and 21. In
such an instance, it is permissible to adopt the integrated proportionality review suggested by the Court in the case of
Akshay N Patel V. Reserve Bank of India6 The Court has held that in the event of a violation of each of the three
rights, a common proportionality review will be undertaken by the Court. The ingredients of the review have been
stipulated as under62.
(i) Is the measure in furtherance of a legitimate aim?
269. This prong of the test entails an evaluation of the legitimacy of an aim that purportedly violates a fundamental
right. The measure must be designated for a proper purpose i.e., a legitimate goal63
270. In the present case, the only legitimate aim that has been provided by the Union is a desire to prioritise
heterosexual marriages on the grounds of social and cultural morality. The converse has also been explicitly stated,
i.e., that this legislature seeks to de-legitimize non-heterosexual unions. It is submitted that after the judgment in
Navtej Singh Johan (supra), social morality cannot be a ground for discriminating against same sex or non-traditional
couples As the Court held there "Constitutional morality will impact upon any law which deprives the LGBT
65
individuals of their entitlement to a full and equal citizenship. After the Constitution came into force, no law can be
divorced from constitutional morality. Society cannot dictate the expression of sexuality between consenting adults.
That is a private affair. Constitutional morality will supersede any culture or tradition"66
[Emphasis supplied]
271. In any event, not all pre-existing social or cultural practices have some form of constitutional immunity. This
would also render laws against dowry or the practice of sati, suspect. Some reason, other than orthodoxy, has to be
supplied as to why a particular social practice is constitutionally legitimate.
272. Further, a desire to de-legitimize a particular form of relationship cannot be said to be a legitimate goal for
State, unless it is explained why such a goal is legitimate. Any possible arguments of the State seeking to maintain
the sanctity of religious traditions have no application in the case of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
(ii) Is the measure suitable for achieving such an aim?
273. This would entail an analysis of whether the proposed measure can further the stated objective6.
274. In case the object of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is to further social stability, it is inexplicable
to
understand how expanding the scope of the social tool used to accomplish the desired stability (marriage), would
simultaneously diminish it. No evidence has been submitted by the Union to the effect that recognition of non-
heterosexual marriages would diminish the sanctity, strength or the significance of heterosexual marriages. Evidence
from societies across the world would establish the contrary - that societies have not crumbled after recognition of
marriage equality.
(iii) Is the measure necessary for achieving the aim?
275. The analysis of necessity is an extension of evaluating the suitability of a restriction, coupled with an analysis
of whether the proposed measure is the least restrictive manner of arriving at the intended legitimate State interest.
This prong has traces of the "narrowly tailored" State interest [K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-5 J.) V. Union of India,
of fundamental rights under Part
276. The test therefore is an extension of the suitability analysis. The burden upon the Union is to show how the
goal of social stability can be met in different ways and how banning non-heterosexual marriage is the least restrictive.
While it may be possible to argue that prohibiting marriage in each personal law of a religious community, would be
necessary to ensure the interests of the adherents of that religion, the same cannot be said of the Special Marriage
Act, 1954. In case the aim of the legislation is seen as banning marriage equality per se, it is submitted that is not a
legitimate aim, and would, in any event, amount to a cyclical argument as submitted above.
(iv) Is the measure adequately balanced with the right of the individual?
277. The fourth and final prong of the proportionality analysis involves the crucial task of conducting a balancing
exercise. The Court is called upon to legitimise the "social importance of the limitation on a constitutional right" [K.S.
justify its existence on this prong is considered to have a disproportionate impact on the right-holder [K.S.
278. In this analysis, the effect of denial of a host of valuable legal rights, as well as the de-legitimization of non-
heterosexual relations (and consequently the stigmatization of non-heterosexual persons), has to be considered. This
prohibition is to be weighed against an alleged societal interest in maintaining the status quo. It is submitted that
permitting marriage equality will not, in any manner, harm the strength and stability of traditional marriage. On the
other hand, failure to recognise marriage equality results in a drastic infringement of legal as well as constitutional
rights as mentioned above.
279. Further, here again the onus is upon the Union to show how exercise of the right to marry would adversely
impact the (rather ambiguous) legitimate State interest. It is submitted that the Union has failed to do so.
V. IS GRANTING THE RELIEF PRAYED FOR 'CREATING HAVOC'?
280. Ensuring equality has never been easy, but it is a Constitutional as well as a moral imperative. The Union has
given a list of laws that would require to be amended or interpreted so as to enable coherence in the law as regards
marriage equality.
281. However, if the list of enactments submitted by the Union in its Counter Affidavits is examined, in the context
of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, it can be seen that the alleged difficulties are largely chimerical. Interestingly, most
of the 'problematic' provisions are those relating to dowry. It is submitted that these provisions will not apply in cases
of same-sex marriage. Besides, dowry is a social and culturally accepted practice amongst a large number of
heterosexual persons. The law, however, proscribes dowry as it is a social evil, even though it may be recognized by
certain members of the community thus establishing that community acceptance has little to do with the legality of a
practice. Same-sex marriages, in any event, are far less likely to suffer from the ills of dowry.
282. A table is given below to explain which laws are affected by recognition of marriage equality under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954.
Section 376B, Indian Penal Code,
This provision is not affected by recognition of marriage equality. All that
1860
happens is that the offence of rape during a period of separation will not be
recognized in most same-sex marriages. This is, in any event, the norm in
heterosexual live-in relationships or with unmarried same-sex couples.
The mere use of the word 'husband' or 'wife' in a statute does not make non-
heterosexual marriages unworkable.
Section 498, Indian Penal Code,
The section will, at best, not apply to a same sex couple.
1860
Section 498A, Indian Penal Code,
The section will, at best, not apply to a same sex couple.
1860
Further, the ills of dowry, which is a social and cultural practice amongst a large
section of heterosexuals, are unlikely to exist for same-sex couples.
Section 304B, Indian Penal Code,
The section will, at best, not apply to a same sex couple.
1860
Further, as stated in the comment above, the ills of dowry are unlikely to exist
for same-sex couples.
Section
113A,
113B,
Indian
Since the substantive provisions in relation to dowry will not apply, there is no
Evidence Act, 1872
occasion for these sections to apply to a same-sex marriage.
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961
These provisions will not apply to a same-sex couple.
Section 125, Code of Criminal
This provision will, at best, not apply to same sex couples.
Procedure, 1973
The effect would be an additional remedy would not be available for same sex
couples. This might be challenged in appropriate, independent, proceedings.
However, this in itself, would not make marriage equality unworkable.
Domestic Violence Act, 2005
These provisions, if marriage equality is recognized, will result in lesbian partners
or non-biological females having access to the law, with men being excluded.
This is in conformity with heterosexual marriages as well and would hardly result
in any unworkability.
Section 2 (b), Special Marriage
These provisions will still apply in the case of a non-heterosexual marriages. The
Act, 1954
Counter Affidavit has highlighted provisions referring to 'wife' and 'ancestress'
without recognizing that this is a reference to the parents or ancestors rather
than to the married couple.
Section 4, Special Marriage Act,
This provision would continue to apply. If the married spouse is a male the age
1954.
of marriage would be 21, and if she is a female the age would be 18. This
differentiation exists with a heterosexual marriage in any event. There is nothing
in the provision which makes the marriage unworkable.
Section 12, 22, 23 and 27,
These provisions would apply in case of same-sex couples. In the case of
Special Marriage Act, 1954
transgenders, these provisions may have to be read down to include the word
'spouse'
Section 15, Special Marriage Act,
Since the present petition pertains solely to recognition of marriage under the
1954
Special Marriage Act, this provision has no application.
Section 31, Special Marriage Act,
These provisions, if marriage equality is recognized, will result in lesbian partners
1954
or non-biological females having the right conferred by the provision. This is in
conformity with heterosexual marriages as well and would hardly result in any
unworkability.
Section 36 and 37, Special
These provisions would have to be read down to include the word spouse.
Marriage Act, 1954
283. The above table shows that no major changes are required in the law to recognize marriage equality. In any
event, if there are further provisions in the law which apply differentially, the same could be challenged in separate
proceedings which would be decided on a case-to-case basis. Finally, it is submitted that legislative drafting cannot
defeat constitutional rights. If needed, this Hon'ble Court will have to issue a declaration that all laws concerning
marriage, where the term used is husband and/or wife, will mean a spouse in the case of non-heterosexual marriages.
VI. EFFECT ON CHILDREN
284. The Union has finally argued that permitting marriage equality might result in an adverse psychological
impact on children . There is no evidence that has been submitted to this effect. On the contrary, the current
literature seems to suggest that children in non-heterosexual relationships are more likely to be well adjusted than
72
children in, say single parent families. The same study suggests that it is important to recognize marriage to ensure
the well-being of children in same-sex couples. At any rate, many same-sex couples in India are already raising
children. 73 By not recognizing the relationship these children have to both of their parents, the law in fact makes their
well-being precarious, especially in cases where their legally recognized parent dies or the relationship breaks down.
Recognition of same-sex marriages is essential for the protection of children being raised by same-sex couples, rather
than an impediment thereto. Therefore, if anything, the data shows that there is a compelling state interest in
recognizing marriage equality.
FILED BY
KARANJAWALA & CO.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 06.04.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA AT NEW DELHI
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) No. 08 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Dr. Kavita Arora & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ann
Respondents
AND
W.P. (C.) NO. 1141/2022
In the Matter of:
Aditi Anand & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS FILED BY ARUNDHATI KATJU, ADVOCATE ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
[Time Sought : 2 hrs]
INTRODUCTION 3
SUBMISSIONS 6
A. Article 21 protects the right to found a family and the right to a meaningful family life 6
(a) The right to found a family and enjoy a meaningful family life are protected under Article 21
7
(b) The right to found a family in international and comparative law 9
International law protects the right to found a family and to meaningful family life for LGBTQ couples 9
Comparative law also protects the right to found a family and meaningful family life 17
Just like opposite sex couples, LGBTQ couples also aspire to a meaningful family life 20
(c) The right to a meaningful family life is not limited to a "biological" man, "biological" woman, and the children
born to them 22
(d) Sociological and psychological impact of childrearing by LGBTQ parents 23
(e) The law defines "family" and "household" broadly and is not limited to a "biological" man and woman and
their children 28
(f) Surrogacy and adoption are available only to married couples, thus, denying LGBTQ couples the right to found
a family 30
B. A Child's right to a meaningful family life under Article 21, and its best interest, is protected by
recognizing its parents' relationship through marriage 32
(a) A child has a right to a legal relationship with both parents 32
(b) Marriage equality furthers the best interest of the child 35
C. Marriage equality is a facet of dignity under Article 21 of the Constitution of India 39
D. Denying LGBTQ couples the right to marry violates Article 14 qua them and their children 43
(a) Denying LGBTQ couples the right to marry denies them equal protection of laws 43 Marriage is both a legal
and a social institution 43 Benefits, privileges and obligations of marriage 44
(b) There is no intelligible differentia in classification of opposite-sex couples and LGBTQ couples for purpose of
marriage 45
The ability to procreate is not an intelligible differentia 45
There is no intelligible differentia based on 'mental or psychological growth' of children raised by LGBTQ
parents 46
A Classification based on a core individual trait of the excluded persons is prohibited by Article 15 47 The so
-called 'normative basis' does not justify excluding LGBTQ couples from the institution of marriage 48
(c) Excluding LGBTQ couples has no rational nexus with the object of the SMA orof social welfare legislation 50
E. This is a fit case for this Hon'ble Court to exercise its power under Article 32 51
F. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 should be read expansively to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality or struck down 54
(a) The limiting part of a statute may be struck down to enlarge the class 54
(b) This Court should apply the principle of updating construction 55
G. International and Comparative Law and the Supreme Court of India 58
(a) The Role of this Court's Jurisprudence in International and Comparative Law 58
(b) The Role of International and Comparative Law in Indian Fundamental Rights Jurisprudence
61
CONCLUSION 62
APPENDIX A Definitions of Family in various statutes 64
APPENDIX B Illustrative list of benefits conferred by law upon married couples and their
children 70
APPENDIX : COMMENT ON WORKABILITY OF THE Special Marriage Act, 1954 109
INTRODUCTION
Dr. Kavita Arora & Ankita Khanna [T.C. (C.) no. 08 of 2023]
285. Dr. Kavita Arora, a psychiatrist, and Ankita Khanna, a therapist, are part of the team that built North India's
leading clinic specializing in mental health and learning disabilities for children and young adults. Petitioners have
been in a committed relationship for over ten years. They live together. They share finances. They look after Petitioner
no. 1's father, who is over 90 years old. They go on vacations with their parents. And when they are ill, they care for
each other.
286. Petitioners are like any other couple you might meet, except they both are women.
287. Simple things a married couple takes for granted pose an undue burden for the Petitioners. For the longest
time, Ankita did not have any proof of residence, even though Kavita owns the flat they live in. When Ankita needed a
passport to travel abroad, she could not avail of address proof as Kavita's wife. To avail an address proof that was
acceptable to passport authorities, Ankita's only option was to change her address with a nationalised bank. She first
had to change her address at a private bank, based on which she changed her address in the account with a
nationalised bank. Therefore, when Kavita and Ankita visited the local police station to complete police verification to
obtain Ankita's passport, they had to convince the police officer that Ankita and Kavita lived together in the home
Kavita owns, but was not her tenant. Despite the parties' explanation, the police officer conducting Ankita's address
verification could not understand why the parties lived together and finally put down Ankita as Kavita's tenant.
288. Kavita and Ankita approached the Marriage Officer [Annexure P-11 @ pg. 116] under the Special Marriage
Act, 1954 seeking registration of their marriage thereunder. On 30.09.2020, Kavita and Ankita reached the office of
the SDM-Kalkaji at 9 : 45 am with all the relevant documents in original as well as three witnesses.
289. They were not permitted to enter the SDM office building for their appointment. At 11 : 45 am only their
counsel was permitted to enter. On realising that Kavita and Ankita were seeking registration of a same-sex marriage,
Respondent no. 2 Marriage Officer/SDM South-East Kalkaji stated that he would not register their marriage. The
Marriage Officer did not pass any formal order of rejection and verbally indicated that he would not solemnize the
marriage of the Petitioners. Therefore, Kavita and Ankita were denied even the opportunity to file their application
[Annexure P-10 @ pg. 114].
Aditi Anand and Susan Diaz [W.P. (C.) NO. 1141/2022]
290. Aditi and Susan have been in a committed relationship and lived together in a shared household for more than
a decade. They share household responsibilities, care for each other in sickness and health, and hold out to the world
that they are a couple. They shifted to New Delhi during the COVID-19 pandemic after having lived together in
Mumbai for 7 years.
291. Aditi and Susan are also parents, raising a child together. With the full support of their families, Aditi went
ahead for single-parent adoption. She and Susan take equal responsibility for nurturing, loving, and bringing up their
child but despite the deep emotional bonds built by both sets of parents and grandparents with the child, Susan, her
parents, and her siblings have no legal relationship with their child, the existing legal framework does not allow Susan
and Aditi to marry, and hence to be parents together.
292. As LGBTQ persons, the Petitioners faced many challenges due to their sexual orientation. Each struggled with
sorrow, shame, guilt, and fear during their youth. They were fortunate that when they opened up to their families
about their sexual orientation and their relationship, their families responded with love and acceptance.
293. Today Aditi and Susan are part of a happy family, where they have a loving relationship with each other's
parents and siblings. To have a successful marriage is hard work for any couple, but Aditi and Susan had to go the
extra mile to make their relationship work and to bring their two families together since they had to do all of this
without the social and legal adhesion provided by the institution of marriage. In the eyes of the law, their happy family
is no family at all.
294. Both sets of Petitioners seek the following reliefs from this Hon'ble Court:
1)
A writ of mandamus declaring that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is unconstitutional insofar as it does not
provide for solemnization of marriage between an LGBTQ couple; OR
2) A writ of mandamus declaring that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ought to apply to all couples regardless of
their gender identity and sexual orientation, and reading the SMA so as to apply to all couples irrespective of
their gender identity and sexual orientation.
295. In addition, Kavita and Ankita seek a writ of mandamus directing the Sub-Divisional Magistrate South-East
Kalkaji as Marriage Officer, South East District, Delhi to register their marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
SUBMISSIONS
A. Article 21 protects the right to found a family and the right to a meaningful family life
296. Time and again, this Hon'ble Court has enriched the rights enjoyed by citizens by expounding the
unenumerated rights protected under Article 21. Petitioners submit that Article 21 encompasses the right to found a
family and the right to a meaningful family life.
297. Having children is one of life's great joys. It strengthens the bond between any couple, broadening and
deepening their relationship. The trust, love, and commitment that a couple has for each other increases manifold as it
encompasses their children. The right to found a family and the right to a meaningful family life cannot be denied to
LGBTQ couples merely on grounds of their sexual orientation and gender identity.
298. In Navtej Singh Johar, this Hon'ble Court held that "(h)istory owes an apology to LGBT people and their
families..." (para 644). This Court rightly found that an apology was owed, not to LGBT people alone, but to their
families as well. Recognizing that LGBTQ couples enjoy the right to marry is a recognition of the dignity and humanity
of not only the couple but also of their children, parents, and all the family members with whom they together make
up the social fabric.
299. Petitioners rely on domestic and international law in support of their submission that Article 21 encompasses
the right to found a family and the right to a meaningful family life.
(a) The right to found a family and enjoy a meaningful family life are protected under Article 21
300. Article 21 of the Constitution protects the right to found a family and enjoy a meaningful family life for all
citizens, including LGBTQ couples.
301. This Hon'ble Court in K.S. Puttaswamy has recognised that the right to privacy includes the "rights of same-
sex couples - including the right to marry; rights as to procreation, contraception, general family relationships, child-
bearing, education, data protection, etc." (paragraph 479, R.F. Nariman, J., concurring opinion). The rights
enumerated herein are all crucial aspects of the protection of family life.
include non-traditional, modern or atypical forms, which are as real as their traditional counterparts. They too need
legal recognition. They are equally deserving of the protection of law, including the benefit of social welfare legislation.
Petitioners submit that these benefits under social welfare legislation in essence protect the right to a meaningful
family life. In para 26 of Deepika Singh, this Hon'ble Court held that:
The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists of a
single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation, to begin with. Familial relationships may take the form
of domestic, unmarried partnerships, or queen relationships. A household may be a single-parent household for any
number of reasons, including the death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the guardians and caretakers
(who traditionally occupy the roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may change with remarriage,
adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be typical but they are as real as their
traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally deserving not only of protection
under the law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The black letter of the law must not
be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional ones. The same undoubtedly holds true
for women who take on the role of motherhood in ways that may not find a place in the popular imagination.
303. The right to a meaningful family life has also been recognized by the Delhi High Court in various judgments.
OnLine HRC 31, held that:
38. Religious nuances apart, in our country, marriage is considered a sacred institution. The institution of
marriages entails the right of spouses to live together and to raise a family, which right must receive support of the
community as also of the State since it is central to human life as we understand it.
41.
Drawing upon the covenants contained in the ICCPR, we hold that the 'family', being the natural and
fundamental unit of society, is entitled to protection of its integrity against arbitrary interference by the State.
the decision of the House of Lords in Huang V. Secy. of State for the Home Dept., (2007) 2 AC 167, held that:
48. We have no doubt that the right to meaningful family life which allows a person to live a fulfilling life and
helps in retaining her/his physical, psychological and emotional integrity would find a place in the four corners of
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
305. Under statutory law, the right to found a family and the right to meaningful family life finds expression inter
alia in Section 12(1) of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 which provides that no child shall be
separated from parents or immediate family on the ground of being transgender, except on an order of a competent
court, in the interest of such child.
306. Hence, Petitioners submit that this Hon'ble Court ought to declare that the right to found a family and to a
meaningful family life is part of the Right to Life under Article 21 of the Constitution.
(b) The right to found a family in international and comparative law
International law protects the right to found a family and to meaningful family life for LGBTQ couples
307. International covenants impute a positive obligation on the Respondent Union to protect the family as a
natural and fundamental group unit of society. They also illuminate the Right to Life, enshrined under Article 21, to
include the right to found a family and to a meaningful family life. These rights extend to all couples, including LGBTQ
couples.
308. India is a signatory to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. All these covenants enshrine the right to found a family.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
309. Articles 1275 and 1676 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights declare that men and women of full age,
without limitations due to race, nationality, or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. Article 16 further
declares that the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society
and the State, and that men and women are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage, and at its
dissolution.
310. Interpreting Article 16 with respect to LGBTQ couples, in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT 60/04,
the Constitutional Court of South Africa interpreted Article 16 UDHR broadly to hold that it was not intended to apply
only to heterosexual couples. The Court held, in poetic terms, that all forms of family are entitled to the equal
protection of law:
101. The statement in Article 16(3) of the UDHR that the family is the natural and fundamental group unit in
society, entitled to protection by the state, has in itself no inherently definitional implications. There is nothing in
the international law instruments to suggest that the family which is the fundamental unit of society must be
constituted according to any particular model. Indeed, even if the purpose of the instruments was expressly to
accord protection to a certain type of family formation, this would not have implied that all other modes of
establishing families should for all time lack legal protection.
149. At the heart of these principles lies the notion that in exercising its legislative discretion Parliament will
have to bear in mind that the objective of the new measure must be to promote human dignity, the achievement of
equality and the advancement of human rights and freedoms. This means in the first place taking account of the
fact that in overcoming the under-inclusiveness of the common law and the Marriage Act, it would be inappropriate
to employ a remedy that created equal disadvantage for all. Thus the achievement of equality would not be
accomplished by ensuring that if same-sex couples cannot enjoy the status and entitlements coupled with the
responsibilities of marriage, the same should apply to heterosexual couples. Leveling down so as to deny access to
civil marriage to all would not promote the achievement of the enjoyment of equality. Such parity of exclusion
rather than of inclusion would distribute resentment evenly, instead of dissipating it equally for all. The law
concerned with family formation and marriage requires equal celebration, not equal marginalisation; it calls for
equality of the vineyard and not equality of the graveyard.
311. A press release issued by the Office of High Commissioner of Human Rights on 25.11.2018 further clarifies
that Article 16 of the UDHR is not intended to limit marriage rights to heterosexual couples. Rather, it states that both
genders shall have an equal right to marry rather than stipulating that they must marry someone of the opposite
sex 77.
77
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966
312. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights grants similar protections to families as the
fundamental group unit of society and protects families against arbitrary and unlawful interference. Article 17(1)
states that no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home, or
correspondence, non to unlawful attacks on his honor or reputation. Article 17(2) states that everyone has the right to
protection of the law against such interference or attacks.
313. Further, Article 2378 states that the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled
to protection by the society and the state. State parties are directed to take appropriate steps to ensure equality of
rights and responsibilities of spouses during marriage and at its dissolution. Article 26 ICCPR79 emphasizes that
all
persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law.
314. Article 23 ICCPR and Article 26 ICCPR are to be read together. The United Nations Humans Rights Committee
in
X V. Colombia CCPCR/C/89/D/1361/2005, relying on Article 26 ICCPR, held that Article 26 prohibits sexual
orientation discrimination:
7.2 The Committee notes that the author was not recognized as the permanent partner of Mr. Y for pension
purposes because court rulings based on Act No. 54 of 1990 found that the right to receive pension benefits was
limited to members of a heterosexual de facto marital union. The Committee recalls its earlier jurisprudence that
the prohibition against discrimination under article 26 comprises also discrimination based on sexual orientation.
In this context, the Committee finds that the State party has violated article 26 of the Covenant by denying the
author's right to his life partner's pension on the basis of his sexual orientation.
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966
315. Article 10 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognizes that the family
is the natural and fundamental group unit of society. It, therefore, requires States to give the widest possible
protection to the family, especially when families are responsible for the care and protection of dependent children.
Crucially, the ICESCR also enjoins States to take special measures to protect children without any discrimination
based on parentage.
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989
316. The Convention on the Rights of the Child deepens the right to found a family by recognizing that States must
respect the rights and duties of parents to in turn enable children to exercise their rights. Article 281 prohibits
discrimination against a child based not only on her own race, colour, sex, language, religion, political on other opinion,
national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth or other status, but also on the traits of her parents or legal
guardian. Article 5 requires Parties to the Convention to respect the responsibilities, rights and duties of parents or,
where applicable, the members of the extended family or community as provided for by local custom, legal guardians
or other persons legally responsible for the child, to provide, in a manner consistent with the evolving capacities of the
child, appropriate direction and guidance in the exercise by the child of the rights recognized in the present
Convention.
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 1979
317. Specifically, in the context of women, Article 16 of the Convention on Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women, enshrines the right to choose one's spouse:
(1) States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all matters
relating to marriage and family relations and in particular shall ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women
(a) The same right to enter into marriage;
(b) The same right freely to choose a spouse and to enter into marriage only with their free and full consent;
(c) The same rights and responsibilities during marriage and at its dissolution;
(d) The same rights and responsibilities as parents, irrespective of their marital status, in matters relating to
their children; in all cases the interests of the children shall be paramount;
Yogyakarta Principles, 2007
Principles conform to the fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution of India and held that:
355. We may hasten to add, that the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law
in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity discussed below, which were also referred to by
Radhakrishnan, J. in NALSA, conform to our constitutional view of the fundamental rights of the citizens of India
and persons who come to this Court.
319. Principle 24 of the Yogyakarta Principles, which have been recognised by this Hon'ble Court as
aforementioned, states that:
"Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Families exist in
diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or gender
identity of any of its members."
320. Regional human rights tribunals, implementing regional covenants, have also upheld the right of LGBTQ
couples to form families.
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 1950 (i.e. the European Convention on
Human Rights)
321. The European Court of Human Rights in Oliari V. Italy, 2015 ECHR 176 held that the absence of a legal
framework allowing for recognition and protection of an LGBTQ relation violated the right of LGBTQ persons under
Article 8 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, i.e. Right to respect for
private and family life82.
American Convention on Human Rights, 1969
322. In 2018, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights held that all kinds of families are entitled to protection of
the State. The Court issued an advisory opinion (Advisory Opinion OC-24/17) to Costa Rica that signatories of the
American Convention on Human Rights are obliged to legalize LGBTQ marriages. The Court held that:
179. In the Court's opinion, there is no doubt that - for example - a single-parent family must be protected in
the same way that the grandparents who assume the role of parents of a grandchild. Likewise, adoption is
unquestionably a social institution that, in certain circumstances, allows two or more persons who do not know each
other to become a family. Also, pursuant to the considerations set out in Chapter VU of the Opinion, a family may
also consist of persons with different gender identities and/or sexual orientations. All these models require
protection by society and the State because, as mentioned previously (supra para. 174), the Convention does not
protect a single or a specific model of a family.
191. Bearing this in mind, the Court finds no reason to ignore the family relationships that same-sex couples
who seek to undertake a life project together may establish by means of permanent emotional ties, typically
characterized by cooperation and mutual support. In the Court's opinion, it is not its role to give preference to or
distinguish one type of family tie over another. However, the Court finds that, under the Convention, it is the
obligation of States to recognize such family ties and protect them.
221. The Court notes that, in order to deny the right of access to the institution of marriage, it is typically
asserted that the purpose of marriage is procreation and that such a union could not meet this purpose. The Court
finds that this assertion is incompatible with the intention of Article 17 of the Convention, which is the protection of
the family as a social reality. Moreover, the Court considers that procreation is not a characteristic that defines
conjugal relationships, because affirming the contrary would be demeaning for couples -whether married or not
who, for whatever reason, are unable or unwilling to procreate.
323. Hence, international law uniformly recognizes the right to found a family and to equal protection in matters of
family life. These rights have been extended to LGBTQ couples. International law further recognizes that families are
diverse and are entitled to the equal protection of law. Most importantly, international law recognizes that respect for
parenthood is crucial for children to in turn enjoy their rights in full. LGBTQ couples also enjoy these rights under
international law which ought to be recognized and protected by this Hon'ble Court.
Comparative law also protects the right to found a family and meaningful family life
324. Constitutional courts around the world, including in countries in the global south, have recognized marriage
equality both under international covenants and their own Constitutions as a facet of protecting family life.
down the Defence of Marriage Act, 1996 (DOMA) which denied federal recognition for LGBTQ marriages. The Court
recognized that denying marriage hurt LGBTQ couples and their children:
This places same-sex couples in an unstable position of being in a second-tier marriage. The differentiation
demeans the couple, whose moral and sexual choices the Constitution protects, see Lawrence, 539 U.S. 558, and
whose relationship the State has sought to dignify. And it humiliates tens of thousands of children now being raised
by same-sex couples. The law in question makes it even more difficult for the children to understand the integrity
and closeness of their own family and its concord with other families in their community and in their daily lives.
326. In Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015), the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the US
Constitution guaranteed a fundamental right to LGBTQ couples to marry on the grounds, inter alia, that the right to
privacy protects matters of family life:
A first premise of the Court's relevant precedents is that the right to personal choice regarding marriage is
inherent in the concept of individual autonomy. Indeed, the Court has noted it would be contradictory "to recognize
a right of privacy with respect to other matters of family life and not with respect to the decision to enter the
relationship that is the foundation of the family in our society."
A third basis of protecting the right to marry is that it safeguards children and families and thus draws meaning
from related rights of childrearing, procreation, and education. The marriage laws at issue here thus harm and
humiliate the children of same-sex couples.
Fourth and finally, this Court's cases and the Nation's traditions make clear that marriage is a keystone of our
social order.
For that reason, just as a couple vows to support each other, so does society pledge to support the couple,
offering symbolic recognition and material benefits to protect and nourish the union.
327. The Supreme Court of Nepal in Sunil Babu Pant V. Nepal Government, (2008) 2 NJA LJ 262, relied inter alia
upon Articles 23 and 26 of ICCPR, and Article 10 of ICESCR to hold that "it is an inherent right of an adult to have
marital relation with another adult with his/her free consent and according to her/his will. The Court further held that:
LGBTI people, do obviously possess equal rights as others for the enjoyment of the rights guaranteed by these
international covenants such as right to marry with free consent, right to form a family, noninterference on privacy,
non discrimination on the grounds of race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinions, national or social
origin, birth or other status.
328. In 2017, the Taiwan Constitutional Court (Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 748) held that marriage could not
be restricted to opposite-sex couples:
The current provisions of the Marriage Chapter do not allow two persons of the same-sex to create a union of
intimate and exclusive nature for the purpose of living a common life. This is obviously a gross legislative flaw. To
such extent, the provisions of the Marriage Chapter are incompatible with the spirit and meaning of the freedom of
marriage as protected by Article 22 of the Constitution.
329. Ecuador's Constitutional Court (10-18-CN/19), ruled to overhaul the country's laws and hold that legislation
prohibiting same-sex marriage was discriminatory and unconstitutional, and that same-sex couples enjoy equal rights.
330. The Constitutional Court of Austria (G-258-259 of 2017) held that the denial of marriage equality was
discriminatory and legalized same-sex marriage.
331. The Constitutional Court of Slovenia (Decision No. U-1-486/20, Up-572/18), legalized same-sex marriage and
adoption by same-sex couples. It held that allowing marriage and adoptions only for opposite-sex couples violated the
constitutional prohibition against discrimination. It further held that such discrimination cannot be justified by the
traditional meaning of marriage as a union of husband and wife, nor can it be justified by the special protection of
family. Equally, the Court held, its judgment did not diminish the importance of the traditional family, and in
particular not the biological family, for the best interests of the child3.
332. Thus Constitutional courts have protected the rights of LGBTQ couples to marry as a facet of their right to
enjoy a meaningful family life. India cannot be left behind in the march of civilizations in matters of marriage equality.
By recognizing marriage equality, this Hon'ble Court brings its weight to bear on this international judicial consensus
and enables and encourages other constitutional courts to protect marriage rights for their own citizens.
Just like opposite sex couples, LGBTQ couples also aspire to a meaningful family life
333. Inasmuch as LGBTQ couples enjoy all rights guaranteed under the Constitution, the right to found a family
and to a meaningful family life must extend to them as well. Access to the institution of marriage, with its concomitant
rights, benefits and obligations, is one of the key ways in which this right is protected under Indian statutory law.
Denying LGBTQ couples access to the institution of marriage fragments their family unit. Dr. Kavita Arora and Ankita
Khanna [T.C. (C.) no. 08/2023], despite having been a couple for over a decade, are legally strangers to each other.
The denial of this right harms them emotionally, financially, and socially.
334. The milestones that an opposite-sex couple takes for granted - including simple things, like opening a joint
bank account or locker, or creating address proof for one's spouse - were a hard-fought battle for Kavita and Ankita.
For the longest time, Ankita did not have any proof of residence, even though Kavita owns the flat they live in. This
became particularly difficult when Ankita had to apply for a passport to travel abroad. To create address proof that was
acceptable to passport authorities, Ankita's only option was to first change her address with a nationalised bank.
Ankita first had to change her address at a private bank, based on which she then changed her address in her account
in a nationalised bank. Passports are only completed on police verification of the given address. Even on receiving the
passport, both Kavita and Ankita had to visit the local police station to convince them that they lived together in the
home Kavita owns, even though Ankita was not Kavita's tenant. Despite this, the police officer in charge of Ankita's
address verification put her down as Kavita's tenant.
335. One of the basic ways in which married couples deepen their relationship is when one spouse, typically the
wife, moves into the other's home. Opening a joint account or creating joint rights in the home are all ways of offering
economic security and thereby indicating to one's spouse that one hopes for a stable and long-lasting relationship. It
would never occur to an opposite-sex married couple to declare the wife a tenant of her husband, and the police, as a
State agency, would never countenance such a declaration. As an LGBTQ couple, Kavita and Ankita have had to work
hard to bring meaning to their relationship when the State does not recognize their family. Opposite-sex married
couples rarely have to face these challenges, which invariably create friction and weaken a couple's relationship.
336. Denying marriage equality is even more debilitating when the couple has children. With full support of their
families, Aditi went ahead for single parent adoption [W.P.(C) no. 1141/2022]. Their child has a deep relationship with
not only Aditi and Susan but also their parents, siblings, uncles and aunts. Both sides have been involved equally in
the child's upbringing and have shared responsibilities equally. The child has brought together not just two people as
parents but has acted like glue bringing two families together in an indelible bond. However, the lack of legal
recognition means that while one parent has a legal relationship with their child, the other parent is unrecognized qua
the child in law, even though they are raising their children together. In these circumstances, Aditi, Susan and their
child are denied the right to a meaningful family life.
(c) The right to a meaningful family life is not limited to a "biological" man, "biological" woman, and the
children born to them
337. Contrary to what the Union argues in its Counter Affidavit, the right to a meaningful family life is not reserved
only for a conventional family consisting of a biological man, biological woman and the children born of their union
what the Union calls "the Indian family unit".
338. The Union contends that marriage gives rise to joint responsibility for supporting and raising children born of
the marriage, and ensuring their proper mental and psychological growth in the most "natural" way possible. To
contend that LGBTQ couples are incapable or unworthy of raising children violates the right to dignity of LGBTQ
couples and their children.
339. The argument about a "natural" way of conceiving and raising children is simply old wine in a new bottle, re-
agitating arguments about "natural" and "unnatural" unions that have been squarely dismissed by this Hon'ble Court
418. If it is difficult to locate any intelligible differentia between indeterminate terms such as "natural" and
"unnatural", then it is even more problematic to say that a classification between individuals who supposedly
engage in "natural" intercourse and those who engage in "carnal intercourse against the order of nature" can be
legally valid.
419. In addition to the problem regarding the indeterminacy of the terms, there is a logical fallacy in ascribing
legality or illegality to the ostensibly universal meanings of "natural" and "unnatural" as is pointed out in a scholarly
article
340. As regards the Union's contention that marriage is intrinsically connected to the duty and responsibility for
supporting and raising children, it is submitted that married LGBTQ couples who have children will raise them with the
same sense of duty and responsibility as opposite-sex married couples. In any event, Johar has already rejected
arguments that marriage is only for the purpose of procreation (see Dipak Mishra, CJI and Khanwilkar, J. at paragraph
230). Further, there is no restriction, statutory or otherwise, barring opposite-sex couples from marrying if they cannot
have children because of their age or infertility, nor upon couples who choose not to have children.
341. Moreover, children grow mentally and psychologically in a range of families including joint families, single-
parent families, to unmarried mothers, adoptive parents, with foster parents, step-parents, or extended family
members who may raise children as guardians, or may be conceived through IVF or with a sperm or egg donor these
are all "natural" families where children enjoy "proper mental and psychological growth" and such families are also
recognized and protected by law. To impose a restriction arising from procreation while no such restriction is placed on
opposite-sex couples amounts to sex and sexual orientation discrimination.
(d) Sociological and psychological impact of childrearing by LGBTQ parents
342. The Union in its Counter-Affidavit makes a bare assertion, without any source or authority, that there could be
an adverse impact on the mental and psychological growth/upbringing of children raised by LGBTQ parents.
343. To the contrary, the Indian Psychiatric Society vide its Position Statement dated 03.04.2023 has stated that
LGBTQ persons should be treated like all citizens of this country, and enjoy rights inter alia to marriage, adoption, and
military service. The IPS emphasised that
There is no evidence to indicate that individuals on the LGBTQIA spectrum cannot partake any of the above. On
the contrary, discrimination which prevents the above, may lead to mental health issues.
344. The IPS has also cautioned that a child raised by same-sex parents may face discrimination and hence should
be raised in a gender-neutral, unbiased environment, with the family, community, school and society in general being
"sensitized to protect and promote the development of such a child, and prevent stigma and discrimination at any
cost"
85
345. Since the issue of child-rearing has been raised by the Union of India, this Court may take judicial notice of
some data relating to the condition of children in this country. As per data from the National Family Health Survey
(2019-2021), 35.4% of children under age 5 are stunted and 32.1% are underweight Only 26% of mothers
consumed iron folic acid for 180 days or more when they were pregnant. Unsurprisingly then, 67.1% of children aged
6-59 months are anaemic (<11.0 g/dl)87.
346. Only 13.6% of children aged 5 years attended pre-primary school during the school year 2019-20. Amongst
rural children this figure drops to 12%88
347. The neonatal mortality rate per 1000 live births is 18 in urban areas, 27.5 in urban areas, and 24.9 in total. 89
The infant mortality rate per thousand live births is 26.6 in urban areas, 38.4 in rural areas, and 35.2 in total. 90 The
under-five mortality rate is 31.5 in urban areas, 45.7 in rural areas, and 41.9 in total91.
348. In In Re Contagion of COVID 19 Virus in Children Protection Homes, S.M.W. (C) no. 4/2020, this Hon'ble Court
has highlighted that children of this country need care and attention especially those who do not have a home or who
have lost their parents. The Court felt the need to protect the interest of all the children of this country. Vide Order
dated 28.05.2021, this Hon'ble Court directed all the District Authorities to upload the information of children who
have become orphans after March 2020 on the portal of National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR)
'Bal Swaraj'.
349. The NCPCR submitted an Affidavit dated 31.05.2021 before this Hon'ble Court submitting data of children who
have been abandoned or orphaned from March 2020 till 29.05.2021, i.e. 1,882 children who have been orphaned and
abandoned.
350. Thereafter, as per Press Release dated 02 March 2022 by the Ministry of Women & Child Development,
Government of India, there were 10,386 children who were orphaned and 492 children who were abandoned during
the pandemic, as identified in the 'Bal Swaraj' Portal set up by NCPCR as per the directions of this Hon'ble Court in
S.M.W.(C no. 4/202092
351. Yet contrary to what one might expect, during the years of the COVID pandemic, the number of adoptions has
only fallen. As per data provided by the Central Adoption Resource Authority, in FY 2019-2020, there were 3,351
domestic adoptions and 394 foreign adoptions; in FY 2020-21 there were 3,142 domestic adoptions and 417 foreign
adoptions; FY 2021-22, there were 2,991 domestic adoptions and 414 foreign adoptions. Overall, in the last decade,
the number of domestic adoptions has fallen, from 5,693 in 2010-11 to 2,991 in 2021-2022
352. LGBTQ couples can and do provide loving and nurturing homes to the many children in this country who have
been either orphaned, abandoned, or surrendered for adoption. Like all adoptive parents they are concerned for their
children's basic needs, like medical care, basic vaccinations, nutrition, and education, which may have suffered or not
even reached their children in their biological homes or in institutional care. And being adoptive parents, they work
hard to integrate as a family provide their children with a stable and loving home environment which is the basic need
of a child who has emerged from institutional care.
353. Aside from having children by means of adoption, LGBTQ persons have -and always have had - children
biologically, through surrogacy, and adoption, both as couples and singly.
354. The Union's apprehension that the children of LGBTQ parents will suffer adverse psychological outcomes
because of their parents' sexual orientation is unfounded. To the contrary, social science literature from a number of
countries concurs that "children living with two same-sex parents fare just as well as children residing with two
different-sex parents" In terms of their academic performance in school, children raised by LGBTQ parents perform
as well as (if not better) than children raised by different-sex parents. 95 Non is there any difference amongst children
raised by LGBTQ parents and opposite-sex parents in terms of their emotional functioning, sexual preference, gender
role behaviour, etc.96.
355. Comparable and at times superior outcomes found in children raised by LGBTQ parents are seen despite the
fact that children living with LGBTQ parents may come from a variety of situations, such as foster homes, orphanages
and divorced/separated heterosexual families97.
356. LGBTQ couples face significant obstacles in achieving parenthood, ranging from lack of social support to
having to undertake time consuming and costly procedures to have children (adoption, fertility treatment or
surrogacy). It is self-evident that "same-sex couples who become parents in spite of these obstacles must have a
strong desire to become parents. "98
357. LGBTQ couples may also face psychosocial distress due to their sexual orientation. In jurisdictions which have
legalized LGBTQ marriage, studies now show that legalization of LGBTQ marriage and the legitimacy this brings to
LGBTQ couples leads to fewer depressive symptoms, lower levels of stress and more meaning in their lives99
358. A Taiwanese study conducted after the legalization of marriage in 2019 reported a decrease in the depressive
symptoms of sexual minority respondents, and greater prevalence of disclosure to friends and family. These positive
changes were seen in both partnered and unpartnered respondents The legalization of LGBTQ marriage enhances
well-being of not just those LGBTQ persons who are in a relationship but also for young persons who are growing up.
After legalization of LGBTQ relationships, studies report a reduction in the proportion of high school students reporting
suicide attempts101 The beneficial impact on the mental health of LGBTQ couples has a positive impact not only on
them but also on their children, parents and loved ones.
(e) The law defines "family" and "household" broadly and is not limited to a "biological" man and woman
and their children
359. The Union asserts in its counter affidavit that the Indian family unit consists of a "biological man as a
'husband', a biological woman as a 'wife' and the children born out of the union between the two, who are reared by
the biological man as father and the biological woman as mother."
360. The aforementioned conception of family ignores the reality of millions of Indians who do not live within the
confines of the narrow definition set out by the Union, viz. single parent families, biological parent and a step-parent,
adoptive parents, children raised by grandparent(s)/aunt/uncle/elder sibling, children raised in orphanages, etc.
361. Taken to its logical conclusion, the Union's argument suggests that a widow or widower should never remarry,
because a stepfather or stepmother can never truly form an "Indian family unit" with their stepchildren. To take
another example, the Union's argument would suggest that children should not be taken or given in adoption, as
adoptive families cannot have the same bonds as biological families.
362. To the contrary, the law provides different definitions of family under different statutes. There is no one
conception of the so-called "Indian family unit". Under the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)
Act, 1986, it includes a person's brothers and sisters; under the Delhi (Urban Areas) Tenants Reliefs Act, 1961, family
includes dependent grandchildren. By contrast, the IBC, 2016 includes dependent parents in the definition of family as
well. Under some statutes, such as Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, only unmarried daughters are included in
the definition of family, whereas under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, or the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme,
1952, both married and unmarried children form part of the family. Other laws specify that families include persons
related by blood, adoption and marriage (Mental Healthcare Act, 2017); or specifically include step-children and half-
siblings (Carriage by Air Act, 1972). By contrast, the Plantation Labour Act, 1951 excludes illegitimate children.
3 The law also provides a broad definition of "household". For instance S. 2(f) of the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, includes persons "normally residing together and sharing meals"; the Census
Manual defines a household as "a group of persons who normally live together and take their meals from a common
kitchen." Definitions of family and household under Indian law are set out in Appendix A (internal page no. 64)
herewith.
364. This Court's jurisprudence also recognizes and values family ties beyond the merely biological. In K.A. Paul
V.
Reforms Act, 1963, a stepson is as much a member of the family as a son. In Kirtikant D. Vadodaria V. State of
support her, can claim maintenance from her stepson under Section 125 CrPC.
365. Thus the Union's argument that the "Indian family unit" consists only of a "biological" man, woman, and
biological children is belied by Indian statutory and case law.
(f) Surrogacy and adoption are available only to married couples, thus, denying LGBTQ couples the right to
found a family
366. One of the ways the law protects a married couple's right to a meaningful family life is by enabling them to
adopt a child, avail of surrogacy or to avail of assisted reproductive technologies as a couple. Denying LGBTQ couples
the right to marry in turn denies them the right to found a family through surrogacy, ART, or adoption.
367. Section 2(1)(h) of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 only allows a "legally married Indian man and
woman" to opt for surrogacy. Section 2(1)(e) of the Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021 only
allows an "infertile married couple" to avail of assisted reproductive technology.
368. Further, while a single or divorced person may adopt under Section 57(3) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 there is no provision for an unmarried couple to adopt. Clause 5(3) of the Adoption
Regulations, 2022 passed under the JJ Act, 2016 states that "(n)o child shall be given in adoption to a couple unless
they have at least two years of stable marital relationship except in the cases of relative or step-parent adoption".
369. Further, as per Office Memorandum no. S.No. CARAICA013/1/2022 Administration dated 16 June 2022 issued
by the Central Adoption Resource Authority, live-in couples cannot adopt at all, either as a couple or as "single"
persons:
2. It has been decided to go with the earlier decision of 14th Steering Committee Meeting held on 10th May,
2018 that the cases of single PAP in a live-in relationship with a partner will not be considered eligible to adopt a
child and their registration from concerned agencies/authorities will not be considered for approval.
370. Hence, while the law enables opposite-sex couples to have children, it actively obstructs LGBTQ couples who
wish to do so. When LGBTQ couples do have children, their children have a legal relationship with only one parent. The
unrecognized parent is not recorded as a parent in the child's birth certificate or school certificates. She is not
recognized as a parent in matters of guardianship, custody, or visitation, and even distant relatives would take
precedence in case anything would happen to the recognized parent.
371. Raising a child is one of life's most enriching and challenging experiences. For the State to enable parenthood
for some individuals and opposite-sex couples while denying it to all LGBTQ and live-in couples is a patent violation of
Article 14 of the Constitution. There is no basis to say that only opposite-sex married couples can provide a stable
home environment to a child, inasmuch as unden law the matrimonial reliefs of divorce and judicial separation remain
open to them. The State cannot bestow the right to have children only upon married couples while excluding LGBTQ
couples from the institution of marriage altogether.
B. A Child's right to a meaningful family life under Article 21, and its best interest, is protected by
recognizing its parents' relationship through marriage
(a) A child has a right to a legal relationship with both parents
372. Families with LGBTQ parents are nothing new. They have existed throughout history. The reality of this
country is that families are diverse, and numerous LGBTQ couples have children. At least three of those couples are
before this Court today : the present Petitioners, Aditi and Susan; Uday and Parth [W.P. (C.) no. 1020/2022]; and
Vaibhav and Parag [T.C. (C.) no. 10/2023], who had a daughter, Parineeti Vinoo Mehta-Jain in March 2023, and hope
to welcome their son, Vivaan Renu Mehta-Jain, due in May 2023. In the absence of marriage, their children - as
children of an LGBTQ couple - have a legal relationship with only one parent. Their children have no claims, rights or
entitlements vis--vis the other parent.
373. The law mandates that when a married opposite-sex couple adopts a child, or has a child through surrogacy or
ART, their child shall have all the rights and privileges available to a natural child under any law for the time being in
force. However, the child of an LGBTQ couple is not accorded such rights and privileges in respect of one of its parents,
because its parents' relationship has no legal recognition.
374. Section 2(2) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 defines adoption as the
process whereby the adopted child is permanently separated from the biological parents, and becomes the lawful child
of the adoptive parents with all the rights, privileges and responsibilities that are attached to a biological child.
Similarly, under Section 12 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 an adopted child is deemed to be the
child of his or her adoptive father or mother for all purposes with effect from the date of the adoption. All the ties of
the child in the birth family are severed from the date of the adoption and replaced by those created by the adoption
in the adoptive family.
375. In cases of surrogacy, Section 8 of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 lays down that a child born out of
surrogacy procedure, shall be deemed to be a biological child of the intending couple or intending woman and the said
child shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges available to a natural child under any law for time being in force.
376. In case of ART, Section 31 of the Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021, states that a child
born through use of ART would be a biological child of the commissioning couple and it shall be entitled to all the
rights and privileges available to a natural child from the commissioning couple under any law for the time being in
force.
377. By contrast, the child of an LGBTQ couple enjoys no such protections. To the contrary, the child is denied a
range of rights and benefits under law inter alia in matters of succession, being recognised as a dependant or
entitlement to compensation in case of death of the unrecognized parent, claiming maintenance, etc.
378. The unrecognized parent is not recorded as a parent in the child's birth certificate or school certificates. She is
not recognized as a parent in matters of guardianship, custody, or visitation, and even distant relatives would take
precedence in case anything would happen to the recognized parent.
379. This Court has time and again held that a child needs the love and affection of both parents and has
accordingly granted legal recognition and protections to both parents. In Yashita Sahu V. State of Rajasthan, (2020) 3
23. The concept of visitation rights is not fully developed in India. Most courts while granting custody to one
spouse do not pass any orders granting visitation rights to the other spouse. As observed earlier, a child has a
human right to have the love and affection of both the parents and courts must pass orders ensuring that the child
is not totally deprived of the love, affection and company of one of her/his parents.
380. In Anuj Chaturvedi V. Jyoti, SLP (C) No. 6303/2017, vide Order dated 04.10.2019, while dealing with the
issue of visitation rights this Hon'ble Court held that a child has a right to the affection of both his parents and the
Family Court shall ensure that visitation rights are granted in such a manner.
recognized that:
81. Children of today are citizens and the future of a nation. The confidence and happiness of a child who is
showered with love and affection by both parents is totally distinct from that of a child who has no parents or has
lost a parent and still worse, is that of a child whose paternity is in question without there being any cogent reason
for the same. The plight of a child whose paternity and thus his legitimacy, is questioned would sink into a vortex of
confusion which can be confounded if Courts are not cautious and responsible enough to exercise discretion in the
most judicious and cautious manner.
382. Just like a child born during the subsistence of a valid marriage, children of LGBTQ couples are also entitled to
the confidence and happiness of a secure legal relationship with both their parents.
383. For a child to have no legal relationship with one parent because the law fails to recognize its parents'
relationship violates the child's right to a meaningful family life and the right to dignity which is protected by Article
21 of the Constitution.
(b) Marriage equality furthers the best interest of the child
384. This Hon'ble Court has held the best interest of the child to be of paramount consideration when dealing with
15.1 It is a well-settled principle of law that the courts while exercising parens patriae jurisdiction would be
guided by the sole and paramount consideration of what would best subserve the interest and welfare of the child,
to which all other considerations must yield. The welfare and benefit of the minor child would remain the dominant
consideration throughout.
12. We understand that the aforesaid principle is aimed at serving twin objectives. In the first instance, it is to
ensure that the child grows and develops in the best environment. The best interest of the child has been placed at
the vanguard of family/custody disputes according the optimal growth and development of the child primacy over
other considerations. This right of the child is also based on individual dignity.
13. Second justification behind the "welfare" principle is the public interest that stand served with the optimal
growth of the children. It is well recognised that children are the supreme asset of the nation. Rightful place of the
child in the sizeable fabric has been recognised in many international covenants, which are adopted in this country
as well
51. The doctrines of comity of courts, intimate connect, orders passed by foreign courts having jurisdiction in the
matter regarding custody of the minor child, citizenship of the parents and the child, etc., cannot override the
consideration of the best interest and welfare of the child and that the direction to return the child to the foreign
jurisdiction must not result in any physical, mental, psychological, or other harm to the child.
387. This Hon'ble Court has held the guiding principle in child custody cases to be the principle of the best interest
of the child rather than the rights of the parents. This Hon'ble Court in Gaurav Nagpal V. Sumedha Nagpal, (2009) 1
43. The principles in relation to the custody of a minor child are well settled. In determining the question as to
who should be given custody of a minor child, the paramount consideration is the 'welfare of the child' and not
rights of the parents under a statute for the time being in force the foundation of a happy home is love, sharing of
joys and sorrows, and not in that sense bricks and concrete. There should be cementing of hearts and not
cementing of floors and walls The best way to make children good said a learned author is to make them happy."
388. The principle of the best interest of the child also finds place in the statutory framework for adoption of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. Section 3(iv) of the Act requires the Central and State
governments and all agencies to make all decisions based on the primary consideration that they are in the best
interest of the child and to help the child to develop full potential. Similarly, Section 13 of the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956 requires the welfare of the minor to be the paramount consideration when a court appoints
any person as guardian of a Hindu minor.
389. The principle is also enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which India is a party:
Article 3
1. In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of
law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration.
2. States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being,
taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally
responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.
Article 21
States Parties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the best interests of the
child shall be the paramount consideration
390. It is evidently in the best interest of the child to be in a stable home environment with parents who love the
child and are invested in providing him or her the best upbringing that they can. Where the parents wish to marry,
allowing them to do so enhances the stability of the home through the institution of marriage. It detracts from the
child's best interest to deny his or her parents the right to marry.
391. The best interest of the child would require recognising marriages of LGBTQ couples. This in turn recognises
rights and obligations of both parents towards their children. Denying such legal recognition to the children of LGBTQ
couples despite the willingness of both parents to provide love and care inter alia violates the principle of best interest
of the child. The US Supreme Court in United States V. Windsor, 570 U.S. 744 while striking down the Defense of
Marriage Act, which excluded LGBTQ marriages recognised under state law from federal recognition held that:
And it humiliates tens of thousands of children now being raised by same-sex couples. The law in question
makes it even more difficult for the children to understand the integrity and closeness of their own family and its
concord with other families in their community and in their daily lives.
392. In the absence of the right to marriage, the unrecognized parent is reduced to the status of a caregiver. She
cannot travel freely with the child, visit a Government office for the child's Aadhar or passport, cannot open a joint
bank account with the child, cannot make gifts to her child without raising tax liabilities, cannot avail deductions in tax
for contributions to the child's insurance, PPF on investments, or open a Sukanya Samridhi account for her child.
393. The unrecognized parent is reminded on a daily basis that legally she is a stranger to her child. Despite all her
love, dedication and sacrifice, she has no claims or rights in respect of her child and her child has no claim on right to
her. If she were ever to separate from her partner or if her partner were to die, she would lose custody and not even
have visitation rights. This is a gross violation of the right to meaningful family life and the right to dignity of LGBTQ
families.
394. Thus, the law discriminates against children of LGBTQ couples who are denied the same rights and protections
from two parents that a child of an opposite-sex, married couple enjoys. This is described in more detail in the
discussion under Part D of these submissions on Article 14.
C.
Marriage equality is a facet of dignity under Article 21 of the Constitution of India
395. At its heart, this case is about dignity. For a couple to go through life without legal recognition is an affront to
their dignity. When a child is told, in ways big and small, that her family is not worthy of protections because her
parents are not like other parents, that child grows up knowing that it is in a class of its own - a class that is lesser.
396. "Dignity" is not an empty word to be casually bandied about in our constitutional vocabulary. Those who are
denied dignity know the pain of its absence. Marriage is one of the key ways in which society and the law adorn a
family with dignity.
397. On 30.09.2020, with the Constitution in their hearts, Kavita and Ankita approached the Respondent no. 2 in
Transfer Case (Civil) no. 08/2023, i.e. the Marriage Officer (SDM, South East Delhi, Kalkaji) seeking solemnization of
their marriage under the Special Marriage Act. They reached the SDM's office with all their relevant documents and
their close friends and colleagues to act as their witnesses.
398. Dr. Arora and Ms. Khanna were not permitted to enter the SDM's office building for their appointment. At
11.45 AM, only their counsel was permitted to enter. On realizing that Petitioners were seeking registration of an
LGBTQ marriage, the Respondent no. 2 Marriage Officer stated he would not register the marriage of the Petitioners.
He did not pass any formal order of rejection of their application, but verbally indicated that he would not solemnize
their marriage. The Petitioners' email of the same date to the SDM elicited no response.
399. The Marriage Officer, SDM East-Kalkaji [Respondent no. 2 in T.C. (C.) no. 08/2023], a State actor, did not feel
compelled to dignify Kavita and Ankita's application even with a rejection. No similarly placed opposite-sex couple
seeking to marry - an inter-caste couple, for example, or an inter-faith couple would have been denied even entry to
a government office. To the contrary, this Hon'ble Court, in a slew of judgments starting with Lata Singh V. State of
400. Vaibhav Jain and Parag Mehta [Petitioners in T.C. (C.) no. 10/2023] also received discriminatory treatment
from the office of the Consulate General of India, New York. Vaibhav and Parag were married in the District of
Columbia, USA. On 05.03.2020, Vaibhav and Parag approached the office of the Consulate General to complete the
formalities to register their marriage under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969. They carried all their documents. They
were also accompanied by three close friends as witnesses.
401. Vaibhav and Parag took a token and awaited their turn. After realizing that the Petitioners were an LGBTQ
couple, the Consular Officer asked Vaibhav and Parag to wait until she consulted her supervisor. Thereafter, the
Petitioners were requested to meet the Consular Officer in an interview room, where she explained to them that they
would not receive a Certificate of Marriage. When the Petitioners asked the Consular Officer why they were denied a
Certificate of Marriage, the Consular Officer offered the circular logic that Parag's name was not updated as "spouse" in
Vaibhav's passport. At this juncture, the Petitioners supplied a copy of the Certificate of Marriage issued by the
Superior Court of District of Columbia Marriage Bureau as a proof of their marriage. The Petitioners also reminded the
officers of the 2nd Respondent that inclusion of the spouses' name in a passport was not a requirement under S. 17 of
the FMA.
402. Thereafter, the Consul for Visa and Attestation met the Petitioners. He told them that registering their
marriage was not permitted under the Consulates' guidelines. When Vaibhav and Parag asked him which guidelines
these were, he could not name any. They then asked for a formal rejection of their application, but he said he was not
willing to do so. Finally, when Parag asked the Consul for Visa and Attestation directly, "are you denying us the right
to register our marriage because we are a same-sex couple?", the Consul said yes.
403. Dr. Kavita Arora is one of only a handful of child psychiatrists in this country - a country with the world's
largest adolescent population, according to UNICEF103 She is one of the founders of Children First, where Ankita
Khanna is a psychologist and art therapist. Children First is arguably one of India's leading outpatient providers of
child, adolescent and young adult mental health services, treating a variety of mental health concerns such as
neurodevelopmental differences and delays, academic, social and behavioural concerns and treating children in need of
emotional work. At the time of filing their writ petition, Children First had offices in Delhi and Gurugram with 2
psychiatrists, 29 psychologists, 11 occupational therapists, and 13 administrative and support staff.
404. This treatment was meted out to Kavita and Ankita, who are mental health professionals and have sufficient
means in life, and could retain counsel for their process. Vaibhav and Parag were equally well placed. It is relevant to
consider how the State would treat less fortunate couples absent a suitable declaration as prayed for in these
petitions.
405. In Puttaswamy, this Hon'ble Court has held that "family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all
integral to the dignity of the individual." (Para 298).
406. In Johar, this Court held as under:
139. The fundamental idea of dignity is regarded as an inseparable facet of human personality. Dignity has been
duly recognized as an important aspect of the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution. In the international
sphere, the right to live with dignity had been identified as a human right way back in 1948 with the introduction of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The constitutional courts of our country have solemnly dealt with the
task of assuring and preserving the right to dignity of each and every individual whenever the occasion arises, for
without the right to live with dignity, all other fundamental rights may not realise their complete meaning.
482. Social institutions must be arranged in such a manner that individuals have the freedom to enter into
relationships untrammeled by binary of sex and gender and receive the requisite institutional recognition to perfect
their relationships. The law provides the legitimacy for social institutions. In a democratic framework governed by
the rule of law, the law must be consistent with the constitutional values of liberty, dignity and autonomy."
407. When at every instance of State interaction, LGBTQ couples are met with apathy and ostracism, this Court
ought to find that the State has failed to secure the promise of dignity guaranteed by the Constitution. Denying LGBTQ
persons access to the institution of marriage has an adverse impact on their mental health and well-being. It is within
the power of this Hon'ble Court to right this wrong, as it did by decriminalizing Section 377 IPC. It is submitted that
legal recognition and acceptance of a marginalized community brings with it a collective sigh of relief where it once
brought collective grief and depression.
408. The social institution of marriage that has been arranged in the language of the SMA and in turn, sanctions
the actions of the Respondents in an exclusionary manner, violates the constitutional values of liberty, dignity and
autonomy of the Petitioners.
D. Denying LGBTQ couples the right to marry violates Article 14 qua them and their children
(a) Denying LGBTQ couples the right to marry denies them equal protection of laws
Marriage is both a legal and a social institution
409. A family is a unit of ties and bonds, both horizontally between spouses and vertically between parents and
children. These bonds are recognized and protected by law - by statutory law, as described hereinafter, but in essence
these protections flow from Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
410. The law confers a bouquet of protections and benefits on a married couple, the first of which is the status of
marriage itself. While marriage is a social institution, the status of being married is a benefit conferred by law. The law
honours this status above other relationships by clothing it with wide-ranging protections, discussed in more detail
hereinbelow.
Benefits, privileges and obligations of marriage
411. The law bestows wide-ranging benefits, protections and obligations upon a married couple and their children.
These include:
Employment laws, including in matters of pension, compassionate appointment, nomination for a range of
employment benefits and protections like gratuity.
Matrimonial rights and remedies
Tax laws
Inheritance
Privileged communications
Organ donation
Protection against dowry demands
Presumption that children born during the marriage are legitimate
412. There are numerous statutes, rules and regulations providing benefits to a married couple in different ways,
wherefrom the Petitioners are excluded, impacting their day to day lives. An illustrative list of more than 20 such
statutes which confer benefits upon a married couple and their children, are listed out in detail in Appendix B
(internal page no. 70) to these submissions. This excludes numerous office memoranda, notifications, regulations and
other delegated legislation which also confer matrimonial benefits.
413. While society respects, honours and protects a married couple, these legal protections also strengthen and
protect a couple's relationship. A young bride entering her husband's home knows she has a legal right to live there.
The newlywed couple does not have to worry about making their wills, as the law has stepped in at the moment of the
marriage. Every time they encounter the State - whether to obtain a ration card, seek address proof, open a bank
account or be recognised as a dependant, or get a pension or compassionate appointment or maternity benefits, the
couple's relationship and the wife's status in her new family is protected by law.
414. In Navtej Singh Johar, this Hon'ble Court held that LGBTQ persons like all other citizens are entitled "to the
full range of constitutional rights including the liberties protected by the Constitution" [paragraph 618.2]. On similar
lines, in Pavan V. Smith [137 S.Ct. 2075 (2017)], the US Supreme Court held that Obergefell V. Hodges [576 U.S.
644] proscribes any disparate treatment between LGBTO and opposite-sex couples in relation to the benefits conferred
by marriage. Petitioners submit that LGBTQ and opposite sex couples are thus equally entitled to participate in the
legal and social institution of marriage.
415. Since the status of being married and a legally recognised family is itself a benefit conferred by various laws,
the denial of marriage to LGBTQ couples and the resultant non-recognition of their family is a denial of their right to
equality before law and the equal protection of law.
(b) There is no intelligible differentia in classification of opposite-sex couples and LGBTQ couples for
purpose of marriage
416. The classification of opposite-sex couples and LGBTQ couples for the purpose of marriage is not based on any
intelligible differentia.
The ability to procreate is not an intelligible differentia
417. The State has attempted to justify the classification in its Counter Affidavit by arguing that the "Indian family
unit" consists of a biological man, biological woman and children born of their union. This is in essence an argument
based on the so-called ability of opposite-sex couples to procreate. However, the ability or the choice to procreate is
not a prerequisite for marriage under any law. Matrimonial laws, both civil and personal, extend to cover opposite-sex
couples who are unable to procreate due to medical issues or age, or who choose not to procreate. Further,
matrimonial and other statutes extend all the benefits of marriage to opposite-sex couples in the years before they
procreate. Further, many opposite-sex couples have children through adoption, surrogacy or ART, in the same way as
LGBTQ couples.
418. It is apposite to note that all the rights, privileges, benefits and entitlements flowing from the institution of
marriage, such as inheritance, maintenance, exclusive right to companionship of spouse, etc., have no relation to non
are dependent upon the ability or choice to procreate.
419. A classification based on the so-called ability to procreate has no nexus to the object of protecting family or
conferring benefits of social welfare legislations. The law does not discriminate between a child conceived naturally,
and a child who is adopted or born through surrogacy or ART. Rather the law expressly prohibits such
discrimination
There is no intelligible differentia based on 'mental or psychological growth' of children raised by LGBTQ parents
420. The Union further seeks to justify the classification by contending that marriage places upon the couple an
obligation to ensure their children's "proper mental and psychological growth in the most natural way possible".
Petitioners have already demonstrated, above, that children of LGBTQ parents have either similar or even better
outcomes as compared to children raised by opposite-sex couples.
421. In fact, even while awarding custody of children, courts look to the child's best interest rather than
Hon'ble Court granted custody of a girl child to her maternal relatives over her father who had remarried:
43. A plethora of decisions of this Court endorse the proposition that in matters of custody of children, their
welfare shall be the focal point. Once we shift the focus from the rights of the contesting relatives to the welfare of
the minor children, the considerations in determining the question of balance of convenience also differ. We
are,
hence, convinced that the respondents will be in a position to provide sufficient love and care for the children until
the disposal of the guardianship application.
welfare of the child required he be returned back to the USA along with his father rather than stay in Bengaluru with
his mother. The Court also noted that since he was a naturalised US citizen he would have good avenues and
prospects there.
423. Hence, the Union cannot argue that there is an intelligible differentia based on the psychological and mental
impact on children of being raised by LGBTQ and opposite-sex parents so as to justify excluding LGBTQ couples and
parents from the institution of marriage.
A Classification based on a core individual trait of the excluded persons is prohibited by Article
15
424. The impugned statute seeks to classify LGBTQ couples and non-LGBTQ couples based on a core individual
trait, i.e. sexual orientation. Based on this classification, LGBTQ couples are excluded from the operation of the statute.
This exclusion violates Article 15.
425. In Johar, this Hon'ble Court held that:
637.3 Where a legislation discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an individual, it cannot
form a reasonable classification based on an intelligible differentia.
637.5 A person's sexual orientation is intrinsic to their being. It is connected with their individuality, and their
identity. A classification which discriminates between persons based on their innate nature, would be violative of
their fundamental rights, and cannot withstand the test of constitutional morality.
638.2 The prohibition against discrimination under Article 15 on the ground of "sex" should therefore
encompass instances where such discrimination takes place on the basis of one's sexual orientation.
426. In fact, denying LGBTQ couples the right to marry denies their children the benefits conferred by various social
646, this Court held that a child cannot be discriminated against based on who her parents are:
Children do not choose their parents. To deny compassionate appointment though the law treats a child of a void
marriage as legitimate is deeply offensive to their dignity and is offensive to the constitutional guarantee against
discrimination (para 17).
The so-called 'normative basis" does not justify excluding LGBTQ couples from the institution of marriage
427. The State also argues that the intelligible differentia has a 'normative basis' that distinguishes heterosexual
couples from LGBTQ couples. The Counter Affidavit makes a bald assertion that 'on a normative level' society consists
of smaller units of family, which in turn are predominantly organised in a heterogenous fashion. This organisation of
the building blocks of society is premised on further continuance of the building blocks i.e. the family unit.
428. Essentially, the State's argument seems to be (i) that the discrimination against LGBTQ couples is justified
because that has always been the case, and (ii) if LGBTQ couples marry, the family unit will cease to exist
(presumably because LGBTQ couples cannot conceive children biologically).
429. The argument that 'it has always been so' does not justify sexual orientation discrimination any more than it
justifies any other form of discrimination. The Union would not, for example, dream of justifying caste discrimination
on such grounds.
430. Further, the State cannot justify the classification based on a traditional conception of marriage as a union
between a biological man and woman. This is nothing but an assertion that social morality allegedly does not support
marriage equality. To the contrary, the Petitioners before this court are deeply embedded in their families and
communities.
431. But even otherwise, this Hon'ble Court has repeatedly held that constitutional morality trumps social morality.
The Supreme Court is entrusted with the task of being a countermajoritarian institution and is duty bound to ensure
that the rights of minorities are not trampled upon. [See Senior Divisional Commercial Manager, South Central
(c) Excluding LGBTQ couples has no rational nexus with the object of the SMA or of social welfare
legislation
432. Moreover, sexual orientation has no rational or reasonable nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the
SMA of providing a uniform, civil form of marriage. The objects of the SMA were to provide a special form of marriage
which can be taken advantage of by any person in India, or an Indian citizen abroad, irrespective of the faith which
either party to the marriage may profess. The Act also allows persons who are already married under other forms of
marriage to register their marriages under SMA.
433. Excluding LGBTQ couples from the SMA also has no rational nexus with the object of social welfare legislation
to protect and confer benefits on a family.
434. The objects of the various social welfare legislations can be broadly categorised into:
a) regulation of certain activities to prevent misuse and to ensure safe and ethical practices, viz. surrogacy, assisted
reproductive technology and transplantation of human organs and tissues;
b) consolidate the law relating to certain aspects of social conduct and activities, viz. marriage, intestate succession
and adoption;
c) to give effect to international conventions ratified by India, viz. the Carriage by Air Act, 1972, which provides for
compensation to the family in case of a person's death
d) to protect families in the case of a person's death caused by accident, actionable wrong or employment injury,
viz. Employees' Compensation Act, 1923, the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
e) to provide benefits to certain classes of workers and their families, viz. gratuity, provident fund, pension, etc.
435. It is submitted that there is no nexus at all between the objects sought to be achieved by the aforementioned
Acts and a classification excluding LGBTQ couples and their families therefrom. To the contrary, the objects of the said
Acts would be better served by extending the benefits thereunder to LGBTQ couples and their families.
E. This is a fit case for this Hon'ble Court to exercise its power under Article 32
436. The Constitution of India expressly confers the power of judicial review upon this Hon'ble Court and the High
Courts under Articles 32 and 226. This Hon'ble Court in a catena of cases has held judicial review to be a part of the
basic structure of the Constitution. The Constitution of India is unique in making the right to move this Hon'ble Court
for the enforcement of fundamental rights, a fundamental right in itself.
437. Petitioners are before this Hon'ble Court under Article 32 of the Constitution because their rights have been
infringed. Kavita and Ankita approached the SDM but their application for solemnization was not even considered.
Aditi, Susan and their child are not legally recognized as a family. When Petitioners approach this Court under Article
32 of the Constitution, there can be no question of leaving their rights to the Parliament to decide.
438. This Hon'ble Court in State of West Bengal V. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal,
51. The Constitution of India expressly confers the power of judicial review on this Court and the High Courts
under Articles 32 and 226 respectively. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar described Article 32 as the very soul of the Constitution-
the very heart of it-the most important article. By now, it is well-settled that the power of judicial review, vested in
the Supreme Court and the High Courts under the said articles of the Constitution, is an integral part and essential
feature of the Constitution, constituting part of its basic structure. Moreover, Article 13 of the Constitution
not
only declares the pre-Constitution laws as void to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the fundamental
rights, it also prohibits the State from making a law which either takes away totally or abrogates in part a
fundamental right. Therefore, judicial review of laws is embedded in the Constitution by virtue of Article 13 read
with Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
439. In relation to judicial review of laws relating to civil liberties or where a question of violation of fundamental
88. In our opinion, therefore, while Judges should practice great restraint while dealing with economic statutes,
they should be activist in defending the civil liberties and fundamental rights of the citizens.
176. Regarding the view in Suresh Koushal case to the effect that the Delhi High Court in Naz Foundation case
had erroneously relied upon international precedents in its anxiety to protect the so-called rights of LGBT persons,
the nine-judge Bench was of the opinion that the aforesaid view in Suresh Koushal was unsustainable. The rights of
the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population, as per the decision in Puttaswamy, cannot be construed to
be "so-called rights" as the expression "so-called" seems to suggest the exercise of liberty in the garb of a right
which is illusory.
521. If a law discriminates against a group or a community of citizens by denying them full and equal
participation as citizens, in the rights and liberties granted by the Constitution, it would be for the Court to
adjudicate upon the validity of such a law.
441. In Senior Divisional Commercial Manager, South Central Railways V. S.C.R. Caterers, Dry Fruits, Fruit Juice
"(t) his Court, being entrusted with the task of being the counter-majoritarian institution, is duty-bound to ensure that
the rights of the downtrodden minorities and the members of the weaker sections of the society are not trampled
upon"
91. It must be understood that while a statute is made by the peoples' elected representatives, the Constitution
too is a document which has been created by the people (as is evident from the Preamble). The courts are
guardians of the rights and liberties of the citizens, and they will be failing in their responsibility if they abdicate
this solemn duty towards the citizens. For this, they may sometimes have to declare the act of the executive or the
legislature as unconstitutional.
443. Judicial review is one of the ways this Court fulfils its role as a countermajoritarian institution within the
constitutional scheme. By protecting constitutional morality against social morality, it protects minorities against the
tyrannies of majority rule. When it exercises its powers of judicial review, this Court tests legislation against the
fundamental rights guaranteed to the individual under the Constitution. It is submitted that the rights of sexual
minorities and transgender persons under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 are violated by matrimonial statutes. Hence, this
is a fit case for this Hon'ble Court to exercise its powers of judicial review.
F. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 should be read expansively to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality
or struck down
(a) The limiting part of a statute may be struck down to enlarge the class
444. If there is a statute which appears to violate the Constitution then this Hon'ble Court can either declare it
unconstitutional, or read it expansively to save its constitutionality. This is particularly true of statutes which are
intended to confer benefits upon a section of society.
82. If a law (whether primary or subordinate legislation) is found to be untenable on the touchstone of Article 14
by the constitutional court, one clear option for a constitutional court is that it can declare such law to be
unconstitutional and strike down the law. But, striking down a law, which confers some benefit on a class of people
ignoring others who are otherwise similarly situated in our opinion is not to be done as a matter of course. If the
benefit sought to be conferred by such a law is not repugnant to the Directive Principles of State Policy, striking
down the same would virtually amount to throwing away the baby with bath water.
446. This Hon'ble Court can enlarge the ambit of law, i.e. grant inductive relief by eliminating factors which create
the artificial classification leading to a discriminatory application of the law. This Hon'ble Court in D.S. Nakara V. Union
60. Said the learned Attorney - General that principle of severability cannot be applied to augment the class and
to
adopt his words severance always cuts down the scope, never enlarges it'. We are not sure whether there is any
principle which inhibits the Court from striking down an unconstitutional part of a legislative action which may have
the tendency to enlarge the width and coverage of the measure. Whenever classification is held to be impermissible
and the measure can be retained by removing the unconstitutional portion of classification, by striking down words
of limitation, the resultant effect may be of enlarging the class. In such a situation, the Court can strike down the
words of limitation in an enactment. That is what is called reading down the measure. We know of no principle that
'severance' limits the scope of legislation and can never enlarge it. To refer to the Jaila Singh's case (supra), when
for the benefit of allotment of land the artificial division between pre-1955 and post-1955 tenant was struck down
by this Court, the class of beneficiaries was enlarged and the cake in the form of available land was a fixed quantum
and its distribution amongst the larger class would protanto reduce the quantum to each beneficiary included in the
class. Similarly when this Court in Randhir Singh's case (supra) held that the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'
may be properly applied to cases of unequal pay based on no classification or irrational classification it enlarged the
class of beneficiaries. Therefore, the principle of 'severance' for taking out the unconstitutional provision from an
otherwise constitutional measure has been well recognised.
447. By applying well-recognised rules of statutory interpretation, this Hon'ble Court can expand the scope of the
statutes under challenge to include LGBTQ couples within their ambit.
(b) This Court should apply the principle of updating construction
448. This Hon'ble Court has also applied the principle of updating construction to account for social and
technological changes which were beyond the contemplation of the legislature at the time of enactment of the statute.
10. Statutory interpretation by Francis Bennion, 2nd Edn., Section 288 with the heading "Presumption that
updating construction to be given" states one of the rules thus (p.617)
(2) It is presumed that the Parliament intends the Court to apply to an ongoing Act a construction that
continuously updates its wording to allow for changes since the Act was initially framed (an updating construction).
While it remains law, it is to be treated as always speaking. This means that in its application on any date, the
language of the Act, though necessarily embedded in its own time, is nevertheless to be construed in accordance
with the need to treat it as current law.
In the comments that follow it is pointed out that an ongoing Act is taken to be always speaking. It is also,
further, stated thus (pp. 618-19)
"In construing an ongoing Act, the interpreter is to presume that Parliament intended the Act to be applied at
any future time in such a way as to give effect to the true original intention. Accordingly the interpreter is to
make allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since the Act's passing, in law, social condition,
technology, the meaning of words, and other matters. Just as the US Constitution is regarded as 'a living
Constitution', so an ongoing British Act is regarded as 'a living Act'. That today's construction involves the
supposition that Parliament was catering long ago for a state of affairs that did not then exist in no argument
against that construction. Parliament, in the wording of an enactment, is expected to anticipate temporal
developments. The drafter will try to foresee the future, and allow for it in the wording.
An enactment of former days is thus to be read today, in the light of dynamic processing received over the
years, with such modification of the current meaning of its language as will now give effect to the original
legislative intention. The reality and effect of dynamic processing provides the gradual adjustment. It is
constituted by judicial interpretation, year in and year out. It also comprises processing by executive officials".
expanded Section 125 CrPC to be read in a gender-neutral manner so that both sons and daughters are liable to
maintain their parents.
8. It is true that clause (d) has used the expression "his father or mother" but, in our opinion, the use of the
word 'his' does not exclude the parents claiming maintenance from their daughter. Section 2(y) CrPC provides that
words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Penal Code have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that code. Section 8 of the Indian Penal Code lays down that the pronoun 'he' and
its derivatives are used for any person whether male or female. Thus, in view of Section 8 IPC read with Section 2
(y) CrPC, the pronoun 'his' in clause (d) of Section 125(1) CrPC also indicates a female. Section 13(1) of the
General Clauses Act lays down that in all Central Act and regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context, words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include females. Therefore, the pronoun
'his' as used in clause (d) of Section 125(1) CrPC includes both a male and a female. In other words, the parents
will be entitled to claim maintenance against their daughter provided, however, the other conditions as mentioned
in the section are fulfilled.
13. After giving our best consideration to the question, we are of the view that Section 125(1)(d) has imposed a
liability on both the son and the daughter to maintain their father or mother who is unable to maintain himself or
herself. Section 488 of the old Criminal Procedure Code did not contain a provision like clause (d) Section 125(1).
The legislature in enacting Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 thought it wise to provide for the maintenance of the
parents of a person when such parents are unable to maintain themselves. The purpose of such enactment is to
enforce social obligation and we do not think why the daughter should be excluded from such obligation to maintain
their parents.
450. The principle of updating construction being a principle of statutory interpretation also applies where there has
been a change in the legal or socio-cultural context vis--vis when the statute was originally enacted.
451. If reading the provisions of the SMA as having gendered terminology violates the right of LGBTQ persons to
marry a person of their choice as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution, then the same ought to be read
expansively to include LGBTQ couples to save the law from the vice of unconstitutionality. It is settled law that if a
literal reading of a statute results in the violation of a fundamental rights of citizens, constitutional courts have the
power to read the said provisions so as to conform to the constitutional provisions
452. Reading the SMA in a gender-neutral manner presents no difficulty with respect to the workability of its
various provisions. A table on the workability of the various provisions of SMA has been appended to these Written
Submissions as Appendix C (internal page no. 109).
G. International and Comparative Law and the Supreme Court of India
(a) The Role of this Court's Jurisprudence in International and Comparative Law
453. As other leading constitutional courts become more conservative, this Hon'ble Court is a beacon of hope on
questions of rights and social justice amongst global constitutional courts. While this Hon'ble Court's judgements are
binding precedent throughout the territory of India under Article 141 of the Constitution, this Court's judgments also
carry great weight in and are cited by constitutional courts across the world, particularly in common law countries
across South Asia, South East Asia, Africa, Canada, and Australia.
454. For example, Puttaswamy quickly became a landmark judgment in comparative constitutional law. In Jason
Jones V. Attorney General of Trinidad & Tobago, (Claim no. CV 2017-00720 decided on 12th April 2018), the High
Court of Justice of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago held that Section 13 of the Sexual Offences Act (which made
the offence of buggery punishable with 25 years' imprisonment) and Section 16 (the offence of serious indecency,
punishable with imprisonment for five years) were unconstitutional under the Trinidad and Tobago Constitution. The
Hon'ble Court held that:
A felicitous exposition of what the right to privacy entails, to this court's mind, is summarized in the Supreme
Court of India decision in Puttaswamy V. Union of India. In that matter, a nine judge bench of the Supreme Court of
India handed down its decision in a 547 page judgment, containing six opinions, and ruled unanimously that
privacy is a constitutionally protected right in India despite there being no explicit right to privacy as found in their
Constitution. The right to privacy was held to exist based on the principle that the Indian Constitution is a living
Instrument and the Court sought to give effect to the values of the Constitution by interpreting express
fundamental rights protections as containing a wide range of other rights. As such, Article 21 of the Constitution
which provides that 'No person shall be deprived of his life or liberty expect according to procedure established by
law', was held to incorporate a right to privacy.
455. Citing paras 297 and 298 of Puttaswamy, the High Court of Justice noted that "the dicta coming out of
Puttaswamy emphasized the fact that sexual orientation is an essential attribute of privacy, which is inextricably linked
to human dignity. ,106
456. Puttaswamy has also been cited before the High Court of Kenya in Eric Gitari V. The Hon. Attorney General
(Petition no. 150 of 2016). Eric Gitari challenged the law criminalizing LGBTQ conduct in Kenya when the registration
of an NGO for LGBTIQ persons was rejected. Subsequently, the Kenyan Supreme Court ruled that the National Gay &
Lesbian Human Rights Commission must be allowed to officially register as a non-governmental organisation, holding
that it is unconstitutional to deny registration on the basis of the applicant's sexual orientation
457. Similarly, the High Court of Botswana in Attorney General V. Motshidiemang [MAHGB-000591 16] cited Johan
while decriminalising LGBTQ relations. The High Court noted that personal autonomy and choice must be respected on
matters of sexual preference. In November 2021, this Judgement of the High Court of Botswana was upheld by the
Court of Appeal of Botswana (High Court Civil Case no. MAHGB-00591-16).
458. The Court has expanded the scope of fundamental rights to include the right to health, to education, and to
marry a person of one's choice, amongst others. It has protected free speech and those unlawfully incarcerated.
Constitutional courts across the world refer to the Court's judgments, especially those in Commonwealth jurisdictions
that have similar laws because of their colonial history. Barring a few discordant notes, this Hon'ble Court has always
expanded freedom and protected individuals against the State and majoritarianism. In matters of sexual orientation
and gender identity equality particularly, it does so on a global stage.
459. Evidently, there is an increasing international judicial consensus around marriage equality. In Navtej Singh
Johar, this Hon'ble Court held:
564. This evolution has enabled societies governed by liberal constitutional values - such as liberty, dignity,
privacy, equality and individual autonomy - to move beyond decriminalisation of offences involving consensual
same-sex relationships. Decriminalisation is of course necessary to bury the ghosts of morality which flourished in a
radically different age and time. But decriminalisation is a first step. The constitutional principles on which it is
based have application to a broader range of entitlements. The Indian Constitution is based on an abiding faith in
those constitutional values. In the march of civilizations across the spectrum of a compassionate global order, India
cannot be left behind.
(b) The Role of International and Comparative Law in Indian Fundamental Rights Jurisprudence
460. International and comparative law is a global dialogue amongst international and constitutional courts which
together create jurisprudence on constitutionally protected human rights. This Hon'ble Court does not look to
international and comparative law merely 'follow' it. Rather, it finds that international and comparative law reflect, and
thus can enrich, the rights and freedoms guaranteed under the Indian Constitution.
wisdom reflected in judgments delivered by other constitutional courts provides a sound and appreciable confirmation
of the guarantees contained in the Indian Constitution.
5 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to another and that we must
therefore look at comparative law-making allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight of international
opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental rights for same-sex couples reflects a
growing consensus towards sexual orientation equality. We feel inclined to concur with the accumulated wisdom
reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees contained within the Indian
Constitution, but to provide a sound and appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about those guarantees.
462. Similarly, this Court has held that international covenants conform to the fundamental rights enshrined in the
Constitution of India. In the context of the Yogyakarta Principles, for example, this Court held in Johan that:
355. We may hasten to add, that the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law
in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity discussed below, which were also referred to by
Radhakrishnan, J. in NALSA, conform to our constitutional view of the fundamental rights of the citizens of India
and persons who come to this Court.
4 Conversely, constitutional guarantees are also illuminated by international conventions to which India is a
party1 In Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan, this Hon'ble Court held that:
14. The international conventions and norms are to be read into them in the absence of enacted domestic law
occupying the field when there is no inconsistency between them. It is now an accepted rule of judicial construction
that regard must be had to international conventions and norms for construing domestic law when there is no
inconsistency between them and there is a void in the domestic law.
CONCLUSION
464. In Navtej Singh Johar, this Hon'ble Court held that "History owes an apology to LGBT people and their
families..." (para 644). This Court rightly found that an apology was owed, not to LGBTQ people alone, but to their
families as well. Kavita and Ankita look after their parents together, but their parents are denied a dignified language
with which to address their child's partner, both to society and themselves. Aditi and Susan have a child but are
denied the right to be parents together.
465. Becoming parents, grandparents, or even in-laws - these are all rites of passage in life that are embedded in
our personhood and respected and celebrated in society. Denying LGBTQ couples the right to marry violates their right
to found a family and to a meaningful family life. It deprives their children of the rights and protections that all
children should enjoy.
466. LGBTQ couples are just like opposite-sex couples in the love, dignity and respect they wish to bestow on each
other. For the law to burden them with exclusion from its protections, and status of marriage itself, is an act of
discrimination that is constitutionally impermissible.
467. Hence it is submitted that the instant petitions ought to be allowed in favour of the Petitioner and against the
Respondents, in the interests of justice.
Drawn by:
Settled by:
Himanshu Suman
Arundhati Katju, Advocate
Ritika Meena
Advocates
Filed by:
W.P. (C.) no. 1141/2022 : Malak Bhat, AOR
T.C. (C.) no. 08/2023 : Shally Bhasin, AOR
APPENDIX A : Definitions of Family in various statutes
S.NO
Legislation
Provision defining Family
1.
Bonded
Labour
System
2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(Abolition) Act, 1976
-
h) "family", in relation to a person, includes the ascendant and
descendant of such person;
2.
Carriage by Air Act, 1972
5. Liability in case of death.
(2) The liability shall be enforceable for the benefit of such of the
members of the passengers family as sustained damage by reason of
his death.
Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "member of a
family" means wife or husband, parent, step-parent, grand-parent,
brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, child, step-child and
grandchild:
3.
Child and Adolescent Labour
2. Definitions - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act,
-
1986
(v) "family", in relation to an occupier, means the individual, the wife
or husband, as the case may be, of such individual, and their
children, brother or sister of such individual;
4.
Delhi (Urban Areas) Tenants
2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
Reliefs Act, 1961
(b) "family" means- (i) in relation to a person belonging to a joint
Hindu family, every member of such family; and (ii) in relation to
any other person, the person, the wife or husband, as the case may
be, and the dependent children and grand-children, of such person;
5.
Employees'
Provident
Fund
2. Definitions.-In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise
Scheme, 1952
requires-
(g) "family" means-
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether
married or unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's
widow and children:
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the
personal law governing him or the customary law of the community
to which the spouses belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall
no longer be deemed to be a part of the member's family for the
purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member subsequently intimates
by express notice in writing to the Commissioner that she shall
continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children,
whether married or unmarried, her dependant parents, her
husband's dependant parents and her deceased son's widow and
children:
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner
expresses her desire to exclude her husband from the family, the
husband and his dependant parents shall no longer be deemed to be
a part of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless
the Member subsequently cancels in writing any such notice;
Explanation.-In either of the above two cases, if the child of a
Member or, as the case may be, the child of a deceased son of the
Member has been adopted by another person and if, under the
personal law of the adopter, adoption is legally recognised such a
child shall be considered as excluded from the family of the Member:
6.
Employees' State Insurance Act,
2. Definitions.- In these rules, unless the context otherwise
1948
requires,-
(b) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an
employed person, namely:- -
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor child dependant upon the employed person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed
person and who is receiving education, till he or she attains the age
of twenty-one years;
(iv) an unmarried daughter;
(v) a son or daughter who is inform by reason of any physical or
mental abnormality or injury and is wholly dependant on the
earnings of the employed person, so long as the infirmity continues;
7.
Governors Act, (Emoluments,
2. Definition : In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
Allowances and Privileges) Act,
(c) "members of the family", in relation to a Governor, means the 2
1982
[spouse, dependent children and the dependent parents] of the
Governor.
8.
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
79. Definitions: In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
2016
(17) "immediate family" of the debtor means his spouse, dependent
children and dependent parents;
9.
Mental Healthcare Act, 2017
2. Definition : In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(h) "family" means a group of persons related by blood, adoption or
marriage;
10.
Merchant Shipping Act 1958
3. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(11A) "family" means-
(i) in the case of male, his wife, his children whether married or
unmarried, his dependent parents and his deceased son's widow and
children:
Provided that if a person proves that his wife has ceased under the
personal law governing him or the customary law of the community
to which the spouses belong to be entitled to maintenance she shall
no longer be deemed to be a part of such person's family for the
purpose of this Act unless such person subsequently intimates by
express notice, in writing, to the Central Government that she shall
continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of female, her husband, her children, whether married
or unmarried, her dependent parents, her husband's dependent
parents and her deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a person by notice in writing to the Central
Government expresses her desire to exclude her husband from the
family, the husband and his dependent parents shall no longer be
deemed to be a part of such person's family for the purpose of this
Act, unless such person subsequently cancels in writing any such
notice.
Explanation. In either of the above two cases, if the child, or, as the
case may be, the child of a deceased son, of a person has been
adopted by another person and if under the personal law of the
adopter adoption is legally recognised, such a child shall be
considered as excluded from the family of the first mentioned
person.]
11.
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
2. Definitions. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,
(h) "family", in relation to an employee, shall be deemed to consist
of-
(i) in the case of a male employee, himself, his wife, his children,
whether married or unmarried, his dependent parents 15 [and the
dependent parents of his wife and the widow] and children of his
predeceased son, if any,
(ii) in the case of a female employee, herself, her husband, her
children, whether married or unmarried, her dependent parents and
the dependent parents of her husband and the widow and children of
her predeceased son, if any:
Explanation.-Where the personal law of an employee permits the
adoption by him of a child, any child lawfully adopted by him shall be
deemed to be included in his family, and where a child of an
employee has been adopted by another person and such adoption is,
under the personal law of the person making such adoption, lawful,
such child shall be deemed to be excluded from the family of the
employee;
12.
Payment of Wages (Nomination)
2. Definitions.- - In these rules, unless the context otherwise
Rules, 2009
requires,-
(b) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an
employed person, namely:-
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor child dependant upon the employed person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed
person and who is receiving education, till he or she attains the age
of twenty-one years;
(iv) an unmarried daughter;
(v) a son or daughter who is inform by reason of any physical or
mental abnormality or injury and is wholly dependant on the
earnings of the employed person, so long as the infirmity continues;
13.
Plantation Labour Act, 1951
2. Definition- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(ee) "family", when used in relation to a worker, means-
(i) his or her spouse, and (ii) the legitimate and adopted children of
the worker dependent upon him or her, who have not completed
their eighteenth year,
[and includes parents and widow sister, dependent upon him or
her;)
14.
Real Estate (Regulation and
2. Definition : In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
Development) Act, 2016
(x) "family" includes husband, wife, minor son and unmarried
daughter wholly dependant on a person;
15.
Special Protection Group Act,
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
1988
-
(e) "members of immediate family" means wife, husband, children
and parents;
16.
Transgender Persons (Protection
2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
of Rights) Act, 2019
(c) "family" means a group of people related by blood or marriage or
by adoption made in accordance with law;
APPENDIX B Illustrative list of benefits conferred by law upon married couples and their children
I. Matrimonial Rights and Remedies
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Right to Maintenance
and Alimony
order/decree of maintenance may be enforced like a decree of a civil court
through the provisions which are available for enforcing a money decree, viz. civil
detention, attachment of property, etc.
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the wife
or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the
applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as,
having regard to the respondent's own income and other property, if any, the
income and other property of the applicant, the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case, it may seem to the court to be just, and any such
payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the immovable property
of the respondent.
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is, a change in the circumstances of either
party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may at the
instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner
as the court may deem just.
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has
not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he has had sexual
intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may at the instance of the other
party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may
deem just.
The Special Marriage Act, 1954
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any court exercising
jurisdiction under Chapter V or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any
decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on application made to it for the
purpose, order that the husband shall secure to the wife for her maintenance and
support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband's property, such gross sum or
such monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life,
as, having regard to her own property, if any, her husband's property and ability
the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may seem to
the court to be just.
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of
either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may,
at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such
manner as it may seem to the court to be just.
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order has
been made under this section has remarried or is not leading a chaste life, it
may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify or rescind any such order and
in such manner as the court may deem just.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
40. Permanent alimony and maintenance. (1) Any Court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on an application made to it for the purpose by either the
wife or the husband, order that the defendant shall pay to the plaintiff for her or
his maintenance and support, such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum,
for a term not exceeding the life of the plaintiff as having regard to the
defendant's own income and other property, if any, the income and other
property of the plaintiff, the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of
the case, it may seem to the Court to be just, and any such payment may be
secured, if necessary, by a charge on the movable or immovable property of the
defendant.
(2) The Court if it is satisfied that there is change in the circumstances of either
party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the
instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner
as the Court may deem just.
(3) The Court if it is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has
not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he had sexual
intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may, at the instance of the other
party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the Court may
deem just.
The Divorce Act, 1869
37. Power to order permanent alimony.- Where a decree of dissolution of
the marriage or a decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the
District Court may order that the husband shall], to the satisfaction of the Court,
secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum of money for
any term not exceeding her own life, as, having regard to her fortune (if any), to
the ability of the husband, and to the conduct of the parties, it thinks
reasonable; and for that purpose may cause a proper instrument to be executed
by all necessary parties.
Power to order monthly or weekly payments.-Ir every such case the Court
mav make an order on the husband for payment to the wife of such monthly or
weekly sums for her maintenance and support as the Court may think
reasonable:
Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes unable to make
such payments, it shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order,
or temporarily to suspend the same as to the whole or any part of the money so
ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order wholly or in part, as to
the Court seems fit.
2.
Right in respect of
The Hindu Marriage Act. 1955
joint property
27. Disposal of property.- In any proceeding under this Act, the court may
make such provisions in the decree as it deems just and proper with respect to
any property presented, at or about the time of marriage, which may belong
jointly to both the husband and the wife.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
42. Disposal of joint property.- In any suit under this Act the Court may
make such provisions in the final decree as it may deem just and proper with
respect to property presented at or about the time of marriage which may belong
jointly to both the husband and wife.
3.
Restitution
of
Conjugal Rights
has held that this remedy serves a social purpose as an aid to the prevention of
break-up of marriage and is not violative of either Articles 14 or 21 of the
Constitution.
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
9. Restitution of conjugal rights.- When either the husband or the wife has,
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other aggrieved
party may apply, by petition to the district court, for restitution of conjugal rights
and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such
petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be
granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation.-Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse
for withdrawal from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be
on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
The Special Marriage Act. 1954
22. Restitution of conjugal rights. - When either the husband or the wife has,
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the
aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district court for restitution of
conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements
made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application
should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation.-Whe a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse
for withdrawal from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be
on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act. 1936
36. Suit for restitution of conjugal rights.- Where a husband shall have
deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with his wife, or where a wife
shall have deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with her husband,
the party so deserted or with whom cohabitation shall have so ceased may sue
for the restitution of his or her conjugal rights and the Court, if satisfied of the
truth of the allegations contained in the plaint, and that there is no just ground
why relief should not be granted, may proceed to decree such restitution of
conjugal rights accordingly.
The Divorce Act, 1869
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights.-
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn
from the society of the other, either wife or husband may apply, by petition to
the District Court, for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is
no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
4.
Right to sue third
This Hon'ble Court in Pinakin Mahipatray Rawal V. State of Gujarat, (2013) 10
party who attempts
to alienate affection
intrusions or assaults on the marriage relationship by another, whether or not
of one's spouse
associated with "extramarital sex", his or her continued overtures or sexual
liaisons can be construed as something akin to an assumption of risk that his/her
conduct will injure the marriage and give rise to an action. But all the same,
a
person is not liable for alienation of affection for merely becoming a passive
object of affection. The liability arises only if there is any active participation,
initiation or encouragement on the part of the defendant. Acts which lead to the
loss of affection must be wrongful, intentional, calculated to entice the affection
of one spouse away from the other, in order to support a cause of action for
alienation of affection. For proving a claim for alienation of affection it is not
necessary for a party to prove an adulterous relationship."
11. Right of spouse and children for maintenance
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Right to maintenance
125. Orden for maintenance of wives, children and parents.- (1) If any
of wife and children
person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain-
under Section 125 of
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
the
Criminal
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to
Procedure Code
maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order
such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such
child, father or mother, at such monthly rate, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child
referred to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if
the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if
married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding
regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order
such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife
or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the
Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the
Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim
maintenance and expenses for proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far
as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the service of
notice of the application to such person.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Chapter,
(a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act,
1875 (9 of 1875), is deemed not to have attained his majority;
(b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce
from, her husband and has not remarried.
(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and
expenses for proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so
ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the
order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for
levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may
sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each month's allowance for
the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the
case may be, remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if
sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due
under this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount
within a period of one year from the date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her
living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider
any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section
notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so
doing.
Explanation.- -If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps
a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live
with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the
interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, from her
husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient
reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living separately by
mutual consent.
(5)On proof that any wife in whose favour an orden has been made under this
section is living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live
with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual consent, the
Magistrate shall cancel the order.
111. Rights in case of succession and intestate succession
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Rights in case of
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956
intestate succession
8. General rules of succession in the case of males.-
The property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the
provisions of this Chapter-
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in Class I of the
Schedule;
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of Class I, then upon the heirs, being the
relatives specified in Class 11 of the Schedule;
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon the agnates of
the deceased; and
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the deceased.
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.-
Among the heirs specified in the Schedule, those in Class | shall take
simultaneously and to the exclusion of all other heirs; those in the first entry in
Class 11 shall be preferred to those in the second entry: those in the second
entry shall be preferred to those in the third entry; and so on in succession.
10. Distribution of property among heirs in Class I of the Schedule.- - The
property of an intestate shall be divided among the heirs in Class | of the
Schedule in accordance with the following rules:
Rule 1.- The intestate's widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the
widows together, shall take one share.
Rule 2.- The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall
each take one share.
Rule 3.- The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased
daughter of the intestate shall take between them one share.
Rule 4.- The distribution of the share referred to in Rule 3-
(i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased son shall be so made that
his widow (or widows together) and the surviving sons and daughters get equal
portions; and the branch of his pre-deceased sons gets the same portion; (ii)
among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased daughter shall be so made
that the surviving sons and daughters get equal portions.
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 8)
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS 11
Class /
Son; daughter; widow; mother; son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-
deceased son; son of a predeceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased
daughter; widow of a pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-
deceased son; daughter of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; widow of a
pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased daughter of a
pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased
daughter; daughter of a predeceased son of a pre-deceased daughter; daughter
of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased son.
SC 471, held:
"15. In the instant case, it is admitted by the second defendant that the
settlement deed dated 22.03.1980 (Ex.P-1) is, in fact, a gift-deed which was
executed by the first defendant in favour of the second defendant 'out of love
and affection" and by virtue of which the second defendant was given a portion of
the joint family property. It is well-settled that a Hindu father or any other
managing member of a HUF has power to make a gift of ancestral property only
for a 'pious purpose" and what is understood by the term 'pious purpose" is a gift
for charitable and/or religious purpose. Therefore, a deed of gift in regard to the
ancestral property executed 'out of love and affection" does not come within the
scope of the term 'pious purpose'. It is irrelevant if such gift or settlement was
made by a donor, i.e. the first defendant, in favour of a donee who was raised by
the donor without any relationship, i.e. the second defendant. The gift deed in
the instant case is not for any charitable or religious purpose."
The Indian Succession Act, 1925
Part V Intestate Succession
Chapter 11 : Rules in cases of intestates other than
Parsis
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and
kindred only, or widow and no kindred.- Where the intestate has left a
widow-
(a) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one-third of his property shall
belong to his widow, and the remaining two-thirds shall go to his lineal
descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(b) save as provided by Section 33-A], if he has left no lineal descendant, but
has left persons who are of kindred to him, one-half of his property shall belong
to his widow, and the other half shall go to those who are of kindred to him, in
the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(c) if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his property shall
belong to his widow.
33-A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal
descendants.- (1) Where the intestate has left a widow but no lineal
descendants and the nett value of his property does not exceed five thousand
rupees, the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.
(2) Where the nett value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand
rupees, the widow shall be entitled to five thousand rupees thereof and shall
have a charge upon the whole of such property for such sum of five thousand
rupees, with interest thereon from the date of the death of the intestate at 4 per
cent per annum until payment.
(3) The provision for the widow made by this section shall be in addition and
without prejudice to her interest and share in the residue of the estate of such
intestate remaining after payment of the said sum of five thousand rupees, with
interest as aforesaid, and such residue shall be distributed in accordance with
the provisions of Section 33 as if it were the whole of such intestate's property.
(4) The nett value of the property shall be ascertained by deducting from the
gross value thereof all debts, and all funeral and administration expenses of the
intestate, and all other lawful liabilities and charges to which the property shall
be subject.
(5) This section shall not apply-
(a) to the property of-
(i) any Indian Christian,
(ii) any child or grandchild of any male person who is or was at the time of his
death an Indian Christian, or
(iii) any person professing the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion the
succession to whose property is, under Section 24 of the Special Marriage Act,
1872, regulated by the provisions of this Act;
(b) unless the deceased dies intestate in respect of all his property.
35. Rights of widower.- A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in
respect of her property, if she dies intestate, as a widow has in respect of her
husband's property, if he dies intestate.
37. Where intestate has left child or children only.-
Where the intestate has left surviving him a child on children, but no more
remote lineal descendant through a deceased child, the property shall belong to
his surviving child, if there is only one, or shall be equally divided among all his
surviving children.
Chapter 111 : Special Rules for Parsi Intestates
51. Division of intestate's property among widow, widower, children and
parents.- (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the property of
which a Parsi dies intestate shall be divided,-
(a) where such Parsi dies leaving a widow or widower and children, among the
widow or widower, and children so that the widow or widower and each child
receive equal shares;
(b) where such Parsi dies leaving children, but no widow or widower, among the
children in equal shares.
(2) Where a Parsi dies leaving one or both parents in addition to children or
widow or widower and children, the property of which such Parsi dies intestate
shall be so divided that the parent or each of the parents shall receive a share
equal to half the share of each child.
54. Division of property where intestate leaves no lineal descendant but
leaves a widow on widower or a widow or widower of any lineal
descendant.- Where a Parsi dies without leaving any lineal descendant but
leaving a widow or widower or a widow or widower of a lineal descendant, the
property of which the intestate dies intestate shall be divided in accordance with
the following rules, namely,-
(a) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower but no widow or widower of a lineal
descendant, the widow or widower shall take half the said property;
(b) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower and also a widow or widower of
any lineal descendant, his widow on her widower shall receive one-third of the
said property and the widow or widower of any lineal descendant shall receive
another one-third or if there is more than one such widow or widower of lineal
descendants, the last mentioned one-third shall be divided equally among them.
(c) if the intestate leaves no widow or widower, but one widow or widower of a
lineal descendant, such widow or widower of the lineal descendant shall receive
one-third of the said property or, if the intestate leaves no widow or widower but
more than one widow or widower of lineal descendants, two-thirds of the said
property shall be divided among such widows or widowers of the lineal
descendants in equal shares;
(d) the residue after the division specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause
(c) has been made shall be distributed among the relatives of the intestate in
the order specified in Part I of Schedule 11; and the next-of-kin standing first in
Part I of that Schedule shall be preferred to those, standing second, the second
to the third and so on in succession, provided that the property shall be so
distributed that each male and female standing in the same degree of
propinquity shall receive equal shares;
(e) if there are no relatives entitled to the residue under clause (d) the whole of
the residue shall be distributed in proportion to the shares specified among the
persons entitled to receive shares under this section.
Muslim Law
This Hon'ble Court in Jamil Ahmad V. Vth Addl. Distt. Judge, Moradabad, (2001)
"11. The property (both movable as well as immovable) left by a deceased
Muslim is called matruka. The scheme of distribution of matruka among the heirs
of a deceased Muslim is that first that part of the matruka which is covered by a
will of the deceased, if there is a valid will (subject to a maximum of 1/3rd of the
total matruka provided it is not in favour of an heir) will be separated and given
to the legatee. The balance of matruka alone is distributable among the heirs and
in the proportion ordained under the Mohammedan Law.
IV. Right of married couples to be parents together
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Only married couples
The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956
are entitled to adopt
7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption. Any male Hindu who is of
as a couple
sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or a daughter in
adoption:
Provided that, if he has a wife living, he shall not adopt except with the consent
of his wife unless the wife has completely and finally renounced the world or has
ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be of unsound mind.
Explanation. a person has more than one wife living at the time of adoption,
the consent of all the wives is necessary unless the consent of any one of them is
unnecessary for any of the reasons specified in the preceding proviso.
8. Capacity of a female Hindu to take in adoption. Any female Hindu who
is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or daughter in
adoption:
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or daughter
except with the consent of her husband unless the husband has completely and
finally renounced the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.
14. Determination of adoptive mother in certain cases. - (1) Where a Hindu
who has a wife living adopts a child she shall be deemed to be the adoptive
mother.
(2) Where an adoption has been made with the consent of more than one wife,
the seniormost in marriage among them shall be deemed to be the adoptive
mother and the others to be stepmothers.
(3) Where a widower or a bachelor adopts a child, any wife whom he
subsequently marries shall be deemed to be the stepmother of the adopted
child.
(4) Where a widow or an unmarried woman adopts a child, any husband whom
she marries subsequently shall be deemed to be the stepfather of the adopted
child.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
57. Eligibility of prospective adoptive parents.- (1) The prospective
adoptive parents shall be physically fit, financially sound, mentally alert and
highly motivated to adopt a child for providing a good upbringing to him.
(2) In case of a couple, the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be
required.
(3) A single or divorced person can also adopt, subject to fulfilment of the
criteria and in accordance with the provisions of adoption regulations framed by
the Authority.
(4) A single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child.
(5) Any other criteria that may be specified in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority.
The Adoption Regulations, 2022
5. Eligibility criteria for prospective adoptive parents.-(1) The prospective
adoptive parents shall be physically, mentally, emotionally and financially
capable, they shall not have any life threatening medical condition and they
should not have been convicted in criminal act of any nature or accused in any
case of child rights violation.
(2) Any prospective adoptive parent, irrespective of their marital status and
whether or not they have biological son or daughter, can adopt a child subject to
the following, namely: -
(a) the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be required, in case of
a married couple;
(b) a single female can adopt a child of any gender;
(c) single male shall not be eligible to adopt a girl child.
(3) No child shall be given in adoption to a couple unless they have at least two
years of stable marital relationship except in the cases of relative or step-parent
adoption.
Office Memorandum issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority
bearing S. No. CARAICA013/1/2022 Administration dated 16 June 2022
2. The cases of single PAPs engaged in live-in relationship have been discussed
in the Steering Committee of Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) during
its 31st Meeting held on 18th April, 2022. It has been decided to go with the
earlier decision of 14th Steering Committee Meeting held on 10th May, 2018 that
the cases of single PAP in a live-in relationship with a partner will not be
considered eligible to adopt a child and their registration from concerned
agencies/authorities will not be considered for approval.
3. The decision has been taken in line with Regulation 5(3) of the Adoption
Regulations, 2017. The authority would like the children to be placed only with
the stable family and single applicant in a live-in relationship cannot be
considered as stable family.
2.
Couples need to be
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-(h)
married to avail
"couple" means the legally married Indian man and woman above the age of 21
surrogacy under the
years and 18 years, respectively;
Surrogacy
(Regulation) Act,
2021
3.
Couples need to be
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-(e)
married to avail
"commissioning couple" means an infertile married couple who approach an
assisted reproductive
assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted reproductive technology bank
technology under the
for obtaining the services authorised of the said clinic or bank;
Assisted Reproductive
Technology
(Regulation)
Act,
2021
V. Right to compensation of spouse and children in case of accidental death
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Entitlement
to
5. Liability in case of death.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
compensation under
Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855) or any other enactment or rule of law in
the Carriage by Air
force in any part of India, the rules contained in [the First Schedule, the Second
Act, 1972
Schedule and the Third Schedule] shall, in all cases to which those rules apply,
determine the liability of a carrier in respect of the death of a passenger.
(2) The liability shall be enforceable for the benefit of such of the members of the
passengers family as sustained damage by reason of his death.
Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "member of a family" means
wife on husband, parent, step-parent, grand-parent, brother, sister, half-brother,
half-sister, child, step-child and grandchild:
Provided that in deducing any such relationship as aforesaid any illegitimate
person and any adopted person shall be treated as being, or as having been, the
legitimate child of his mother and reputed father or, as the case may be, of his
adopters.
(3) An action to enforce the liability may be brought by the personal
representative of the passenger or by any person for whose benefit the liability is
under sub-section (2) enforceable, but only one action shall be brought in India
in respect of the death of any one passenger, and every such action by
whomsoever brought shall be for the benefit of all such persons so entitled as
aforesaid as either are domiciled in India or not being domiciled there express a
desire to take the benefit of the action.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the amount recovered in any
such action, after deducting any costs not recovered from the defendant, shall be
divided between the persons entitled in such proportion as the Court may direct.
2.
Entitlement
to
compensation under
680, has held that upon the death of a person in a motor vehicle accident their
the
Motor
Vehicles
spouse is entitled to inter alia compensation under the head of loss of consortium
Act, 1988
of Rs. 50,000/- The head of loss of consortium attempts to compensate for the
loss of spouse's affection, comfort, solace, companionship, society, assistance,
protection, care and sexual relations during the future years.
3.
Entitlement
to
1-A. Suit for compensation to the family of a person for loss occasioned
compensation under
to it by his death by actionable wrong.- Whenever the death of a person
the Fatal Accidents
shall be caused by wrongful act, neglect or default, and the act, neglect or
Act, 1855
default is such as would (if death had not ensued) have entitled the party injured
to maintain an action and recover damages in respect thereof, the party who
would have been liable if death had not ensued, shall be liable to an action or
suit for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person injured, and although
the death shall have been caused under such circumstances as amount in law to
felony or other crime.
Every such action or suit shall be for the benefit of the wife, husband, parent and
child, if any, of the person whose death shall have been so caused, and shall be
brought by and in the name of the executor, administrator, or representative of
the person deceased;
and in every such action the court may give such damages as it may think
proportioned to the loss resulting from such death to the parties respectively, for
whom and for whose benefit such action shall be brought; and the amount so
recovered, after deducting all costs and expenses, including the costs not
recovered from the defendant, shall be divided amongst the before-mentioned
parties, or any of them, in such shares as the court by its judgement or decree
shall direct.
4.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject
compensation in case
or context,-
of employment injury
(6-A) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a deceased insured
under the Employees'
person, namely:
State Insurance Act,
(i) a widow, a legitimate or adopted son who has not attained the age of twenty-
1948
five years, an unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter; (i-a) a widowed
mother;
(ii) If wholly dependant on the earnings of the insured person at the time of his
death, a legitimate or adopted son or daughter who has attained the age of
twenty-five years and is infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependant on the earnings of the insured person at the
time of his death,-
(a) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(b) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter
legitimate or adopted or illegitimate if married and a minor or if widowed and a
minor,
(c) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(d) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is alive,
or
(g) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the insured person is alive;
46. Benefits.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the insured persons
their dependants or the persons hereinafter mentioned, as the case may be, shall
be entitled to the following benefits, namely-
(a) periodical payments to any insured person in case of his sickness certified by
a duly appointed medical practitioner or by any other person possessing such
qualifications and experience as the Corporation may, by regulations, specify in
this behalf] (hereinafter referred to as sickness benefit);
(b) periodical payments to an insured woman in case of confinement or
miscarriage or sickness arising out of pregnancy, confinement, premature birth of
child or miscarriage, such woman being certified to be eligible for such payments
by an authority specified in this behalf by the regulations (hereinafter referred to
as maternity benefit);
(c) periodical payments to an insured person suffering from disablement as a
result of an employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act and
certified to be eligible for such payments by an authority specified in this behalf
by the regulations (hereinafter referred to as disablement benefit);
(d) periodical payments to such dependants of an insured person who dies as a
result of an employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act, as are
entitled to compensation under this Act (hereinafter referred to as dependants'
benefit);
(e) medical treatment for and attendance on insured persons (hereinafter
referred to as medical benefit); and
(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the family of an insured person
who has died, towards the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured
person, or, where the insured person did not have a family or was not living with
his family at the time of his death, to the person who actually incurs the
expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured person (to be known as
[funeral expenses):
Provided that the amount of such payment shall not exceed such amount as may
be prescribed by the Central Government and the claim for such payment shall
be made within three months of the death of the insured person or within such
extended period as the Corporation or any officer or authority authorised by it in
this behalf may allow.
52. Dependant's benefit.- (1) If an insured person dies as a result of an
employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act (whether or not he
was in receipt of any periodical payment for temporary disablement in respect of
the injury) dependants' benefit shall be payable at such rates and for such period
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government
to his dependants specified in sub-clause (i) sub-clause (i-a) and sub-clause (ii)
of clause (6-A) of Section 2.
(2) In case the insured person dies without leaving behind him the dependants
as aforesaid, the dependants' benefit shall be paid to the other dependants
of
the deceased at such rates and for such period and subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
VI. Right to compensation of spouse and children in case of death, under various labour laws
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Entitlement to Death
2. Definitions.- In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,-
Gratuity under the
(h) "family", in relation to an employee,
Payment of Gratuity
shall be deemed to consist of- (i) in the case of a male employee, himself, his
Act, 1972
wife, his children, whether married or unmarried, his dependent parents and the
dependent parents of his wife and the widow and children of his predeceased
son, if any, (ii) in the case of a female employee, herself, her husband, her
children, whether married or unmarried, her dependent parents and the
dependent parents of hen husband and the widow and children of her
predeceased son, if any:
Explanation.-W the personal law of an employee permits the adoption by
him of a child, any child lawfully adopted by him shall be deemed to be included
in his family, and where a child of an employee has been adopted by another
person and such adoption is, under the personal law of the person making such
adoption, lawful, such child shall be deemed to be excluded from the family of
the employee;
4. Payment of gratuity.- (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the
termination of his employment after he has rendered continuous service for not
less than five years,-
(a) on his superannuation, or
(b) on his retirement or resignation, or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease:
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be
necessary where the termination of the employment of any employee is due to
death or disablement:
Provided further that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to
him shall be paid to his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his
heirs, and where any such nominees or heirs is a minor, the share of such minor,
shall be deposited with the controlling authority who shall invest the same for
the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution, as may be
prescribed, until such minor attains majority.
6. Nomination.- (1) Each employee, who has completed one year of service,
shall make, within such time, in such form and in such manner, as may be
prescribed, nomination for the purpose of the second proviso to sub-section (1)
of Section 4.
(2) An employee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity
payable to him under this Act amongst more than one nominee.
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the
nomination shall be made in favour of one or more members of his family, and
any nomination made by such employee in favour of a person who is not a
member of his family, shall be void.
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the employee has no family, the
nomination may be made in favour of any person or persons but if the employee
subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith become invalid
and the employee shall make, within such time as may be prescribed, a fresh
nomination in favour of one or more members of his family.
2.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires-
compensation under
(g) "family" means-
the
Employees
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether married or
Provident
Fund
unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's widow and children
Scheme, 1952
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the personal
law governing him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses
belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be deemed to be a part
of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member
subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to the Commissioner that
she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children, whether married
or unmarried, her dependant parents, her husband's dependant parents and her
deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner expresses her
desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependant
parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of the member's family for the
purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member subsequently cancels in writing any
such notice;
Explanation.- either of the above two cases, if the child of a Member or, as the
case may be, the child of a deceased son of the Member has been adopted by
another person and if, under the personal law of the adopter, adoption is legally
recognised such a child shall be considered as excluded from the family of the
Member;
61. Nomination.-(1) Each member shall make in his declaration in Form 2, a
nomination conferring the right to receive the amount that may stand to his
credit in the Fund in the event of his death before the amount standing to his
credit has become payable, or where the amount has become payable before
payment has been made.
(2) A member may in his nomination distribute the amount that may stand to
his credit in the Fund amongst his nominees at his own discretion.
(3) If a member has a family at the time of making a nomination, the
nomination shall be in favour of one or more persons belonging to his family. Any
nomination made by such member in favour of a person not belonging to his
family shall be invalid : Provided that a fresh nomination shall be made by the
member on his marriage and any nomination made before such marriage shall be
deemed to be invalid.
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the member has no family, the
nomination may be in favour of any person or persons but if the member
subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith be deemed to be
invalid and the member shall make a fresh nomination in favour of one or more
persons belonging to his family.
(4-A) Where the nomination is wholly or partly in favour of a minor, the member
may, for the purposes of this Scheme, appoint a major person of his family, as
defined in clause (g) of Paragraph 2, to be the guardian of the minor nominee in
the event of the member predeceasing the nominee and the guardian so
appointed:
Provided that where there is no major person in his family, the member may, at
his discretion, appoint any other person to be a guardian of the minor nominee.
(5) A nomination made under sub-paragraph (1) may at any time be modified by
a member after giving a written notice of his intention of doing so in Form
annexed hereto. If the nominee predeceases the member, the interest of the
nominee shall revert to the member who may make a fresh nomination in
respect of such interest.
(6) A nomination or its modification shall take effect to the extent that it is valid
on the date on which it is received by the Commissioner.
70. Accumulations of a deceased member- To whom payable.-O the death
of a member before the amount standing to his credit has become payable or
where the amount has become payable before payment has been made-
(i) if a nomination made by the member in accordance with Paragraph 61
subsists, the amount standing to his credit in the Fund or that part thereof to
which the nomination relates, shall become payable to his nominee or nominees
in accordance with such nomination; or
(ii) if no nomination subsists or if the nomination relates only to a part of the
amount standing to his credit in the Fund, the whole amount or the part thereof
to which the nomination does not relate, as the case may be, shall become
payable to the members of his family in equal shares:
Provided that no share shall be payable to-
(a) sons who have attained maioritv:
(b) sons of a deceased son who have attained majority;
(c) married daughters whose husbands are alive;
(d) married daughters of a deceased son whose husbands are alive;
if there is any member of the family other than those specified in clauses (a),
(b), (c) and (d):
Provided further that the widow or widows, and the child or children of a
deceased son shall receive between them in equal parts only the share which
that son would have received if he had survived the member and had not
attained the age of majority at the time of the member's death.
(iii) in any case, to which the provisions of clauses (i) and (ii) do not apply the
whole amount shall be payable to the person legally entitled to it.
Explanation. For the purpose of this paragraph a member's posthumous child, if
born alive, shall be treated in the same way as a surviving child born before the
member's death.
3.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the
compensation under
subject or context-
the
Employees
(d) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a deceased employee,
Compensation Act,
namely-
1923
(i) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried legitimate or
adopted daughter, or a widowed mother; and
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of his death,
a son or a daughter who has attained the age of 18 years and who is infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of
his death-
(a) a widower,
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter
legitimate or illegitimate or adopted if married and a minor or if widowed and
a
minor,
(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is
alive, or
(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the employee is alive;
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (ii) and items (f) and (g) of sub-
clause (iii), references to a son, daughter or child include an adopted son,
daughter or child respectively;
8. Distribution of compensation.- (1) No payment of compensation in respect
of a employee whose injury has resulted in death, and no payment of a lump
sum as compensation to a woman or a person under a legal disability, shall be
made otherwise than by deposit with the Commissioner, and no such payment
made directly by an employer shall be deemed to be a payment of
compensation:
Provided that, in the case of a deceased employee, an employer may make to
any dependant advances on account of compensation of an amount equal to
three months' wages of such employee and so much of such amount as does not
exceed the compensation payable to that dependant shall be deducted by the
Commissioner from such compensation and repaid to the employer.
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than ten rupees which is payable as
compensation may be deposited with the Commissioner on behalf of the person
entitled thereto.
(3) The receipt of the Commissioner shall be a sufficient discharge in respect of
any compensation deposited with him.
(4) On the deposit of any money under subsection (1), as compensation in
respect of a deceased employee the Commissioner shall, if he thinks necessary,
cause notice to be published or to be served on each dependant in such manner
as he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants to appear before him on such date
as he may fix for determining the distribution of the compensation. If the
Commissioner is satisfied after any inquiry which he may deem necessary, that
no dependant exists, he shall repay the balance of the money to the employer by
whom it was paid. The Commissioner shall, on application by the employer,
furnish a statement showing in detail all disbursements made.
(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a deceased employee shall, subject to
any deduction made under sub-section (4), be apportioned among the
dependants of the deceased employee or any of them in such proportion as the
Commissioner thinks fit, or may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be
allotted to any one dependant.
(6) Where any compensation deposited with the Commissioner is payable to any
person, the Commissioner shall, if the person to whom the compensation is
payable is not a woman or a person under a legal disability, and may, in other
cases, pay the money to the person entitled thereto.
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is payable to a
woman or a person under a legal disability, such sum may be invested, applied
or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of the woman, or of such person during his
disability, in such manner as the Commissioner may direct; and where a half-
monthly payment is payable to any person under a legal disability, the
Commissioner may, of his own motion or on an application made to him in this
behalf, order that the payment be made during the disability to any dependant
of the employee or to any other person, whom the Commissioner thinks best
fitted to provide for the welfare of the employee.
(8) Where, an application made to him in this behalf or otherwise, the
Commissioner is satisfied that, on account of neglect of children on the part of a
parent or on account of the variation of the circumstances of any dependant or
for any other sufficient cause, an order of the Commissioner as to the distribution
of any sum paid as compensation or as to the manner in which any sum payable
to any such dependant is to be invested, applied or otherwise dealt with, ought
to be varied, the Commissioner may make such orders for the variation of the
former orden as he thinks just in the circumstances of case:
Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be made unless such
person has been given an opportunity of showing cause why the order should not
be made, or shall be made in any case in which it would involve the repayment
by a dependant of any sum already paid to him.
(9) Where the Commissioner varies any order under sub-section (8) by reason of
the fact that payment of compensation to any person has been obtained by
fraud, impersonation or other improper means, any amount so paid to or on
behalf of such person may be recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in
Section 31.
4.
Entitlement
for
9. Benefits to the family on death of an eligible subscriber.-During the
pension upon death
receipt of pension, if an eligible subscriber dies, his spouse shall be only entitled
of spouse under the
to receive fifty per cent. of the pension received by such eligible subscriber, as
Pradhan
Mantri
family pension and such family pension shall be applicable only to the spouse.
Shram Yogi Maan-
dhan Yojana, 2019,
5.
Entitlement
for
16.A. Family Pension and Gratuity: Where a Judge dies before retirement
pension to
Judges
his/her family shall be only entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension
under Supreme Court
received by such eligible subscriber, as family pension and such family pension
Judges (Salaries and
shall be applicable only to the family members.
Condition of Service)
Act, 1958
6.
Entitlement
for
Rule 50 : Family Pension: During the receipt of pension, if the Government
pension by
the
servant dies, his widow, children, dependant parents and dependant siblings
Ministry of Personnel,
shall be only entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension received by such
Public Grievances and
eligible subscriber, as family pension and such family pension shall be applicable
Pensions under CCA
only to the widow, children, dependant parents and dependant siblings.
(CCS) Rules 2021
7.
Entitlement to the
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936
amounts standing in
25-A. Payment of undisbursed wages in cases of death of employed
credit
upon
an
person.- (1) Subject to the other provisions of the Act, all amounts payable to
employee's death
an employed person as wages shall, if such amounts could not or cannot be paid
under the Payment of
on account of his death before payment or on account of his whereabouts not
Wages Act, 1936
being known,-
(a) be paid to the person nominated by him in this behalf in accordance with the
rules made under this Act; or
(b) where no such nomination has been made or where for any reasons such
amounts cannot be paid to the person so nominated, be deposited with the
prescribed authority who shall deal with the amounts so deposited in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), all amounts
payable to an employed person as wages-
(a) are paid by the employer to the person nominated by the employed person;
or
(b) are deposited by the employer with the prescribed authority,
the employer shall be discharged of his liability to pay those wages.
The Payment of Wages (Nomination) Rules, 2009
2. Definitions. - In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(b) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an employed person,
namely:
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor child dependant upon the employed person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed person and
who is receiving education, till he or she attains the age of twenty-one years;
(iv) an unmarried daughter;
(v) a son or daughter who is inform by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury and is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed
person, so long as the infirmity continues;
3. Procedure for nomination.-( Every employed person shall make a
declaration in Form-I, nominating a person conferring the right to receive the
amount that may stand in his credit at the event of his death before that amount
standing to his credit has become payable or where the amount has become
payable, before payment has been made.
(2) If an employed person has a family at the time of making nomination, the
nomination shall be in favour of the spouse or the spouse in preference followed
by one more members of his family:
Provided that nominated made by an employed person having a family in favour
of a person other than member of his family shall be invalid:
Provided further that a fresh nomination towards his/her spouse shall be made
by the employed person on his marriage and any nomination made before such
marriage shall be deemed to be invalid.
VII. Extension of medical benefits to spouse and/or children under various labour laws
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Entitlement to extend
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject
medical benefits to
or context,-
spouse under the
(11) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an insured person,
Employees'
State
namely:
Insurance Act, 1948
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the insured person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person and
who is-
(a) receiving education, till he or she attains the age of twenty-one years,
(b) an unmarried daughter;
(iv) a child who is infirm by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or
injury and is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person, so long as
the infirmity continues;
(v) dependant parents, whose income from all sources does not exceed such
income as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(vi) in case the insured person is unmarried and his or her parents are not alive,
a minor brother or sister wholly dependant upon the earnings of the insured
person;
56. Medical benefit. (1) An insured person or (where such medical benefit is
extended to his family) a member of his family whose condition requires medical
treatment and attendance shall be entitled to receive medical benefit.
(2) Such medical benefit may be given either in the form of outpatient treatment
and attendance in a hospital or dispensary, clinic or other institution or by visits
to the home of the insured person or treatment as inpatient in a hospital or other
institution.
(3) A person shall be entitled to medical benefit during any period for which
contributions are payable in respect of him or in which he is qualified to claim
sickness benefit or maternity benefit or is in receipt of such disablement benefit
as does not disentitle him to medical benefit under the regulations:
Provided that a person in respect of whom contribution ceases to be payable
under this Act may be allowed medical benefit for such period and of such nature
as may be provided under the regulations:
Provided further that an insured person who ceases to be in insurable
employment on account of permanent disablement shall continue, subject to
payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, to receive medical benefit till the date on which he would
have vacated the employment on attaining the age of superannuation had he not
sustained such permanent disablement:
Provided also that an insured person who has attained the age of
superannuation, a person who retires under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme or
takes premature retirement, and his spouse shall be eligible to receive medical
benefits subject to payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Explanation.- this section, "superannuation", in relation to an insured person,
means the attainment by that person of such age as is fixed in the contract or
conditions of service as the age on the attainment of which he shall vacate the
insurable employment or the age of sixty years where no such age is fixed and
the person is no more in the insurable employment.
2.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions. In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires-
withdraw
non-
(g) "family" means-
refundable advances
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether married or
from Provident Fund
unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's widow and children:
for treatment
of
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the personal
spouse under the
law governing him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses
Employees Provident
belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be deemed to be a part
Fund Scheme, 1952
of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member
subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to the Commissioner that
she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children, whether married
or unmarried, her dependant parents, her husband's dependant parents and her
deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner expresses her
desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependant
parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of the member's family for the
purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member subsequently cancels in writing any
such notice;
Explanation.-I either of the above two cases, if the child of a Member or, as the
case may be, the child of a deceased son of the Member has been adopted by
another person and if, under the personal law of the adopter, adoption is legally
recognised such a child shall be considered as excluded from the family of the
Member;
68-J. Advance from the Fund for illness in certain cases.-(1) A member
may be allowed non-refundable advance from his account in the Fund in cases
of-
(a) hospitalisation lasting for one month or more, or
(b) major surgical operation in a hospital, or
(c) suffering from T.B., leprosy, paralysis, cancer, mental derangement or heart
ailment and having been granted leave by his employer for treatment of the said
illness.
(3) A member may be allowed non-refundable advance from his account in the
fund for the treatment of a member of his family who has been hospitalised, or
requires hospitalisation, for one month or more-
(a) for a major surgical operation, or
(b) for the treatment of T.B., leprosy, paralysis, cancer, mental derangement or
heart ailment:
(4) The amount advanced under this paragraph shall not exceed the member's
basic wages and dearness allowance for six months or his own share of
contribution with interest in the Fund, whichever is less.
(6) No advance shall be granted to the member under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-
paragraph (3) unless he produces a self-declaration to that effect.
VIII. Miscellaneous Benefits
S. No.
Benefit
Applicable Law
1.
Privilege accorded to
122. Communications during marriage.-
communications
No person who is or has been married, shall be compelled to disclose any
during
marriage
communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or
under the Indian
has been married; non shall he be permitted to disclose any such
Evidence Act, 1872
communication, unless the person who made it, or his representative in interest,
consents, except in suits between married persons, or proceedings in which one
married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the other.
2.
Right to receive
9. Restrictions on removal and transplantation of human organs or
bodily organs or
tissues or both.- (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), no human
tissues or both under
organ or tissue or both] removed from the body of a donor before his death shall
the Transplantation of
be transplanted into a recipient unless the donor is a near relative of the
Human Organs and
recipient.
Tissues Act, 1994
3.
Tax benefits in case
80-C. Deduction in respect of life insurance premia, deferred annuity,
of payments made on
contributions to provident fund, subscription to certain equity shares or
behalf of spouse or
debentures, etc.- (1) In computing the total income of an assessee, being an
child for annuity,
individual or a Hindu undivided family, there shall be deducted, in accordance
provident
fund,
with and subject to the provisions of this section, the whole of the amount paid
savings, etc. under
or deposited in the previous year, being the aggregate of the sums referred to in
the Income Tax Act,
sub-section (2), as does not exceed one hundred and fifty thousand rupees.
1961
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be any sums paid or deposited
in the previous year by the assessee-
(i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the life of persons specified in
subsection (4);
(ii) to effect or to keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity, not being an
annuity plan referred to the clause (xii), on the life of persons specified in sub-
section (4);
Provided that such contract does not contain a provision for the exercise by the
insured of an option to cash payment in lieu of the payment of the annuity; (iii)
by way of deduction from the salary payable by or on behalf of the Government
to any individual being a sum deducted in accordance with the conditions of his
service, for the purpose of securing to him a deferred annuity or making
provision for his spouse or children, in so far as the sum so deducted does not
exceed one-fifth of the salary;
(v) as contribution to any provident fund set up by the Central Government and
notified by it in this behalf in the Official Gazette, where such contribution is to
an account standing in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4);
(viii) as subscription, in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4), to]
any such security of the Central Government or any such deposit scheme as that
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(x) as a contribution, in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4), for
participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan, 1971 (hereafter in this section
referred to as the Unit-linked Insurance Plan) specified in Schedule 11 of the Unit
Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);
(xi) as a contribution in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4) for
participation in any such unit-linked insurance plan of the LIC Mutual Fund
referred to in clause (23-D) of Section 10, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(xvii) as tuition fees (excluding any payment towards any development fees or
donation or payment of similar nature), whether at the time of admission or
thereafter,-
(a) to any university, college, school or other educational institution situated
within India;
(b) for the purpose of full-time education of any of the persons specified in
subsection (4);
(4) The persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be the following, namely:-
(a) for the purposes of clauses (1), (v.), (x) and (xi) of that sub-section,-
(i) in the case of an individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any child
of such individual, and
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, any member thereof;
(b) for the purposes of clause (ii) of that sub-section, in the case of an
individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any child of such individual;
(ba) for the purposes of clause (viii) of that sub-section, in the case of an
individual, the individual or any girl child of that individual, or any girl child for
whom such person is the legal guardian, if the scheme so specifies;
(c) for the purposes of clause (xvii) of that sub-section, in the case of an
individual, any two children of such individual.
APPENDIX C : COMMENT ON WORKABILITY OF THE Special Marriage Act, 1954
S. No.
Section
Comment on workability
1.
2(b) "degrees of prohibited relationship" -a man
Workable-prohibited degrees can be maintained
and any of the persons mentioned in Part | of the
in same- sex relationships. For instance, in a
First Schedule and a woman and any of the
marriage between two men, both men should not
persons mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule
be within degrees of relationship mentioned in Part
are within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
11.
Gender Neutral
2.
4(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-
Workable-only prescribes minimum age for each.
one years and the female the age of eighteen
As long as the minimum age is met by the
years
spouses, section is unaffected.
3.
12 (2) The marriage may be solemnized in any
Workable. Section in its present form can be made
form which the parties may choose to adopt:
applicable to same-sex couples.
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding
on the parties unless each party says to the other
in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the
three witnesses and in any language understood by
the parties,-" (A), take the (B), to be my
lawful wife (or husband)
4.
15 (a) ceremony of marriage has been performed
Workable-"as husband and wife" can be read to
between the parties and they have .been living
mean "as spouses". This is not repugnant to the
together as husband and wife ever since
context.
5.
22. Restitution of conjugal rights. either
Workable-"eithen the husband or the wife" can
the husband or the wife has, without reasonable
be read to mean "either spouse". This is not
excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other,
repugnant to the context.
the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the
district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and
the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the
statements made in such petition, and that there is
no legal ground why the application should not be
granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights
accordingly.
6.
23. Judicial separation.-(1) A petition for
Workable-"eithen by the husband or the wife"
judicial separation may be presented to the district
can be read to mean "by either of the spouses."
court either by the husband or the wife
This is not repugnant to the context.
7.
27. Divorce.- [(1)] Subject to the provisions of
Workable-"either by the husband or the wife"
this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a
can be read to mean "by either of the spouses."
petition for divorce may be presented to the district
This is not repugnant to the context.
court either by the husband or the wife
8.
27 (1A) A wife may also present a petition for
Workable. Can be retained as it is only to apply to
divorce to the district court on the ground, (i)
different sex couples.
that her husband has, since the solemnization of
the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or
bestiality
9.
31. Court to which petition should be made.-
Workable. This additional protection granted to
2 [(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter
women remains unaffected. In a situation where
VI shall be presented to the district court within
simultaneously two jurisdictions are invoked by a
the local limits of whose original civil jurisdiction-
same-sex couple, it can be resolved on a case to
(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where
case basis.
she is residing on the date of presentation of the
petition; or
10.
Sections 36, 37-Alimony pendente lite,
Workable. Gendered provisions in favor of wives in
Permanent Alimony and maintenance
a heterosexual provision may be maintained.
11.
Second Schedule uses "widow" and "widower"
Workable. Can be made available to same-sex
couples by amending forms to provide for both
entries to read "widow(er)"
12.
Third and Fourth Schedules use "bride" and
Workable. Can be made available to same-sex
"bridegroom"
couples by amending declarations to provide for
"bride (groom)"
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
Civil Writ Petition No. 1105 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Sameer Samudra and Anr. Petitioner
V.
Union of India and Ors
Respondents
AND
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION Civil
Writ Petition No. 1150 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Nitin Karani and Ann
Petitioner
V.
Union of India and Ors
Respondents
Written Submissions on Behalf of Mr. Anand Grover, Senior Advocate
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MR. ANAND GROVER, SENIOR ADVOCATE
ON MARRIAGE
From The Prophet" by Kahlil Gibran
1. A BRIEF CASE OF THE PETITIONERS
1.1 The Case of Sameer Samudra- WP (Civil) No. 1105 of 2022
1.2 The Case of Nitin Karani- Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1150 of 2022
2. WHAT IS MARRIAGE?
2.1 Definition Generally
2.2 How have the Indian Courts defined it?
2.3 Courts around the World
2.4 Necessity of Marriage
3. HINDU MARRIAGE ACT AND MARRIAGE EQUALITY
3.1 Interpretation of Hindu Marriage Act
4. FOREIGN MARRIAGE ACT
5. SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, ITS LIMITED UNCONSTITUTIONALITY
FAILURE TO RECOGNISE NON-HETEROSEXUAL MARRIAGE FALLS FOUL OF ARTICLE 14
The Manifest Arbitrariness Test
UNDER ARTICLE 15 DISCRIMINATION BASED ON GENDER IS NOT PERMITTED
THE NON-RECOGNITION OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE VIOLATES FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION UNDER
ARTICLE 19(1) (A)
Sexuality and Marriage are forms of expression
THE RIGHT TO INTIMATE ASSOCIATION IS PROTECTED BY 19(1)(C)
THE RIGHT TO LIFE AND THE RIGHT TO MARRY A PERSON OF ONE'S CHOICE IS PROTECTED BY
ARTICLE 21
The Right to Privacy is a Fundamental Right
The right to autonomy under Article 21 includes the right to choose a partner of one's choice to
marry
The denial of the Right to Marry is an affront to dignity
Not allowing marriage and its effect on Health
6. INTERNATIONAL LAW
Relevant Articles from International Covenants
INTERNATIONAL COVENANTONCIVIL ANDPOLITICAL RIGHTS : ICCPR
Other Documents
V. LAWS IN OTHER COUNTRIES
VI. CONCLUSION AND A PARTING NOTE
On Marriage
From "The Prophet" by Kahlil Gibran
Then Almitra spoke again and said,
And what of Marriage master?
And he answered saying:
You were born together, and together you shall be forevermore.
You shall be together when the white wings of death scatter your days.
Aye, you shall be together even in the silent memory of God.
But let there be spaces in your togetherness,
And let the winds of the heavens dance between you.
Love one another, but make not a bond of love:
Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls.
Fill each other's cup but drink not from one cup.
Give one another of your bread but eat not from the same loaf. Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each
one of you be alone,
Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the same music.
Give your hearts, but not into each other's keeping.
For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts.
And stand together yet not too near together:
For the pillars of the temple stand apart,
And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other's shadow.
1. A Brief Case of the Petitioners
1.1 The Case of Sameer Samudra- WP (Civil) No. 1105 of 2022
468. The petitioner, Sameer Samudra, and his partner are challenging the decision of the Indian Embassy to
register their marriage under the Foreign Marriage Act, and the Hindu Marriage Act.
469. The case involves the interpretation of the Hindu Marriage Act as well as the Special Marriage Act.
470. In their petition, the petitioners have sought for the following reliefs:
a. For a declaration, or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring that the Petitioners, like any person
belonging to the LGBTQI communities, have a right to marry each other, that is a person of their choice, of the
same sex, irrespective of one's religion, gender, sexual orientation or any other protected under Articles 14, 19
and 21 of the Constitution and further have a right to register their marriage under Section 5 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955, and under Section 17 of the Foreign Marriages Act, 1969 if they have lawfully married in a
foreign jurisdiction at least one person is an Indian citizen for like any other heterosexual couple as also register
their marriage;
b. For a declaration that the refusal by the Respondent No. 3 and the Respondent / through the Indian Embassy to
register the Petitioners' marriage, which is legally solemnised in the USA, is in violation of their Fundamental
Rights under Articles 14 and 21 (both Petitioners) and Article 19 (Petitioner No. 1);
C. For an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus, directing Union of India through the Indian
Embassy at Washington, USA, to register the marriage of the Petitioners under the Foreign Marriage Act;
d. For a declaration that the Petitioners shall be eligible to exercise all the rights that any heterosexual married
couples may exercise in India including but not limited to adoption of a child, or any benefits, privileges where
the condition of the same is being a married spouse.
1.2 The Case of Nitin Karani- Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1150 of 2022
471. The petitioners in this case are an inter-faith couple who are in a loving relationship since 2009 and currently
reside in Bombay. They want to get married under the Special Marriage Act, and have filed the present Writ Petition
seeking a declaration from this Hon'ble Court to the effect that the members of the LGBTQIA+ community have the
same right to marriage as their cisgender and heterosexual counterparts have under the Special Marriage Act, 1954
and to declare sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 as constitutionally invalid.
472. The petitioners seek the following reliefs:
a. For a Writ or Declaration, or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring that right to marry a person of
one's choice, irrespective of their religion, gender, sexual orientation or any other factor is a fundamental part of
Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
b. Declare that S. 4(c) of the Special Marriage Act is unconstitutional insofar as it discriminates between couples from
LGBTQIA+ community and their cisgender, heterosexual counterparts.
C. Declare that S. 6, 7, 8, 9 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 are violative of Articles 14, 15 and 21, and are thus,
unconstitutional.
d. In the alternative to and without prejudice to prays (b) and (c) for a writ order or direction directing the
Respondents to register their marriage under the Foreign Marriages Act;
e. For an appropriate writ order or direction directing the Respondents to permit to register their marriage under the
Special Marriages Act;
2. What is Marriage?
2.1 Definition Generally
473. During the course of these proceedings, this Hon'ble Court will be called upon to decide, fundamentally, what
is a marriage?
474. Amongst other questions, this court will have to answer if marriage can be defined in the narrow, parochial,
and dogmatic terms as that between only a cisgender man a cisgender woman. While multiple statutes which this
court will be called upon to interpret, use the term marriage, it is not defined under ANY of these statutes.
475. Understanding what marriage is, and what it entails, becomes a condition precedent to be defined, before
going to into the legal necessities of marriage.
476. The Britannica Encyclopaedia defines marriage as this- "marriage [is a] a legally and socially sanctioned union,
usually between a man and a woman, that is regulated by laws, rules, customs, beliefs, and attitudes that prescribe
the rights and duties of the partners and accords status to their offspring (if any). The idea, simply put, is that a man
and a woman enter into a marriage to care for each other mutually, in a partnership of equals.
477. For a union of two people to be recognised as marriage, there is a formal procedure prescribed by law under
different under personal law. It remains different under different personal laws. However, the substance of marriage
remains the same, as does the love of the parties that are subject to a marriage.
478. Marriage, as multiple scholars agree, involves a comprehensive union of spouses, a special link to the children,
and third, norms of permanence, monogamy, and exclusivity. (See, See Girgis, Sherif and George, Robert and
Anderson, Ryan T., What is Marriage? (November 23, 2012). Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy, Vol. 34, No. 1,
pp. 245-287, Winter 2010, Available at SSRN https://ssrn.com/abstract=1722155, at page 252).
479. As Martha Nussbaum puts it: 'Marriage has, first, a civil rights aspect. Married people get a lot of government
benefits that the unmarried usually do not get : favourable treatment in tax, inheritance, and insurance status;
immigration rights; rights in adoption and custody; decisional and visitation rights in health care and burial; the
spousal privilege exemption when giving testimony in court; and yet others. Marriage has, second, an expressive
aspect. When people get married, they typically make a statement of love and commitment in front of witnesses. Most
people who get married view that statement as a very important part of their lives. Being able to make it, and to make
it freely (not under duress) is taken to be definitive of adult human freedom. The statement made by the marrying
couple is usually seen as involving an answering statement on the part of society : we declare our love and
commitment, and society, in response, recognizes and dignifies that commitment." (See, FROM DISGUST TO
HUMANITY SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW by Martha C. Nussbaum, New York : Oxford University
Press, 2010).
2.2 How have the Indian Courts defined it?
480. Indeed, this question has come up before this court multiple times too. This Hon'ble court, in Indra Sarma
V.
man/woman, which is voluntarily undertaken by the parties in public in a formal way, and once concluded, recognises
the parties as husband and wife.. Sharing a common household and duty to live together form part of the consortium
omnis vitae which obliges spouses to live together, afford each other reasonable marital privileges and rights and be
honest and faithful to each other. One of the most important invariable consequences of marriage is the reciprocal
support and the responsibility of maintenance of the common household, jointly and severally.
2.3 Courts around the World
481. Justice O'Regan of the South African Supreme Court, [(2000) 3 SA 936 (CC)], expounded on what a marriage
was. He held that "Marriage and the family are social institutions of vital importance. Entering into and sustaining a
marriage is a matter of intense private significance to the parties to that marriage for they make a promise to one
another to establish and maintain an intimate relationship for the rest of their lives which they acknowledge obliges
them to support one another, to live together and to be faithful to one another. Such relationships are of profound
significance to the individuals concerned. But such relationships have more than personal significance at least in part
because human beings are social beings whose humanity is expressed through their relationships with others.
Entering into marriage therefore is to enter into a relationship that has public significance as well.
482. Since any true and honourable harmony between two people has value in itself (not merely as a means), each
such comprehensive union of two people-each permanent, exclusive commitment sealed by organic bodily union-
would be a marriage.
483. There remains much truth in the Lord Westbury's dictum in Shaw V. Gould where his Lordship said, "Marriage
is the very foundation of the civil society, and no part of the laws and institutions of a country can be of more vital
importance to its subject than those which regulate the manner and condition of forming, and if necessary of
dissolving, the marriage contract".
484. Each legal system determines the attributes of a marriage; at Common Law in England, it is in essence a
consensual union of a man and a woman. A marriage was a voluntary union for life of one man with one woman to the
exclusion of others. (See, for example Hyde V. Hyde, (1866) LR 1 P & D 130.)
485. This decision was the foundation of the rule that polygamous marriages were not recognized in England, and
indeed, this cannot be true for India, as multiple personal laws here recognised polygamous marriages.
486. Though legal scholars, sociologists, philosophers, and feminists disagree on what marriage is, how to define it,
or in case of some feminist thinkers, if it is even necessary, no one denies that in modern times, as in the old,
marriage remains fundamental to the functioning of the society, and to avail important schemes under the modern
nation-state, such as joint tax benefits, rights of surrogacy etc.
2.4 Necessity of Marriage
487. Indeed, there are more than 20 such rights that the other petitioners have pointed out in the pleadings that
discriminate against queer couples, simply on the account of the fact that they are not married. These include a wide
plethora of rights- from a right to make medical decisions on behalf of their partner to making sure that both parents
have parental rights over the children born in the wedlock.
488. These rights include:
a. Section 80-C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 provides for deductions of certain sums for computing the total income
of the assessee when such sums are paid on behalf of spouse, specifically; - Payments or deposits made towards
life insurance for a wife or a husband [Section 80C(2)(i)]
Payments or deposits made to effect or keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity on the life of a wife or a
husband [Section 80C(2)(ii)]
A contribution to any provident fund set up by the Central Government, where such contribution is to an
account standing in the name of a wife or a husband [Section 80C(2)(v)]; and,
A contribution in the name of a wife or a husband for participation in the Unit-Linked Insurance Plan [Section
80C(2)(x)]
b. Section 6 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 requires that a nomination be made by every employee who has
completed one year of service. Section 6(3) of the Act provides that if an employee has a family at the time of
making a nomination, the nomination shall be made in favour of one or more members of his family and any
nomination made in favour of a person who is not a member of the family shall be void. "Family" is defined under
Section 2(h) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 to include amongst others the employee, their spouse,
children, dependent parents and parents of the spouse.
C. Rule 3(2) of the Payment of Wages (Nomination) Rules, 2009 under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 provides
that if an employed person has a family at the time of making a nomination, the nomination shall be in favour of
the spouse, or the spouse in preference followed by one or more members of his family. Section 2(b) of the said
Rules does not include a non-marital partner in the definition of 'family', which is defined under Rule 2(b) to
include a spouse, minor or dependent child and dependent parents.
d. Clause 61 of the Employee's Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 [framed under the Employees' Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952] requires the employee to make a nomination conferring the right to receive
the amount that may stand to his credit in the fund in the event of his death. Clause 2(g) of the said Scheme
defines "family" to include a wife, a husband, dependants or widow of son and children. Clause provides
that if the member of the scheme has a family at the time of making a nomination, the nomination shall be in
favour of one or more persons belonging to his family. A nomination made by such person in favour of a person
not belonging to his family shall be invalid.
e.
Under Section 10A(4) of the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923, the Commissioner (appointed under Section
20 of the Act) may inform any of the dependants of a deceased workman that is it open to the dependents
to
prefer a claim for compensation. Section 2(d) of the said Act defines "dependent" to include a widow or widower,
children, the deceased's parent, and in the absence of living parents, the grandparents f. Under the Pradhan
Mantri Shram Yogi Maan-dhan Yojana, passed under the Unorganized Workers' Social Security Act, 2008, a
subscriber would receive a minimum assured pension of Rs. 3000 per month after attaining the age of 60 years
and in the event of the death of the subscriber, the spouse of the beneficiary shall be entitled to receive half of
the pension as family pension; which benefit is also not available to same-sex partners. No person other the
spouse of the subscriber may receive the benefit of family pension.
g. Section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 provides for spousal privilege, i.e., immunity to married people
from being compelled to disclose any communication made to them during marriage by any person to whom
they are married. They shall also not be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person who
made it, or his representative in interest consents.
3. Hindu Marriage Act and Marriage Equality
3.1 Interpretation of Hindu Marriage Act
489. A plain reading of the Hindu Marriage Act, S. 5 will show that a marriage can be solemnised between 'any two
Hindus'.
490. The statute, in itself does not contain any bar against marriage of a queen couple. It is a well-accepted
principle that social legislation, like the one in question must be liberally interpreted, and the interpretation must be
done so as to advance the cause of the society at large. The same must not be interpreted to cause hardship (see, U.P.
491. So, the Hindu Marriage Act has to be interpreted such that it allows a marriage between same sex couples.
492. While allowing a marriage between a transwoman and a man, the Madras High Court has adopted a similar
8779.
493. Apart from religious beliefs and purely religious rites, the practice of religion includes acts incidental to
religion. (see, Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras V. Shri Lakshmindra Thritha Swamian of Sri. Shirur
Mutt, (1954) SCR 1005 ('Shirur Mutt'); Ratilal Panachand Gandhi V. State of Bombay, AIR 1954 SC 388).
494. It has been the established position in law that that personal law does not constitute 'law.'
495. Article 13 of the Constitution, states that "all laws in force in [...] India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution, in SO far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of [Part III], shall [...] be
void", with laws including "custom or usage [...] having the force of law".
496. In State of Bombay V. Narasu Appa Mali ('Narasu Appa Mali'), a statute criminalised bigamy among Hindus
but exempted Muslims. Since it touched on marriage, this affected the 'personal law' of Hindus. Nevertheless, the
Bombay High Court upheld it. This is relevant because- First, it held that personal law was not included in the
definition of 'laws' in Article 13, and secondly, personal law custom or usage, since custom or usage represented a
deviation from personal law was not law as well. (State of Bombay V. Narasu Appa Mali, AIR 1952 Bom 84., para 86-
90).
OnLine SC 1690, at paragraph 274, he stated that Gajendragadkar, J.'s opinion that personal laws are not 'law' under
Article 13 was incorrect. The judgement of Chandrachud J further held that Narasu Appa Mali's reasoning was flawed
but left it to future courts to overrule it (See para 278). The remaining judges in the majority in the case did not
comment on Narasu Appa Mali, though they concurred in the ruling.
498. However the foundational issue in Narsau Appa Mali has been eroded. For example, in C. Masilamani
Mali, repeated the proposition that personal laws are derived from scriptures and not the Constitution, but
nevertheless held that such would be void under Article 13 if they violated Fundamental Rights.
499. Thus, all personal laws have to be interpreted in light of the principles of the constitution and the idea of
constitutional morality.
500. However, the position in Narsu Appu, Justices Chagla and Gajendragadkar held that uncodified personal laws
cannot be tested on the touchstone of fundamental rights guaranteed under Part 111 of the Indian Constitution.
501. It is submitted that what entails under religious laws has changed over time, and law has been an effective
tool for the social change. Traditional Hindu law required a girl to be married before puberty. (See, Ruth Vanita, Love's
Rite, p 6.) On the death of her husband, she was to perform Sati and burn herself over the funeral pyre of her now
dead husband. Over time, the law stepped in and effectuated change in these practices, and thus, in religion.
502. Under the Indian legal system, with the decision in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community V. State of
Maharashtra, WP Civil No. NO. 740 OF 1986, it is now well established that religious mores when not in line with
constitutional morality, will be susceptible to judicial review.
503. The same is writ large in the Hindu Marriage Act too. As an illustration, the definition of custom or usage has a
proviso which says- provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy'.
504. A perusal of Hindu theological literature will show that the supposed rule against marriage equality is not
certain, and it certainly is opposed to public policy when one looks at the cavalcade of rights and benefits that are not
extended to same sex partners. (See, Ruth Vanita (2004). "Wedding of Two Souls" : Same-Sex Marriage and Hindu
Traditions. Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion, 20(2), 119-135. doi : 10.2307/25002506)
505. To the contrary, priests have performed Hindu weddings for same sex couples, based on the belief that Hindu
marriage is between souls, which are not bound to any particular gender. (See, Ruth Vanita, Democratising Marriage
:
Consent, Custom and the Law in LAW LIKE LOVE : QUEER PERSPECTIVES ON LAW 338 (Arvind Narrain & Alok Gupta
eds., 2011)
4. Foreign Marriage Act
506. The Foreign Marriages Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as FMA) was enacted to regulate marriages of citizens
of India outside India.
507. Section 4 of the Act categorically states that a marriage between "parties" may be solemnized under this Act,
provided that at least one of the two parties has to be a citizen of India.
508. A bare perusal of the act shows that it does not, in any way, bar the registration of marriage of a couple
belonging to the non-heterosexual LGBTQIA community validly married in a foreign jurisdiction.
509. Section 17 of the Act, requires the foreign marriage to not be in contravention with local laws, i.e. the laws of
the country where it is solemnized. This provision allows for registration of marriage when it has been duly solemnised
in a foreign country in accordance with the law of that country, between two parties one of whom was a citizen of
India, and an application has to be made in writing to the Marriage Officer in India to be registered under S. 7(1) (a)
and (b). The same procedure can be adopted in the country by applying to the Indian Embassy in that country.
510. It is submitted, that like the Hindu Marriage Act, the Foreign Marriage is a social statute and thus, has to be
liberally interpreted, and the interpretation must be done so as to advance the cause of the society at large. The same
must not be interpreted to cause hardship (see, U.P. SEB V. Shiv Mohan Singh, supra).
5. Special Marriage Act, its limited unconstitutionality
511. The Special Marriage Act was enacted in 1954 to allow citizens of India to solemnize inter-faith and inter-caste
marriages without the need to renounce their religion. It is submitted that the Petitioners belong to different faiths
and will need to get married under the Special Marriage Act.
512. Section 6(1) provides for the recording of notice given under Section 5 and entering of a true copy of it in the
Marriage Notice Book. The second part of this clause provides that such book shall be open for inspection to any person
desirous of inspecting the same.
513. Under S. 6(2) the notice of intended marriage provided by the couple under S. 5 must be kept in a
conspicuous place in the Marriage Officer's office.
514. Section 7 of the Act provides for raising of objection by "any" person to the marriage notice of intending
couples on the grounds specified in Section 4 of the Act. Further S. 8 and S. 9 of the Special marriage act provide that
the Marriage Officer must inquire into any objections received to the marriage under S. 7. The Officer can uphold the
objection and refuse to solemnize the marriage, and that while doing so, the Marriage Officer will have all the powers
of a civil court when trying a suit.
515. Several couples who marry under the SMA are subject to violent threats by families, caste organisations and
at times, even death. Various press reports show the gravity of difficulties faced by them, including the problems
created by the framework of the SMA.
516. Reports of honour killings and violence against inter caste and inter religious couples are predominant. It is
the submission of the petitioners that the violence will be replicated when they, as queen couples put up such notice.
517. The article titled 'Interfaith Marriages and Negotiated Spaces' written by Shwetha Varma and Neelam
Sukhramani, published in Society and Culture in South Asia 4 (I) 16-43, South Asian University, 2017 lists various
problems such as excommunication, parental alienation and violence faced by inter- religious and inter-caste couples.
518. The details of the couples marrying under the SMA is through the public notice under Sections 6(2) and 6(3)
of the Act.
519. In Lata Singh V. State of U.P., AIR SCW 3499, this Hon'ble Court had expressed its anguish over the
increasing violence over the inter caste and inter religious marriages.
marriages has been stressed by this Hon'ble Court. The impugned provisions act as hindrances to the said aspiration.
521. It is well known that queen persons often do not come out of the closet for fear of retribution on account of
their sexuality. As a result, such a notice will force them to come out, and put them in harm's way. Thus, there is a
legitimate threat of violence from not just their families, who may not be accepting, but also from other persons. This
is not just a violation of their right to life but also a violation of the right to privacy of the queen couple.
522. The United Nations Human Rights Committee has emphasized that States have an obligation to take
appropriate measures to prevent and respond to acts of violence, as well as to protect individuals from foreseeable
threats to life or bodily integrity proceeding from State or private actors. (See, Human Rights Committee, General
Comment No. 35 (CCPR/C/GC/35), 2014, at para. 9.)
523. Article 2 of the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women notes that violence against women
encompasses violence within the family, within the community, and physical, sexual or psychological violence
perpetrated and condoned by the State, wherever it occurs.
524. LGBTI individuals in all regions are at particular risk of targeted violence at the hands of private actors. Such
violence may be physical or psychological (including murder, beatings, kidnappings, rape and sexual assault, threats,
coercion and arbitrary deprivations of liberty).
525. These attacks constitute a form of gender-based violence, driven by a desire to punish those seen as defying
gender norms.
526. LGBTI people are among the victims of killings committed in the name of culture, tradition or religion, carried
out against those seen by family or community members as having brought "shame" or "dishonour" on a family, often
for being perceived to transgress gender norms, for sexual behaviour including actual or assumed same-sex sexual
activity, or based on sex characteristics. See for example, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
"The Protection of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Asylum-Seekers and Refugees", 2010 at para. 53.
(See, See for example, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), "The Protection of Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Asylum-Seekers and Refugees", 2010 at para. 53).
527. Examples include cases of gay men who have been kidnapped, beaten and humiliated, with film clips of their
abuse shared on social media; transgender people harassed, beaten and sexually abused; and lesbians assaulted and
raped.
fundamental right. More importantly, therein this Hon'ble Court specifically dealt with informational privacy. (See also
301)
529. The Law Commission of India in its consultation paper dated 31.08.2018 on 'Reform of Family law', has
recommended to remove the provision which mandates 30 days for publicising notice under the SMA as it discourages
inter-caste and inter-religious marriages.
530. It is submitted that this could lead to an invasion of the Petitioners' privacy inordinately and turn their
relationship into a public spectacle. It is submitted that this will heighten the dangers that will be posed to queen
couples.
531. It is submitted that the legality of various additional requirements with regard to publication of notice of
intended marriage under Section 6 of the Special Marriage Act has been challenged in Av State of Haryana (CWP No.
15296 of 2018 (O&M)), Kuldeep Singh Meena V. State of Rajasthan (D.B. Civil Writs No. 17080/2017), and in Pranav
Kumar Mishra V. Govt. of Net. of Delhi (WP(C) No. 748/2009).
532. In Kuldeep Singh Meena V. State of Rajasthan (D.B. Civil Writs No. 17080/2017), the Delhi High Court held
that sending notices to the residences of the parties to marriage is violative of their right to privacy and is an
unwarranted procedure.
533. Sections 6(2), 6 (3), 7 and 8 violates the right to equality and non-discrimination, privacy and dignity are
liable to be struck down being violative of their rights under Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of the Constitution.
Failure to recognise non-heterosexual marriage falls foul of Article 14
534. Article 14 provides for equal protection of laws and the equality before the law. It is well established by a
catena of cases that Article 14 permits classification, based on intelligible differentia, provided that such classification
bears a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
The Classification Test
535. A perusal of the judgements by this Hon'ble Court will show that Courts across the Country have
unequivocally acknowledged the right of consenting adults to marry a partner of their choice. However, such rights
have not been extended to queen couples.
536. Various High Courts have extended protection to queen partners, in tacit acknowledgement of their
relationship. It is thus, submitted that the petitioners have a right to marry a partner of their choice, irrespective of
their gender or sexual orientation. (See, for example Rohit Sagar V. State of Uttarakhand, Writ Petition (CRL) No. 2254
of 2021).
537. The non-recognition of the right of LGBTQIA+ persons to get married to queen individual is a violation of
Article 14. This is in violation of well settled equality jurisprudence of Article 14 laid down by this Hon'ble Court.
538. While reasonable classification is permissible, such classification must be based upon some real and
substantial distinction bearing a reasonable and just relation to the object sought to be attained, and the classification
cannot be made arbitrarily and without any substantial basis. (See, State of Bombay V. F.N. Balsara, AIR 1951 SC 318
at paragraph 19).
539. There may be a reasonable classification based on the intelligible differentia of biological sex on which basis
the state argues that marriage can only between a biological man and a biological woman.
540. However the classification test further requires that the classifictation must have rational nexus to the object
sought to be achieved.
541. In this context the idea or purpose of marriage becomes important.
542. The state argues that the purpose of marriage is to perpetuate the human race. Therefore, and necessarily
marriage must be between heterosexual couples. The notion of marriage is, accordingly, to be able to have
heterosexual sex to procreate.
543. This notion of marriage is outdated. First of all, this notion doesn't recognize that large numbers of people get
married for companionship. Second, even those who want children can have them, with ARTs and like technologies like
surrogacy. Thus queen couples can also procreate.
544. Thus, even if it is accepted that the marriage is for procreation, it is submitted purported classification has no
relationship to the object sought to be achieved.
545. It is therefore submitted that non-recognition of the right of LGBTQIA+ persons to get married to individuals
of the same sex as theirs, or, or any of the LGBTQI+ persons, is a violation of Article 14 insofar that the object sought
to be achieved is invalid in the eyes of the law. The purpose that the State seeks to achieve are outdated, and cannot
find space in our constitutional morality, because the Constitution is a transformative document.
The Manifest Arbitrariness Test
546. The petitioners also submit that non recognition of same sex marriages does not just also doesn't not meet
the manifestly arbitrary test.
review of case law under Article 14, which dealt with legislation being struck down, has held that one of the ground
548. The thread of reasonableness runs through the entire fundamental rights chapter. What is manifestly arbitrary
is obviously unreasonable and being contrary to the rule of law, would violate Article 14. (See, Nikesh Tarachand Shah
married to individuals of the same sex, on any of the LGBTQI+ persons, is a violation of Article 14 insofar that it
classifies them on the basis of their sexual orientation and such classification is unreasonable, and manifestly arbitrary
and therefore illegal.
549. The text of Section 9 (1) of the Constitution of South Africa is akin to that of Article 14 of the Constitution of
Court of South Africa ruled unanimously that same-sex couples have a constitutional right to marry. The ration of that
judgment is equally applicable here.
Under Article 15 discrimination based on gender is not permitted
550. Article 15 provides that the State cannot discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. Clause 1 prohibits the state form discriminating against citizens on grounds
only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
includes "gender", held that discrimination merely on the grounds of gender or sexual orientation is violative of Article
15. This court held that sexual orientation is a prohibited ground of discrimination. in the application of law under
Article 14. The Supreme Court held that the term "person" under Article 14 is gender-neutral and includes all genders.
It also held that "sex" in the context of discrimination under Article 15, includes "gender identity", and the same is
fluid or a spectrum as opposed to merely a binary of male and female. It therefore concluded that sex discrimination
under both Articles 14 and 15 (amongst several provisions in the Constitution) includes discrimination on the basis of
genden identity and sexual orientation. (See paragraphs 81, 82, 83, 113).
552. Thus it is submitted that not permitting queen couples to marry a person of their choice, while recognising the
choice for their cis gender counterparts falls in the face of Aarticle 15.
553. The denial of recognition of marriage is contrary to the fabric of Constitutional morality, which is governed by
the rule of law and therefore the only test that same sex marriage must pass is the test of constitutional morality. The
idea of what constitutes constitutional morality has been elucidated upon in the judgment passed by Hon'ble High
paragraph 79.
The non-recognition of Same-sex Marriage Violates freedom of Expression under Article 19(1)(a)
554. The right to marry a person of one's choice is an integral part of the freedom of expression as read by the
Supreme Court in Navtej and NALSA, and the non-recognition of the right of LGBTQ+ persons to get married to
individuals of the same sex as theirs, or any other LGBTQI+ persons, is violative of their freedom of Expression, as
guaranteed to all citizens under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
555. For those who believe in the institution of marriage, to get married is one of the highest forms of expressing
one's love and commitment to one's partner. Insofar that the State prohibits a person to get married to the person of
their choice, the State is not only, through uncanalized power, restricting the choices of citizens but is also denying
them the right to the exercise their expression, thereby violating their rights under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution.
556. It is well established that sexuality and gender expression are a part of the freedom of speech and expression
and thus, protected by Article 9(1)(a)
Sexuality and Marriage are forms of expression
aspect of identity. Choices in matters of sexuality are reflective of the human desire for expression. Sexuality cannot
be construed purely as a physiological attribute. In its associational attributes, it links up with the human desire to be
intimate with a person of one's choice. Sharing of physical intimacies is a reflection of choice. In allowing individuals to
make those choices in a consensual sphere, the Constitution acknowledges that even in the most private of zones, the
individual must have the ability to make essential decisions. Sexuality cannot be disassociated from the human
personality. For, to be human involves the ability to fulfil sexual desires in the pursuit of happiness. (see paragraph
169, opinion of DY Chandrachud J)
558. The ill-treatment of queen persons chiefly takes the form of denials of equality. These people are subject to
violations of freedom and inflictions of severe harms. Still, these violations and inflictions are usually perpetrated with
an eye to their serving as vehicles for the denial of equality. In making a positive declaration in this matter, this court
will move one tiny step ahead in ensuring true equality.
559. It is time that the Court moves away from patriarchal notions of family and move towards an institution that is
truly in line with the times that we live in and recognise marriage as a form of expression.
The Right to Intimate Association is Protected by 19(1)(c)
560. The right to intimate association refers to the right of individuals to maintain close familial or other private
associations free from state interference. Such rights include the right to marriage, the rearing of children, and the
right to habitate with relatives.
561. The right to form associations under 19(1)(c) is a broad right and should be interpreted liberally. The right to
form associations should include two types of associations : firstly expressive associations, such as workers' unions
and second, intimate associations in the nature of relationships and marriage. The same has been included in the right
to privacy also. (See p. 415 of Justice Bobde's Opinion in K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India, (Privacy-9J) (2017) 10
562. The US Supreme Court had asserted as early as Meyer V. Nebraska (1923) and Pierce V. Society of sisters
(1925).
5 that the Constitution protected the freedom to marry and raise one's children, and Skinner V. Oklahoma
(1942) had subjected a compulsory sterilization law to strict scrutiny. But the modern beginning for the freedom of
intimate association was Justice William O. Douglas's opinion for the Court in Griswold V. Connecticut (1965).
564. The right to marry has been recognized as a substantive right in Loving V. Virginia (1967) and Zablocki V.
Redhail (1978). The right to use contraceptives has been extended to unmarried persons in Eisenstadt V. Baird (1972)
on an equal protection theory, and even the right to advertise and sell them has been defended in Carey V. Population
Services International (1977) on the basis of the first amendment and the privacy right of potential buyers of
contraceptive pills, married or not.
decisions by married persons, concerning the intimacies of their physical relationship, even when not intended to
produce offspring, are a form of "liberty" protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In doing
so, it relied on the jurisprudence of the right to intimate association laid down previously in Griswold V. Connecticut,
381 U.S. 479, 85 S.Ct. 1678, 14 L.Ed.2d 510 (1965).
566. It is further submitted that in five cases across the United States, upholding the right of intimate association.
A number of claims were presented asserting that there were compelling reasons that justified restricting the right of
intimate association through criminal laws prohibiting sodomy. In all of the cases, these claims were rejected.
567. The US Supreme Court further held that this protection extends to intimate choices by unmarried as well as
married persons. (See Carey V. Population Services International, 431 U.S. 678, 97 S.Ct. 2010, 52 L.Ed.2d 675
(1977); Eisenstadt V. Baird, 405 U.S. 438, 92 S.Ct. 1029, 31 L.Ed.2d 349 (1972)). And so, in depriving queen couples
of the 20 odd rights, the government is violating the right of intimate association. A declaration to the effect that all
same sex couples have the same rights as their heterosexual counterparts would be a necessary if this court holds in
the favour of the petitioners.
568. It is submitted that previous decisions of this court where they held that the right to marry a person of one's
choice is a fundamental right has extended to heterosexual couples only. This is recognition of the right of intimate
association for these couples. This right has however, not been read into Article 19(1)(c) and the petitioners submit
that the same should be done.
569. It is only apropos that the court recognises these rights for same sex couples. This is not a new principle. All
that the petitioners are asking is to reiterate a principle already laid down in Navtej (supra), albeit in a setting of a
different right, that : the State has no business to intrude into these personal matters. Non can societal notions of
heteronormativity regulate constitutional liberties based on sexual orientation." (See para 613, opinion of DY
Chandrachud J).
The Right to Life and the Right to Marry a Person of one's choice is Protected by Article 21
570. This section will argue that the right to marry is a fundamental part of the right to privacy as has been
recognised in Puttuswamy. The petitioners will further argue that the right to autonomy, which flows from privacy
includes that a person can marry a partner of their own choosing. Not allowing queen couples to marry a person of
their own choice is an affront to their dignity. Finally, through research in the health sciences we will show how
marriage has health benefits for not just the parties to a marriage, but to the queen community as a whole.
The Right to Privacy is a Fundamental Right
571. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in KS Puttaswamy V. Union of India, (K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J.) V. Union of
21 of the Indian Constitution. Pertinently, while writing the ratio for the majority, Hon'ble Justice DY Chandrachud (as
he then was), examined the reasoning for arriving at the decision laid down "Sexual orientation is an essential
attribute of privacy. Discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual orientation is deeply offensive to the
dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality demands that the sexual orientation of each individual in society
must be protected on an even platform. The right to privacy and the protection of sexual orientation lie at the core of
the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution.
572. This Court in Puttaswamy elucidated that privacy is the entitlement of every individual, with no distinction to
society irrespective of social class or economic status is entitled to the intimacy and autonomy which privacy protects.
It is privacy as an intrinsic and core feature of life and personal liberty which enables an individual to stand up against
a programme of forced sterilisation. Then again, it is privacy which is a powerful guarantee if the State were to
introduce compulsory drug trials of non-consenting men or women. The sanctity of marriage, the liberty of procreation,
the choice of a family life and the dignity of being are matters which concern every individual irrespective of social
strata or economic well-being. The pursuit of happiness is founded upon autonomy and dignity. Both are essential
attributes of privacy which makes no distinction between the birth marks of individuals.
The right to autonomy under Article 21 includes the right to choose a partner of one's choice to marry
573. It is a well-established fact, that an adult person is free to marry a person of their choice, and the same is
protected under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
country, and once a person becomes a major, he or she can marry whosoever he/she likes."
575. In In Re : Indian Woman says gang-raped on orders of Village Court published in Business &
protect the Fundamental Rights of its citizens; and an inherent aspect of Article 21 of the Constitution would be the
freedom of choice in marriage."
choosing her partner in life is a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded on individual choice that is recognized in
the Constitution under Article 19."
to piously be given primacy."
whether within or outside marriage lies within the exclusive domain of each individual. Intimacies of marriage lie
within a core zone of privacy, which is inviolable."
579. Thus, when such a right is available to heterosexual couples, the same should be extended to queer couple
too. Equality at its core does not merely imply that one should treat similar cases similarly, but it means that people
should have equal access to whatever (other) rights there are. It is in line with the constitutional philosophy that
substantive justice gives way to procedural justice.
The denial of the Right to Marry is an affront to dignity
580. The non-recognition of the right of LGBTQ+ persons to get married to individuals of the same sex as theirs,
and others in the LGBTAQI+ communities, leads to the violation of their right to dignity, which is germane to the
exercising of rights under Article 21 of the Constitution.
includes the right to live with human dignity and all that goes along with it, namely, the bare necessaries of life such
as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter and facilities for reading, writing and expressing oneself in diverse forms,
freely moving about and mixing and commingling with fellow human beings. Every act which offends against or
impairs human dignity would constitute deprivation pro tanto of this right to live and it would have to be in accordance
with reasonable, fair and just procedure established by law which stands the test of other fundamental rights." (see
paragraph 8).
582. The non-recognition of the right to same sex Marriage deprives persons of the LGBTQI communities of social
recognition of their unions and therefore amounts to them being treated as an inferior class of citizens and thus,
violates their dignity.
Not allowing marriage and its effect on Health
583. There is growing body of literature that has evolved in recent times that shows that that there are far more
important benefits to marriage equality than just substantive equality. There are significant healthcare benefits of
protecting same sex marriage, and thus, the same is essential in ensuring the right to health.
584. This must be foregrounded in existing research that shows:
i. Adolescents with same-sex attraction are more than twice as likely as their peers to attempt suicide. (See, Russell
ST, Joyner K. Adolescent sexual orientation and suicide risk : evidence from a national study. Am J Public Health.
2001; 91 (8) : 1276 - 81).
ii. Gay men are at higher risk of contracting HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, while lesbians are less
likely to access preventive services for cancer. (See, HealthyPeople.gov. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
health. Washington (DC) : Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion)
iii. LGBT people have higher rates of smoking and of alcohol and drug abuse. (See, Mayer KH, Bradford JB, Makadon
HJ, Stall R, Goldhammer H, Landers S. Sexual and gender minority health : what we know and what needs to be
done. Am J Public Health. 2008; 98 (6) : 989 - 95.
iv. Elderly LGBT people are more likely to experience social isolation and face barriers to accessing needed care.
(Fredriksen-Goldsen KI, Kim HJ. The science of conducting research with LGBT older adults-an introduction to
aging with pride : National Health, Aging and Sexuality/Gender Study (NHAS). Gerontologist. 2017; 57 (Suppl
1) S1 S14 See also, Lalwani, Vijayta. "Long Shadows in the Sunset." Queer Beat Media, 30 Jan. 2023,
www.queerbeat.org/stories/long-shadows-in-the-sunset.Accessed 15 Feb. 2023
585. A 2010 study of couples in a state, published in Health Affairs, found that gay men in relationships were less
than half as likely as married heterosexual men to receive coverage through their partners' employer. (See, Ponce NA,
Cochran SD, Pizer JC, Mays VM. The effects of unequal access to health insurance for same-sex couples in California.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2010; 29 (8) : 1539 - 48.)
586. The results of one of the earliest studies were published in 2004 in the Journal of Family Psychology. Its
authors reported that gay men in Vermont who were in civil unions were closer to their biological families, compared to
peers who were not in civil unions (See, Solomon SE, Rothblum ED, Balsam KF Pioneers in partnership : lesbians and
gay male couples in civil unions compared with those not in civil unions and married heterosexual siblings. J Fam
Psychol. 2004; 18 (2) : 275 - 86).
587. This becomes important in a society like India where families form a. essential part of the society.
588. A study from Massachusetts, for example, compared health care use and expenditures among more than
1,200 gay and bisexual male patients at a community-based health centre in the twelve months before and then the
twelve months after the same-sex marriage law was adopted in the state and found that married heterosexuals were
significantly less distressed than nonmarried heterosexuals. In adjusted pairwise comparisons, married heterosexuals
had the lowest psychological distress, and lesbian, gay, and bisexual persons who were not in legalized relationships
had the highest psychological distress. (See, Wight RG, Leblanc AJ, Lee Badgett MV. Same-sex legal marriage and
psychological well-being : findings from the California Health Interview Survey. Am J Public Health. 2013; 103 (2) :
339 46)
589. A 2013 study in California found lower levels of psychological distress among gay, lesbian, and bisexual adults
who were in same-sex marriages, compared to those who weren't. "Being in a legally recognized same-sex
relationship, marriage in particular, appeared to diminish mental health differentials between heterosexuals and
lesbian, gay, and bisexual persons," concluded the authors of the study, also published in the American Journal of
Public Health. (See, Wight RG, Leblanc AJ, Lee Badgett MV. Same-sex legal marriage and psychological well-being :
findings from the California Health Interview Survey. Am J Public Health. 2013; 103 (2) : 339 46 .)
590. In view of this, and in order to protect the right to physical and mental health of a huge population, it is
incumbent that this court protect the rights of same-sex couples.
6. International Law
591. India is a signatory to multiple international treaties, and these treaties lay down an obligation in India to
recognise same sex marriages. Thus the government has a duty to recognise same sex relationships. When the
government refuses to act on these treaties, this Court can invoke its powers under Article 32 to fill in the gap of the
multiple obligations under international statutes, UN Declarations, and Yogyakarta principles that were incumbent on
it, the Government of India had not done anything for the welfare of transgender persons. It was the opinion of the
Court that it cannot be a mute spectator and thus, must act in to fill out the gaps. That, along with Article 235 of the
Constitution, Courts have recognised that there must be recognition of international law as a source of law. (See
paragraph 23 to 26, 53, 54, 55, 58, and 60).
Relevant Articles from International Covenants
INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS : 1CCPR
ARTICLE 2
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or
international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be
independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty.
ARTICLE 3
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.
ARTICLE 7
All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection
of
the law. All are entitled to equal protection against any discrimination in violation of this
Declaration and against any incitement to such discrimination.
ARTICLE 12
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or
correspondence, non to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the
protection of the law against such interference or attacks.
ARTICLE 16
Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have
the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage,
during marriage and at its dissolution.
Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection
by society and the State.
ARTICLE 19
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom
to
hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers.
ICESSR INTERNATIONAL COVENANT FOR ECONOMIC SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
ARTICLE 2 (2)
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to guarantee that the rights
enunciated in the present Covenant will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,
property, birth or other status.
CCPR : IENTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS
ARTICLE 2 (1)
Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to respect and to ensure to
all
individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the
present Covenant, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status
ARTICLE 17 (1)
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home
or correspondence, non to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation
ARTICLE 17 (2)
Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks
ARTICLE 23 (1)
The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection
by society and the State
ARTICLE 23 (2)
The right of men and women of marriageable age to marry and to found a family shall
be
recognized.
ARTICLE 26
All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal
protection of the law. In this respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee
to all persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any ground such as
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,
property, birth or other status
Article 2 (1)
States Parties shall respect and ensure the rights set forth in the present Convention to each
child within their jurisdiction without discrimination of any kind, irrespective of the child's or
his or her parent's or legal guardian's race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth or other status
Other Documents
593. A number of United Nations and other human rights experts have also elaborated the Yogyakarta Principles on
the application of international human rights law in relation to sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression
and sex characteristics. (See, Yogyakarta Principles, 2006 and Yogyakarta Principles plus 10, 2017.)
594. These core principles are reaffirmed through international human rights covenants and treaties, many of which
contain open-ended provisions against discrimination, 13 and have been interpreted to include discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex characteristic. (See for example, Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, General Comments No. 20 (/C.12/GC/20), 2009, para. 27, and No. 22 E/C.12/GC/22), 2016, at
paras. 9, 23; Toonen V. Australia, Human Rights Committee, Communication No. 499/1992 (CCPR/C/50/D/499/1992),
para. 8.7; Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comments No. 4 (CRC/GC/2003/4), 2003, para. 6, and No. 9
(CRC/C/GC/9), 2007, para. 8; Committee against Torture, General Comments No. 2 (CAT/C/GC/2), 2008, para. 21,
and No. 3 (CAT/C/GC/3), 2012, paras. 32, 39.)
595. The body of United Nations experts tasked by States with monitoring compliance with the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - has repeatedly urged States Parties to guarantee equal rights to all individuals,
as established in the Covenant, regardless of their sexual orientation and gender identity, and called on States to
address violence and discrimination against LGBTI people. Ensuring the right to marriage is a necessary part of this.
(See for example, Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on Ecuador (CCPR/C/ECU/CO/6) 2016, paras.
11-12; Venezuela (CCPR/C/VEN/CO/4), 2015, para. 8; Austria (CCPR/C/AUT/CO/5), 2015, paras. 11-12; Republic of
Korea (CCPR/C/KOR/CO/4), 2015, para. 13; Iraq (CCPR/C/IRQ/CO/5), 2013, para. 12(d); Chile (CCPR/C/CHL/CO/5),
2009, at para. 16.)
596. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), which monitors compliance with the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, has affirmed that the non-discrimination guarantee of
the Covenant includes sexual orientation and gender identity and intersex status.
597. It has reflected this in general comments relating to the rights to sexual and reproductive health, work, water,
social security, and health, as well as in a general comment on the general meaning of the non-discrimination
guarantee. As this written submission will show, that depriving LGBTQIA persons of the right to marry has a
dangerous consequence for the physical, mental and reproductive health of these persons. (See, Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comments No. 23 /C.12/GC/23), 2016, paras. 11, 48, 65(a); No. 22
(E/C.12/GC/22), 2016, at para. 23; No. 20 (E/C.12/GC/20), 2009, para. 32; No. 19 (E/C.12/GC/19), para. 29; No. 18
(E/C.12/GC/18), 2006, para. 12(b); No. 15 (E/C.12/2002/11), 2003, para. 13; No. 14 (E/C.12/2000/4), 2000, para.
18.)
598. The Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) also interprets the right to non-discrimination in Article 2 of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child to include sexual orientation19 gender identity20 and intersex status/sex
characteristics and has regularly addressed violations of the rights of children who are or who are perceived to be
LGBTI. (See, Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 20 (CRC/C/GC/20), 2016, para. 34, Joint
statement of United Nations and regional human rights experts, "End violence and harmful medical practices on
intersex children and adults", 24 October 2016, available at NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?
NewsID=20739&LangID=E)
599. In 2011 and 2014, the Human Rights Council passed resolutions in which it expressed concern regarding
violence and discrimination against LGBT persons and requested reports from the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. The High Commissioner's two reports. published in 2012 and 2015 respectively. pointed to a pattern of
systematic violence and discrimination directed at LGBTQIA people in all regions - from discrimination in employment,
health care and education, to criminalization and targeted physical attacks, even killings. (See, Reports of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on "Discriminatory Laws and Practices and Acts of Violence against
Individuals Based on their Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity" (A/HRC/19/41), 2011, and "Discrimination and
violence against individuals based on their sexual orientation and gender identity" (A/HRC/29/23), 2015.)
600. The legal obligations of States to safeguard the human rights of LGBTI people are well established in
international human rights law on the basis of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, international human rights
treaties and customary international law. All people, irrespective of sexual orientation, gender identity or sex
characteristics, are entitled to enjoy the protections provided by international human rights law, including rights to
life, security of person and privacy, the right to be free from torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, the right to be free
from discrimination, equality before the law, and the right to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly.
601. As the High Commissioner has stated, The struggle for the rights of LGBTI people is a core part of the human
rights struggle." (see, Remarks by Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to the
LGBTI Core Group High-level Event on Violence against LGBTI Persons, United Nations Headquarters, 25 September
2018).
602. In the case of G. V. Australia, the Human Rights Committee found that Australia's refusal for a trans woman to
change the sex marker on her birth certificate to align with her gender identity, unless she divorced from her spouse,
constituted arbitrary or unlawful interference with her privacy and family, as well as discrimination on the basis of
marital and transgender status.(G V. Australia, Human Rights Committee, Communication No. 2172/2012
(CCPR/C/119/D/2172/2012), 2017, paras. 7.10 and 7.15).
603. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has called on States to ensure that individuals in
same-sex unions are entitled to equal enjoyment of their economic, social and cultural rights, including by undertaking
a comprehensive review of legislation to ensure de jure equality between de facto and official unions, to legally
recognize same-sex couples and to regulate the financial effects of such relationships. (See, for example, Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding Observations on Italy (E/C.12/ITA/CO/5), 2015, para. 17; See also
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding Observations on Bulgaria (E/C.12/BGR/CO/4-5),
2012, para. 17; and on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (E/C.12/MKD/CO/2-4), 2016, paras. 25-26.)
604. When States have legally recognized same-sex marriage, it has been welcomed by various United Nations
entities. (See, Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on France (CCPR/C/FRA/CO/5), 2015, para. 3(e);
on Canada (CCPR/C/CAN/CO/6), 2015, para. 3(b); on the United Kingdom (CCPR/C/GBR/CO/7), 2015, para. 3(f); on
New Zealand (CCPR/C/NZL/CO/6), 2016, para. 3(g); Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on
discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity (A/HRC/29/23), 2015.)
V. Laws in other Countries
605. Same sex marriage is legally performed and recognized (nationwide or in some parts) in about 32 countries.
Netherlands and Belgium being the first ones to legalize respectively in December 2000 and 2003, and Slovenia being
the
latest to sanction on October 2022. The following are a few of those, according to the Pew Research Centre:
606. In May 2020, Costa Rica became the first Central American country to legalize same-sex marriage. The
country's highest court in 2018 ruled that the nation's law banning same-sex marriage was unconstitutional and said
the ban would be nullified in 18 months unless the legislature acted before then, which it did not.
607. In October 2019, same-sex marriage became legal in Northern Ireland. Although Northern Island is a
constituent of the United Kingdom, with its own parliament at Stormont, the change in its marriage laws ultimately
came about due to action by the UK's Parliament in London. British lawmakers justified the change (which was
accompanied by the legalization of abortion) because the Northern Irish parliament was suspended in January 2017
due to a stalemate between Northern Ireland's parties. Northern Ireland had been the last part of the UK where same-
sex marriage was banned; England and Wales moved to allow gay and lesbian couples to wed in 2013 and Scotland
followed in 2014.
608. On June 12, 2019 Ecuador's Constitutional Court ruled that that same-sex couples have a right to marry. The
decision, which went into effect immediately thereafter, made the Andean mountain nation the fifth country in Latin
America to allow gays and lesbians to wed.
609. On May 17, 2019, Taiwan's legislature passed a law legalizing same-sex marriage and making the island
nation the first country in Asia to permit gays and lesbians to wed. The vote in Taiwan's Legislative Yuan (the official
name of Taiwan's unicameral parliament) was prompted by a 2017 decision by the country's Constitutional Court,
which struck down a law defining marriage as being between a man and woman. The court gave the nation's
legislature until May 24, 2019, to change Taiwan's marriage laws to accommodate same-sex couples.
610. On Jan. 1, 2019, Austria joined the vast majority of Western European countries in legalizing same-sex
marriage. The country had granted gay and lesbian couples the right to enter into a civil partnership in 2010. But in
2017, Austria's highest court ruled that these partnerships are inherently discriminatory. The court also ruled that,
unless the country's legislature passed a law to the contrary, gays and lesbians should be allowed to wed by Jan. 1,
2019. Austria's legislature did not act to counter the ruling, leading to the first same-sex weddings at the beginning of
2019.
611. On Dec. 7, 2017, the Australian Parliament passed legislation allowing gay and lesbian couples to legally wed.
Passage came just three weeks after Australians voted in favor of legalizing same-sex marriage, by a 62% to 38%
margin, in a non-binding, nationwide referendum. Along with New Zealand, Australia became the second country in
the Asia-Pacific region to make same-sex marriage legal.
612. Malta's parliament almost unanimously voted to legalize same-sex marriage in July 2017, despite opposition
from the Catholic Church on the small Mediterranean island.
613. On June 30, 2017, Germany became the 15th European country to enact legislation allowing same-sex couples
to wed. The 393-226 vote in the nation's Bundestag (or Parliament) came just days after Chancellor Angela Merkel
surprised many by saying that members of her ruling Christian Democratic Union should be able to vote their
conscience on the issue even though the party formally opposes same-sex marriage.
614. On April 28, 2016, Colombia became the fourth country in Catholic-majority South America to legalize same-
sex marriage, following Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil. The country's Constitutional Court, by a 6-3 vote, ruled that
that "all people are free to choose independently to start a family in keeping with their sexual orientation receiving
equal treatment under the constitution and the law," according to the wire service Agence France-Presse.
615. Eleven years after same-sex marriage was first made legal in Massachusetts, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled
that the Constitution guarantees it throughout the country. The 5-4 decision rests in part on the court's interpretation
of the 14th Amendment, and States that limited marriages only to heterosexual couples violate the amendment's
guarantee of equal protection under the law. Before the ruling, 36 states and the District of Columbia had legalized
same-sex marriage.
616. Greenland, an autonomous territory of Denmark, was not subject to Denmark's same-sex marriage law, which
was enacted in 2012. However, legislators in Greenland passed a law in May 2015 to legalize same-sex marriage on
the world's biggest island.
617. On May 22, 2015, Catholic-majority Ireland became the first country to legalize same-sex marriage through a
popular referendum. More than six-in-ten Irish voters (62%) voted "yes" to amend the Constitution of Ireland to say
that "marriage may be contracted in accordance with law by two persons without distinction as to their sex." While
some Catholic Church leaders opposed the change, Dublin Archbishop Diarmuid Martin wrote a commentary in The
Irish Times newspaper before the referendum, saying that he would not tell people how to vote and that he had "no
wish to stuff my religious views down other people's throats." Irish Prime Minister Enda Kenny supported the "yes"
campaign.
618. Same-sex marriage became legal in Finland starting in 2017. The Finnish Parliament approved a bill legalizing
same-sex unions in November 2014, and Finland's president, Sauli Niinisto, signed the measure into law in February
2015. The bill started out as a "citizens' initiative" - a public petition with a reported 167,000 signatures. Finland
becomes the last of the five Nordic countries to legalize same-sex marriage, joining Denmark, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden.
619. On June 18, Luxembourg's parliament, the Chamber of Deputies, overwhelmingly approved legislation to allow
gay and lesbian couples to wed and to adopt children. The bill, which took effect in early 2015, was championed by the
country's prime minister, Xavier Bettel, who is openly gay. The changes are part of a larger rewrite of the tiny
country's marriage laws - the first major overhaul since 1804. In addition to allowing same-sex couples to marry and
adopt, the legislation sets the legal age of marriage at 18 and eliminates the existing requirement that couples who
want to marry must first submit to a medical exam.
620. On Feb. 4, 2014, the Scottish Parliament voted overwhelmingly to approve legislation legalizing same-sex
marriage. In addition to allowing same-sex couples to wed, the measure gives churches and other religious groups the
option of deciding whether or not they want to conduct such marriages. The two largest churches in Scotland the
Church of Scotland and the Roman Catholic Church - oppose same-sex marriage and lobbied against the bill. The law
took effect and same-sex couples began marrying in Scotland in December 2014.
621. On July 17, 2013, Queen Elizabeth 11 gave her "royal assent" to a bill legalizing same-sex marriage in England
and Wales. The day before, the measure had won final passage in the British Parliament after months of debate. The
law only applies to England and Wales because Scotland and Northern Ireland are semi-autonomous and have
separate legislative bodies to decide many domestic issues, including the definition of marriage. While Northern
Ireland's legislature in April 2014 voted down a measure that would have legalized same-sex marriage, the Scottish
Parliament passed a bill to legalize same-sex marriage in February 2014. The new law in England and Wales, which
was a priority for British Prime Minister and Conservative Party leader David Cameron, allowed gay and lesbian couples
to marry beginning March 29, 2014. However, the law prohibits same-sex weddings within the Church of England,
which continues to define marriage as between one man and one woman.
622. On May 14, 2013, Brazil's National Council of Justice ruled that same-sex couples should not be denied
marriage licenses, allowing same-sex marriages to begin nationwide. (Previously, about half of Brazil's 27 jurisdictions
had allowed same-sex marriage). The conservative Social Christian Party has appealed the Council of Justice's decision
to the Supreme Court, and Brazil's legislature may still weigh in on the issue, leaving some uncertainty surrounding
the future of same-sex marriage in the world's fifth-largest country.
623. On May 18, French President Francois Hollande signed into law a measure legalizing same-sex marriage,
making France the 14th country to grant gays and lesbians the right to wed. Although the bill had passed the National
Assembly and the Senate in April, Hollande's signature had to wait until a court challenge brought by the conservative
opposition party, the UMP, was resolved. On May 17, France's highest court, the Constitutional Council, ruled that the
bill was constitutional. In May 2012, Hollande was elected and his Socialist Party won majorities in both houses of
France's legislature. True to their campaign promises, Hollande and the Socialists have pushed through a law that not
only legalizes same-sex marriage but also gives gay and lesbian couples the right to adopt children-a provision that
has drawn especially strong criticism from French Catholic leaders.
624. On April 17, the New Zealand Parliament gave final approval to a measure that legalizes same-sex marriage,
making the Pacific island nation the 13th country in the world and the first in the Asia-Pacific region to allow gays and
lesbians to wed. The measure won approval by a 77-44 margin in the country's unicameral legislature, including
support from Prime Minister John Key, and was signed by the country's governor-general (a process known as royal
assent) on April 19. The law took effect in August 2013. In 2005, New Zealand enacted legislation allowing same-sex
couples to enter into civil unions. The 2013 measure not only legalizes same-sex marriage but also allows for gay and
lesbian couples to adopt children.
625. On April 10, the lower house of Uruguay's Congress passed legislation legalizing same-sex marriage, a week
after the country's Senate did so. President Jos Mujica signed the bill into law on May 3, making Uruguay the second
Latin American country to legalize same-sex marriage, following Argentina. Civil unions have been permitted in
Uruguay since 2008, and gay and lesbian couples were given adoption rights in 2009. Uruguay is among the most
secular countries in Latin America. A Pew Research Center study on the global religious landscape as of 2010 found
that roughly four-in-ten Uruguayans are unaffiliated with a particular religion. About 58 percent of Uruguayans are
Christian; in the Latin America-Caribbean region as a whole, 90 percent of the population is Christian.
626. In June 2012, Denmark's legislature passed a bill legalizing gay marriage. The measure was enacted into law
a few days later when Queen Margrethe 11 gave her royal assent to the bill. In 1989, Denmark became the first
country to allow same-sex couples to register as domestic partners. And in 2010, the country enacted a law allowing
gay couples in registered partnerships the right to adopt children. With the legalization of gay marriage, the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Denmark (which is the state church), is required to allow same-sex couples to marry in
churches. However, no member of the church's clergy is required to perform the wedding of a gay or lesbian couple. In
addition, the law leaves it up to other religious groups to determine whether or not to allow same-sex weddings in its
churches.
627. In July 2010, Argentina became the first country in Latin America to legalize same-sex marriage. In spite of
vigorous opposition from the Catholic Church and evangelical Protestant churches, the measure passed both houses of
the Argentine legislature and was signed into law by President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner. The law grants same-
sex couples who marry all the rights and responsibilities enjoyed by heterosexual couples, including the right to adopt
children. In the decade before the enactment of the same-sex marriage law, a number of local jurisdictions, including
the nation's capital, Buenos Aires, had enacted laws allowing gays and lesbians to enter into civil unions.
628. In June 2010, Portugal became the eighth country to legalize same-sex marriage. Its parliament had passed
the measure legalizing gay marriage earlier in 2010. But following its passage, Portugal's president, Anibal Cavaco
Silva, asked the Constitutional Court to review the measure. In April 2010, the Constitutional Court declared the law to
be constitutionally valid. It was signed by Silva in May of that year and took effect one month later. Portugal's gay
marriage law does not give married same-sex couples the right to adopt children.
629. A measure legalizing same-sex marriage passed the Icelandic legislature in June 2010. Public opinion polls
prior to the vote indicated broad support for the measure, and no members of the country's legislature voted against
it. Iceland had allowed same-sex couples to register as domestic partners since 1996. A decade later, the parliament
passed a measure allowing gay couples to adopt children. After the new law took effect in late June 2010, the
country's prime minister, Johanna Sigurdardottir, wed her longtime partner, Jonina Leosdottir, becoming one of the
first people to marry under the statute.
630. In April 2009, the Swedish parliament voted by an overwhelming majority to legalize same-sex marriage. Gay
couples in Sweden had been allowed to register for civil unions since 1995. The 2009 law allows gays and lesbians to
marry in both religious and civil ceremonies, but it does not require clergy to officiate at such ceremonies. The
Lutheran-affiliated Church of Sweden, to which roughly three-quarters of all Swedes belong, has offered blessings for
same-sex partnerships since January 2007. In October 2009, the church's governing board voted to allow its clergy to
officiate at same-sex marriage ceremonies.
631. Since January 2009, gay couples in Norway legally have been able to marry, adopt children and undergo
artificial insemination. The new law, which was passed in 2008, replaced a 1993 law permitting civil unions. It passed
despite resistance from members of the Christian Democratic Party and the Progress Party, as well as a public
controversy over state funding for fertility treatments for lesbian couples. The largest religious group in the country,
the Lutheran-affiliated Church of Norway, initially voted to prohibit its pastors from conducting same-sex weddings.
But the Church of Norway changed course and began sanctioning same-sex weddings in early 2017.
632. The South African parliament legalized same-sex marriage in November 2006, one year after the country's
highest court ruled that the previous marriage laws violated the South African constitution's guarantee of equal rights.
The new law allows for religious institutions and civil officers to refuse to conduct same-sex marriage ceremonies, a
provision that critics claim violates the rights of same-sex couples under the constitution. The new measure passed by
a margin of greater than five-to-one, with support coming from both the governing African National Congress as well
as the main opposition party, the Democratic Alliance. However, the traditional monarch of the Zulu people, who
account for about one-fifth of the country's population, maintains that homosexuality is morally wrong.
633. A closely divided Spanish parliament legalized same-sex marriage in 2005, guaranteeing identical rights to all
married couples regardless of sexual orientation. The new measure added language to the existing marriage statute,
which now reads, "Marriage will have the same requirements and results when the two people entering into the
contract are of the same sex or of different sexes." Vatican officials, as well as the Catholic Spanish Bishops
Conference, strongly criticized the law, and large crowds demonstrated in Madrid for and against the measure. After
the law went into effect, the country's constitutional court rejected challenges from two municipal court judges who
had refused marriage licenses to same-sex couples. The high court ruled that the lower court judges lacked legal
standing to bring the suits.
634. Same-sex couples in Canada gained most of the legal benefits of marriage in 1999 when the federal and
provincial governments extended common law marriages to gay and lesbian couples. Through a series of court cases
beginning in 2003, same-sex marriage gradually became legal in nine of the country's 13 provinces and territories.
In
2005, the Canadian Parliament passed legislation making same-sex marriage legal nationwide. In 2006, lawmakers
defeated an effort by the ruling Conservative Party of Canada to reconsider the issue, leaving the law unchanged.
635. Beginning in 1998, the Belgian parliament offered limited rights to same-sex couples through registered
partnerships. Same-sex couples could register with a city clerk and formally assume joint responsibility for a
household. Five years later, in January 2003, the Belgian parliament legalized same-sex marriage, giving gay and
lesbian couples the same tax and inheritance rights as heterosexual couples. Support for the law came from both the
Flemish-speaking North and the French-speaking South, and the law generated surprisingly little controversy across
the country. The long-dominant Christian Democratic Party, traditionally allied with the Catholic Church, was out of
power when the parliament passed the measure. The 2003 law allowed the marriages of Belgian same-sex couples and
recognized as married those from other countries where same-sex marriage was legal. Those provisions were
broadened in 2004 to allow any same-sex couple to marry as long as one member of the couple had lived in Belgium
for at least three months. In 2006, the parliament also granted same-sex partners the right to adopt children.
636. In December 2000, the Netherlands became the first country to legalize same-sex marriage when the Dutch
parliament passed, by a three-to-one margin, a landmark bill allowing the practice. The legislation gave same-sex
couples the right to marry, divorce and adopt children. The legislation altered a single sentence in the existing civil
marriage statute, which now reads, "A marriage can be contracted by two people of different or the same sex." The
only opposition in parliament came from the Christian Democratic Party, which at the time was not part of the
governing coalition. After the law went into effect, the Protestant Church in the Netherlands, which then represented
about 12% of the country's population, announced that individual congregations could decide whether to conduct
same-sex marriage ceremonies. Although Muslim and conservative Christian groups continue to oppose the law, same-
sex marriage is widely accepted by the Dutch public.
637. In 2015, the Mexican Supreme Court issued a ruling making it much easier for gay and lesbian couples to
wed. The decision gave same-sex couples the right to seek a court injunction against state laws banning gay
marriage; although it did not technically legalize same-sex unions nationwide, it was a major step in that direction.
Mexico's Supreme Court also issued a ruling in favor of same-sex marriage in 2010, saying that same-sex marriages
performed in Mexico City were valid and that they must be accepted throughout the country (Mexico City had legalized
gay marriage in December 2009). Since 2011, the southern Mexican state of Quintana Roo also has allowed gay
marriages. In 2014, the congress of the northern state of Coahuila approved same-sex marriage, and in 2015,
neighbouring Chihuahua followed suit.
vi. Conclusion and A Parting Note
638. Under international law, States have a positive obligation to provide legal recognition to couples, regardless of
sexual orientation, gender identity and sex characteristics, as well as to their children. Legal recognition may take
various forms, ranging from civil unions and civil partnerships to marriage.
639. Family law in India consists of both secular and religion-based personal laws. The debate around the
constitutional morality interfering in personal laws. An examination of other common law jurisdictions like the United
States will show that the recognition of marriage equality has bolstered constitutional arguments for recognizing non-
traditional forms of parenthood and non-marital relationships.
640. Macarena Saez, a legal scholar while writing about comparative family law argues that the judicial recognition
of marriage equality claims through the linking of the rights to dignity, autonomy and equality in different national
courts opens possibilities of transforming existing family law.
641. Excluding same-sex couples from marrying does nothing to benefit the children of opposite sex marriages or
their parents, but it does deprive children of same-sex couples the considerable benefits that flow from a stable family
structure. In truth, limiting marriage to opposite-sex couples does virtually nothing to advance procreation and child-
rearing within marriage, but it does cause considerable harm to the members of same-sex families. This view is also
held that atypical manifestations of the family were equally deserving of the protections under the Constitution.
642. It also has been argued that laws prohibiting same-sex activity, including marriage are justified by the state
interest in advancing social morality. However, it is now a well-established principle of law that social morality must
give way to constitutional morality. (See, Navtej Singh Johar, Naz Foundation, Central Board of Dawoodi Bora).
643. Because prohibiting same-sex marriage hardly advances the goal of encouraging procreation and child-rearing
within the marital relationship if that is indeed the goal of the State. Same-sex marriage will not harm traditional
families. Allowing same-sex marriage in no way interferes with procreation or child-rearing within opposite-sex
marriage, but it does harm same-sex couples and their children by denying them legal benefits, financial security, and
making child-rearing more difficult.
644. Lack of official recognition of same-sex relationships and absence of legal prohibition on discrimination can
also result in same-sex partners being discriminated against by private companies, organizations or individuals,
including health-care providers and insurance companies. (See, Transgender Europe, Trans Respect V. Transphobia
Project Legal Gender Recognition, 2017. Available fromhttp://transrespect.org/en/map/pathologization-requirement/?
submap=marriage-divorce#; UNDP, APTN, Legal Gender Recognition : A Multi-country Legal and Policy Review, 2017,
Malawi Marriage, Divorce and Family Relations Act 2015.)
645. It is submitted that States are obliged to address discrimination in this area by, inter alia, ensuring that
benefits traditionally accorded to married partners - including those related to benefits, pensions, and taxation and
inheritance - are accorded on a non-discriminatory basis. (See, Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity (A/HRC/29/23), 2015,
para. 79(h); Young V. Australia, Human Rights Committee, Communication No. 941/2000 (CCPR/C/78/D/941/2000),
paras. 10.4; OHCHR, Living Free and Equal : What States are doing to tackle violence and discrimination against
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people, 2016, p. 75).
646. This is how marriage under special Marriage act are considered under Indian Law.
647. Because the non-recognition of the Right to Same Sex Marriage violates substantial due process of law under
Article 21, when read with Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution. The effect of the conjoint reading of Articles 14, 19
and 21 of the Constitution has been detailed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohd. Arif V. Supreme Court of India,
648. The denial of recognition of marriage is contrary to the fabric of Constitutional Democracy, which is governed
by the rule of law and therefore the only test that same sex marriage must pass is the test of constitutional morality.
The idea of what constitutes constitutional morality has been elucidated upon in the judgment passed by Hon'ble High
paragraph 79. 183) Indeed, there may be religious objections to same sex marriages across faiths, but this Court has
recently in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community V. State of Maharashtra, WP (Civil) No. 740 OF 1986 held that
anti-discriminatory ethos forms a part of Constitutional morality. Therefore, the Constitutional Court ought not to
tolerate anything which takes away the right and privilege of any person to live with dignity as the concept of
Constitutional morality does not permit the Court to do so.
649. Legislation and procedures regulating marriage and civil unions should not be based on the sex assigned to a
person at birth and States should also remove other restrictions on relationship recognition, parenting or adoption on
the basis of a person's sex, gender identity or expression, including for persons who are transgender, intersex and/or
non-binary ( OHCHR, Living Free and Equal, 2016, p. 76).
650. The reason that the petitioners are praying for the declaration that the right to marry a person of choice,
irrespective of race, gender, caste, etc is because the definition and other legally recognized relationships as
exclusively between men and women further exclude non-binary persons who identify as neither. (See, Byrne J.,
License to be yourself : Marriage and Forced Divorce, Brief 1 of 4, Legal gender recognition issue briefs, Open Society
Foundations, 2015.)
Drafted By:
Rohin Bhatt
Settled by:
Anand Grover.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
ORDINARY CIVIL JURISDICTION
TRANSFERRED CASE NO. 7 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Nibedita Dutta & Ann Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN UBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS WITH REGARD TO THE NDU MARRIAGE ACT. 1955
[By Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, Senior Advocate]
INDEX
Introduction : The Lives of the Petitioners
I. The reformist legislative intent of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ('HMA') necessitates the recognition
of same-sex marriages
a. Historical Context : Hindu Code - A reform legislation
b. Opposition to the Hindu Code : Similar to present day opposition to same sex marriage
C. Justifying the Reform of the Hindu Code
11. Recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA is consistent with the evolving conception of
the institution of marriage
a. Marriage : An evolving institution
b. Judicial contribution to the ever evolving institution of 'marriage'
111. Same Sex unions have formed part of Hindu society since time immemorial and have received
community sanction
a. Recognition of same-sex unions in Hindu texts and mythology
b. Dynamic nature of marriage in Hinduism and in Hindu statutory law
IV A. The gendered references in the provisions of HMA are capable of being read to recognize same-
sex marriages
a. Provisions of HMA
b. Test of 'workability' enables gender neutral reading
C. Rule of 'reading down' can validate same-sex marriage under HMA
IV B. The provisions of HMA, insofar as they do not recognise customary marriages of same-sex
Hindu couples are unconstitutional as being violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the
Constitution. Hence, to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality, the HMA must be read down to
recognise same-sex marriages
(i) Non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA contravenes the rights of LGBT Hindus under Article
21 of the Constitution to (a) marry a person of their choice; and (b) choice between personal law and civil
law in matters of marriage and family, as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution
a. Right to marry a person of one's choice
b. Right to choice in matters of faith and marriage
(ii) The non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA violates the rights of LGBT couples under
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution
a. The exclusions of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA does not pass the rational nexus test
b. Excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA is manifestly arbitrary
C. Denying same-sex couples the right to marry enjoyed by opposite-sex couples amounts to discrimination
on the grounds of
d. Non-recognition of same-sex marriages results in differential treatment of LGBT persons and excludes
them from the multitude of legal benefits that marriage encompasses
(iii) Denying legal recognition to same-sex marriages violates their right to freedom of expression and
association guaranteed under Article 19
(iv) Exclusion of same-sex marriages under the HMA is violative of the rights guaranteed under Article 25
(v) HMA ought to be interpreted to recognise same-sex marriages to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality
V. Constitutional Courts are empowered to review statutory law to ensure its conformity with
constitutional values. Such Courts do not need to wait for the Legislature to enact/amend law to
recognize same-sex marriage
VI. The provisions of the HMA are amenable to a constitutional challenge against the touchstone of
fundamental rights
a. Hindu personal law governing marriage is entirely codified under the HMA
b. Customs contrary to the HMA have ceased to have effect
C. Personal laws (codified and uncodified) are included within the expression "All laws in force" under Article
13(1) of the Constitution and must conform with the provisions of Part 111
ANNEXURE- 1 : Indicative changes to personal laws depicting the evolution of marriage as an
institution
ANNEXURE- 2 : Workability of the provisions of HMA
Introduction : The Lives of the Petitioners
651. The Petitioners, Nibedita Dutta and Pooja Srivastava, are two Hindu women. Like lakhs of other couples, they
fell in love, entered into a committed relationship, undertook marriage rituals according to Hindu customary rites, and
have been living together as spouses. While they are married in the eyes of God and consider each other spouses,
their marriage is not legally recognised. They are therefore constrained to approach this Hon'ble Court seeking
recognition of their marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ('HMA') and the enforcement of their fundamental
rights under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution of India.
652. Petitioner No. 1, Nibedita Dutta, grew up in Delhi and Durgapur. She struggled to come to terms with her
sexual orientation. Being introverted, she could not bring herself to open up to her family or friends about her
sexuality, and lived in denial till the age of about 32. Ultimately, as the burden to carry her secret became too much
for Petitioner No. 1, she consulted a counsellor, whose guidance and support enabled her to accept herself.
653. Petitioner No. 2, Pooja Srivastava, grew up in Varanasi. She realized her sexual orientation at a very young
age. Youngest of four siblings, she was treated at par with her brother and given the same rights and liberties.
However, when her mother discovered her private diary where she had poured her heart about her romantic feelings
for her female neighbour, Pooja was chastised, slapped and told she had gone mad and needed to get checked. This
opposition from her family with respect to her sexual orientation confused her and she became depressed. At the
behest of a friend, she even consulted a psychiatrist in Delhi. However, unfortunately, the psychiatrist thought her
sexual orientation was a disease and prescribed her medicines which made her very sick. Eventually, with the help an
organisation working to support LGBT people, she received counselling and gained the strength to accept her
sexuality. After a few failed relationships and heartbreaks, Pooja finally met Nibedita and the two have never looked
back.
654. Nibedita and Pooja met through social media in the year 2015. After over a year of chatting online, the
Petitioners became comfortable with each other. They met for the first time at Nirula's Connaught Place. Over warm
pizza, they spent hours together sharing their stories and struggles with each other. Struck by cupid's arrow, the
Petitioners entered into a committed relationship in 2017.
655. The Petitioners' wedding was a spontaneous and entirely private ceremony. In February 2018, when Nibedita
was visiting her grandmother in Varanasi, Pooja decided to accompany her, as this would give them an opportunity to
spend quality time together. For Pooja, who had grown up in Varanasi, this was also a chance to show Nibedita around
her hometown. On the evening of 20th February 2018, in the holy city of Varanasi, when Nibedita indirectly mentioned
to Pooja that the adjoining temple was selling wedding garlands, the underlying hint of a proposal was sufficient for
Pooja. She was thrilled! And so it happened. In a private ceremony conducted in their hotel room, the Petitioners lit a
candle as a representation of the sacred fire; played wedding mantras/shlokas on a phone: took their vows and seven
pheras around the sacred fire; applied sindoor to each other's foreheads and exchanged garlands. This was a
watershed moment in their relationship - a union of their souls, a true marriage recognised in the eyes of God.
656. The Petitioners' families and friends have accepted their marriage. Nibedita's father, a man of few words,
would laugh in the company of Pooja and talk to her for hours, even when he was unwell. During the Covid-19
pandemic, Nibedita's father became extremely unwell and had to be admitted to the ICU in AIIMS. On the evening of
17.04.2020, he passed away. The Petitioners together heartbroken took his body from AIIMS and cremated him
and performed his last rites and rituals. When Pooja decided to leave behind her home in Ghaziabad to move into
Nibedita's house in Delhi, Pooja's mother also agreed to move in with them, despite having 2 other daughters and a
son. Today, the Petitioners live together with Pooja's mother as a closely integrated family unit.
657. After moving in together, the Petitioners quit their respective jobs and realized their dream of starting a
business together. Through their successful business venture 'Inands Enterprises' they manufacture and supply fancy
dresses for schoolchildren. The Petitioners have been working and living together for over 2.5 years now. They are an
integral part of each other's friend circle and have gained support and acceptance from their friends.
658. In the absence of legal recognition to their marriage, the Petitioners have faced a host of problems, as they
are excluded from the regime of rights and responsibility that marriage creates in law. They have been unable to open
a joint account or locker together or obtain medical insurance as a family. Nibedita is unable to get Pooja's name
included in her property papers. Pooja cannot include Nibedita's name in her Provident Fund form as a spouse. Both
the Petitioners invested their money in renovating and reconstructing the house Nibedita inherited from her father. In
fact, Pooja sold her property and utilised the entire proceeds therefrom for this purpose. However, she cannot claim
any legal right to the property. The Petitioners are thus denied basic rights and recognition that every opposite-sex
couple easily and automatically enjoys as a result of their marriage or even if they are in a live-in relationship. The
Petitioners have therefore approached this Hon'ble Court for the enforcement of their fundamental rights.
I. The reformist legislative intent of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ('HMA') necessitates the recognition of
same-sex marriages.
"No law passed by the Indian legislature in the past or likely to be passed in the future can be compared to it
(Hindu Code) in point of its significance. To leave inequality between class and class, between sex and sex which is
the soul of Hindu society, untouched and to go on passing legislation relating to economic problems is to make a
farce on our Constitution This is the significance / attached to the Hindu Code." - Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
659. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ('HMA') was enacted as a reform legislation, aimed at amending and codifying
the Hindu law governing marriage, eradicating the inequality between classes, castes and sexes and permitting inter-
caste and sagotra marriages which stood prohibited under the existing Hindu law. Removing the existing barriers in
Hinduism on 'who one could marry', the HMA embodied the recognition of the freedom to choose a life partner and
individual autonomy in matters of marriage and family. It reflected the vision of the drafters that individual choice,
and not community recognition, constitutes a valid Hindu marriage. In view of this, recognising same-sex marriages
under the provisions of the HMA is not only imperative, but consistent with the transformative origins of the
legislation.
660. 18th May 1955 marked a significant milestone on the journey to reform and codify the Hindu law governing
marriage. The HMA, "An Act to amend and codify the law relating to marriage among Hindus" was passed by
both
the
Houses of the Parliament and received the President's assent on that date. Originally, it was Part 11 of the Hindu Code
('Hindu Code'), a consolidated Code codifying select Hindu personal laws. A precursor to the HMA, the Hindu Code
was introduced in the Constituent Assembly on 11th April 1947 and recommended to a Select Committee on 9th April
1948. However, despite 4 years of deliberations, it could not be passed. As such, the Hindu Code was split up into Bills
and passed separately, the HMA being the first, followed by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956110. the Hindu Minority
and Guardianship Act, 19561 and the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956112 The legislative intent of the
HMA must thus be interpreted in the historical context of the Hindu Code.
a. Historical Context : Hindu Code - A reform legislation
661. The codification of Hindu personal laws commenced in 1941 with the colonial Government appointing the
Hindu Law Committee1 to examine women's property rights under Hindu law. Expressing concerns about the
piecemeal nature of reforms in women's property rights, the Committee opined - "We ourselves think that the time
has now arrived to attempt a Code of Hindu Law". Accordingly, the first draft of the Hindu Code was prepared in by the
Hindu Law Committee. 114 Post-independence, the Hindu Code was revived and redrafted by a departmental committee
headed by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar.
662. Dr. Ambedkar envisioned the Hindu Code as a reform legislation, with the objects of eradicating the unequal
treatment of Hindus based on class, caste, and sex across the country. 115 As the Law Member and the Chairman of
the
Drafting Committee of the Constitution, he was simultaneously engaged in the drafting and deliberation on the
Constitution as well as the Hindu Code. According to him, the purpose of the Hindu Code was to ensure that the
political rights guaranteed under the Constitution could be actually realized by citizens in their everyday, civic life.
6 A composite Code for Hindus applicable across India, it provided for women's rights to separate property
(stridhan), maintenance and alimony, succession, guardianship, etc. As such, the spirit of the Hindu Code was
transformative. It aimed at reforming Hindu personal laws along the lines of Constitutional values of equality and
dignity of the individual and non-discrimination between classes, castes and sexes.
664. Further, the Hindu Code revolutionized the institution of Hindu marriage. Dr. Ambedkar was of the view that
the institution of marriage could not have been allowed to stand as it was then. He proceeded with the Hindu Code Bill
to bring the institution of marriage in consonance with the Constitution, in particular the guarantees of liberty and
equality to every citizen1 At the time when a Clause-by-Clause discussion of the Hindu Code was being undertaken
(14.12.1950 onwards), Dr. Ambedkar set out the test for every social institution in the following manner:
"My ideals are derived from the Constitution that we have laid down. The preamble of the Constitution speaks of
liberty, equality and fraternity. We are therefore bound to examine every social institution that exists in the
country and see whether it satisfies the principles laid down in the Constitution ,117
665. The radical nature of the reform, relating to marriage, sought to be introduced by way of the Hindu Code was
captured by Dr. Ambedkar in the following manner118. First, it introduced a civil form of marriage in addition to the
Dharmik (sacramental) marriage recognized under Hindu law. This not only allowed individuals the right to choose
between a religious or secular marriage, but also aided inter-caste, intercommunity Hindu couples lacking family and
community sanction a legally backed mode of getting married.
666. Secondly, the sanction to polygamy existing in Hindu customary laws was scrapped and monogamy was made
the norm. Thirdly, it provided for the right of parties to end a marriage, either by obtaining a decree of divorce or a
119
decree of nullity. This altered the conception of Hindu marriage as an indissoluble, sacred union. While
today
we
take these reforms (viz. monogamy as the default nature of a marriage; the parties' right to dissolve a marriage) for
granted, their introduction was faced with staunch opposition on the ground that they would destroy the fabric of the
Hindu society. In this regard, it is pertinent to note that almost 70 years after the enactment of HMA, the institution of
Hindu marriage has evolved to recognise progressive rights and responsibilities of the parties to a marriage, however,
keeping the fabric of the Hindu society intact.
667. Fourthly, it removed the bar of caste, gotra and pravara existing under customary laws, paving way for inter-
caste and sagotra In providing legal sanction to inter-caste and sagotra marriages, the customary as
well as shastric restrictions under Hindu law on who one could marry were removed - not only from the civil marriage,
but also from the Dharmik/sacramental marriage. When conservative Hindu leaders opposed this citing custom and
tradition, Dr. Ambedkar defended the provision as being merely permissive and not compelling any Hindu to marry
outside caste12
b. Opposition to the Hindu Code : Similar to present day opposition to same sex marriage
668. There was vociferous opposition to the Hindu Code Bill. Inter-caste marriages, Sagotra marriages and the
prescription of monogamy were met with great opposition. Divorce was also met with great resistance and became a
point of significant contention. Despite, such vehement opposition, the above reforms have stood the test of time and
the Hindu religion/society has prospered overall as a result. Today, the objections raised on behalf of the Union of
India opposing the recognition of same-sex marriage under the HMA are akin to the opposition to the Hindu Code. To
illustrate the nature of the opposition to the Hindu Code, a few extracts of the discussions undertaken by members of
the Constituent Assembly (Legislative) are being reproduced hereinafter:
i) Opposition to the Hindu Code on grounds that it was against the structure and fabric of Hindu society.
"This is not a simple measure. But the fact is that this Bill aims at the utter demolition of the entire structure
and fabric of Hindu society. It aims at changing the law of marriage, the law divorce, the law of adoption, law
relating to minority and guardianship, the Law of the Hindu joint family, the law of succession and everything
that constitute and what remains of the features of Hindu society. The very foundations not only of one pillar but
of all the pillars on which the Hindu society rests, are shaken. Therefore, Sir, it is but neat and proper that we as
legislators, we who are the guardians of the interests of the people should discharge our duty to the best of our
ability and see how far the measure that we are considering is wanted by public opinion in the country."
- Pandit Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava24
ii) Opposition to the Hindu Code that it regulated/attached conditions to a sacramental marriage.
"My fundamental objection to these marriages is, that while on the one hand it characterises one form of
marriage as sacramental marriage, inside this sacramental cover there has been introduced a number of things
which cannot conceivably be called sacramental or sacred ceremonial marriage. Look at the prohibited degrees.
Look at the character of the parties. It can easily be an intercaste marriage, a marriage outside caste, marriage of
sagotras, and at the same time it would be sacramental marriage. It is rather curious, Sir, that while a
sacramental form of marriage is being prescribed, along side with it there is a civil marriage. / do not know how
it finds a place in the Hindu code itself."
- Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra 23
iii) Opposition to the Hindu Code to the extent that it permitted dissolution of marriage.
"I feel that the basic conception of Hindu marriage has suffered the rudest possible shock by introduction into
it of the matter of divorce which is SO repugnant to Hindu notions of marriage. Hindu marriage as ought to be
known to everyone who professes himself to be a Hindu, who honestly takes pride in calling himself a Hindu, as /
myself do, is a sacrament and not a civil contract and as such it will not be difficult for him to admit that divorce
is absolutely foreign to its concept. Union by marriage, according to the Hindu Shastras is sacred and absolutely
indissoluble.
- Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra24
"My submission, therefore, is that the provisions for judicial separation and for dissolution of marriage as
incorporated in clauses 30 and 33 are not only opposed to accepted ideals of Hindu Society, they are diagonally
opposed to our civilization and culture. They are directly contradictory to the sacramental marriage because it is
not a contractual relationship that can be brought to an end by the whim and caprice of any of the parties but it
is sacred bond of union which has its root in the past and which will have its effect in the future. That is the
conception of Hindu marriage. These provisions of judicial separation or dissolution of marriage are diagonally
opposed to what is our conception of marriage...
- Pandit Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava 125
C. Justifying the Reform of the Hindu Code
669. The marriage reforms sought to be introduced by the Hindu Code were eventually enacted as 4 separate acts
by the then newly formed Parliament (post the 1952 General Elections). There was considerable public opposition to
the marriage reforms that the Hindu Code put forward. Dr. Ambedkar addressed such opposition/public opinion
against the Hindu Code in the following terms:
"Sir, much has been made of the fact that there is a great deal of public opinion which is opposed to this
Bill. / have certainly not weighed the opinions that we have received but / do like to say this, that this is hardly a
question which we can decide by counting heads. This is not a question which we can decide in
accordance with the opinion of the majority. When society is in a transitory stage, leaving the past, going to
the future, there are bound to be opposing considerations : one pulling towards the past and one pulling towards
the future and the test that we can apply is no other than the test of one's conscience. / have not the
slightest doubt in my mind that the provisions of this Bill are in perfect consonance with the conscience of
the community, and / have therefore, no hesitation in putting forth this measure although it may be as a matter of
fact that a large majority of our countryment do not accept it. "126
670. A very familiar argument against marriage reform is that it vitiates the structure and fabric of Hinduism. Such
fears are unfounded as the Hindu religion has historically been a liberal religion where varying 'views, customs and
manners' have always found shelter. This has been reflected in the debates that ensued from the deliberation of the
Hindu Code:
"We have also brought in social legislation of great importance. We have abolished the Sati : we have abolished
child marriage : we have also abolished to a great extent untouchability. Hindu religion is a very catholic and
liberal religion. So the argument of religion in danger does not behave us. Within the fold of this liberal
and catholic religion people of various views, customs and manners have found shelter and lived. Today
what has happened? Why have we lost our faith in our own religion that we are raising the cry of religion in danger?
It does not mean that / want to say that all those who oppose us are orthodox and are reactionaries. / only want to
point out that in forcing your point of view, you are only doing injustice to your religion when you put forward this
argument."
- Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani 127
671. Historically, even reform in marriage to abolish social evils was opposed on the ground of such practices being
sanctioned by the Hindu Dharma. Despite such opposition, reforms such as increasing the age of marriage and
abolition of Sati were introduced. Such opposition has never deterred reform of the institution of marriage. Reform of
the institution of marriage has been brought about time and again keeping in mind principles of equality and free
choice. The following extracts from the debates relating to the Hindu Code capture the discussion around the necessity
for reform and those reacting against it:
"Again, Sir, honourable Members will recollect the opposition that was started against the Sarda Act, which
tabooed child-marriage, on the ground that Hindu Dharma was in danger and that Hindu religion and Hindu
society were in danger. In the last century when the custom of sati, cremation of the widow with her husband,
was sought to be abolished, these same reactionaries who block the road to progress denounced the
attempt stating that the Hindu-Dharma sanctioned sati and that it granted the highest salvation to women
and therefore it should be continued. In spite of their agitation and obstruction, much-needed reforms like
that were put through."
- Shri H.V. Kamath128
"If marriage is a matter of free choice, why should there be legal impediments in it? Why should a
person belonging to one section or one community not marry a woman belonging to another? All these
artificial man-made impediments must go. / do not remember any case in which the son of a Brahmin was born
with a copy of Vedas or a Kshatrya born with a sword or a Harijan born with a broom. At birth they are all alike and
at death they are all alike. In between the two, it is the duty of the society and the State to see that the same
atmosphere of equality shall prevail. Anybody who argues against this, argues against humanity, argues against the
very principle which goes to make a man, argues against self-respect."
- Shri Gadgil (Minister of Works, Production and (Supply)1
129
672. The codification of Hindu laws was a means to reform the Hindu society. Additionally, the HMA sought to
eradicate the differential treatment accorded to classes, castes and sexes and to make the law of marriage applicable
to Hindus across the country as a homogenous class. While codification was met with pushback from the society, it
was actually seen as a step that would make Hindu society and the laws governing Hindu society more in keeping with
the time. Thus, even those opposing the Hindu Code agreed that customs must evolve and be evaluated against the
touchstone of the societal need to evolve:
"This country having passed under the rule of foreigners for nearly a thousand years has not been able to effect
that social progress which is incidental to changes in society in the world and which takes place imperceptibly by
force of everchanging custom. Custom is a force which is generally patronized, appreciated and recognised by
rulers. As such, he (the King/the State) evaluates the customs age long, traditional and hoary - sanctified by age
and it lies in his power to change that custom one way or the other. (As the British did not want to touch
our
personal laws), custom became petrified and when custom became petrified, progress became impeded altogether,
and for a hundred and fifty years our society has not been able to make any progress."
- P. Sitaramayya-
673. Thus, the HMA has reform at its very core. In recognising the right of Hindus to choose a life partner
irrespective of societal or community sanction, it embodies constitutional values of liberty and dignity. The legislative
object of the HMA does not merely permit but necessitates the recognition of same-sex marriages.
the right of individuals to marry a person of their choice, especially in case of inter-caste and inter-community unions
which do not receive societal sanction. In similar vein, the Petitioners have sought the protection of this Hon'ble Court
for realising their fundamental right to love, companionship and family. Denying LGBT Hindu couples like the
Petitioners the right to solemnize a marriage according to their traditional rites and ceremonies would amount to
treating them differently from opposite-sex Hindu couples insofar as marriage is concerned and would defeat the very
purpose for which the HMA was enacted.
Recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA is consistent with the evolving conception of the
institution of marriage.
675. The institution of marriage has evolved through legislation and judicial interpretation, to remove restrictions
and prohibitions on categories of persons who were not allowed to marry under Hindu law. For instance, widows,
divorcees, sagotra and inter-caste couples who could not marry under Hindu law have been permitted to marry;
divorce has been introduced to enable parties to end an unhappy union; and minimum age for marriage has been
introduced to ensure that girl children were not forced into marriages.
676. Surprisingly, the Respondent, in its common counter-affidavit filed in the main matter, i.e., Supriyo @ Supriya
Chakraborthy V. Union of India [W.P. (C) No. 1011/2022] has relied on the grossly outdated definition of "Marriage" as
provided in the 4th Edition of the Black's Law Dictionary (1968), to further its misplaced contention that marriage is a
union between a "biological man" and a "biological woman". The contemporary definition of "Marriage" as found in the
Black's Law Dictionary (11th Edition, 2019) is as follows:
"Marriage, n. 1. The legal union of a couple as spouses. The essentials of a valid marriage are (1) parties legally
capable of contracting to marry, (2) mutual consent or agreement, and (3) an actual contracting in the form
prescribed by law. Marriage has important consequences in many areas of the law such as torts, criminal law,
evidence, debtor-creditor relations, property and contracts. - Also termed matrimony; conjugal union.
"131
677. The two definitions may be compared:
Revised 4th Edition of Black's Law Dictionary
11th edition of Black's Law Dictionary (2019)
(1968):
"Marriage, as distinguished from the agreement to marry
"The legal union of a couple of as spouses. The essential
and from the act of becoming married, is the civil status,
of a valid marriage are (1) parties legally capable of
condition, or relation of one man and one woman united
contracting to marry, (2) mutual consent or agreement,
in law for life, for the discharge to each other and the
(3) an actual contracting in the form prescribed by law."
community of the duties legally incumbent on those
whose association is founded on the distinction of sex"
678. Thus, 'marriage' today, is defined as a legally recognised union of spouses, without any reference to the
gender of the spouses. In fact, the Dictionary also has a defining entry for "same-sex marriage", which is defined
as-
"The ceremonial union of two people of the same sex. A marriage between two men or two women. "132
679. By citing a definition from a 1968 edition, the Respondent no. 1 Union has failed to note how the
jurisprudence of marriage equality has subsequently developed in that jurisdiction. The US Supreme Court judgments
in United States V. Windsor [570 US 744 (2013)], and Obergefell V. Hodges [576 US 644 (2015)] both upheld
680. Petitioners emphasize that they are citing US law merely because, Black's being an American publication,
Petitioners seek to demonstrate how greatly the law has changed in that jurisdiction. The Petitioners submit that as
suggested by the Respondent, the definition of "marriage" may be understood with the aid of legal dictionaries,
however, it is prudent to rely on the latest edition. The legal definition as well as the societal perception of the
institution of marriage has surpassed its heteronormative conception as a union between a "biological man" and a
"biological woman". In light of this, it is imperative that this Hon'ble Court extends legal recognition to same-sex
marriages.
a. Marriage : An evolving institution
681. The institution of marriage, initially seen as an indissoluble sacrament under the Hindu law, has undergone
substantial reform. In the early 19th century, when the colonial administration sought to uniformise the civil, criminal
and commercial laws governing the territory of India, personal laws were deliberately left untouched. T.B. Macaulay,
the then Law Member of the Governor General's Council while proposing legal reform for the colonies had expressed
his reservations with respect to uniformising the personal laws in colonial India as follows:
"We do not mean that all the people of India should live under the same law : far from it : there is not a word in
the bill, there was not a word in my right honourable friend's speech, susceptible of such an interpretation. We
know how desirable that object is; but we also know that it is unattainable. We know that respect must be paid
to feelings generated by differences of religion, of nation, and of caste. Much, / am persuaded, may be done
to assimilate the different systems of law without wounding those feelings. "133
682. It is submitted that in spite of this reluctance to intervene, in matters where it was considered necessary, the
colonial administration enacted reformative legislations to end social evils or pave way for progressive rights, which
significantly altered the institution of marriage.
683. For instance, the Hindu Widows Remarriage Act, 1856 legalised the remarriage of Hindu widows throughout
India, which had been prohibited for widows in high-caste society134. The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929
prohibited child marriage by setting a minimum age limit [14 years for girls; 18 years for boys] for solemnisation of a
valid marriage. The Hindu Women's Right to Property Act, 1937 provided for a widows' right to a share equal to that of
a son's share (though only a life interest) in her husband's property upon his death. As a result of these legislations,
customs recognised under traditional Hindu law and prevalent in the society were revamped and superseded,
transforming the notion of Hindu marriage and family.
684. On similar lines, the Government of India has today sought to raise the marriageable age of women from 18 to
21 years, to bring it at par with that of men. A Bill to this effect introduced in the Lok Sabha in 2021 135 has been
referred to a Standing Committee.
685. As submitted above, the enactment of the HMA was also a step towards reformative change in the institution
of marriage. For instance, before the enactment of the HMA, persons belonging to different castes could not marry in
most parts of the country. The introduction of divorce under the HMA, including divorce by mutual consent by way
of Marriage Laws (Amendment Act), 1976 has transformed the customary view of Hindu marriage as an indissoluble
sacrament and conferred rights and responsibilities on the parties to a marriage.
686. This Hon'ble Court, while interpreting Section 13-B of the HMA which provides for divorce by mutual consent,
"16. We have given due consideration to the issue involved. Under the traditional Hindu Law, as it stood prior to
the statutory law on the point, marriage is a sacrament and cannot be dissolved by consent. The Act enabled the
court to dissolve marriage on statutory grounds. By way of amendment in the year 1976, the concept of divorce by
mutual consent was introduced."
687. This shows that the HMA has fundamentally altered the nature of Hindu marriage. Legal scholar Paras Diwan
explains that while Hindus continue to refer to a Hindu marriage as a sacrament, not much of the sacramental aspect
of the marriage is left. A Hindu marriage today is neither indissoluble, as decrees of divorce and nullity end the
marriage, nor purely shastric, as a valid Hindu marriage can also be solemnised according to customary rites and
ceremonies, without the same being backed by the shastric Hindu law1
b. Judicial contribution to the ever evolving institution of 'marriage'
688. Courts have consistently taken a liberal and progressive view of the concept of marriage as an evolving
State enacts a legislation of marriage it is nevertheless bound by the norms of a liberal Constitution which emphasise
dignity, equality, and liberty:
[D.Y. Chandrachud]
"212. The State undoubtedly has a legitimate interest in regulating many aspects of marriage. That is the
foundation on which the State does regulate rights, entitlements and duties, primarily bearing on its civil nature.
When the State enacts and enforces such legislation, it does so on the postulate that marriage as a social institution
has a significant bearing on the social fabric. But in doing so, the State is equally governed by the norms of a liberal
Constitution which emphasise dignity, equality and liberty as its cardinal values."
689. Illustratively, permitting widow remarriage, inter-caste and inter-faith marriages, introducing divorce,
including by mutual consent, placing restrictions on child marriage are all steps in the direction of reforming Hindu
marriage as an institution. Over the years, the concept of a Hindu family has also undergone reform in both personal
as well as civil laws as regards aspects of marriage, succession, adoption etc.
39 also acknowledged how the notion of marriage had changed since the enactment the Indian Penal Code in 1860:
"102. The background in which this provision was enacted now needs to be stated. In 1860, when the Penal
Code was enacted, the vast majority of the population in this country, namely, Hindus, had no law of divorce as
marriage was considered to be a sacrament. Equally, a Hindu man could marry any number of women until 1955.
Two of the fundamental props or bases of this archaic law have since gone. Post 1955-1956, with the advent of
the "Hindu Code", SO to speak, a Hindu man can marry only one wife; and adultery has been made a ground for
divorce in Hindu Law.
109.
The moving times have not left the law behind as we have just seen, and SO far as engaging the
attention of law-makers when reform of penal law is undertaken, we may only hasten to add that even when the
CrPC was fully replaced in 1973, Section 198 continued to be on the statute book. Even as of today, Section 497
IPC continues to be on the statute book. When these sections are wholly outdated and have outlived their purpose,
not only does the maxim of Roman law, cessante ratione legis, cessat ipsa lex, apply to interdict such law, but when
such law falls foul of constitutional guarantees, it is this Court's solemn duty not to wait for legislation but to strike
(Civ) 277, it is only the minority view of Khehar, C.J. and S. Abdul Nazeer, J., that one must wait for the law to
change legislatively by way of social reform. The majority view was the exact opposite, which is why Triple Talaq
was found constitutionally infirm and struck down by the majority.
691. Therefore, Courts have actively participated in the evolution of marriage as an institution has been evolving
with time, particularly with respect to broadening the domain of who can marry whom. At one point, sagotras, widows,
divorcees, and persons of different castes and religions could not marry. All these restrictions have been eliminated
over time.
692. For instance, from being a polygamous institution Hindu marriages became a monogamous institution. From
not permitting inter-caste marriages, marriages between castes began to be permitted and have even been
marriages within the same gotra (lineage/descendants in an unbroken male line from a common male ancestor or
patriline), not only have such marriages been permitted under the HMA, this Hon'ble Court in in Shakti Vahini V. Union
have no value in light of the constitutional right to marry a partner of one's choice. A table demonstrating how
marriage as an institution has undergone changes and developments over centuries in India is annexed herewith and
marked as Annexure-1.
lamented the exclusion of LGBT couples from the enjoyment of fundamental rights easily available to opposite-sex
couples and recognised the colonial origins of the same, based on the criminalisation brought about by Section 377 of
the Indian Penal Code.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
"372. The lethargy of the law is manifest yet again. A hundred and fifty-eight years ago, a colonial legislature
made it criminal, even for consenting adults of the same gender, to find fulfilment in love. The law deprived them of
the simple right as human beings to live, love and partner as nature made them. The human instinct to love was
caged by constraining the physical manifestation of their sexuality. Gays and lesbians were made subordinate to
the authority of a coercive State. A charter of morality made their relationships hateful. The criminal law became a
willing instrument of repression. To engage in "carnal intercourse" against "the order of nature" risked being tucked
away for ten years in a jail. The offence would be investigated by searching the most intimate of spaces to find tell-
tale signs of intercourse. Civilisation has been brutal.
694. Thus, prior to the enactment of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, same-sex unions were neither prohibited non
regulated in the Indian subcontinent. Scholars such as Ruth Vanita and Devdutt Pattanaik have documented the traces
of same-sex couples in Hindu mythology, citing examples from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas138
The restriction on same-sex marriage, therefore, is a colonial construct and cannot be permitted to continue in light of
the evolution of the institution of marriage.
695. Courts have also been at the forefront of reforming marriage as an institution by rendering progressive
decisions regarding divorce39 maintenance140 guardianship, and succession Constitutional courts have
interfered to strike down customary practices in personal laws, and also, recognised irretrievable breakdown of
marriage as a potential ground of divorce. In Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum AIR 1985 SC 945, this Hon'ble
Court expanded the rights of a Muslim wife to seek maintenance under S. 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
by holding therein that such a remedy was not in conflict with the personal laws governing the parties. Further, in
and Guardianship Act, 1956 to recognise the right of a Hindu mother as a natural guardian of her minor son to ensure
its conformity with the Constitutional guarantee of equality & non-discrimination under Articles 14 and 15.
696. The notion that marriage is only for procreative purposes has also been discarded over time which has been
[Deepak Misra, CJI]
"230. With the passage of time and evolution of the society, procreation is not the only reason for which people
choose to come together, have live-in relationships, perform coitus or even marry. They do SO for a whole lot of
reasons including emotional companionship.
held that "statutes particularly those governing and regulating human relations are dynamic in nature and their
interpretation, with societal changes, cannot remain static. Law cannot be a fossil."
698. LGBT persons have, even in the absence of legal recognition, solemnized their companionship through
customary marriage. Scholars like Ruth Vanita have documented hundreds of cases of same sex couples since the
1980s who have undergone rituals of a marriage to "compel their communities to consider same sex relationships in
terms of love and commitment rather than simply in terms of sex." 143 One of the first documented instance
of
marriage between two LGBT persons is that of two police women, Leela Namdeo and Urmila Srivastava, who, like the
Petitioners herein, got married as per Hindu religious rites in Bhopal in 1987.
699. Scholar and author Ruth Vanita, in her book titled Love's Rite : Same-Sex Marriages in Modern India, notes
that persons from all over India including Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Dalits, tribals, fisherwomen, agricultural
workers, students, construction workers almost all being from non-English speaking, lower-income backgrounds got
married as per their respective religious ceremonies. However, since same-sex marriages have not been granted
recognition under the statutes governing marriage, they are constrained to operate under the shadow of the law while
being deprived of a legally protected marital rights.
700. Preceding sections will show that same-sex customary marriages have taken place, in the absence of legal
recognition under the HMA. As a result, such marriages lack the various protections which a opposite sex marriage has
to offer. Such a popular practice must be given legality so as to avoid multiple irregular marriages and further to avoid
the risk of driving people out of the Hindu fold. The said reasoning can also be found in discussions on the Hindu Code
(while addressing the permissibility of inter-caste/sagothra marriages under the Hindu fold):
"We come to the question of inter-caste and sagothra marriages. / was hearing my friend who preceded me. / do
not know how we can wax eloquent over the objection to sagothra and inter-caste marriages because / find a very
large number of such marriages taking place in the society. If we did not have such marriages it was all
right, but when a very large number of such marriages are taking place, either we compel them to have
irregular marriage or we drive them out of the Hindu fold or we make them go somewhere or they have to go
to the civil registration office and get it done. When it is there, why not accept the fact? When it is a practice why
not recognise it and give it legality? Therefore, it is but right at this stage, when Indian society has
changed SO considerably to allow inter-caste and sagothra marriages within the Hindu fold."
Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani 144
701. The Petitioners, having solemnised their marriage as per Hindu rites and rituals, live together along with
Petitioner No. 2's mother, as a closely-knit family. Petitioner No. 2's mother heads the family as an elder, respected
member. Both the Petitioners take care of Petitioner No. 2's mother. In fact, sometimes, she relies on Petitioner No. 1
more than her own daughter! They spend quality time together, celebrate festivals together. They are a family, albeit
different from a heteronormative one.
recognised that family units may manifest in atypical ways and has upheld the need to legally recognise these non-
traditional manifestations of familial relationships. Denying legal recognition to the Petitioners' marriage violates their
fundamental right to found a family.
703. In light of the above, it is submitted that recognising same-sex marriages such as that of the Petitioners' is
therefore, in consonance with the evolving nature of marriage as a legal and social institution. It is submitted that
Section 5 of the HMA which provides for the solemnisation of a marriage between "any two Hindus" is permissive
enough to be interpreted as including within its ambit same-sex marriages.
111. Same Sex unions have formed part of Hindu society since time immemorial and have received
community sanction
704. Hindu mythology and folklore are replete with stories of marriages and relationships involving androgynous or
transgender individuals as well as same sex couples, without any stigma or disapproval being attached to such unions.
705. Eminent scholars and authors like Devdutt Pattanaik and Ruth Vanita have chronicled many such accounts
which have an underlying theme of social acceptance towards same sex, queer and gender fluid relationships in
ancient Hindu scriptures. Their works leave no doubt that such liaisons and marriages were not prohibited, but rather
perceived to be as mainstream as a marriage between persons of opposite sex.
a. Recognition of same-sex unions in Hindu texts and mythology
706. In 'Marriage 100 stories around India's favourite ritual', Devdutt Pattanaik enumerates various examples of
references to marriages and marriage-like unions between same sex couples in ancient Hindu scriptures such as the
Mahabarata, Ramayana, Skanda Puranas etc. Similarly, Ruth Vanita, in 'Loves' Rite - Same-sex Marriage in India and
the West 145 and 'Wedding of Two Souls : Same-Sex Marriage and Hindu Traditions' 146 cites several instances of
unions between two men and two women in ancient and medieval India.
707. To cite a few examples, Mahabharata chronicles the tale of Hamsa and Dimbhaka, two generals of king
Jarasandha, who were so deeply committed to one another, that when the rumour of Hamsa's death reached
Dimbhaka, the latter drowned himself in the Yamuna. Agonised by Dimbhaka's death, Hamsa too later drowned
himself in the river. Bhagirath is begotten from two widows of a king in order to continue his lineage. Somavat and
Sumedha, close male friends, become a couple after they are mistakenly blessed as man and wife. Teeja and Beeja
(two females at birth) get married, as astrologers predicted when they were in the womb that their union would bring
great happiness. Shikhandi, born with the genitals of a woman, behaves like a man, is married to a woman and is
finally granted his manhood by a yaksha. Bahuchra's husband (a prince) prefers having sexual relations with other
men to consummating his marriage. Krishna transforms into Mohini to be Aravan's wife, Shiva becomes
Ardhanarishvara and forest sages fervently pray to be transformed into women so they could entice Ram.
147
708. The concepts of androgyny, gender fluidity and same sex unions in Hindu mythology can be best understood
from the excerpt below:
"Some Hindu icons visually represent this perfect fusion (of lovers as two halves of a soul). The ardhanarishwara
form of Shiva and his wife Parvati shows them fused by love into a being that is simultaneously male and female.
A
same-sex variation of this is Harihara, an icon that is half-Shiva and half-Vishnu. The two male Gods are fused by
love into one being, which has attributes both of destroyer God Shiva and preserver God Vishnu. These icons signal
the ultimate unity of the divine, and the irrelevance of gender (male and female are one; male and male are one;
preservation and destruction are one). But the icons also signal love. Parvati is famous for her devoted love of
Shiva.
In another love story, Shiva asks Vishnu to assume his female form as the enchantress Mohini. When Vishnu
does so, Shiva falls in love with the transformed Vishnu/Mohini and embraces him/her. The offspring of their union
is the God Ayyappa or Harihara Hari=Vishnu, Hara=Shiva).
In these texts and icons, principles of attraction and fusion take primacy over gender. This happens not just in
written texts but also in some social practices, where same-sex marriage between a God and a human is
institutionalized. "148
b. Dynamic nature of marriage in Hinduism and in Hindu statutory law
709. This recognition of same-sex unions also needs to be appreciated in light of the dynamic nature of marriage in
Hinduism. Pattanaik, in 'Fluid Marriage Rites' emphasizes the fact that Hindu wedding rituals have never been rigid
and contain ideas from Harappan and Vedic times, to practices that came with the Greeks, Sakas, Kushan, Huns,
Turks, Afghans, Persians, Arabs and even Europeans.
710. Section 7 (1) of the HMA embodies this fluidity of custom. It provides that a Hindu marriage may be
solemnized in accordance with the customary rites and ceremonies of either party without formally laying down any
particular ritual as being essential for the solemnization of valid marriage. The State of Tamil Nadu and the Union
Territory of Puducherry have even amended this section to provide for recognition of suyamariyathai and
seerthiruththa marriages i.e., self-respect marriages. Such marriages do not even require a Brahmin priest or to be
conducted in the Sanskrit language.
711. Customs vary by locality, caste and family, and from case to case, and hence the same is to be interpreted
flexibly and a rigid interpretation is to be avoided. Section 3 (a) of the HMA defines 'custom' and is the guiding
provision in that respect. Pertinently, there is no such thing as a uniform traditional Hindu marriage ceremony that
could be held up to all Hindus as the binding model. It is reiterated that the HMA does not specifically prescribe any
particular from of marriage15
712. This highlights that it is impossible to strait-jacket Hindu wedding rituals and customs into one homogenous
affair. The Hindu society's inclusivity, dynamism, diversity and capability of being adapted to an individual's personal
disposition are features that form its very core.
713. Ceremonies/traditions in different parts of the country, although conducted under the common umbrella of
Hinduism, can be diametrically opposite to one another. For example, while marriages between Hindus who are
cousins are not permitted in the majority of Northern India, the same is an age-old practice in Southern India. This is
clear evidence of the fact that there exist a wide range of diverse customs and traditions for the solemnisation of
Hindu marriages and there is no uniform or singular set of rules or practices which occupies the field.
714. It is therefore submitted that same-sex marriages are in no way antithetical to Hindu customs and traditions.
In fact, in light of the above, it is clear that the tenets of Hinduism have consistently contained clear and unambiguous
references to same sex unions. Pertinently, Hindu priests have been conducting same-sex marriages as per Hindu rites
and rituals, both in India and abroad, clearly evidencing that there are no customary restrictions regarding such
marriages in Hinduism. Rather, LGBT persons have faced several struggles, as even though they may have
successfully conducted a marriage as per Hindu customs, they are not recognized as valid marriages under the HMA.
715. As in case of the present Petitioners, who have solemnized their marriage by circumambulating the sacred
fire, garlanding each other and applying sindoor to each other's foreheads. Their marriage is complete as per the
customs applicable to them. However, in the absence of legal recognition, it lacks the protection automatically granted
to opposite-sex marriages. It is submitted that the provisions of the HMA must be interpreted to recognise same-sex
marriages, in line with the sanction accorded to them in Hinduism.
IVA. The gendered references in the provisions of HMA are capable of being read to recognize same-sex
marriages.
a. Provisions of HMA
716. Section 5 of the HMA which provides conditions for a Hindu marriage states that-
"5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage. -A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if the following
conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(2) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;
(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party-
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or
(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to
such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or
has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of [twenty-one years] and the bride, the age of [eighteen years]
at the time of the marriage;
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or usage governing
each of them permits of a marriage between the two;
(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits
of a marriage between the two;
717. Thus, the language of Section 5 is broad enough to permit a marriage to be solemnized between "any two
Hindus". Except for sub-section (iii), the Section employs gender-neutral terminology throughout, referring to the two
Hindus as 'parties', instead of 'man' and 'woman'; and their 'spouses', instead of 'husband' and 'wife'. The issues in
relation to the gendered references in sub-section (iii) of Section 5 and other such similar provisions will be dealt with
in subsequent sections.
718. Section 7, which stipulates that a Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance with the customary rites
and ceremonies " of either party thereto" also employs gender-neutral terminology. It reads as follows:
"7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.-(1) A Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance with the
customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto.
(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi (that is, the taking of seven steps by the bridegroom
and the bride jointly before the sacred fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding when the seventh step is
taken.
719. Thus, neither the initial part of Section 5, non Section 7 non Section 8, which deals with registration of Hindu
marriages contain any restriction on marriage based on sex or sexual orientation of parties.
720. The Petitioners satisfy all the conditions for a valid marriage laid down under Section 5 of the HMA. When the
marriage between them was solemnized, neither of them had a spouse living; they were both of sound mind, capable
of giving a valid consent and above 18 years of age; they were neither within prohibited degrees of relationship, non
sapindas of each other. As such, it is submitted that the marriage solemnized between them as per their rituals is a
valid marriage in terms of Sections 5 and 7 of the HMA.
b. Test of 'workability' enables gender neutral reading
721. It is further submitted that nothing in the HMA prevents 'working' the statute in a gender-neutral manner.
The principle of interpretation that is known as the Test of 'workability' or 'the statute to be construed to make it
effective and workable' 151 is applicable in the present circumstances. As per the workability principle, the Court
strongly leans against a construction which reduces the statute to futility152 or unconstitutionality. The captioned
principle calls for a construction in favour of workability of a provision/rule/statute. The construction which makes the
rule otiose or unworkable should be avoided where 2 constructions are possible, and the court should lean in favour of
the construction which would make the rule workable and further the purpose for which the rule is intended. 153 In
other words, if more than one construction is possible, the one which preserves its workability and efficacy should be
preferred to the other which would render it otiose or sterile154
722. A statute is designed to be workable, and the interpretation thereof by a Court should be to secure
that
object, unless crucial omission or clear direction makes that end unattainable. 155 A statute or any enacting provision
therein must be so construed as to make it effective and operative on the principle expressed in the maxim 'ut res
magis valeat quam pereat 156 The maxim implies that a statute must be construed reasonably. A provision must be so
interpreted as to achieve the aim of workability of the enactment as a whole while giving it a purposive interpretation
in preference to textual interpretation.
C. Rule of reading down' can validate same-sex marriage under HMA
723. Alternatively, the rule of reading down' may be applied. Such a principle of statutory interpretation states
that where 2 interpretations are possible, one which validates the legislation must be preferred157 The Courts can,
having regard to the Preamble, objects, scheme, historical background and the mischief of the Act seeks to eliminate,
read down a provision, with a view to uphold the validity of a legislation. The said rule was applied by Courts to
salvage a legislation to achieve its objective and not to let it fall merely because of a possible ingenious
interpretation The rule of reading down' is similar to the rule of 'harmonious construction'. The rule of 'reading
158
down' is to be used for the limited purpose of making a particular provision workable and to bring it in harmony with
other provisions of the statute. It is to be used keeping in view the scheme of the statute and to fulfil its purposes15
724. In this case, the HMA must be read down to recognise same-sex marriages. This would ensure that the HMA is
in tune with its objective of reformation of Hindu law pertaining to marriage. The HMA was enacted as a reform
legislation, aimed at amending and codifying the Hindu law governing marriage. It removed the barriers in Hinduism
on 'who one could marry'. The HMA embodied the recognition of the freedom to choose a life partner and individual
autonomy in matters of marriage and family. Further, the origins of the HMA lie in the Hindu Code which itself aimed
at reforming Hindu personal laws along the lines of Constitutional values of equality and dignity of the individual and
non-discrimination between classes, castes and sexes.
725. Further, the gendered references in the HMA can be read and interpreted in a manner so as to be workable
even for same sex couples in tune with S. 13 (1) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 which provides that:
"13. Gender and number.-In all Central Acts and Regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context,-
(1) words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include females."
726. Pertinently, there is nothing repugnant to the subject or context of the HMA in reading the words importing
masculine gender to be taken to include females as well.
727. In view of the above, the provisions of the HMA are either gender neutral or can be interpreted in a manner to
be gender neutral in order to protect it from the vice of unconstitutionality. For instance, where Section 5 (iii)
prescribes a minimum age limit of 21 years for the "bridegroom" and 18 years for the "bride", such age restrictions
would apply to both spouses in case of a same-sex marriage. Similarly, other provisions of the statute which employ
gendered terms such as "wife" or "husband" would continue to be read to apply to both wives and both husbands in
case of same-sex marriages.
728. The Petitioners contend that all the provisions of the HMA are capable of being read to recognise same-sex
marriages. A chart prepared compiling the various provisions of the HMA containing gendered references along with a
comment on their workability is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure-2. In light of this, it is submitted that
this Hon'ble Court ought to declare that the HMA be interpreted in a manner so as to recognise the right of LGBT
Hindus to get married in accordance with their traditional rites and ceremonies.
IVB. The provisions of HMA, insofar as they do not recognise customary marriages of same-sex Hindu
couples are unconstitutional as being violative of Articles 14. 15. 19. 21 and 25 of the Constitution. Hence.
to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality, the HMA must be read down to recognise same-sex
marriages.
729. It is submitted that provisions of the HMA, insofar as they do not recognise same-sex marriage violate
fundamental rights enshrined under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution. To save them from the vice of
unconstitutionality, the HMA must be interpreted to recognise the right of LGBT persons to get married in accordance
with their traditional rites and ceremonies.
persons enjoy all the rights and privileges guaranteed under the Constitution. Denying LGBT Hindu couples the right to
marry according to their traditional rites and ceremonies is violative of their constitutional rights.
(i) Non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA contravenes the rights of LGBT Hindus under
Article 21 of the Constitution to (a) marry a person of their choice; and (b) choice between personal law
and civil law in matters of marriage and family, as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
a. Right to marry a person of one's choice
731. The right to marry a person of one's choice, which is a momentous and life-changing decision, is an integral
aspect of the right to life, dignity, decisional autonomy, privacy and personal liberty enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution. Marriage is one of the most memorable events in any person's life and is an institution that brings great
joy not only to the two individuals but also to their families. It is submitted that denying LGBT persons this right to
choose their life partner and form a union which enjoys legal recognition violates their rights under Article 21.
732. Right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution encompasses the right to marry a person
of one's choice. Freedom of choice in matters of marriage and family life is protected by liberty granted under Article
21. Expression of one's choice is a fundamental right under Article 21. A three-judge bench of this Hon'ble Court in
choice is protected under Article 21:
[DY Chandrachud, J]
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional compliance) the conditions of a valid
marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be ended or annulled. These remedies are
available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on whether they should accept each other into a
marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to play in determining our choice of partners.
87. The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual will
have a protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside marriage."
733. More recently, this Hon'ble Court in Laxmibai Chandaragi B. V. State of Karnataka, (WP (Cr.) No. 359/2020
decided on 08.02.2021) reaffirmed this right as being integral to the "dignity" of the individual, which is immune to
the concepts of "class honour" or "group thinking." The Court held that:
"10. the choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where is erosion of
choice. Such a right or choice is not is not expected to succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group thinking".
734. The right to marry is a fundamental right that is not predicated on coming together for the purpose of
procreation, and people exercise the choice to come together for marriage for a variety of reasons. A constitution
the only purpose of marriage.
[Deepak Mishra, CJI and A.N. Khanwalikar, J.]
"230. With the passage of time and evolution of the society, procreation is not the only reason for which people
choose to come together, have live-in relationships, perform coitus or even marry. They do SO for a whole lot of
reasons including emotional companionship.
735. This Hon'ble Court has time and again ruled that this right of individuals supersedes the considerations of
families or communities.
persons who defy social conventions to enter into inter-religious and inter-caste marriages. Similarly, society may
disapprove of same-sex marriages, in line with its disapproval of inter-caste and inter-religious marriages, however,
the Courts have a constitutional mandate to enforce the constitutional right of choice of marital partner, and non-
discrimination.
b. Right to choice in matters of faith and marriage
737. Excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of Section 5 of the HMA denies the LGBT persons' right to get
married according to their traditional rites and ceremonies, which is an integral aspect of decisional autonomy
guaranteed under Article 21. A 9-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court in K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India (2017) 10
procreation and sexual orientation are intrinsic to the dignity of the individual and inherent in the right to privacy
safeguarded under Article 21, as follows:
intrinsic to his/her meaningful existence and to have freedom in matters of faith is the substratum of individuality.
Further, choice in respect of faith and belief, dress and food, love and partnership and matters of marriage has been
protected as a facet of privacy.
"84. Choices of faith and belief as indeed choices in matters of marriage lie within an area where individual
autonomy is supreme. The law prescribes the conditions for a valid marriage. It provides remedies when
relationships run aground. Neither the State nor the law can limit the free ability of every person to decide
on
these matters."
739. The choice of individuals to contract either a religious or a civil marriage and the choice be governed by
religious personal laws or the secular scheme of SMA is an inherently personal choice of parties in matters governing
faith and marriage and as such, falls within the sphere of decisional autonomy guaranteed under Article 21.
740. Non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA denies Hindu LGBT persons the right to choose
between a Hindu traditional marriage and a civil marriage solemnized/recognised according to the procedure under
SMA. Such non-recognition under HMA will force LGBT Hindus to choose between their faith and marriage.
741. A statute which inhibits LGBT persons from marrying a partner of their choice and from exercising their choice
in matters of faith and belief, and marriage and family, violates Article 21. Therefore, insofar as it does not include
within its ambit LGBT couples, the HMA violates Article 21.
742. The Respondent, in its common counter-affidavit filed in the main matter, i.e., Supriyo @ Supriya
Chakraborthy V. Union of India [W.P. (C) No. 1011/2022] has contended that the right to marry a person of one's own
choice, guaranteed under Article 21, can be curtailed on the ground of legitimate state interest, to preserve the notion
of marriage as a heteronormative institution, which is deeply and intrinsically ingrained in the Indian society. However,
the counter-affidavit falls hopelessly short of demonstrating any state interest, much less a legitimate one, to deny
recognition to same-sex marriages under the HMA.
743. It is submitted that the non-recognition of same-sex marriage does not meet the threefold test for "legitimate
existence of a law; (ii) the need of legitimate state aim; and (iii) the proportionality of the means adopted to achieve
the object sought to be fulfilled by the law. This Hon'ble Court has given a narrow meaning to "legitimate state aim" to
include-
"328... for instance protecting national security, preventing and investigating crime, encouraging innovation and
the spread of knowledge, and preventing the dissipation of social welfare benefits." [Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
744. In light of this narrow import given to "legitimate state aim", it is submitted that the restriction of legal
recognition to opposite-sex marriages does not fit the parameters of the test of legitimate state interest. In fact, the
Respondent, in its counter-affidavit has once again, as it had before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, failed to rely on
or even refer to the 9-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court on the 'legitimate state interest" test.
745. Further, the 9-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court, in setting out the test, has held that if rights are restricted
on the ground of legitimate state interest the same must be independently tested on the anvil of the fundamental
rights that the restriction relates to (Para 526). The Petitioners herein have challenged the provisions of the HMA as
violating their fundamental rights under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution. Thus, in the absence of a
clear legitimate state interest being demonstrated, the rights of LGBTQ persons cannot be curtailed on the basis of this
ground.
746. In Navtej Johar (cited supra), it was held that:
"561.6 Sexual orientation implicates negative and positive obligations on the state. It not only requires the state
not to discriminate, but also calls for the state to recognise rights which bring true fulfillment to same-sex
relationships
618.3. The choice of whom to partner, the ability to find fulfilment in sexual intimacies and the right not to be
subjected to discriminatory behaviour are intrinsic to the constitutional protection of sexual orientation"
747. The right to choose a marital partner is a positive obligation of the State to be fulfilled through its existing
marriage laws. Excluding same-sex marriage from a legislation governing marriage, renders the HMA violative of part
III of the constitution. Instead, the Act should be interpreted so as to allow same sex couples to enable exercise of
their fundamental right to marry.
(ii) The non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA violates the rights of LGBT couples under
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
748. The non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA violates Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution, as
(a) the exclusion of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA does not pass the rational nexus test; and (b)
excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA is manifestly arbitrary; (c) denying same-sex couples the
right to marry, enjoyed by opposite-sex couples amounts to discrimination on the ground of 'sex' and 'sexual
orientation'; and (d) non-recognition of same-sex marriages results in differential treatment of LGBT persons under
different laws.
a. The exclusions of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA does not pass the rational nexus test.
749. The exclusion of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA amounts to drawing a distinction between a
same-sex couple and an opposite-sex couple, even though both the couples may be professing the Hindu religion and
married as per Hindu rites and rituals. Such a classification of Hindu couples between same-sex couples and opposite-
sex couples does not pass the rational nexus test of Article 14. For a classification to be valid under Article 14, it must
pass the twin tests of (i) intelligible differentia; and (ii) rational nexus to the object of the statute. The classification
arising from this interpretation of Section 5 of HMA does not satisfy the two tests and is hence, violative of Article 14.
750. The classification, in order to be constitutionally permissible, must be based on intelligible differentia. This
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 ('DV Act') to delete the words "adult male" from the definition
of "respondent", as the same was based on the "microscopic classification" between male and female, and adult and
non-adult. This Hon'ble Court has warned against the overemphasis on the doctrine of classification and held that a
valid classification must be based on a real and substantial difference and the same must have a just and reasonable
relation with the object of the legislation.
the basis of sexual orientation as impermissible.
[Indu Malhotra, J.]
"637.3 The natural or innate orientation of a person cannot be a ground for discrimination. Where a legislation
discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an individual, it cannot form a reasonable classification
based on intelligible differentia."
752. As submitted above, the HMA is a reform legislation, enacted with the purpose of codifying the Hindu law of
marriage and eradicating restrictions under the shastric Hindu law on who could marry whom160 Embodying the
constitutional guarantee of non-discrimination and the right of individuals to marry a person of their choice, the HMA
removed the bar of caste, gotra and pravara existing in Hindu law prior to its enactment. This Hon'ble Court in a series
192 has recognised this reformative character of the HMA. Thus, in light of the legislative object of the HMA, a
classification between same-sex couples and opposite-sex couples under Section 5 of HMA neither has an intelligible
differentia, nor a reasonable nexus to the object of HMA. In fact, this classification defeats the very purpose for which
the statute was enacted.
b.
Excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of the HMA is manifestly arbitrary.
753. It is submitted that the provisions of the HMA, insofar as they exclude same-sex marriages, are manifestly
arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. This Hon'ble Court in Shayara Bano V. Union of India (2017) 9
adequate determining principles, as also if it is excessive or disproportionate. The HMA, insofar as it precludes same-
sex marriages is manifestly arbitrary as the same is not based on any fair or reasonable justification for the exclusion
of same-sex couples.
or discrimination based on 'sexual orientation' cannot be permitted. As such, the non-recognition of same-sex
marriages under Section 5 of the HMA lacks a sound determining principle and is hence, manifestly arbitrary.
755. The Petitioners in the present case have undergone the rites and rituals to solemnise a valid Hindu marriage in
terms of Section 7 of the HMA. They have circumambulated the sacred fire seven times, applied sindoor to each
other's foreheads, garlanded each other. However, their marriage is not recognised under the HMA merely because
they are a same-sex couple. This non-recognition is not backed by any determining principle, and is thus, manifestly
arbitrary.
C. Denying same-sex couples the right to marry enjoyed by opposite-sex couples amounts to discrimination on the
grounds of 'sex" and 'sexual orientation'.
756. The HMA, insofar as it denies recognition to same-sex marriages solemnised as per Hindu rites and
ceremonies discriminates between same-sex and opposite-sex couples solely on the basis of 'sex' and 'sexual
orientation', based on a stereotypical notion of gender and is therefore, in the teeth of Article 15 of the Constitution.
757. Article 15 prohibits discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. In National Legal Services Authority V.
"sex" under Articles 15 and 16, also includes "discrimination on the ground of gender identity." Relying on this
sexual orientation is a protected ground under Article 15 and all persons have a right to not be discriminated against
on the basis of their sexual orientation under any legislation.
[Indu Malhotra J.]
"638.2. The term "sex", as it occurs in Article 15 has been given an expansive interpretation by this Court in
National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India [National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (2014) 5
Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also
includes their "sexual identity and character". The J.S. Verma Committee [ Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law (2013).] had recommended that "sex" under Article 15 must include "sexual
orientation":
"65. Further, we are clear that Article 15(c) of the Constitution of India uses the word "sex" as including
sexual orientation."
The prohibition against discrimination under Article 15 on the ground of "sex" should therefore
encompass instances where such discrimination takes place on the basis of one's sexual orientation."
[Emphasis Supplied]
758. The Court in Navtej Singh Johar's case (cited supra) further held in paragraph 428, that "while assessing
whether a law infringes a fundamental right, it is not the intention of the lawmaker that is determinative, but whether
the effect or operation of the law infringes fundamental rights."
759. Additionally, the HMA in excluding same-sex marriages, discriminates against same-sex individuals on the
ground of their choice of marital partner. This amounts to discrimination on the basis of sex of their partner, and is
prohibited under Article 15 of the Constitution. The exclusion of same-sex marriages under the HMA is predicated upon
on a heteronormative conception of marriage based on stereotypes of sex and gender, and as such, the same is
violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
760. In the present case, the Petitioners have solemnised a valid marriage as per their religious rites and
ceremonies. However, their marriage is not recognised under the HMA on grounds of their sexual orientation alone. The
object of the HMA is to reform the Hindu law governing marriage and to recognise individual choice of partners
irrespective of social acceptance. However, by recognizing marriages only between opposite sex couples, the effect of
the law is to deny LGBT couples like the Petitioners the right to solemnize their marriage solely on the ground of their
sexual orientation.
761. The non-recognition of the marriage of the Petitioners under the HMA renders them strangers in law, even
when they have been in committed long term relationships that are identical to those of opposite sex married couples
that the HMA recognizes. Further, excluding same sex couples from the bundle of rights available to married couples
discriminates against same sex couples solely on the ground of sexual orientation.
d. Non-recognition of same-sex marriages results in differential treatment of LGBT persons and excludes them from
the multitude of legal benefits that marriage encompasses.
762. Marriage is a bundle of rights - such as the right to live in a shared household, parenthood, inheritance,
adoption, joint ownership of properties and bank accounts, etc. The non-recognition of same-sex marriages denies
same-sex couples the legal protection of these rights conferred upon married couples, which become automatically
available to opposite-sex couples. Same-sex couples have the same level of commitment, love, respect and emotional
attachment to each other as exists in opposite-sex couples. Denying them the rights enjoyed by an opposite-sex
married couple is violative of their rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution.
7 The Petitioners herein, even though married as per Hindu rites and rituals, cannot open a joint bank account
or a locker, or avail of medical insurance as a family. They cannot name each other as nominees in their bank accounts
or insurance policies. The Petitioners cannot include each other's names in their property papers though they both
would be happy to extend this right of joint ownership to each other.
764. Even though Petitioner No. 2 has invested the proceeds from selling her property into renovating and
reconstructing the Petitioners' shared household, she has no legal right in the property, as it was inherited by
Petitioner No. 1 from her father. To the Petitioners' shock, Petitioner No. 2 had to approach a local municipal councilor
to obtain an address proof on their house, as it stood in the name of Petitioner No. 1. In case of an opposite-sex
marriage, a house owned or rented by a "spouse" would have been sufficient to prove the residence of the other
spouse.
765. It is submitted that this exposes a gaping hole in the law which fails to ensure to same-sex partners the basic
rights which flow from a marriage. As such, same-sex couples are deprived of a host of rights and privileges including
- (i) the benefits available to spouses under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in case of demise of one spouse due to
vehicular accidents; (ii) the benefits under the Income Tax Act, 1961; (iii) spousal privilege under Section 122 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872; (iv) donation of organs under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994; (v) benefits
under labour laws, to name a few.
the importance of institutions of marriage and family to an individual's right to self-determination, an integral facet of
the guarantee of dignity protected under Article 21, as follows:
[Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
"298. The intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom
of thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination. When these
guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects all those elements which are crucial to
gender identity. The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of
the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to determine how
freedom shall be exercised."
[Emphasis supplied]
767. Denying LGBT couples such as the Petitioners the protection of the rights and privileges conferred upon
married couples infringes upon their right to choose a partner, and found a family, guaranteed under Article 21.
Treating them differently from opposite-sex married couples, who enjoy these rights and privileges violates their right
to equal protection of laws and non-discrimination enshrined under Articles 14 and 15.
(iii) Denying legal recognition to same-sex marriages violates their right to freedom of expression and
association guaranteed under Article 19.
768. To deny according legitimacy to an individual's choice of partner would be in gross violation of their rights
guaranteed under Articles 19 of the Constitution. Article 19(1)(a) guarantees to all citizens of India the right to
freedom of expression. The Petitioners' choice of life partner is an essential facet of their freedom of expression and is
protected under Article 19(1)(a).
769. Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution confers upon the Petitioners the freedom of association and the right to
recognised the equal entitlement of LGBT persons to the full range of constitutional rights. As such, depriving same-
sex couples of their right to form a union is violative of the constitutional guarantee of association under Article 19(1)
(c).
770. This Hon'ble Court has, in a plethora of recent judgements, has held that an individual's right to marry a
person of their choice, irrespective of the barriers of caste, class or community, is inherent in their freedom of
"43. Honour killing guillotines individual liberty, freedom of choice and one's own perception of choice. It has to
be sublimely borne in mind that when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a
manifestation of their choice which is recognised under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has the
sanction of the constitutional law and once that is recognised, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot
succumb to the conception of class honour or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely
does not have any legitimacy.
below:
[Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
"346. Our autonomy as persons is founded on the ability to decide : on what to wear and how to dress, on
what to eat and on the food that we share, on when to speak and what we speak, on the right to believe or not to
believe, on whom to love and whom to partner, and to freely decide on innumerable matters of consequence and
detail to our daily lives."
The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual will have a
protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside marriage."
772. It is pertinent to note that the HMA is fully capable of being interpreted in an inclusive manner so as to
recognise same-sex marriages. Therefore, once it is established that a person enjoys the fundamental right to marry a
person of their choice under Articles 19 & 21 of the Constitution, coupled with the fact that the Act itself does not bar
same-sex marriages, the State ought to necessarily register and recognize such marriages under law.
773. In addition to the above, it is submitted that the plea for recognition of same-sex marriages is also specifically
while stating the importance of this Hon'ble Court laid down the following:
"71. The principles referred to above clearly indicate that the freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 19
(1) (a) includes the freedom to express one's chosen gender identity through varied ways and means by way of
expression, speech, mannerism, clothing, etc.
72. Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal identity, gender expression and presentation
and, therefore, it will have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. A transgender's
personality could be expressed by the transgender's behaviour and presentation. State cannot prohibit, restrict or
interfere with a transgender's C expression of such personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often the
State and its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest the innate character and identity of such
persons. We, therefore, hold that values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy and personal integrity are fundamental
rights guaranteed to members of the transgender community under Article 19(1)(o) of the Constitution of India and
the State is bound to protect and recognise those rights.
774. In conclusion, the freedom of expression and association under Article 19 includes the freedom to express
one's chosen sexual orientation through a variety of ways. This Hon'ble Court has observed that both sexual
orientation and gender identity are equally integral to an individual's personality and is one of the most basic aspects
of self-determination, dignity and freedom. It is submitted that the plea to extend the regime of the HMA to apply to
same sex marriages is duly covered by the aforesaid judgement. Whether it is between people of the same sex or of
the opposite sex, marriage is a form of expression of one's sexual orientation. In fact, for same-sex couples, who
continue to be discriminated against, marriage is one of the most powerful ways in which they can express their
identity and also achieve social acceptance.
(iv) Exclusion of same-sex marriages under the HMA is violative of the rights guaranteed under Article 25.
775. Marriage is a matter of conscience. It is one of the most personal associations between two individuals
recognized, protected, as well as incentivised by the law. A partner is one's companion on life's ethical, moral,
financial. and social journey. It is submitted that the choice of a marital partner is a facet of freedom of conscience
under Article 25 of the Constitution. Article 25 guarantees all persons the freedom of conscience and the right to freely
profess, practice and propagate religion. This entitlement is only subject to public order, morality, health and to other
provisions of Part III of the Constitution. It is submitted that by not recognising same-sex marriages, the HMA denies
this aspect of the individual's exercise of the freedom of conscience to LGBT Hindus.
776. Article 25 grants the freedom of conscience equally to every individual, irrespective of their gender identity
and sexual orientation. Conscience is the innermost thought or the sense of moral correctness that governs or
influences the actions of an individual. It corresponds to the mental process of belief or non-belief
of
conscience is a matter of "purely private thought" which may touch upon areas broader than religious beliefs "such as
political beliefs etc.". It was held that this forms part of liberty guaranteed to an individual under Article 21. Further,
"conscience, as a cognitive process that elicits emotion and associations based on an individual's beliefs, rests only in
individuals."
778. Explaining the ambit of freedom of conscience as protected under Article 25 and the equal entitlement of the
nature of the right conferred by this Article, this Hon'ble Court held-
[Dr. Chandrachud, J]
"208*. In clause (1), Article 25 protects the equal entitlement of all persons to a freedom of conscience and to
freely profess, protect and propagate religion. By conferring this right on all persons, the Constitution emphasises
the universal nature of the right. By all persons, the Constitution means exactly what it says : every individual in
society without distinction of any kind whatsoever is entitled to the right. By speaking of an equal entitlement, the
Constitution places every individual on an even platform. Having guaranteed equality before the law and the equal
protection of laws in Article 14, the draftspersons specifically continued the theme of an equal entitlement as an
intrinsic element of the freedom of conscience and of the right to profess, practise and propagate religion. There are
three defining features of clause (1) of Article 25 : first, the entitlement of all persons without exception, second,
the recognition of an equal entitlement; and third, the recognition both of the freedom of conscience and the right
freely to profess, practise and propagate religion. The right under Article 25(1) is evidently an individual right for, it
is in the individual that a conscience inheres. Moreover, it is the individual who professes, practises and propagates
religion. Freedom of religion in Article 25(1) is a right which the Constitution recognises as dwelling in each
individual or natural person.
779. Marriage, as a choice of one's life partner, one's companion for the journey of life, constitutes an important
facet of the freedom of conscience protected under Article 25 of the Constitution. In the absence of the freedom to
choose a life partner, LGBT Hindus are deprived of their freedom of thought and belief, as guaranteed under Article 25.
780. This Hon'ble Court inhas categorically stated that under Article 25, all persons, regardless of any other factors,
are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and to freely profess, protect and propagate religion. When the aforesaid
ratio is applied herein, the inevitable conclusion is that when a Hindu marriage between opposite sex couples is
recognized under law, same-sex couples, who are equally entitled to the freedom of conscience and the right to
practice their religion, ought to be permitted to have their marriages recognized under the Act. Any other course of
action would be impermissible as per Article 25 of the Constitution. Sexual orientation of individuals cannot be a factor
in barring them from the equal entitlement to freedom of conscience and the right to practice religion.
aspects of faith and belief, marriage and family as being integral to the dignitarian guarantee:
[Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
"298.
The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the
individual. Read in conjunction with Article 21, liberty enables the individual to have a choice of
preferences on various facets of life including what and how one will eat, the way one will dress, the
faith one will espouse and a myriad other matters on which autonomy and self-determination require a
choice to be made within the privacy of the mind. The constitutional right to the freedom of religion
under Article 25 has implicit within it the ability to choose a faith and the freedom to express or not
express those choices to the world. These are some illustrations of the manner in which privacy facilitates
freedom and is intrinsic to the exercise of liberty. Privacy is the ultimate expression of the sanctity
of
the
individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles across the spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for
the individual a zone of choice and self-determination."
[Emphasis supplied]
782. It is submitted that the protection extended to the sphere of marriage and family as being an aspect of
privacy is thus inextricably linked to the choice in matters of faith and belief and the freedom to publicly express these
choices. The right to form a religious union, the right to choose between a religious and a civil marriage, the right to
establish a family and raise children as believers of a particular religion are all expressions of the right to freedom of
conscience and religion under Article 25 of the Constitution and are protected also as an expression of the individuals'
right to privacy and dignity under Article 21.
783. The Petitioners Nibedita and Pooja grew up in Hindu families. They were raised to believe that marriage
constitutes an important part of an individual's life. Their conception of a marriage is founded on the ideal of mutual
love and respect, and expressed by performing the rites and ceremonies that solemnize and have come to symbolize a
Hindu marriage - taking pheras around the sacred fire, applying sindoor to the forehead of the bride, garlanding each
other, receiving shagun from family and loved ones. Denying recognition to their marriage solely on the ground of their
sexual orientation is violative of their fundamental rights.
784. Further, it is submitted that inclusion of same sex marriages under the Act neither contravenes any other
individual's rights under Article 25 non is injurious to public order, morality or health. Therefore, there exists no
constitutional fetter that prevent this Hon'ble Court from recognizing same sex marriages under the Act.
(v) HMA ought to be interpreted to recognise same-sex marriages to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality.
785. If a plain and literal interpretation of a statute results in the violation of any fundamental rights, this Hon'ble
Court has the power to read the provisions of the statute in a manner that conforms with the Constitution. In fact, the
HMA has already been interpreted in this manner by the Hon'ble Madras High Court in Arun Kumar V. Inspector
[R.F. Nariman, J.]
"56. And this brings us to the question as to when petitions have been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution
of India, is it permissible for us to state that we will not decide an alleged breach of a fundamental right, but will
send the matter back to the legislature to remedy such a wrong.
58. We are heartened to note that in a recent US Supreme Court decision the same thing has been said with
respect to knocking at the doors of the US Supreme Court in order to vindicate a basic right. In Obergefell V.
"The dynamic of our constitutional system is that individuals need not await legislative action before asserting
a fundamental right. The Nation's courts are open to injured individuals who come to them to vindicate their own
direct, personal stake in our basic charter. An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection when he
or she is harmed even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act. The idea of the
Constitution was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them
beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied by the courts'.
West Virginia State Board of Education V. Barnette [West Virginia State Board of Education V. Barnette, 1943
why 'fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote: they depend on the outcome of no elections."
787. This Hon'ble Court has also held that the rule of adherence to a literal construction/plain meaning construction
is not absolute and may be departed from if it renders the impugned provision unconstitutional. In State of U.P. V.
"14. It is true that there are situations in which courts are compelled to subordinate the plain meaning of
statutory language. Not unoften, courts do read down the plain language of a provision or give it a restricted
meaning, where, to do otherwise may be clearly opposed to the object and scheme of the Act or may lead to an
absurd, illogical or unconstitutional result...
789. Section 5 of HMA provides the conditions of a valid marriage between "any two Hindus". Except for sub-
section (iii), the Section employs gender-neutral terminology throughout, referring to the two Hindus as 'parties',
instead of 'man' and 'woman'; and their 'spouses', instead of 'husband' and 'wife'.
790. Thus, the provisions of HMA are broad enough to be interpreted to include same-sex marriages. Therefore, it is
submitted that this Hon'ble Court ought to declare that the HMA be interpreted in a manner so as to recognise the
right of LGBT persons to get married in accordance with their traditional rites and ceremonies so as to prevent it from
falling foul of the fundamental rights enshrined under Article 21,14, 15, 19, and 25 of the Constitution.
V. Constitutional Courts are empowered to review statutory law to ensure its conformity with
constitutional values. Such Courts do not need to wait for the Legislature to enact/amend law to recognize
same-sex marriage.
791. The Respondent, in its common counter-affidavit has inter alia contended the following:
The competent legislature can only enact a law which would govern personal relationships including marriage,
divorce, etc.
- Granting recognition and conferring rights recognising human relations is a legislative function and cannot be
made a subject matter of judicial adjudication.
- Any deviation from the concept of marriage being a relationship between a biological man and a biological
woman, can occur only before the competent legislature.
792. The said contentions are patently erroneous and ignore well-settled legal precedents of this Hon'ble Court.
793. Before we delve into dissecting the legality of the contentions raised by the Respondent, it will be relevant to
see if any steps were taken by the Respondent to enact any legislation to recognize same-sex marriages. In response
to an unstarred question (No. 4644) raised on the floor of the Lok Sabha on 24.03.2021 as to "whether the
Government proposes to make Special Marriage Act and the Foreign Marriage Act applicable to all couples regardless
to gender identity and sexual orientation", the Minister of Law and Justice responded categorically that there is no
such proposal. Since the Legislature has decided not to take any steps in this regard, the Petitioners were constrained
to approach the Court to enforce their fundamental right to marry a person of their choice, as well as their
fundamental right to equality and non-discrimination.
794. It is submitted that any law by a competent legislature is subject to judicial review and/or judicial
interpretation in order to make it consistent with Constitutional values and rights. Further, "cultural ethos", "social
standards", "national acceptability" and "societal values" must give way to constitutional morality in the face of
violation of fundamental rights of citizens.
795. The contention of the State that the field of personal relationships (including marriage, divorce, etc.) ought to
be left to the legislature is in gross violation of numerous precedents of this Hon'ble Court which have subjected laws
of marriage, succession and divorce to judicial review. The Petitioners cannot be left remediless when they have
approached the Court to enforce their fundamental rights to marry a person of their choice, equality and non-
discrimination. The issue of whether LGBT rights can be left to the legislature to decide is now no longer res integra.
A
"144. The purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature of guaranteed fundamental rights is to
insulate their exercise from the disdain of majorities, whether legislative or popular. The guarantee of
constitutional rights does not depend upon their exercise being favourably regarded by majoritarian
opinion. The test of popular acceptance does not furnish a valid basis to disregard rights which are conferred with
the sanctity of constitutional protection. Discrete and insular minorities face grave dangers of discrimination for the
simple reason that their views, beliefs or way of life does not accord with the "mainstream". Yet in a democratic
Constitution founded on the Rule of Law, their rights are as sacred as those conferred on other citizens to protect
their freedoms and liberties."
796. The above observation explicitly overruled the finding in Suresh Kumar Koushal V. Naz Foundation, (2014) 1
deleting Section 377 IPC from the statute book or amend the same..." . Hence, the exclusion of certain citizens from the
full enjoyment of rights guaranteed by law is a question to be determined by this Hon'ble Court and cannot be left to
the Legislature.
797. The aforesaid contentions of the Respondent have been also dealt with in detail and rejected in Navtej Singh
[R.F. Nariman, J.]
352. Another argument raised on behalf of the interveners is that change in society, if any, can be reflected
by amending laws by the elected representatives of the people. Thus, it would be open to Parliament to carve
out an exception from Section 377, but this Court should not indulge in taking upon itself the guardianship of
changing societal mores. Such an argument must be emphatically rejected. The very purpose of the
fundamental rights chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdraw the subject of liberty and dignity
of the individual and place such subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments SO that
constitutional morality can be applied by this Court to give effect to the rights, among others, of
"discrete and insular" minorities. One such minority has knocked on the doors of this Court as this Court is the
custodian of the fundamental rights of citizens. These fundamental rights do not depend upon the outcome of
elections. And, it is not left to majoritarian governments to prescribe what shall be orthodox in matters
concerning social morality. The fundamental rights chapter is like the North Star in the universe of
constitutionalism in India. Constitutional morality always trumps any imposition of a particular view of
social morality by shifting and different majoritarian regimes.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
"514. Under our constitutional scheme, no minority group must suffer deprivation of a constitutional right
because they do not adhere to the majoritarian way of life. By the application of Section 377 of the Penal Code,
MSM and transgender persons are excluded from access to healthcare due to the societal stigma attached to their
sexual identity. Being particularly vulnerable g to contraction of HIV, this deprivation can only be described as cruel
and debilitating. The indignity suffered by the sexual minority cannot, by any means, stand the test of
constitutional validity.
521. The power to enact legislation in the field of criminal law has been entrusted to Parliament and, subject to
its
authority, to the State Legislatures. Both Parliament and the State Legislatures can enact laws providing for
offences arising out of legislation falling within their legislative domains. The authority to enact law, however, is
subject to the validity of the law being scrutinised on the touchstone of constitutional safeguards. A citizen, or, as in
the present case, a community of citizens, having addressed a challenge to the validity of a law which creates an
offence, the authority to determine that question is entrusted to the judicial branch in the exercise of the power of
judicial review. The Court will not, as it does not, in the exercise of judicial review, second guess a value judgment
made by the legislature on the need for or the efficacy of legislation. But where a law creating an offence is found to
be offensive to fundamental rights, such a law is not immune to challenge. The constitutional authority which is
entrusted to the legislatures to create offences is subject to the mandate of a written Constitution. Where the
validity of the law is called into question, judicial review will extend to scrutinising whether the law is manifestly
arbitrary in its encroachment on fundamental liberties. If a law discriminates against a group or a community
of citizens by denying them full and equal participation as citizens, in the rights and liberties granted by
the Constitution, it would be for the Court to adjudicate upon validity of such a law.
608. LGBT individuals living under the threats of conformity grounded in cultural morality have been denied a
basic human existence. They have been stereotyped and prejudiced. Constitutional morality requires this Court not
to turn a blind eye to their right to an equal participation of citizenship and an equal enjoyment of living.
Constitutional morality requires that this Court must act as a counter-majoritarian institution which
discharges the responsibility of protecting constitutionally entrenched rights, regardless of what the
majority may believe. Constitutional morality must turn into a habit of citizens. By e respecting the dignity of
LGBT individuals, this Court is only fulfilling the foundational promises of our Constitution.
643.7 The conclusion in Suresh Kumar Koushal case to await legislative amendments to this provision may not
be necessary. Once it is brought to the notice of the Court of any violation of the fundamental rights of a
citizen, or a group of citizens the Court will not remain a mute spectator, and wait for a majoritarian
Government to bring about such a change. Given the role of this Court as the sentinel on the qui vive, it
is the constitutional duty of this Court to review the provisions of the impugned section, and read it
down to the extent of its inconsistency with the Constitution. In the present case, reading down Section 377
is necessary to exclude consensual sexual relationships between adults, whether of the same sex or otherwise, in
private, SO as to remove the vagueness of the provision to the extent it is inconsistent with Part 111 of the
Constitution.
798. Further, the contentions of the Respondent do not have any legal basis in view of the judgment of this Hon'ble
"The dynamic of our constitutional system is that individuals need not await legislative action before asserting a
fundamental right. The Nation's courts are open to injured individuals who come to them to vindicate their own
direct, personal stake in our basic charter. An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection when he or
she is harmed, even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act. This is why
'fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote; they depend on the outcome of no elections'.
799. In light of the above, the contentions of the Respondent are rejected. The present case is concerned with the
constitutional validity of the HMA insofar as it denies the fundamental rights of the Petitioners under Articles 14, 15,
19, and 21 solely on the ground of their sexual orientation and gender identity. In granting relief, this Hon'ble Court
would not be legislating but would be rightfully exercising its power of judicial review by interpreting the statute in a
manner that is consistent with the rights guaranteed under the Constitution.
VI. The provisions of the HMA are amenable to a constitutional challenge against the touchstone of
fundamental rights.
800. The present Petition has challenged the non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the HMA, as being
violative of the fundamental rights enshrined under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution of India. It is
submitted that the Hindu personal law governing marriage is entirely codified under HMA and as a law enacted by the
Parliament, HMA is subject to judicial review under Article 13(2) of the Constitution.
a. Hindu personal law governing marriage is entirely codified under the HMA.
801. The HMA is a complete Code containing the entire law governing marriage between Hindus. With the
enactment of the HMA, the personal law governing the institution of marriage among Hindus has been entirely
abrogated and modified16.
whether talaq-ul-biddat or "triple talaq", which authorised a Muslim man to divorce his wife by pronouncing the word
"talaq" thrice, was legally valid. In a 3-2 verdict, the majority ruled that triple talaq is not legally valid. Rohinton Fali
Nariman, J. (writing for himself and Lalit, J.) held that the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937
codified the practice of triple talaq. The learned Judge proceeded to examine whether this violated the Constitution
"47. It is, therefore, clear that all forms of talaq recognised and enforced by Muslim Personal Law are recognised
and enforced by the 1937 Act. This would necessarily include triple talaq when it comes to the Muslim Personal Law
applicable to Sunnis in India.
48. As we have concluded that the 1937 Act is a law made by the legislature before the Constitution came into
force, it would fall squarely within the expression "laws in force" in Article 13(3)(b) and would be hit by Article 13
(1) if found to be inconsistent with the provisions of Part 111 of the Constitution, to the extent of such
inconsistency."
803. Nariman, J. thus held that the 1937 Act codified the practice of triple talaq and that the legislation would
consequently fall within the ambit of "laws in force" in Article 13(1) of the Constitution. This squarely applies to the
present Petition. It is submitted that as the HMA, a legislation enacted by the Parliament, codifies the Hindu personal
law governing marriage, the same is subject to judicial review.
b. Customs contrary to the HMA have ceased to have effect.
804. Subsequent to the enactment of the HMA, the scope of customs enjoying legal status under the Hindu law has
been truncated Section 4 of the HMA provides the overriding effect of the HMA, and reads as follows-
"4. Overriding effect of Act- Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,-
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any matter for which
provision is made in this Act;
805. Thus, Hindu laws governing marriage as laid down under any religious text, custom or usage cease to be in
force insofar as they are in conflict with the provisions of the HMA. This overriding effect has been upheld by this
806. Under the HMA, the legal validity of customs is only saved to the limited extent as provided therein. For
instance, S. 5(iv), (v) provides that Hindus falling within a degree of prohibited relationship, or those who are
sapindas of each other, may solemnize a marriage if it is permitted by custom or usage governing the parties. S. 7
provides that Hindu marriage can be solemnized by way of performance of customary rites and ceremonies. Finally, S.
29(2) provides that the provisions of HMA shall not affect the right recognized by custom to obtain dissolution of
marriage whether solemnized before or after the commencement of the Act. Aside from these specific instances of
saving custom or usage, the HMA provides a new law of marriage which overrides custom.
807. Section 7 of HMA saves the customary rites and ceremonies performed at the time of solemnization of a Hindu
marriage. Section 7 does not prescribe any "correct" form of Hindu customary marriage, and simply states that it can
be solemnised in accordance with the customary rights and ceremonies of either party. Implicit in this is the notion
that the customs and ceremonies are fluid and may change with changing times.
808. Section 5 of the HMA prescribes the conditions for a valid marriage. As submitted above, Section 5 is broad
enough to be interpreted to permit same-sex marriages solemnized as per Hindu rites and rituals. In light of the
overriding effect of the HMA as provided under Section 4, any custom inconsistent with the provision of Section 5
ceases to have effect. Therefore, it is submitted that Section 5 of the HMA is the entire law governing conditions of a
valid Hindu marriage. As such, there is no bar on recognising same-sex marriages under the Hindu statutory law
governing marriage, and this Hon'ble Court ought to interpret Section 5 of the HMA in a manner consistent with the
fundamental rights of the LGBT Hindus.
C. Personal laws (codified and uncodified) are included within the expression "All laws in force" under
Article 3(1) of the Constitution and must conform with the provisions of Part 111.
809. It is settled law that personal laws, religious customs and usages are amenable to judicial review and must be
in accordance with constitutional values and constitutional morality. The Constitution itself is a dynamic document and
has been interpreted differently at different times. It is submitted that in light of our transformative and
compassionate Constitution, it is imperative that the right of LGBT couples to get married be recognised under the law.
810. Article 13(1) of the Constitution inter alia provides that all laws in force in India before the commencement of
the Constitution must also be consistent with the provisions of Part 111 and as such, not violate any of the fundamental
rights conferred thereunder, thereby making them amenable to judicial review.
Bom 72] which held that personal laws were immune from constitutional challenge/judicia review under Article 13 of
the Constitution has been held to be incorrect by a Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court in Indian Young Lawyers
"394. Custom, usage and personal law have a significant impact on the status of individuals. Those activities
that are inherently connected with the civil status of individuals cannot be granted constitutional immunity merely
because they may have some associational features which have a religious nature.
397 The decision in Narasu, in restricting the definition of the term "laws in force" detracts from the
transformative vision of the Constitution. Carving out "custom or usage" from constitutional scrutiny, denies the
constitutional vision of ensuring the primacy of individual dignity. The decision in Narasu is based on flawed
premises. Custom or usage cannot be excluded from "laws in force". The decision in Narasu also opined that
personal law is immune from constitutional scrutiny. This detracts from the notion that no body of practices can
claim supremacy over the Constitution and its vision of ensuring the sanctity of dignity, liberty and equality."
812. Thus, this Court has emphatically ruled that "all laws in force" under Article 13(1) includes customs, usages
and personal laws and hence, the same must conform to the provisions of Part III of the Constitution.
813. The Petitioners herein, Nibedita Dutta and Pooja Srivastava, have approached this Hon'ble Court seeking that
their marriage, solemnized as per Hindu customary rites be recognised under the HMA. The Petitioners have performed
the rites and ceremonies that solemnize a Hindu marriage. They have circumambulated the sacred fire seven times;
applied sindoor to each other's foreheads; garlanded each other. They are married in the eyes of God. Further, the
Petitioners satisfy all the conditions for a valid marriage as provided under Section 5 of the HMA. They have been living
together as spouses for over 2.5 years, and along with Petitioner No. 2's mother, who resides with them, they form
a
close-knit family. The Petitioners' marriage is based on mutual respect, deep commitment and love. However, in the
absence of legal recognition, the Petitioners are excluded from the multitude of legal benefits which a marriage
automatically confers upon opposite-sex couples. This is a gross violation of the Petitioners' fundamental rights and
has caused severe hardship to Petitioners. It is thus, humbly prayed that this Hon'ble Court ought to interpret the
provisions of the HMA to recognise same-sex marriages performed as per Hindu rites and rituals, to enforce the
fundamental rights of the Petitioners and similarly placed LGBT Hindu couples.
LGBT Indians from the equal enjoyment of the most basic of their fundamental rights.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
"405. Indian citizens belonging to sexual minorities have waited. They have waited and watched as their fellow
citizens were freed from the British yoke while their fundamental freedoms remained restrained under an
antiquated and anachronistic colonial era law - forcing them to live in hiding, in fear, and as second-class citizens.
In seeking an adjudication of the validity of Section 377, these citizens urge that the acts which the provision
makes culpable should be decriminalised. But this case involves much more than merely decriminalising certain
conduct which has been proscribed by a colonial law. The case is about an aspiration to realise constitutional rights.
It is about a right which every human being has, to live with dignity. It is about enabling these citizens to realise
the worth of equal citizenship. Above all, our decision will speak to the transformative power of the Constitution. For
it is in the transformation of society that the Constitution seeks to assure the values of a just, humane and
compassionate existence to all her citizens."
815. The right to love, seek companionship, found a family are essential to an individual's pursuit of happiness and
are inherent in the guarantees of our Constitution. Nibedita and Pooja, the Petitioners herein, have come before this
Hon'ble Court to enable realization of their Constitutional rights and to enable their full citizenship.
Drawn By:
Bhabna Das, Mukta Halbe, Utkarsh Pratap, Sai Kaushal, Advocates
Settled By:
Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, Senior Advocate
ANNEXURE-1: Indicative changes to personal laws depicting the evolution of marriage as an institution.
DATE
PARTICULARS
4 December, 1829
Bengal Sati Regulation- Abolition of Sati in India
1846
Indian Penal Code- Made sexual intercourse between the husband and the wife,
below 10 years, an offence.
26 July, 1856
Hindu Widows' Remarriage Act, 1856- Legalised the remarriage of Hindu widows
throughout India.
1866
The Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866- The dissolution of a marriage if
one party changed his or her faith and the other did not.
1870
Female Infanticide Prevention Act, 1870.
1872
Special Marriages Act, 1872- Set the minimum age of 14 years for marriage of
girls. Repealed by the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
24 February, 1874
Married Women's Property Act, 1874- Females had unrivalled powers
of
disposition over her separate property. But Hindu women were outside its
purview, making it a futile change.
1891
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1891- The age of consent to sexual intercourse
was raised from 10 years to 12 years.
28 September, 1916
The Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916- To allow transfer of property in the
favour of persons not existing at the time of such transfer.
28 September, 1929
The Child Marriage Restraint Act of 1929 (Sarda Act)- To eradicate child
marriage. Set the age for girls at 14 years and boys at 18 years.
25 July, 1930.
The Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930- It ruled that a Hindu's earnings from a
learned profession for which he had been trained at the expense of joint family
funds were not family property.
14 April, 1937
The Hindu Women Rights to Property Act, 1937- Conferred rights of succession
on widows. (Only life estate)
1937
Arya Marriages Validation Act 1937 was passed to ensure that marriages
performed in the manner of the Arya Samaj community which simplified
ceremonies would also be considered as a valid marriage. This Act permitted
inter-caste marriages categorized as anuloma and patriloma depending on
whether the woman or man was of a higher caste. This permitted class of inter-
caste marriages were under the auspices of the Arya Samaj.
8 April, 1938
Hindu Women's Rights to Property (Amendment) Act, 1938-Amended to exclude
a widow's interest in any agricultural land.
1946
Hindu Marriage Removal of Disabilities Act, 1946 - validated inter- sub-caste
marriages
1949
Article 17- Removal of Untouchability.
1949
Hindu Marriage Validity Act, 1949 permitted performance of both forms of inter-
castes marriage, i.e., rituals of both castes.
1955
Hindu Marriage Act (changes made to customs)-
Removed the necessity that marriage had to be performed within the same
caste.
Monogamy was made a rule.
Divorce provisions were created.
1956
S. 14 of Hindu Succession Act- Removed the disability of women to hold
property. It converted the limited estate of a female owner to an absolute estate.
1956
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act- woman was eligible to claim one-third of
the joint income of her husband and herself in case of divorce.
1956
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act-
gave mother guardianship rights if the father neglected the child.
mother was also granted the right to be the lawful guardian of illegitimate
children.
1961
Dowry Prohibition Act 1961.
27 May, 1976
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976- Brought about an array of changes to
HMA including divorce by mutual consent which departed from the irreversible
nature of a Hindu marriage and demolished the notion that the marriage was a
sacrament that could not be dissolved. These amendments also included the
ability of a divorcee to immediately marry, as opposed to the one year waiting
period in place prior to this.
1978
Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act- Age limit for both girls and boys was
raised to 18 and 21 years respectively. The Act penalised an adult male for
marrying a minor girl. (S.4).
11 September, 1989
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
1983
Criminal Law (second amendment) Act of 1983- S. 113A in Indian Evidence Act
which brought in a presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
This was introduced because there was an increase in the number of dowry
deaths, a matter of serious concern.
1985
One of the most significant reforms came in 1985, when the Supreme Court
delivered its judgement in Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum AIR 1985
SC 945. A five-judge Bench led by Justice YV Chandrachud directed Mohd.
Ahmad Khan to provide maintenance to his divorced wife, despite this not being
required by Muslim personal law.
19 November, 1986
Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act of 1986- Led to addition of Sections 113B
and 304B to IPC.
1999
Court progressively interpreted Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act, 1956 to recognise the right of a Hindu mother as a natural guardian of her
minor son/unmarried daughter.
2002
Court was concerned with the issue of whether only Brahmins could be ordained
as priests in certain temples in Kerala. Longstanding usage and custom was cited
in support of this claim. The Court negatived the plea and held that customs are
subject to Constitutional rights.
2005
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005- Section 3 of the Act
specifically incorporates all forms of harassment, injury and harm inflicted to
coerce a woman to meet an unlawful demand for dowry.
2005
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act amended Section 6 of the Hindu Succession
Act, to provide for equal rights of daughters in the coparcenary property of
a
Hindu Undivided Family.
2006
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006-
Repealed the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.
The Act made the child marriage voidable at the option of the contracting party
to the marriage, who was a child. (S.3).
Allows for maintenance and residence for the girl till her remarriage from the
male contracting party or his parents. (S.4)
2006
familial or customary intervention can be permitted to prevent the right to choice
of marital partner, irrespective of caste of the partner. The decision stated
that: "The caste system is a curse on the nation and the sooner it is destroyed
the better. In fact, it is dividing the nation at a time when we have to be united
to face the challenges before the nation unitedly. Hence, inter-caste marriages
are in fact in the national interest as they will result in destroying the caste
system"
2017
declared the custom of a Muslim man uttering the word "talaq" three times to
divorce his wife as unconstitutional in 2017.
2018
public interest litigation concerned with honor killings of relationships of love and
marriage that defied customs in Haryana, Punjab and Western UP. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that customs that violate the constitutional right to dignity
and choice cannot be upheld.
21 February, 2019
The Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019- Leprosy is no more a ground for
divorce, as it is curable now. Changes made to Divorce Act, 1869; Dissolution of
Muslim Marriages Act, 1939; Special Marriage Act, 1954; Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 and Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
2019
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that since custom, usages and personal law
have a significant impact on the civil status of individuals, they cannot be
granted constitutional immunity merely because they may have some
associational features with religion.
2019
down the offence of adultery penalized under Section 497 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 as being gender discriminatory, and encroaching upon women's
liberty, dignity and sexual autonomy and thus, as violative of Articles 14, 15 and
21 of the Constitution.
2019
Madras High Court interpreted the word "bride" to include a transgender person.
2020
that the 2005 Amendment to the Hindu Succession Act is retroactive in nature
and the right of daughters in the coparcenary property is a birth right, equal to
that of sons and inheres equally in daughters born before the Amendment as
well.
2021
Court held that family or community sanction was not necessary once two adult
individuals consent to a wedlock.
2022
X. V. Principal Secretary Health and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of NCT
Delhi [Civil Appeal No. 5308 of 2022 arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 7772 of 2021]
the Supreme Court interpreted Rule 3B of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy
Rules to include within its ambit unmarried women.
2022
recognised that family units may manifest in atypical ways and has upheld the
need to legally recognise these non-traditional manifestations of familial
relationships.
ANNEXURE-2: Workability of the provisions of HMA
SI.
Section
Comment on Workability
1.
3(g) degrees of prohibited relationship"-two persons are said to
- Workable- prohibited degrees
be within the "degrees of prohibited relationship"-
can be maintained in same-sex
or
relationships.
(ii) if one was the wife or husband of a lineal ascendant or
descendant of the other; or
(iii) if one was the wife of the brother or of the father's or
mother's brother or of the grandfather's or grandmother's
brother of the other; or
(iv) if the two are brother and sister, uncle and niece, aunt and
nephew, or children of brother and sister or of two brothers or
of two sisters;
2.
5 (iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of 2 [twenty-one years]
Workable- only prescribes
and the bride, the age of 3 [eighteen years] at the time of the
minimum age for each. As long
marriage
as the minimum age is met by
the spouses, section is
unaffected.
3.
9. Restitution of conjugal right.- When either the husband or
Workable-
"either
the
the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society
husband or the wife" can be
of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the
read to mean "either spouse".
district court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on
This is not repugnant to the
being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition
context.
and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be
granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
4.
13. Divorce. (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after
Workable- "by either the
the commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented by
husband or the wife" can be
either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of
read to mean "by either of the
divorce on the ground that the other party...
spouses". This is not repugnant
to the context.
5.
(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her
- Workable. Can be retained as it
marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground
is only to apply to different sex
couples.
(ii) that the husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage,
been guilty of rape, sodomy or 1 [bestiality; or]
6.
19. Court to which petition shall be presented. -Every petition
-
Workable. This additional
under this Act shall be presented to the District Court within the local
protection granted to women
limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction :
remains unaffected. In a situation
[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, when she is residing on the
where simultaneously
two
date of presentation of the petition; or
jurisdictions are invoked by a
same-sex couple, it can be
resolved on a case to case basis.
7.
24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings.-
Workable- "by either the
Where in any proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that
husband or the wife" can be
either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has no
read to mean "by either of the
independent income sufficient for her or his support and the
spouses." This is not repugnant
necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of
to the context.
the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the
petitioner the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the
proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's own
income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court
to be reasonable.
8.
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.-(1) Any court
Workable- "by either the
exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any
husband or the wife" can be
decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on application made to it
read to mean "by either of the
for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case
spouses." This is not repugnant
may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the applicant for her
to the context.
or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or
periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as,
having regard to the respondent's own income and other property, if
any, the income and other property of the applicant 4 [the conduct of
the parties and other circumstances of the case], it may seem to the
court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if
necessary, by a charge on the immovable property of the
respondent.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL WRIT JURISDICTION
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 13 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Udit Sood & Ors Petitioners
V.
Union of India & ANR Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
| ISSUES ARISING FOR CONSIDERATION
I. Does the Constitution of India guarantee a Fundamental Right to marry the individual of one's choice?
11. If there is a Fundamental Right to choose whom to marry, does the Constitution guarantee this right to every
person or, as the Union contends, only to cis-gendered heterosexuals?
III. If every person is constitutionally guaranteed the right to choose whom to marry, does the Special Marriage
Act, 1954, permit non-discriminatory exercise of this right, or does it condition solemnization of marriage on
partners identifying as opposite binary genders?
IV. If the Constitution guarantees this Fundamental Right to all, but the Act denies each Petitioner their right to
marry an individual of their choice, are there any constitutionally valid justifications for such denial?
a. Does exclusion violate the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by our Constitution?
(i) Article 14 invalidates gender or sexuality based preconditions
(ii) Article 15 invalidates any gender or sexuality based preconditions
(iii) Article 19 invalidates any genden or sexuality based preconditions
(iv) Article 21 invalidates any gender or sexuality based preconditions
b.
Does exclusion inflict personal harm to LGTBQ+ individuals and an economic cost on the country?
(i) Personal Harm to LGBTQ+ Individuals
(ii) Economic Cost to the Country
Reduced human capital impedes LGBTQ+ workers' ability to contribute economic activity
LGBTQ+ workplace exclusion lowers general productivity
Exclusion leads to the "Gay Brain Drain"
Exclusion deters investment in India
The cumulative effects are enormous
C. Are there any constitutionally valid justifications for such denial?
(i) There is no 'legitimate state interest' promoted or safeguarded by denying LGBTQ+ individuals the
Fundamental Right of marriage
(ii) The Hon'ble Supreme Court ought not to leave the matter to be "resolved" by the legislature
(iii) Constitutional morality prevails over alleged "cultural and societal values"
(iv) Affording LGBTQ+ individuals non-discriminatory access to marriage does not diminish the institution
of marriage or the family unit
V. If there are no justifications for the Act to deny LGBTQ+ people their Fundamental Right, what relief should
the Court orden to address this injury?
FILED BY
KARANJAWALA & CO.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 06.04.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL WRIT JURISDICTION
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 13 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Udit Sood & Ors
Petitioners;
V.
Union of India & Anr Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
Udit Sood, Saattvic, Lakshmi Manoharan, and Gagandeep Paul ("Petitioners"), as queen individuals, have each
endured some combination of sexual violence, bullying, ridicule, rejection, police harassment, employment
discrimination, and housing discrimination, in addition to daily micro-aggressions. The Petitioners did not break.
Instead, they remained true to themselves and excelled at exceptional foreign and Indian institutions like the
University of Oxford, Stanford University, St. Stephen's College, and the National Institute of Technology. Defying
the odds, the Petitioners forged ahead and authored unique stories of resilience, success, community, and love.
The Union of India ("Union"), meanwhile, instead of serving as a custodian of fundamental rights and fostering
an environment where LGBTQ+ individuals can lead a life of dignity, prophesies that equality for Petitioners "would
cause a complete havoc". As a result, the immense potential of queen Indians to help propel our nation forward is
squandered.
Hon'ble Court unequivocally held that the Petitioners "are entitled, as all other citizens, to the full range of
constitutional rights including the liberties protected by the Constitution." (Hon'ble Justice D.Y. Chandrachud,
Navtej at 290 (Para. 618.2)). This petition only implores that this Hon'ble Court uphold Navtej and a
fundamental right that is "integral" to the Petitioners' experience as human beings. Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M.,
Constitution.").
ISSUES ARISING FOR CONSIDERATION
The Petitioners assert their fundamental right to marry. The Petitioners are openly gay or lesbian and harmed by
the Union's unconstitutional denial of this right. By way of the present Petition, the Petitioners hope to secure their
liberty and of other Indian LGBTQ+ individuals, many of whom lack the Petitioners' privilege of being able to
publicly demand just treatment.
The Petitioners respectfully submit that exclusion of same-sex couples from the Special Marriage Act, 1954
("Act"), necessarily violates Articles 14, 15 and 19 of the Constitution of India, and deprives LGBTQ+ individuals
their Article 21 right to live freely. The Petitioners furnish evidence, uncontroverted by the Union, that denying
queer people foundational civil rights trammels not only the lives of those people but shackles Indian society as a
whole.
As relief, the Petitioners humbly pray for a declaration that, to the extent Section 4(c) and any other provisions
of the Act are construed as requiring, for the solemnization of a marriage, one "male" and one "female," those
provisions are unconstitutional unless read as neutral to gender and sexual orientation. In the alternative, the
Petitioners pray for a declaration, by reading down any restrictions, that the Act applies, regardless of sex, to any
two persons who wish to marry. The Petitioners further pray that this Hon'ble Court uphold non-discriminatory
access to the Act, which provides that "a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act," by
invalidating any preconditions for marriage that are based on sex.
The Petitioners respectfully submit that five landmark decisions of this Hon'ble Court - namely, NALSA V. Union
concern the "absolute right of an individual to choose a life partner" and emphasize that this right "is integral to
Article 21," or they affirm that the Petitioners (and the LGBTQ+ community) possess "the same human,
fundamental and constitutional rights as other citizens[.]" Together, it logically follows that LGBTQ+ individuals are
constitutionally entitled, like everybody else, to decide whom to love and marry.
The Petitioners recognize that the relief sought herein is significant. However, the Union's position that granting
this Petition "would cause a complete havoc" (Counter Affidavit, Para. 21) is frivolous, and its assertion that the
recognition of marriage "is in essence a legislative function and can never be the subject matter of judicial
adjudication" (id., Para. 10) is demonstrably incorrect. There are examples of democracies around the world
(discussed below) that have judicially held that constitutional principles of equality, dignity, and privacy require
that the State not dictate who marries whom. This Hon'ble Court's rulings also readily lead to that conclusion.
Indeed, the Hon'ble Madras High Court has already ruled that the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, should "obviously" be
expansively construed to recognize marriage involving transgender individuals. Arunkumar V. Inspector General of
Registration, AIR 2019 Mad 265 (The Court "is not breaking any new ground" in requiring expansive interpretation,
but "is merely stating the obvious. Sometimes to see the obvious, one needs not only physical vision in the eye but
also love in the heart."). The Petitioners respectfully submit that, similarly, this Hon'ble Court ought to reject the
Union's position that the Act should remain limited to a "biological man" and a "biological woman" (Counter
Affidavit, Para. 23).
The questions presented to this Hon'ble Court in this Petition are as follows:
Issue 1 : Does the Constitution of India guarantee a fundamental right to marry the individual of one's
choice?
Issue 2 : If so, does the Constitution guarantee this fundamental right to every person or, as the Union
contends, only to cis-gendered heterosexuals?
Issue 3 : If every person is constitutionally guaranteed the right to choose whom to marry, does the Act
permit non-discriminatory exercise of the right, or does the Act condition solemnization of marriage on partners
identifying as cis-gendered heterosexuals?
Issue 4 If the Constitution guarantees this fundamental right to all, but the Act denies each Petitioner their
right to marry an individual of their choice, are there any constitutionally valid justifications for such denial?
Issue 5: If there are no justifications for the Act to deny LGBTQ+ people their fundamental right, what relief
should the Court order to address the Petitioners' injury?
The Petitioners' affirmative case and the Union's arguments on each of the above issues are summarized below.
I. DOES THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA GUARANTEE A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO MARRY THE INDIVIDUAL
OF ONE'S CHOICE?
816. The Petitioners submit that this Hon'ble Court has already unambiguously answered this question in the
affirmative.
817. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution." Shafin Jahan V.
Asokan K.M. (supra) at 405 (Para. 86).
818. This right is also guaranteed as components of other fundamental rights, e.g., Article 19. Shakti Vahini V.
Union of India (supra) at 211 (Para. 43) ("It has to be sublimely borne in mind that when two adults consensually
choose each other as life partners, it is a manifestation of their choice which is recognized under Articles 19 and 21 of
the Constitution.")
819. This Hon'ble Court has elaborated, "[w]hen two adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they
consummate their relationship; they feel that it is their goal and they have the right to do SO. And it can unequivocally
be stated that they have the right and any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation." Shakti Vahini
(supra) at 212 (Para. 45).
820. Both authorities, Shafin Jahan (supra) and Shakti Vahini (supra), rely on Lata Singh V. State of Uttar Pradesh,
becomes a major he or she can marry whomsoever he/she likes." Id. at 480 (Para 17).
821. To safeguard the "absolute right of an individual to choose a life partner," this Hon'ble Court has mandated
that "[n]either the state nor the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide
on these matters." Shafin Jahan (supra) at 405 (Para. 84)
the holding of Shafin Jahan (supra), i.e., the right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the
Constitution (Para 12).
823. The Union does not appear to dispute this Hon'ble Court's holdings in Shafin Jahan (supra) and Shakti Vahini
(supra) that the right to marry a person of one's choice is a fundamental right recognized under Article 21 of the
Constitution. The Union's only contention seems to be that the said right must be "circumscribed" by the laws enacted
by the Parliament. (Counter Affidavit, Para 42) However, the Union is not "circumscribing" the right-it is denying it
to anyone who is queen and unwilling to be dishonest to themselves and possibly their partner. The Petitioners submit
that the very basis of their petition is that the laws prevailing in the country today (including the Act), at least as they
are being interpreted today, deprive the Petitioners of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15, 19
and 21. It is parliamentary law that must meet the test of fundamental rights, not the other way round.
11. IF THERE IS A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO CHOOSE WHOM TO MARRY DOES THE CONSTITUTION
GUARANTEE THIS RIGHT TO EVERY PERSON OR, AS THE UNION CONTENDS ONLY TO CIS-GENDERED
HETEROSEXUALS?
824. The Constitution guarantees this fundamental right to every person.
825. Embodying the principle that human rights inhere in all humans, the only qualification our Constitution
prescribes to the enjoyment of Article 21 rights is being a "person." Article 21, Constitution of India.
826. This Hon'ble Court has confirmed that homosexuals are people. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 195 (Para.
369) ("We further declare that [sexual minorities] are entitled to be treated in society as human beings ..."). Because
the Petitioners are people, they are entitled to all - not some - of the rights that our Constitution guarantees people.
827. Indeed, this Hon'ble Court has specifically held that LGBTQ+ individuals are entitled to "the same human,
fundamental constitutional rights as other citizens." Navtej Singh Johan (supra), at 140 (Para 255). It is now settled
that the Petitioners "are entitled, as all other citizens, to the full range of constitutional rights including the liberties
protected by the Constitution." (Hon'ble Justice D.Y. Chandrachud, Navtej at 290 (Para. 618.2).)
828. Because LGBTQ+ individuals have "the same" rights - not "a subset of" the rights - as other people and other
citizens, the Petitioners also have the "absolute right... to choose a life partner," and "[n]either the state non the law
can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on these matters." Shafin Jahan
(supra), at 405 (Para 84) (emphasis added); see also Navtej Singh Johan (supra), at 104, 138, 140, 176-178, 239-
240, 271, 290, 302 (Paras. 119, 245, 255, 334-335, 479-481, 561.5, 618.3, 640.2.4) (citing Shafin Jahan and
Shakti Vahini with approval; emphasizing the autonomy of an individual to choose a sexual partner and holding that
"the organisation of intimate relations is a matter of complete personal choice especially between consenting adults").
829. The Union does not address this Hon'ble Court's rulings in Navtej Singh Johan quoted above, but instead
asserts that the only limited declaration, in the 311-page judgment in Navtej Singh Johar, was to decriminalize
consensual intercourse between same-sex couples. The Union contends that "[w]hile the aforesaid conduct has been
decriminalized, it has by no means been legitimized". (Counter Affidavit, Para. 37). This is demonstrably incorrect.
i. For example, the ruling that LGBTQ+ individuals are "entitled to be treated in society as human beings" begins
with the words "We further declare Navtej Singh Johan (supra), at 195 (Para. 369).
ii. Notably, in Navtej Singh Johar, this Hon'ble Court explicitly ordered the Union to "initiate programs to reduce
and finally eliminate the stigma associated with [LGBTQ+ individuals]" (at 195, Para. 370). The Union should
demonstrate what it has done since the judgment to comply with this direction. Alternatively, and to defend its
position that the judgment "only" concerned Section 377, the Union must explain why the explicit direction of
this Hon'ble Court is inconsequential.
830. The Union's argument that "[t]he Petitioners cannot claim a fundamental right for same-sex marriage being
recognized under the laws of the country" (Counter Affidavit, Para 7) is based on a complete misreading of
Paragraph 167 of Navtej Singh Johar (supra), which for the sake of convenience is set out hereunder:
167. The above authorities capture the essence of the right to privacy. There can be no doubt that an
individual also has a right to a union under Article 21 of the Constitution. When we say union, we do not mean
the union of marriage, though marriage is a union. As a concept, union also means companionship in every sense
of
the word, be it physical, mental, sexual or emotional. The LGBT community is seeking realisation of its basic right
to companionship, SO long as such a companionship is consensual, free from the vice of deceit, force, coercion and
does not result in violation of the fundamental rights of others."
[Emphasis supplied]
831. It is clear from the aforesaid paragraph that Article 21 encompasses an individual's right to a union, including
the union of marriage. Further, it is trite that a judgment must be read as a whole65 The Union cannot read this
observation in isolation and in a manner that disregards categorical holdings of this Hon'ble Court that the Petitioners
are entitled to the same fundamental rights as other human beings and citizens.
832. Denying LGBTQ+ individuals the right to marry is unconstitutional. The Constitution of India guarantees
certain inalienable and fundamental rights to all people, including members of the LGBTQ+ community. These rights
enshrined, inter-alia in Articles 14, 15, and 21 in Part 111 of the Constitution, include the right to equality, the right to
be protected against discrimination on the basis of gender identity or sexual orientation, and the right to lead a
dignified life. Article 19(1)(a) additionally guarantees to all citizens, including members of the LGBTQ+ community,
the right to freedom of speech and expression, which includes full expression of gender identity and sexual orientation.
Failure to permit marriage between members of the LGBTQ+ community violates these rights.
833. Article 14 promises every "person" "equality before the law" and "the equal protection of the laws," and thus
requires that the law treat LGBTQ+ individuals as equals to cis-gendered heterosexuals. NALSA (supra), at 487 (Para.
62) ("Discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity. impairs equality before law and equal
protection of law and violates Article 14 of the Constitution."); Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 195 (Para. 369) ("We
may conclude by stating that persons who are homosexual have a fundamental right to live with dignity... We further
declare that [sexual minorities] are entitled to the protection of equal laws, and are entitled to be treated in society as
human beings without any stigma being attached to any of them.").
834. Article 15 prohibits discrimination against any citizen on grounds of "sex," which includes gender identity.
NALSA (supra), at 488 (Para. 66) "The discrimination on the ground of "sex" under Articles 15 and 16, therefore,
includes discrimination on the ground of gender identity. The expression 'sex' used in Articles 15 and 16 is not just
limited to biological sex of male or female, but intended to include people who consider themselves to be neither male
non female. "). Article 15 similarly protects against discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation. Navtej Singh Johan
(supra), at 219-222, (Paras. 431-440) and 299-300 (Para 638.2) ("Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely
restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also includes their 'sexual identity and character." The J.S.
Verma Committee had recommended that 'sex' under Article 15 must include 'sexual orientation' : [W]e are
clean
that Article 15(c) of the Constitution of India uses the word 'sex" as including sexual orientation.").
835. Article 19(1)(a) guarantees to all citizens the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression,
including full expression of gender identity and sexual orientation. NALSA (supra), at 490 (Para 72) ("Gender
identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal identity, gender expression and presentation and, therefore, it will
have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India"); Navtej Singh Johan (supra), at 234 (Para.
467) ("To deny the members of the LGBT community the full expression of the right to sexual orientation is to deprive
them of their entitlement to full citizenship under the Constitution.").
836. Article 21 guarantees the fundamental right to life and personal liberty, which includes dignity, privacy, and
personal autonomy for LGBTQ+ individuals. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 109, 119, 231-232, 302 (Paras. 139,
175, 462, 640.2.4) "Sexual orientation is innate to a human being. It is an important attribute of one's personality
and identity. Homosexuality and bisexuality are natural variants of human sexuality.. LGBT persons, like other
heterosexual persons, are entitled to their privacy, and the right to lead a dignified existence, without fear of
persecution. They are entitled to complete autonomy over the most intimate decisions relating to their personal life,
including the choice of their partners. Such choices must be protected under Article 21. The right to life and liberty
would encompass the right to sexual autonomy, and freedom of expression.") (emphasis added).
837. Simply put, Part 111 of our Constitution outlaws State discrimination against LGBTQ+ individuals. Puttaswamy
(supra), at 422 (Para. 144) ("Discrimination against an individual on the basis of sexual orientation is deeply
offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality demands that the sexual orientation of each
individual in society must be protected on an even platform, [and] the protection of sexual orientation lie[s] at the
core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution.")
838. To summarize, the aforesaid authorities make clear that the Constitution of India:
i. Guarantees equality to members of the LGBTQ+ community and guarantees protection against discrimination on
the basis of sexual orientation;
ii. Guarantees to LGBTQ+ individuals, the fundamental right to life and personal liberty, which includes dignity,
privacy, and sexual autonomy; and
iii. Guarantees the fundamental right to marry a person of one's choice under Article 21, which applies to every
"person."
839. Although the Union argues that the right to marry should be limited to cis-gendered heterosexuals, as noted
above, the Union does not dispute this Hon'ble Court's findings in Shafin Jahan (supra), Shakti Vahini (supra) or
Navtej Singh Johan (supra) that the right to marry a person of one's choice is a fundamental right under Article 21.
Indeed, the Union cannot dispute that Article 21 applies to every person. Moreover, the Union's position cannot be
reconciled with this Hon'ble Court's categorical ruling that "[t]he LGBT community possess[es] the same human,
fundamental and constitutional rights as other citizens." Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 140 (Para. 255) (emphasis
added).
840. Therefore, the only logical and inevitable conclusion is that Constitution of India guarantees the fundamental
right to marry a person of one's choice to all persons, including members of the LGBTQ+ community.
111. IF EVERY PERSON IS CONSTITUTIONALLY GUARANTEED THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE WHOM TO MARRY
DOES THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954, PERMIT NON-DISCRIMINATORY EXERCISE OF THIS RIGHT OR
DOES IT CONDITION SOLEMNIZATION OF MARRIAGE ON PARTNERS IDENTIFYING AS OPPOSITE BINARY
GENDERS?
841. The Act was passed to allow "any two persons" to marry, notwithstanding prevailing religious or other
prejudices. It illustrates that, as society and science evolve, so must social institutions like marriage. The Act owes its
origin to recognition in the late 1800s that two consenting adults wishing to marry should not be prevented from doing
so by religion, caste, or faith. The statute was intended to expansively provide access to marriage. It therefore uses
the words "any two persons" in defining who may marry.
842. The Act's predecessor, the Special Marriage Act, 1872, was enacted in the wake of the Brahmo Samaj
movement, which represented a departure from traditional Hindu customs, including caste. The Brahmo Samaj of
India, organized in 1866, "was most influential in the struggle for social reform" and "encouraged the education of
,166
women, and campaigned for the remarriage of widows and for legislation to prevent child marriages."
In
the
face
of
stiff opposition, the movement advocated for a progressive secular marriage law.
843. Although the secular marriage statute initially conceived provided citizens the ability to freely choose the
statute over their respective personal laws, vehement opposition and accusations of interference with religious affairs
ultimately led to the Special Marriage Act, 1872, conditioning access on a complete severance from one's faith. A
subsequent amendment in 1923 granted special privileges to certain religions. 167 After adoption of the Constitution in
1950, the Special Marriage Bill, 1952, was introduced as a foundational step toward attainment of the uniform civil
code envisioned under Article 44. Avoiding past missteps, under this new law, any two Indians-whether living in India
or in a foreign country, and whether professing the same religion or different religions (or no religion at all)-could
marry. 168 The Bill was enacted in the form of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, replacing the old Special Marriage Act,
1872. (Ref. Teruaki Fujioto, Marriage and Secularism : Parliamentary Debates on the Special Marriage
(Amendment) Bill of 1921 and the Special Marriage Bill of 1952)
844. The Act therefore provides a legal framework for "any two persons" to solemnize marriage, without deference
to customary beliefs or laws like Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872; and Muslim Personal
Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937. The Act provides access to civil marriage independent of the vagaries of
customary laws and embodies the core democratic value that access to fundamental rights should not depend on
religion or custom.
845. The Act provides that, "[n]otwithstanding anything contained in any other law..., a marriage between any two
persons may be solemnized under this Act" subject to certain conditions. Section 4 (emphasis added). Condition (a)
requires that neither party's spouse be alive; condition (b) requires consent; and condition (c) prescribes minimum
age-eighteen if you are "female" and twenty-one if you are "male." However, because Section 4(c) references "male"
and "female," the statute is generally understood as limiting access to couples comprising of one "male" and one
"female.
,169
846. Under the Act as interpreted today, the Union refuses to solemnize marriages of same-sex couples. The Union
concedes that the Act conditions enjoyment of the fundamental right to marry the individual of one's choice on
heterosexuality, and states that the legislative intent was to limit [] the legal recognition of marriage and the benefits
associated with such legal recognition. to heterosexual couples" (Counter Affidavit, Para. 28).
847. Thus, it is clear that the Act, as understood and interpreted today, conditions solemnization of marriage on
partners identifying as heterosexuals and opposite binary genders.
IV. IF THE CONSTITUTION GUARANTEES THIS FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO ALL, BUT THE ACT DENIES EACH
PETITIONER THEIR RIGHT TO MARRY AN INDIVIDUAL OF THEIR CHOICE, ARE THERE ANY
CONSTITUTIONALLY VALID JUSTIFICATIONS FOR SUCH DENIAL?
848. The Petitioners respectfully submit that the Act's exclusion of LGBTQ+ individuals like the Petitioners is
unconstitutional and unjustified. The Petitioners address this issue in three parts : whether exclusion violates our
Constitution, whether it causes harm, and whether there are any valid justifications.
a.
DOES EXCLUSION VIOLATE THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS GUARANTEED BY OUR CONSTITUTION?
849. The Petitioners respectfully submit that Section 4(c) and other provisions of the Act must necessarily be
interpreted as gender-neutral for consistency with Part 111 of the Constitution. Specifically, the statute provides for
marriage between "any two persons" and any provisions limiting availability of marriage under the Act to one "male"
and one "female" necessarily fail judicial review under Article 14, Article 15, Article 19 and Article 21.
(i) Article 14 invalidates gender or sexuality-based preconditions
850. Article 14 prohibits classifying people, inter alia, when (i) the law or the classification is arbitrary; (ii) there is
no intelligible differentia between those included within the class and those excluded; or (iii) there is intelligible
differentia but it lacks rational nexus to the object of the law in question. Any one of the foregoing is sufficient to
invalidate a statutory classification. Preconditions for marriage based on gender or sexuality in the Act survive none of
these three tests.
851. First, Article 14 invalidates arbitrary classifications. Explaining that the State cannot embrace unscientific and
moral notions surrounding sexuality that perpetuate "a way of life in which sexual contact without procreation is an
aberration" this Hon'ble Court has ruled that a law that "subjects the LGBT community to societal pariah and
dereliction. [is]manifestly arbitrary." Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 212 (Para 417) and 147 (Para. 268.15).
Excluding sexual minorities from India's sole secular vehicle to exercise the right of marriage, constitutes a total
exclusion from the institution itself, a foundational element of family and society, and perpetuates dereliction of the
LGBTQ+ community. Further, these exclusions are based on unscientific and moral notions surrounding marriage.
Thus, any preconditions for solemnization of marriage under the Act that are based on gender or sexuality are
manifestly arbitrary.
852. Second, Article 14 invalidates classifications devoid of intelligible differentia. This Hon'ble Court has held that,
[w]here a legislation discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an individual, it cannot form a
reasonable classification based on an intelligible differentia." Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 297 (Para. 637.3). "A
person's sexual orientation is intrinsic to their being. It is connected with their individuality, and identity. A
classification which discriminates between persons based on their innate nature, would be violative of their
fundamental rights, and cannot withstand the test of constitutional morality." Id., at 298 (Para. 637.5). Thus, any
preconditions for solemnization of marriage under the Act that are based on gender or sexuality lack intelligible
differentia.
853. Third, Article 14 invalidates classifications based on differentia that lacks rational nexus to the object of the
law in question. The object of the Act, as discussed above, is to expansively provide access to the fundamental right to
marry, notwithstanding societal prejudices. Conditioning marriage on compliance with outdated and unscientific hetero
-normative values and binary notions of gender, excludes LGBTQ+ individuals. It denies LGBTQ+ individuals what this
Hon'ble Court has described as an "absolute right" while "unequivocally. stat[ing] that. any infringement of the
said right is a constitutional violation." Shafin Jahan (supra), at 405 (Para. 86); Shakti Vahini (supra), at 212 (Para
45). Thus, any preconditions for solemnization of marriage under the Act that are based on gender or sexuality lack
rational nexus to the object of the Act.
854. The Union wrongly contends that there is an intelligible differentia that distinguishes heterosexual couples
from same-sex couples. (Counter Affidavit, Para 35) The Union does not substantiate this statement at all, and
instead makes the conclusory assertion that they are "clearly distinct classes". Moreover, this contention directly
contradicts the unequivocal findings of this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 297, 298 (Para. 637.3,
637.5) as referred to above. The Union additionally contends that this classification has a rational nexus with the
object sought to be achieved i.e., social stability. However, it remains unclear how recognizing same-sex marriage
would actually upset social stability. On the contrary, it would ensure that even non-traditional marriages are held
together by the bounds of law and would thus result in greater stability.
855. Further, denial of the right to marry denies same-sex couples legal benefits that the Union make available to
gender binary heterosexual couples and hence deprives them of the "equal protection of the laws" guaranteed by
Article 14. For example, same-sex couples are denied benefits relating to alimony and maintenance, 170 and property
and
succession. Likewise, same-sex couples are denied protections of spousal privilege under the Indian Evidence
171
Act, 1872, 172 benefits under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994, as well as the economic benefits
under the Income Tax Act, 1961, 174 the Employment Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, 175 Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972, 176 and Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, 177 the Payment of Wages (Nomination) Rules, 2009, 178 framed
under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, the Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maan-dhan Yojna, 2019, passed under the
179
Unorganized Workers' Social Security Act, 2008, to name a few.
856. In sum, to the extent Section 4(c)-or any other provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1954-are construed as
requiring one "male" and one "female" for the solemnization of a marriage, those provisions violate Article 14.
(ii) Article 15 invalidates any gender or sexuality-based preconditions.
857. Article 15 prohibits discrimination founded directly or indirectly on a stereotypical understanding of sex and
gender roles. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 222 (Para. 438) ("If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or
indirect is founded on a stereotypical understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the
discrimination which is prohibited by Article 15 on the grounds only of sex."). Because "sex" includes gender identity
and sexual orientation, as discussed above, laws cannot differentiate between individuals based solely on the
antiquated notions that genders come in but two forms- "male" and "female"-and only opposite genders may partner
romantically. Id., at 240-241 (Para. 482).
858. Preconditions for marriage based on gender or sexuality, by definition, constitute distinctions based on gender
stereotypes. They are grounded in the belief that "males" must marry "females" and "females" marry "males". This
belief altogether denies the existence of other genders as well as non-heterosexual orientations. The belief is
unscientific and based on inherited stereotypes, and thus cannot form the basis for any constitutional legal
classification.
859. The Union's argument is challenging to follow. (Counter Affidavit, Para 36) In substance, it is contended
that marriages are a certain sub-set of legally recognised relationships even among heterosexual relationships (e.g.,
live in relationships are excluded). Therefore, it is argued that there is no violation of Article 15 because the
discrimination is not on the grounds only of sex. This argument is puzzling and fallacious. First, heterosexuals can
choose to get married should they wish, an option that is denied to non-heterosexual people. Live-in relationships for
heterosexual people is a matter of choice, not a compulsion as is the case with same-sex couples. Second, the
argument cannot be reconciled with categorical findings of this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) that
sexuality forms part of the term 'sex' in Article 15 of the Constitution (at 219-222, (Paras. 431-440) and 299-300
(Para 638.2). Therefore, failure to permit marriage on grounds of sexuality, is a violation of Article 15. Finally, the
view that Article 15 is applied only when the discrimination is solely on the basis of sex is outdated; Article 15 has
substantially expanded. Indeed, in Navtej Singh Johar (supra), this Court applied the impact test to hold that if
legislation results in stereotyping a particular class of people it would violate Article 15 of the Constitution. (Id. Pg.
222, Para 438-440)
(iii) Article 19 invalidates any gender or sexuality-based preconditions.
860. Article 19(1)(a) prohibits laws that "inhibit [] [LGBTQ+ individuals] from openly forming and nurturing
fulfilling relationships, thereby restricting rights of full personhood and a dignified existence" as well as laws that have
a "chilling effect" on these right. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 186, 307 (Paras. 354, 641.1). Notably, although
Article 19(2) tolerates reasonable limitations for "decency or morality" this Hon'ble Court has emphasized that "the
morality that is conceived of under the Constitution is constitutional morality" as opposed to popular morality. Id., at
115 (Para 161).
861. The Petitioners submit that any preconditions for marriage in the Act based on gender or sexuality operate to
defeat LGBTQ+ individuals' expression of a long-term romantic and sexual commitment. These preconditions do not
advance constitutional morality-and indeed, are contrary to it-nor should this Hon'ble Court entertain any odious
arguments regarding "decency" requiring LGBTQ+ individuals to be dishonest to themselves and others in order to
marry. In sum, "public decency and morality. cannot be accepted as reasonable grounds for curbing
the
fundamental rights of freedom of expression and choice of the LGBT community" particularly since sexual orientation is
"innate" and "an inalienable part of [a person's] identity" id., at 115, 147 (Paras. 161 and 268.16) and denying
LGBTQ+ individuals their fundamental right to marry the person of their choice violates Article 19.
862. Notably the Union's Counter Affidavit filed in this Hon'ble Court simply ignores the Petitioners arguments on
Article 19(1)(a) and does not address them at all.
(iv) Article 21 invalidates any gender or sexuality-based preconditions.
8 "Article 21 is the most precious human right and forms the ark of all other rights." Navtej Singh Johar (supra),
at 301 (Para 640.2.1). It guarantees every "person", including LGBTQ+ individuals, a bundle of fundamental rights
like the right to dignity, privacy, and health. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 301 (Para 640.1) (" The right to life and
liberty affords protection to every citizen or non-citizen, irrespective of their identity or orientation, without
discrimination."). As discussed above, Article 21 also safeguards every person's "absolute right" to marry the
individual of their choosing without State interference. As shown below, exclusion from India's only secular vehicle to
exercise the right of marriage constitutes a denial not only of the right to marry, but also the right to dignity, privacy,
and health.
864. First, Article 21 guarantees a right to dignity, and "LGBT persons, like other heterosexual persons, are entitled
to.. the right to lead a dignified existence, without fear of persecution. They are entitled to complete autonomy over
the most intimate decisions relating to their personal life, including the choice of their partners." Navtej Singh Johar
(supra), at 302 (Para.640.2.4). "[D]ecisions concerning marriage are among the most intimate that an individual can
make." Id., at 269 (Para. 554) (internal quotations and citation omitted). Conditioning an LGBTQ+ individual's
access to the right to marry on the individual first establishing that they identify as either "male" or "female" and then
demonstrating that their intended spouse identifies as the opposite sex, constitutes a total deprivation of autonomy
with respect to a decision over which the Constitution guarantees the individual "absolute" autonomy. Thus,
preconditions for solemnization of marriage under the Act that are based on gender identity or sexual orientation
deprive LGBTQ+ individuals their right to dignity and are unconstitutional.
865. Second, "[t]he right to privacy" is "an intrinsic part of the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21."
Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 304 (Para. 640.3.1). It includes the "right to be let alone" and the "right to safeguard
the
privacy of his/her own, his/her family, marriage. among other matters." Id., at 166 (Para. 166) (citation
omitted). Whether to marry-and whom to marry-are therefore protected aspects of privacy, and "[n]either the state
nor the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on these matters." Shafin
Jahan (supra), at 405 (Para 84). When the Union condition an individual's access to marriage on the individual
choosing a partner of the opposite binary-gender, then the Union unconstitutionally "dictate[s] a choice of partners"
and robs LGBTQ+ individuals the "free ability" the Constitution guarantees them in deciding whom to marry. Thus, the
Petitioners submit that preconditions for solemnization of marriage under the Act that are based on gender identity or
sexual orientation violate LGBTQ+ individuals' right to privacy and are unconstitutional.
866. Third, "[t]he right to health" is a "crucial facet[] of the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution." Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 305 (Para. 640.4.1). "Health" is not limited to absence of disease, but
also includes physical, mental, and social wellness. See, e.g., Constitution of the World Health Organization, adopted
by the International Health Conference, New York (signed on July 22, 1947, entered into force on April 7, 1948),
Preamble ("Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease
or infirmity.") (Annexure - J, Pg. 187). Several studies have established the health benefits of marriage, including
180
longer lifespan, fewer strokes and heart attacks, and greater chance of surviving cancer or major operations, as well
as the deleterious mental health implications of discriminatory laws for LGBTQ+ individuals. Navtej Singh Johan
(supra), at 253 (Para. 515) (noting the "high levels of mental illness among the LGBT population" and the "clean
correlation between political and social environments... and how persecutory laws against LGBT individuals are leading
to greater levels of depression, anxiety, self-harm, and suicide.") (citation and quotation marks omitted). Thus,
depriving LGBTQ+ individuals their right to marry has the spillover effect of exacerbating the significant mental health
challenges LGBTQ+ individuals already face, while simultaneously denying them the health benefits associated with
marriage made available to cis-gendered heterosexuals.
867. In sum, preconditions for solemnization of marriage under the Act that are based on genden identity or sexual
orientation deny LGBTQ+ individuals not only their Article 21 right to marry, but also their rights to dignity, privacy,
and health181
868. In relation to Article 21, the Union's Counter Affidavit submits that there is no fundamental right of privacy or
dignity to have a marriage recognised. (Counter Affidavit, Para 37-39) It then proceeds to state that even if such a
right exists, it can be curtailed on the ground of a "legitimate state interest". This legitimate state interest is defined
to be "the recognition of heterogeneous institution of marriage and the acceptance of the Indian society based upon its
own cultural and societal values". (Counter Affidavit, Para 40, 42) It is unclear how preservation of amorphous
societal thought can be a basis to curtail Part III fundamental rights. Indeed, there is no elaboration on what the state
interest in recognising only heterosexual marriages is, other than seeking to have a legal regime that only recognises
heterosexual marriages. The argument is circular and illogical. Inasmuch as the argument implies that cultural and
societal values are a legitimate state interest, there is no discussion of the deleterious impact that failure to recognize
marriage equality has on non-heterosexual couples. Non is there any consideration of the detriment to cultural and
societal "values" of a system that compel homosexuals to marry, often dishonestly, individuals of the opposite sex.
869. Even assuming the Constitution recognizes saving "values" as a legitimate state interest, the Union has failed
to
establish that Indian values are indeed promoted through discriminating against homosexuals in the Act.
870. The Petitioners submit that the Act as it is understood today, i.e., denying LGBTQ+ persons the right to marry
the person of their choice, is inconsistent with Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 and is violative of Part 111 of the Constitution.
b. DOES EXCLUSION INFLICT PERSONAL HARM TO LGTBQ+ INDIVIDUALS AND AN ECONOMIC COST ON THE
COUNTRY?
871. The Petitioners submit that denying LGBTQ+ individuals the right to marry inflicts personal harm and also
inflicts a significant economic cost on the country.
(i) Personal Harm to LGBTQ+ Individuals
872. The Petitioners submit that deep-rooted prejudice springing from a lack of awareness-and reinforced by
statutory denial of the opportunity to assimilate within society-leads to LGBTQ+ individuals facing widespread
discrimination, rejection, and violence. For example, LGBTQ+ individuals and couples face discrimination from property
owners and landlords leading to denial of housing, segregation into poorly resourced neighbourhoods, forced evictions,
and homelessness.
873. Discrimination is also common in the workplace and in all aspects of employment, including during the
recruitment process, with respect to promotions, discriminatory and gendered working conditions, and bullying and
harassment. Indeed, LGBTQ+ individuals who are able to conceal their identities and remain in the closet often prefer
to do so than risk the consequences of coming out. Violence similarly takes numerous forms, ranging from physical
force, including outright murder, to sexual assault, forced marriages, and involuntary institutionalization for
"corrective" therapies. (Annexure L (Colly), 207-329)
874. Notably, LGBTQ+ Indians grow old facing a life without lawful companionship, and confronting the reality of
loneliness, which research has shown to be as lethal as smoking 15 cigarettes a day. See Julianne Holt-Lunstad, PhD,
'The Potential Public Health Relevance of Social Isolation and Loneliness : Prevalence, Epidemiology, and Risk Factors,
Public Policy & Aging Report, Volume 27, Issue 4, 2017, Pages 127- 130, https://doi.org/10.1093/ppar/prx030
(loneliness "carries a risk that is comparable, and in many cases, exceeds that of other well-accepted risk factors,
including smoking up to 15 cigarettes per day, obesity, physical inactivity, and air pollution.") (citations omitted)
(Annexure M, Pg. 330-333 331); see also Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B., 'Social Relationships
and
Mortality
Risk
A
Meta-analytic
Review,
PLoS
medicine,
7(7)
(2010),
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000316.(Annexure N, Pg. 334-353 @ Pg. 347)
875. Compounding these costs, denial of the right to marry denies same-sex couples legal benefits that the Union
makes available to gender-binary heterosexual couples, including benefits relating to alimony and maintenance,
property and succession and a host of economic benefits available under the laws of the country.
(ii) Economic Cost to the Country
876. Besides violating the LGBTQ+ community's fundamental rights, exclusion from foundational civil rights like
marriage imposes significant cost on India generally. A growing body of academic research, summarized briefly below,
identifies, documents, and quantifies ways in which social exclusion of the LGBTQ+ community hurts economic output-
an unnecessary cost all Indian citizens are forced to shoulder.
Reduced human capital impedes .GBTQ+ workers' ability to contribute economic activity.
877. The stress and trauma directly arising from legally sanctioned social exclusion leads to an extremely high
incidence of mental and physical health problems among the Indian LGBTQ+ community. Rates of depression in the
Indian LGBTQ+ community are 6-12 times higher than in the general population182. Indian LGBTQ+ individuals are
much more likely to commit suicide, with 15% of participants in one study being classified as "high risk. They are
"183
disproportionately impacted by HIV and other STIs, with estimated prevalence rates of up to 16.5% for men who have
sex with men, and 55% for transgender people in India8. There are also increased rates of incidence of violent
victimization, substance abuse, posttraumatic stress, and anxiety among the LGBTQ+ community185
878. These mental and physical health problems associated with social exclusion drastically reduce LGBTQ+
individuals' ability to engage in productive work and contribute to overall economic activity. A 2014 World Bank Study
estimated that reduced working hours and the increased loss of life from HIV, depression and suicide among the
LGBTQ+ community alone cost India up to 1.3% of GDP annually186.
879. Even when LGBTQ+ individuals participate in the workforce, discrimination and social exclusion prevent them
from contributing to their full potential. It is estimated that LGBTQ+ individuals are 10% less productive in the same
jobs as the general population due to said discrimination and social exclusion, as a result of which India loses an
additional 0.4% of GDP annually187.
880. The total estimated annual loss of up to 1.7% of GDP does not include the negative effects on productivity of
other health disparities, such as violent injury substance abuse, posttraumatic stress, and anxiety. Unfortunately, the
effects of these disparities on economic output have not been studied, but they are undoubtedly substantial.
LGBTQ+ workplace exclusion lowers general productivity.
881. When LGBTQ+ individuals are unable to contribute fully at work, their colleagues cannot benefit from the
ideas, collaboration, and support that fully productive colleagues might provide, leading to a general lowering of
productivity and profitability. Several studies have found systematically positive links between LGBTQ+ friendly
company policy and financial measures like stock prices, 188 asset returns,189 per worker output190 and employee
innovation. 191 It is no coincidence that 91% of Fortune 500 companies included sexual orientation in their non-
discrimination policies in 2019 192
Exclusion leads to the "Gay Brain Drain".
882. Denied equal rights at home, LGBTQ+ individuals who are able to migrate do so, seeking out destination
countries that afford them greater protection. 'Sexual migration'-migration where sexual orientation is an influential
factor-is a well-documented19 and widespread phenomenon, of which the Petitioners are a part. Several studies focus
on Indian migrants, documenting the lack of LGBTQ+ rights in India as a motivating factor in the migration
decision
194
883. The extent of sexual migration in India is not readily quantifiable, including because LGBTQ+ Indians are often
forced to remain discreet about their gender-identity or sexual orientation. But the magnitude can be approximated
from a study in Hong Kong (which also does not offer LGBTQ+ persons the right to marry) : 52.5% percent of the
respondents had considered leaving due to their sexuality, of whom 91.3% cited the lack of marriage equality as a
reason95 The Petitioners submit that it is often the brightest, most highly-educated, and most productive who end up
migrating, leading to a considerable loss to the home country.
Exclusion deters investment in India.
884. Not only does LGBTQ+ exclusion push the brightest of the Indian community away, but it also scares away
lucrative business in general. Research shows that successful companies prefer to locate in countries and cities with an
accepting LGBTQ+ culture, since they consider it a signal of an underlying culture that is open and conducive to
creativity, which is essential for business innovation.
885. There is well-documented evidence of a positive correlation between an acceptance of homosexuality and
foreign
investment level of entrepreneurship, overall well-being and life satisfaction, human development,
urbanization, and per capita GDP. 197 Moreover, cities with the highest concentration of homosexual residents also have
the highest percentages of foreign-born residents, are home to the most successful businesses, and achieve higher
198
levels
of
overall
development. 199 Indian cities fared poorly in a recent report that rates cities according to economic
competitiveness and LGBTQ+ inclusiveness with ratings of CC (Bangalore), C (Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai) and DDD
(Hyderabad). The contrast is stark with major metropolises in North America (Toronto - AAA; New York, San Francisco
- AA), Europe (Amsterdam, Berlin, London - AAA; Paris - AA) and Asia (Taipei -
886. Lastly, the burgeoning LGBTQ+ tourism market was worth $211 billion in 2016. LGBTQ+ travelers spend more
than their heterosexual counterparts but are unlikely to choose travel destinations with discriminatory anti-LGBTQ+
laws and inadequate protections for LGBTQ+ individuals201
The cumulative effects are enormous
887. Cumulatively, the direct and indirect costs are extreme. Cross-country studies have estimated that legal
recognition of marriage equality is associated a long-term increase in per-capita GDP of between 54% 0 and 64%203
The magnitude of forfeited GDP is thus considerable, and the Union's prejudices should not needlessly force India to
bear these costs.
888. In sum, while the harshest consequences of exclusion are borne directly by LGBTQ+ people, the country, as a
whole, incurs significant associated costs.
C. ARE THERE ANY CONSTITUTIONALLY VALI JUSTIFICATIONS FOR SUCH DENIAL?
889. As discussed above, the Act as it is being interpreted today denies LGBTQ+ people their fundamental right to
marry the individual of their choice in violation of Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. This not only inflicts
personal harm on LGBTQ+ individuals but also inflicts a significant economic cost to the country. Therefore, the
question arises as to whether any constitutional justifications exist for denying the fundamental right to marry to
LGBTQ+ individuals.
890. Although the Union contends that the Act conditions marriage on a couple demonstrating that they are "a
biological man and a biological woman" (Counter Affidavit, Para. 23), the Union is unable to offer any
constitutionally valid justifications for this discriminatory precondition. The Union advances several arguments, none of
which have merit.
(i) There is no 'legitimate state interest" promoted or safeguarded by denying LGBTQ+ individuals the
fundamental right of marriage.
891. The Union points to a "larger statutory framework" as a purported state interest. See Counter Affidavit,
Para. 31 ("It is submitted that, considering the larger statutory framework, it is clear that there exists a legitimate
state interest in limiting the legitimate recognition of marriage to persons of opposite sexes only.") (emphasis
added). However, the Union does not specify the interest it is actually seeking to promote or safeguard. Preserving a
"statutory framework" cannot itself constitute a legitimate state interest, because that would render enacting
sufficiently numerous statutory provisions codifying a discriminatory viewpoint a pathway for the State to evade
judicial intervention. Fortunately, the Indian Constitution does not recognize a "legislative entrenchment" loophole to
fundamental rights, and this Hon'ble Court should refuse to create such a loophole in this case.
892. Besides, there is no indication that denying same-sex couples their fundamental right to marry is necessary
for the preservation of any "larger statutory framework." Statutory provisions that the Union relies on presumably do
not apply to same-sex couples currently; should this Petition be granted, and same-sex marriages be registered, at
worst, those provisions will continue being inapplicable and LGBTQ+ couples would have to rely on other available
legal remedies when necessary. For instance, assuming that domestic violence provisions do not currently apply to
same-sex couples (as the Union argues; see Counter Affidavit, Para. 32), should this Petition be granted, at worst,
those provisions will remain inapplicable to married same-sex partners, and the partners will need to invoke general
legal protections against violence should the need arise, or seek other available legal remedies. It is illogical to assume
that potential inapplicability to same-sex couples of laws that provide specific legal protections to particularly
vulnerable individuals, justifies denying all same-sex couples access to marriage altogether. Differently stated,
inability to protect LGBTQ+ couples under all possible statutes tomorrow cannot form a basis to today deny such
couples basic rights. The Union's prediction that granting this Petition "would cause a complete havoc" (Counter
Affidavit, Para.21) is frivolous and constitutes classic demagoguery.
893. Moreover, inconvenience to the State in the form of future litigation is not a legitimate reason to deny an
entire group their fundamental rights in disregard of the letter and spirit of the Constitution. Whether and how
statutory provisions concerning eventualities ancillary to marriage should apply to same-sex couples are not questions
before this Hon'ble Court presently. For example, whether and how Section 304B of the IPC (dowry death) applies to a
same-sex couple is an issue the Courts might address in a future case that actually calls for that issue to be resolved
(and presents facts enabling such resolution). It is unnecessary and improper for those questions to be decided in the
context of this case, and in the absence of relevant facts and allegations. Prophesying litigation on certain issues is not
a substitute for actually identifying the legitimate state interest that the Union seeks to preserve through denying the
Petitioners their fundamental rights.
894. The Petitioners submit that the cases the Union cites are inapposite because they involved a clearly identified
'legitimate state interest', a causal relationship between the law at issue and the preservation of that interest, and a
non-imaginary threat to the interest in the event the law was invalidated as unconstitutional. Alternatively, those
privacy of an individual may be curtailed to safeguard the right to health of another); Javed V.
204
State
of
Haryana,
safeguard public health, order and morality). The cases the Union cites did not involve discriminatory laws that allowed
certain seaments of the Indian population eniovment of a fundamental right while denving. without anv articulable
benefit, the identical right to other segments of the population. Nor are there any competing fundamental rights at
issue here - for example, cis-gendered heterosexuals have no fundamental rights that will be compromised if required
to share the institution of marriage with LGBTQ+ individuals.
895. The Union contends that it has a "compelling interest" in granting statutory recognition only to heterosexual
marriages as it "is the norm throughout history" and "foundational to both the existence and continuance of the
State". (Counter Affidavit, Para 33-34) The premise of the Union's argument is simply that since access to the
institution of marriage has, in the past, been extended only to heterosexual couples, there is a compelling interest
which the State has in preserving the status quo and perpetuating this injustice. The Petitioners submit that that the
Union fails to demonstrate as to how extending access of this institution to same-sex couples threatens the existence
of society as alleged. Further, the Union fails to specify who actually benefits from the Petitioners being prevented
from marrying. Indeed, no one gains anything from members of the LGBTQ+ community being statutorily required to
be dishonest to themselves (and perhaps others) by finding an opposite-sex partner in order to avail the State-
sanctioned benefits of marriage.
(ii) The Hon'ble Supreme Court ought not to leave the matter to be "resolved" by the legislature.
896. The Union contends that the question whether a relationship can be formalized and legally recognized as a
marriage is one for the legislature alone to decide and one that can never be the subject matter of judicial
adjudication. (Counter Affidavit, Para 8-12).
897. However, the Petitioners submit that the present Petition does not involve any issues fit for political debate or
resolution by a political majority. To the contrary, the present Petition concerns unlawful curtailment, by majoritarian
statute, of a constitutionally guaranteed fundamental right. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in Puttaswamy
(supra), at 421 (Para. 144) that "[t]he purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature of guaranteed fundamental
rights is to insulate their exercise from the disdain of majorities, whether legislative or popular." In India, not only is
the judiciary empowered to intervene, the Petitioners respectfully submit that it is the Hon'ble Courts' constitutional
duty to safeguard fundamental rights.
898. It is trite that as far as the enforcement of fundamental rights is concerned the Constitutional Courts do not
have to await action by the legislature. Reference in this regard may be had to the decisions in Vishaka V. State of
899. The Petitioners submit that the Union's argument that the present issue must be exclusively left to the
legislature to address stands foreclosed by Hon'ble Justice R.F. Nariman's opinion in Navtej Singh Johan (supra) at
185-186 (Para 352) that:
"The very purpose of the fundamental rights chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdraw the subject of liberty
and dignity of the individual and place such subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments so that
constitutional morality can be applied by this Court to give effect to the rights, among others, of "discrete and insular"
minorities One such minority has knocked on the doors of this Court as this Court is the custodian of the
fundamental rights of citizens. These fundamental rights do not depend upon the outcome of elections. And, it is not
left to majoritarian governments to prescribe what shall be orthodox in matters concerning social morality. The
fundamental rights chapter is like the North Star in the universe of constitutionalism in India Constitutional morality
always trumps any imposition of a particular view of social morality by shifting and different majoritarian
regimes. (internal citations omitted and emphasis supplied).
900. The Union contends that this Hon'ble Court "cannot create new rights". (Counter Affidavit, Para 43).
However, it is respectfully submitted that the Petitioners are not asking this Hon'ble Court to "create" any new rights
for them; they only ask for the rights which have been guaranteed to them by our Constitution to be recognized and
enforced.
901. Thus, the Petitioners submit that asking this Hon'ble Court to step aside is nothing short of inviting the
Hon'ble Court to abdicate its primary constitutional duty and thus the "argument. that change in society, if any, can
be reflected by amending laws by the elected representatives of the people" is an "argument [that] must be
emphatically rejected." Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 185 (Para. 352).
(iii) Constitutional morality prevails over alleged "cultural and societal values"
902. The Union refers to India's "cultural and societal values" (Counter Affidavit, Para. 44), citing these alleged
"values" as its reason for opposing the present Petition. However, whatever those ever-evolving "values" might be at
this precise moment, the Union is incorrect that, in deciding whose marriages to recognize and whose marriages to
disregard, the State has a responsibility "to judge and enforce. societal morality and public acceptance based upon
Indian ethos" (Counter Affidavit, Para. 45).
903. This is an extraordinary argument because the law is exactly the opposite. This Hon'ble Court has repeatedly
emphasized that societal approval is irrelevant to the exercise of this fundamental right by consenting adults. See,
e.g., Shakti Vahini (supra), at 211 (Para. 41) "What we have stated hereinabove, to explicate, is that the consent of
the.. community or the clan is not necessary once the two adult individuals agree to enter into a wedlock."); id., at
214 (Para. 52) ("Once the fundamental right is inherent in a person, the intolerant groups who subscribe to the view
of superiority class complex or higher clan cannot scuttle the right of a person by leaning on any kind of philosophy,
moral or social, or self-proclaimed elevation.") Shafin Jahan (supra), at 405-406 (Paras. 84, 86) (" The Constitution
recognises the liberty and autonomy which inheres in each individual. This includes the ability to take decisions on
aspects which define one's personhood and identity. The choice of a partner whether within or outside marriage lies
within the exclusive domain of each individual... Our choices are respected because they are ours. Social approval for
intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them. Indeed, the Constitution protects personal liberty
from disapproving audiences."). This Hon'ble Court did not mince its words while mandating that "social values and
morals have their space but they are not above the constitutionally guaranteed freedom." Shafin Jahan (supra), at
396 (Para. 52). Simply put, what the Union characterizes as the State's responsibility is specifically what our
Constitution and this Hon'ble Court prohibit.
904. The Petitioners submit that adjudicating this case does not require assessment of Indian "cultural and societal
values" but rather constitutional values. Under our Constitution, a political or popular majority is simply not entitled to
weigh in on whether the Petitioners, a minority, should be permitted to exercise their fundamental rights.
Constitutional principles of dignity and privacy lead to a similar conclusion marriage is a social contract, and just as it
would be unconstitutional for the State to refuse to acknowledge a contract between two women, it is unconstitutional
for the State to refuse to acknowledge marriage between two women.
905. Alternatively, assuming without prejudice and for the sake of argument that societal beliefs are somehow
legally relevant, the Union has presented no evidence that Indian "cultural and societal values" equal intolerance
towards same-sex couples. The Petitioners humbly submit that Indian culture is actually about love, tolerance, and
inclusivity, and this Hon'ble Court should not assume otherwise, especially in the absence of evidence that the Indian
people are incapable of accepting same-sex couples.
906. Furthermore, to the extent Indian society indeed remains unaccepting of LGBTQ+ individuals, it is because of
the Union's own failings. Specifically, this Hon'ble Court ordered the Union to: "take all measures to ensure that [the
Navtej Singh Johar] judgment is given wide publicity.. and initiate programs to reduce and finally eliminate the
stigma associated with such persons." Navtej Singh Johan (supra), (Hon'ble Justice R.F. Nariman, at 195 (Para. 370).
This Hon'ble Court should not accept, as justification for denial of the Petitioners' fundamental rights, the Union's
failure to comply fully with its directive. A party cannot manufacture a legal defense through violation of a Court order.
907. Lastly, the Petitioners submit that the Union cannot be allowed to answer the present Petition simply by
saying that marriage has traditionally and historically been limited to "male" and "female" partnerships as it has
sought to do (Counter Affidavit, Para 19). Generations of injustice is no argument for the perpetuation of injustice.
If rights were defined by who exercised them in the past, then received practices could serve as their own continued
justification and new groups could not invoke rights once denied." Obergefell (supra) at 671. When science has
evolved, so must the thinking regarding how our laws should be used to organize society. Prolonged injustice must
underscore the urgency of the relief sought in this petition-not constitute an argument against it. Navtej Singh Johar
(supra), at 289, 310 (Paras. 616, 644) ("A hundred and fifty-eight years is too long a period for the LGBT
community to suffer the indignities of denial," and it is "time to invoke the transformative power of the Constitution.")
205
(iv) Affording LGBTQ+ individuals' non-discriminatory access to marriage does not diminish the institution
of marriage or the family unit.
908. The Petitioners submit that upholding everybody's fundamental right to marry would diminish not the worth of
heterosexuals' marriages. It is "wholly illogical to believe that state recognition of the love and commitment between
same-sex couples will alter the most intimate and personal decisions of opposite-sex couples." Obergefell (supra), at
679 (internal citations and original alterations omitted).
909. The Union references the role of marriage and family "in the rearing of children and their mental and
psychological upbringing" (Counter Affidavit, Para. as justification. However, the U.S. Supreme Court carefully
considered this argument in Obergefell (supra), and appropriately ruled that "the right to marry is [not] less
meaningful for those who do not or cannot have children" and "[a]n ability, desire, or promise to procreate is not and
has not been a prerequisite for a valid marriage in any State." As was the case in Obergefell (supra), the Act at issue
here does not require asking couples wishing to marry whether they intend to have children, nor does it require an
undertaking to that effect. Indeed, the Act does not disqualify from marriage couples too old to have children, or
individuals who are infertile. Treating gender and sexuality as a proxy for childrearing is therefore impermissibly
imprecise and discriminatory, and unjustifiably denies some genders and some sexualities access to the health,
financial, social, and other benefits that marriage offers.
910. Moreover, even assuming incentivizing child rearing is a legitimate state interest (which would be ironic given
the Union's citation to precedent concerning overpopulation, see Counter Affidavit, Para. 41), the Union fails to
demonstrate that simply limiting marriage to opposite binary genders sufficiently promotes that interest. Critically, the
Union fails to establish that allowing same-sex couples to marry will compromise the quality of care heterosexual
couples currently provide their children.
911. The Petitioners submit that India being a constitutional democracy, neither popular morality non perceived
behavioural implications for third parties constitutes valid justification for continued deprivation of individual
constitutional liberties. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 288 (Para. 606) ("Constitutional morality," as opposed to
popular morality, "will impact upon any law which deprives the LGBT individuals of their entitlement to a full and equal
citizenship.") 206
912. The Petitioners submit that Constitutional morality- especially pursuant to the ruling of a Nine Judge Bench of
this Hon'ble Court-is clear : sexuality is a private matter and the Union cannot dictate who marries whom. Puttaswamy
(supra), at 421-422, 509, 635-636 (Paras. 144, 146, 323, 645, 647) (Sexual orientation is a facet of a person's
privacy, and the right to privacy is a fundamental right under the Constitution). Indeed, the Bench in Puttaswamy
(supra) quoted with approval the United States Supreme Court's observations that "it would be contradictory to
recognize a right of privacy with respect to other matters of family life and not with respect to the decision to enter the
relationship that is the foundation of the family in our society" to conclude that the "unhindered fulfilment of one's
sexual orientation [is] an element of privacy and dignity" Id., at 422, 448-449 (Paras. 146, 194). Therefore, any
suggestion that the sensibilities of heterosexual couples should dictate a homosexual couple's enjoyment of privacy,
dignity, or the fundamental right to marry, is antithetical to the Constitution of India.
913. Thus, the Petitioners submit that denying LGBTQ+ individuals access to the institution of marriage under the
Act violates Part III of the Constitution including Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21. It inflicts personal harm on such
individuals and also inflicts a significant economic cost on the country. As explained above, the Union has not been
able to put forth any constitutionally valid justifications for such denial.
V. IF THERE ARE NO JUSTIFICATIONS FOR THE ACT TO DENY LGBTQ+ PEOPLE THEIR FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHT WHAT RELIEF SHOULD THE COURT ORDER TO ADDRESS THIS INJURY?
914. The Petitioners respectfully submit that to address this injury, the provisions of the Act, ought to be
interpreted as neutral to gender and sexual orientation for consistency with Part 111 of the Constitution, and in
particular with Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21. The Union asserts that the Petitioners "clearly seek to re-write the legislative
text and intent under various codified statutes governing marriage" (Counter Affidavit, Para. 26). This is incorrect.
The present Petitioners respectfully seek this Hon'ble Court's intervention to preserve the constitutional validity of
provisions in the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
915. Specifically, Section 4 of the Act literally states that "[n]otwithstanding anything contained in any other law...
a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act" subject to certain conditions, and these the
Petitioners request that the Hon'ble Court uphold nondiscriminatory access to the Act by ordering that no
preconditions be understood as excluding certain genders or sexualities. Any provisions understood as imposing such
preconditions would be unconstitutional unless read as neutral to gender and sexuality. For instance, Section 4(c)
prescribes age of consent for marriage, and should only be interpreted as such. It should not additionally be
understood as requiring one "biological male" and one "biological female" since doing so would be inconsistent with
this Hon'ble Court's precedent and our Constitution.
916. Notably, the Hon'ble Madras High court has ruled that the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, should "obviously" be
expansively construed to recognize marriage involving transgender individuals. See Arunkuman V. Inspector General of
Registration, AIR 2019 Mad 265 (by requiring expansive interpretation, "this Court is not breaking any new ground. It
is merely stating the obvious. Sometimes to see the obvious, one needs not only physical vision in the eye but also
love in the heart."). The Petitioners submit that "complete havoc" as the Union foreshadows, has not resulted due to
the Hindu Marriage Act being construed as inclusive of all genders. This Hon'ble Court therefore ought to reject the
Union's position that marriage statutes must be limited to "biological males" and "biological females".
917. Such an interpretation would also be consistent with international law. Principles of international law are
at 540 (Para. 5) ("There can be no question that nations must march with the international community and the
municipal law must respect rules of International law In particular, "any international convention not inconsistent
with the fundamental rights and in harmony with its spirit must be read into those provisions e.g. Articles 14, 15, 19
and 21 of the Constitution to enlarge the meaning and content thereof and to promote the object of constitutional
guarantee." NALSA (supra), at 486 (Para. 59)207. The position under international law supports this Petition.
a.
Part 111 of the Constitution of India embodies universally accepted principles of human rights. For example, like
Article 14 of the Constitution, Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 ("UDHR"), mandates
that "[a]]] human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights" (emphasis added)208 Likewise, consistent
with Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution, Article 2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
1966
("ICCPR")209 and Article 2 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966
("ICESCR")210, 210 prohibit discrimination on the basis of "sex...0 other status." Similarly, like Article 19 of the
Constitution, UDHR's Article 19 recognizes that "[e]veryone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression"
211 and ICCPR's Article 19 provides [e]veryone. the right to freedom of expression"212.
b. Further, like Article 21 of the Constitution, Article 16 of the ICCPR recognizes that "[e]very human being has the
inherent right to life" and UDHR's Article 12214 and ICCPR's Article 17215 elaborate that "[n]o one shall be
subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family home or correspondence" (emphases
added). Adults "have the right to marry" and "are entitled to equal rights as to marriage." (Article 16, UDHR) 216
C. Consistent with Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India, the UDHR, ICCPR, and ICESCR prohibit
discrimination against LGBTQ+ individuals. For example, each of these conventions provides that "[e]veryone" is
entitled to the conventions' enumerated rights "without distinction of any kind" based on "sex" or "other
status" (Article 7, UDHR217 Article 26, ICCPR2123 Article 2, ICESCR219), which "includes sexual
orientation." (United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2009 Report.) Member states,
including India, 220 are obliged to "ensure that a person's sexual orientation is not a barrier to realising Covenant
rights." (Paragraph 32, 2009 Report.)4
d. The Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation
and Gender Identity, 2006, further codify protections, "address[ing] a broad range of human rights standards
and their application to... sexual orientation and gender identity." NALSA (supra), at 466-471 (Para. 24-25).
The First Yogyakarta Principle is that "human beings of all sexual orientations and gender identities are entitled
to the full enjoyment of all human rights.
918. This Hon'ble Court ought to uphold the international law discussed above because each of UDHR, ICCPR,
ICESCR and Yogyakarta principles is "not inconsistent with the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the
Indian Constitution" and "must be recognized and followed." NALSA (supra), at 487 (Para. 60). In sum, like the
Constitution of India, international law recognizes the right to marry as a human right, and guarantees every LGBTQ+
person "the right to recognition everywhere as a person." (Third Yogyakarta Principle.)2 Accordingly, countries like
India that "recognize" and "follow" the Yogyakarta Principles have a duty to ensure that their citizens, including
LGBTQ+ individuals, are guaranteed the right to marry.
919. The Petitioners respectfully submit that same-sex marriages and civil unions are presently recognized in at
least 33 democracies : Netherlands (2001), Belgium (2003), Canada (2005), Spain (2005), South Africa (2006),
Norway (2008), Sweden (2009), Iceland (2010), Portugal (2010), Argentina (2010), Denmark (2012), Uruguay
(2013), New Zealand (2013), France (2013), Brazil (2013), United Kingdom (2014), Finland (2014), Luxembourg
(2015), Ireland (2015), Greenland (2015), United States of America (2015), Colombia (2016), Germany (2017), Malta
(2017), Australia (2017), Austria (2019), Taiwan (2019), Ecuador (2019), Costa Rica (2020), Chile (2022), Slovenia
(2022), Switzerland (2022) and Mexico (2022). The Petitioners submit that the LGBTQ+ community in India, which is
a progressive and liberal democracy with a robust commitment to protection of individual liberties, deserves no less
than its counterparts in the aforesaid jurisdictions. As this Hon'ble Court has already directed, "decriminalisation is
a
first step" and [i]n the march of civilizations across the spectrum of a compassionate global order, India cannot be
left behind." Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at 272 (Para. 564).
920. The Petitioners submit that a statute once considered constitutionally valid, may become unconstitutional over
a passage of time and a change in circumstances. [Ref. Malpe Vishwanath Acharya V. State of Maharashtra (1998) 2
striking down of Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code and this Hon'ble Court unequivocally holding that LGBTQ+
individuals are entitled to "the same human, fundamental constitutional rights as other citizens" Navtej Singh Johan
(supra), at 140 (Para 255), the Act would be unconstitutional unless interpreted as being neutral to gender identity
and sexual orientation.
921. The Petitioners submit that this Hon'ble Court has regularly interpreted statutes in a manner that preserves
explained and applied the doctrine of reading down a statute:
24. The Constitution is the highest law of the land and no statute can violate it. If there is a statute which
appears to violate it we can either declare it unconstitutional or we can read it down to make it constitutional. The
first attempt of the court should be to try to sustain the validity of the statute by reading it down..
26 Although according to the literal rule of interpretation we have to go by the plain and simple language of a
provision while construing it, we may have to depart from the plain meaning if such plain meaning makes the
provision unconstitutional.
27. Similarly, we are of the opinion that the provisions in various statutes i.e. Section 3(5) of TADA or Section 10
of
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act which on their plain language make mere membership of a banned
organisation criminal have to be read down and we have to depart from the literal rule of interpretation in such
cases, otherwise these provisions will become unconstitutional as violative of Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
It is true that ordinarily we should follow the literal rule of interpretation while construing a statutory provision, but
if the literal interpretation makes the provision unconstitutional we can depart from it so that the provision becomes
constitutional.
[Emphasis supplied]
922. Thus, the Petitioners submit that, in the present case too, this Hon'ble Court ought to depart from the literal
rule of interpretation and interpret the provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 as neutral to gender identity and
sexual orientation. This Hon'ble Court ought to read down any gender or sexuality-based restrictions contained in the
Special Marriage Act, 1954 and declare that the Act applies to any to persons who wish to marry, regardless of sex as
long as they are above the permitted marriageable age and meet the other conditions prescribed in Section 4 of the
Act. The Act must be interpreted in a manner which makes it consistent with Part 111 of our Constitution.
FILED BY
KARANJAWALA & CO.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 06.04.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1142 OF 2022
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Utkarsh Saxena and Ann Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
Written Submissions on Behalf of the Petitioners
Senior Counsel on Behalf of the Petitioners : Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi Time Sought for Oral
Arguments : 4 Hours
A. On the Interpretation of the Special Marriage Act
I. Discrimination
11. Freedom of Expression
111. Dignity
IV. Remedies
B. On the Constitutionality of the Notice-and-Objections Regime
I. Privacy
11. Decisional Autonomy
111. Equality
IV. Proportionality
C. On the Relief
Appendix-
Appendix 11
Appendix 111
923. These written submissions are being filed in compliance with the order of this Hon'ble Court dated
06.01.2023, in a batch of writ petitions concerning the legality of same-sex marriages in India [Supriyo @ Supriya
Chakraborty V. Union of India, WP (Civ) No. 1011/2022]. Through this order, this Hon'ble Court directed the
petitioners to file a common set of written submissions before the next date of hearing, i.e. 13th March 2023.
924. Petitioners' written submissions in the captioned matter are divided into three sections. First, Petitioners
submit that the Special Marriage Act 1954 ["SMA"] and Foreign Marriage Act 1969 ["FMA"], when interpreted
consistent with the Constitution, authorise the solemnisation of same-sex marriages [A.]; secondly, Petitioners submit
that the inotice-and-objections regimes under the SMA and the FMA, which require publicisation to the world at large
of an intent to marry in advance of the marriage, are unconstitutional [B.]: and thirdly, Petitioners outline what relief
this Hon'ble Court may consider granting in this matter [C.].
925. Petitioners seek the leave of this Hon'ble Court to file brief, additional written submissions on the conclusion of
the hearing.
A. On the Interpretation of the Special Marriage Act
926. Secular marriages in India are governed by the SMA. Section 4 of the SMA - which regulates the conditions
relating to solemnisation of special marriages - uses the gender-neutral terms "a marriage between two persons", and
"spouse." In plain language, therefore, the Special Marriage Act applies both to marriages between same-sex couples,
and opposite-sex couples.
927. However, a degree of ambiguity is introduced into the SMA by sections 4(c), and 4(d) read with section 2(b)
and the First Schedule to the SMA. Section 4(c) introduces, as a condition for the solemnisation of a special marriage,
the requirement that "the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years."
Section 4(d) stipulates that the parties ought not to be "within the degrees of prohibited relationship." The term
"degrees of prohibited relationship" is defined in section 2(b), and refers to "a man and any of the persons mentioned
in
Part | of the First Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part 11." Part I of the First Schedule
consists exclusively of female family members, and Part II consists exclusively of male family members. Furthermore,
the Second Schedule uses the words "widower" and "widow", the Third and Fourth Schedules "bride" and
"bridegroom", and the Fifth Schedule "husband" and "wife".
928. Consequently, while the SMA is meant to solemnise a marriage between two persons, two of the pre-
conditions for solemnisation appear to restrict its application to heterosexual couples, i.e., a man and a woman.
929. As a preliminary point, Petitioners respectfully submit that none of the other conditions under section 4 (for
instance, there should be no living spouse, the parties should be able to give consent etc.) are based upon a person's
ascriptive characteristics (such as race, caste, ethnicity, national origin etc). The term 'ascriptive' refers to attributes of
an individual that are pre-determined or designated or ascribed by society or other external norms. The implied
exclusion of LGBTQ+ relationships from the SMA, therefore, stands out as the only exclusion that is based on a marker
of identity.
930. The forward march of progress has caused this exclusion to be legislatively or judicially removed in 32
jurisdictions that now legalise same-sex marriage, an illustrative list of which include jurisdictions as diverse as
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, France, Germany, Mexico, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, Uruguay, and the United States of America.
931. Petitioners respectfully submit that SMA is reasonably liable to be read down in a manner so as to validate and
recognise same-sex marriage. Consequently, subsuming same-sex marriages under the SMA, does not require a
finding of unconstitutionality.
932. In its counter-affidavit filed before this Hon'ble Court, Respondent objects to this reading of the SMA,
primarily on the basis that the very concept of marriage "necessarily presupposes a union between two persons of the
opposite sex", and that this definition is "socially, culturally, and legally ingrained into the very idea and concept of
marriage." (Respondent's Counter-Affidavit, para 5). Notably, Respondent produces no evidence in support of this
claim. Furthermore, Respondent does not address the statutory scheme regulating marriages in India, where the
Special Marriage Act (as will be pointed out below) was enacted as an alternative to personal marriage laws, which
were - indeed based on a certain cultural understanding of the nature of marriage.
933. Without, therefore, conceding the point, Petitioner submits, in response, that marriage is a social institution
(as argued below), and society is characterised by its capacity to evolve. There is, therefore, no timeless and
immutable "concept" of marriage that exists outside and beyond society, and is immune to change. Indeed, as
recently as one hundred years ago, child marriages were both legally and socially acceptable; now, we understand
consent to be a cornerstone of marriage, and also understand that valid consent is predicated upon the attainment of
majority.
934. Respondent suggests that if indeed the concept of marriage has evolved, the legislature is the only body that
can bring about a change in the law to reflect that evolution (Counter-Affidavit, para 9). Petitioners disagree. The
present case does not ask the Court to act as a substitute for the legislature, and alter the "concept of marriage."
Rather, it asks the Court to find that the existing legislative definition excludes a group of people solely by virtue of
their ascriptive characteristics, and that this exclusion is unconstitutional. Such an exercise is well within the
jurisdiction and the domain of this Hon'ble Court.
935. To substantiate this submission, Petitioners will address their contentions under the following heads
of
argument non- discrimination (1); freedom of expression and association (11); dignity (111); and remedies (IV).
I. Discrimination
936. By prohibiting same-sex couples from solemnising their marriages, the SMA discriminates on grounds of
sexual orientation. Sexual orientation is both a protected ground under Article 15(1) of the Constitution (subsumed
within sex discrimination), and - as an ascriptive characteristic attracts a higher standard of scrutiny under Article 14
Court will be facially more suspicious of, and more readily inclined to intervene with respect to, classifications that
cause disadvantage based on sex or gender.
937. The locus of discrimination in the present case is the exclusion of same-sex couples from the social institution
of marriage. The institution of marriage, in our society, serves the functions listed below. These are illustratively listed
to show that marriage is not simply a privilege or benefit, but is deeply embedded in society, forming the very basis of
a couple's ability to fully participate in it:
a. For those who seek any form of marriage at all, it is a source of social and community validation for a
relationship, expressed through official recognition by the State through its laws.
b. Relatedly, the ability to marry - and the State and social recognition that comes along with it - often provides a
sense of security to vulnerable couples, facing various forms of stigma or pressure. In that sense, the ability or
choice to marry is needed most by those whose relationships are often subjected to familial or community
disapproval.
C. With respect to the partners themselves, marriage provides greater financial - and other forms of security,
especially to the more vulnerable partner.
d. Marital status is a gateway to a range of other legal and civil benefits, in the domains of tax, inheritance,
adoption, and others. [see Appendix I]
e.
In our society, marriage and marital status - is a source of dignity, fulfilment, and self-respect.
f. Marriage is an integral aspect of the ability to have, and enjoy, a family life.
938. This demonstrates that marriage is not simply a benefit conferred by the State, whose conditions it can
therefore prescribe without any constitutional scrutiny. The fundamental, structural role that marriage plays in our
society means that it is imbued with, and overlaps with, constitutional values. The exclusion of one set of people from
accessing the institution, therefore, requires searching judicial scrutiny on the touchstone of anti-discrimination
doctrine.
939. Notably, Respondent agrees (Counter-Affidavit, paras 15-18). In par 17, Respondent eloquently argues
that "marriage and the family are important social institutions in India that provide for the security, support, and
companionship of members of our society." Petitioners could not have put it better themselves. And that is why, it is
respectfully submitted, exclusion of individuals from these valuable social institutions purely by virtue of their
ascriptive characteristics is unconstitutional.
940. Specifically, Petitioners submit that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the SMA constitutes direct
discrimination under Article 15(1), on grounds of sexual orientation, and is therefore ex facie unconstitutional.
Respondent's submission that the discrimination is not only on grounds of sex is untenable (Counter-affidavit, para
36). Given that "sexual orientation" has been read into "sex", the moment that Respondent submits before this Court
that it has defined marriage to mean a union between one man and one woman, it is ipso facto discrimination on
grounds only of sexual orientation.
941. In any event, Petitioners respectfully submit that the exclusion fails the test of Article 14. While there exists
an intelligible differentia (sexual orientation), there is no rational nexus with any legitimate State purpose.
942. First, it is important to reiterate that, in its origin and its evolution, the SMA is an avowedly secular law, which
was meant to serve as an alternative for individuals who could not - or did not want to - solemnise their marriages
objects and reasons of the SMA, the Act was passed "to provide a special form of marriage which can be taken
advantage of by any person in India and by all Indian nationals in foreign countries irrespective of the faith which
either party to the marriage may profess." Consequently, unlike legislation such as, for example, the Hindu Marriage
Act, where the conditions for solemnisation of marriages must comply with Hindu religion, the SMA is an areligious or
non-religious marriage-related legislation. This addresses a point that Respondent makes repeatedly in its counter-
affidavit, namely, the cultural understanding of marriage as a union between two persons of the opposite sex.
943. Indeed, in para 21, Respondent concedes that it has designed and framed marriage laws as relatable to the
customs of various religious communities (Counter-affidavit, para 21). However, as noted above, the question of
how a or any - religion defines marriage is irrelevant to the legislative purposes of the SMA. Without expressing any
opinion on the place of same-sex marriages within religion(s) it is respectfully submitted that other than alleged
invocations of culture and religion (which is the subject matter of other petitions in this batch), there is no other
putative, constitutionally valid legislative purpose that justifies the exclusion of same-sex couples from the purview of
the SMA. Notably, the Respondent does not attempt to provide one.
944. Secondly, the Respondent cannot argue - as it does in paragraph 23- that it has simply defined marriage as
a union between a man and a woman, and that that constitutes the legislative policy (Counter-affidavit, para 23).
This would be circular and self-referential reasoning, which does nothing more than equate the classification with the
legislative purpose. This, obviously, cannot be a valid defence to an Article 14 challenge, as -in effect any legislative
classification can pass Article 14 scrutiny by the State simply declaring that the classification is the purpose.
945. As an analogy, one can imagine the State announcing a welfare benefit that it then declares off-limits for blue
-eyed people. On being challenged, the State simply says that it has "defined" the welfare benefit as one that all
persons but blue-eyed people are eligible for, and that the legislative purpose is to exclude blue-eyed people from
accessing the said welfare benefit. It is respectfully submitted that just as this self-referential reasoning would not
pass Article 14 scrutiny, so also the State's argument that it has simply "defined" marriage so as to exclude same-sex
couples from accessing the institution, must also be rejected.
946. For example, in Dipak Sibal V. Punjab University, 1989 2 SCR 145, paras 18-20, when the State sought to
justify legislative classification limiting enrolment in evening law classes to government employees by deploying the
self-referential reasoning that the purpose was to provide legal education to government employees - in effect,
equating the classification with the purpose -this Hon'ble Court struck down the classification on the basis, inter alia,
that the legislative purpose was "illogical."
947. Therefore, it is not sufficient for the Union to state simpliciter that, since marriage is by legal definition only a
union between a man and a woman, and since thus, the SMA's legislative purpose is to solemnise marriages fitting
such definition, an otherwise suspect classification on the basis of sexual orientation and gender would be rendered
constitutional.
948. In para 24 of its counter-affidavit, Respondent tries to buttress this classification by referring to the "cultural
ethos and societal values" of the country. This has already been addressed above; here, Petitioners respectfully add
that the invocation of "societal values" (even where such societal values have been established, which is not the case
here) cannot be used to defeat claims for equal treatment and non-discrimination. By definition, equal treatment and
non-discrimination require challenging majoritarian social norms (whether these norms exist in the domain of gender,
caste, place of origin, and so on); if society was already minded to accord equal, non-discriminatory treatment to all,
there would be no need for a constitutional right to equality. In paragraph 35, Respondent makes a faint reference to
"social stability", but provides no argument for why the recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA would
adversely affect social stability.
949. Thirdly, this leaves the only remaining legislative purpose as animus against the LGBTQ+ community, and the
refusal to treat them as equal moral members of society, by offering them the same range of rights and benefits as
opposite-sex couples. It is clear that any such purpose needs only to be stated to be rejected : as held in Navtej Johar
V. Union of India, supra (para 353), legislative purpose cannot itself be discriminatory or unconstitutional. As noted by
the South African Constitutional Court in Ministry of Home Affairs V. Fourie 2006 (1) SA 524 (CC), para 71, the
exclusion of same-sex couples from the legal institution of marriage conveys a message of unequal moral concern or
respect of the Constitution:
The exclusion of same-sex couples from the benefits and responsibilities of marriage, accordingly, is not a small
and tangential inconvenience resulting from a few surviving relics of societal prejudice destined to evaporate like
the morning dew. It represents a harsh if oblique statement by the law that same-sex couples are outsiders. and
that their need for affirmation and protection of their intimate relations as human beings is somehow less than that
of heterosexual couples. It reinforces the wounding notion that they are to be treated as biological oddities, as
failed or lapsed human beings who do not fit into normal society, and, as such, do not qualify for the full moral
concern and respect that our Constitution seeks to secure for everyone. It signifies that their capacity for love,
commitment and accepting responsibility is by definition less worthy of regard than that of heterosexual couples.
950. By sending a message of and perpetuating the subordination of a disadvantaged group of persons, the
position that marriage is the preserve of the heterosexual couple breaches this Hon'ble Court's understanding of
951. In addition to failing the classification test, it is also submitted that the impugned exclusion is manifestly
arbitrary. This is because it privileges one conception of the "family unit" - i.e., a man, a woman, and associated
offspring - over other conceptions. However, the Constitution does not authorise - or sanction - a hierarchy between
different conceptions of the family where unions between some kinds of persons are more equal than others for no
reason other than their ascriptive characteristics.
Court specifically held that "atypical family units" - specifically including queen relationships - are "equally deserving
not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation."
953. It is therefore submitted that the legal privileging of the heterosexual marriage-based family unit over others
lacks any "determining principles", and therefore fails the test of manifest arbitrariness. (see e.g. Joseph Shine V.
954. For these reasons, it is respectfully submitted that insofar as the SMA prohibits same-sex couples from
solemnising their marriages, it is directly discriminatory, and violates Articles 14 and 15(1) of the Constitution.
11. Freedom of Expression
955. The guarantee of freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) is not limited to verbal or written
90). Furthermore - and crucially - the right is not limited to speech-acts performed in isolation, but extends to
participation in socially valuable forms of expression, that are articulated in community : for instance, in NALSA V.
were both considered to be protected forms of expression, by virtue of their social salience to the community in
question. Separately, the act of casting a vote has also been held to be a protected expression, because of the social
956. Applying this doctrine, Petitioners respectfully submit that the act of entering into the marital relationship,
because of the social and symbolic meaning that it carries, is protected expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution.
957. Deprivation of the right to marry, therefore, must comply with one of the eight sub-clauses under Article 19
(2) of the Constitution. It is respectfully submitted that none of the sub-clauses are available to the State. In
particular, the term "decency and morality" under Article 19(2) must be read to mean not public morality, but
constitutional morality, i.e., morality infused by constitutional values. This rules out any restriction upon the right that
is based purely on ascriptive characteristics, such as sexual orientation.
958. It is therefore submitted that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the ambit of the SMA violates Article 19
(1) (a) (and, by extension, Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution, and is not saved by Articles 19(2) or 19(4).
III. Dignity
959. The right to dignity is at the core of Article 21 of the Constitution.
960. Dignity - in the context of the State's treatment of groups and communities - requires the State to treat
everyone with equal concern and respect, and to not send a message that an individual, or a set of individuals, are
less worthy by virtue of their ascriptive characteristics.
961. The central importance of marriage as a social institution - as outlined above - means that the ability to
participate in it on equal terms is a question of dignity. When the State excludes a set of people from participation in a
valuable social institution, by comparing their choice with the State proscribing what it considers noxious business
activities, it communicates both to the excluded and to the rest of the society that these individuals are less than
complete moral members of society : it is, therefore, a message of subordination.
962. There are many historical instances of the exclusion of a group of people from a social institution being used to
send a public message about their worth as equal moral members of society : these include, for example, caste-based
restrictions on temple entry (see Shri Venkataramana Devaru V. State of Mysore, 1958 SCR 895), rules that prohibited
women from participating in certain "male" professions (see Anuj Garg V. Hotel Association, AIR 2008 SC 663) the
refusal to accommodate disability in public examinations (Vikash Kumar V. Union Public Service Commission, (2021) 5
these
exclusions, on the understanding that the ability to participate in the making and remaking of social institutions is
central to individual dignity. The exclusion of LGBTQ+ people from the social institution of marriage is one of the last
remaining legal outposts that sanctions such exclusion; it is therefore respectfully submitted that the removal of this
exclusion by this Hon'ble Court would advance the constitutional goal of guaranteeing the dignity of all.
9 Respondent submits that the right under Article 21 has been curtailed by virtue of a "legitimate state
interest" (Counter-affidavit, para 40), which - it reiterates - is the "the acceptance of Indian society based upon its
own cultural and societal values (Counter-affidavit, para 42), and "societal morality" (para 45). This submission has
been addressed in some detail above, and Petitioners shall not reiterate it here; it suffices to say that Respondent has
neither established what societal morality is or requires, and has also failed to demonstrate how the version of societal
morality that it articulates is in any way distinct from bare animus against the LGBTQ+ community.
IV. Remedies
964. Petitioners respectfully submit that the present case does not require a strike-down from this Hon'ble Court. It
only requires a declaratory judgement that, in accordance with well-established principles of statutory interpretation
and - when necessary - reading down:
a. The word "man" in section 2(b) includes "any person", and that correspondingly, the word "woman" includes
"any person";
b. The words "man" and "woman" include trans-men and trans-women, intersex and non-binary individuals as the
case may be; it is respectfully submitted that this would be in furtherance of the judgement of this Hon'ble Court
gender identities that do not conform to the traditional binary genders, i.e. male or female).
C. Section 4(c) enacts only an age-based exclusion for persons otherwise eligible to marry under the provisions of
Section 4, and shall not be construed to impose any disabilities based on gender, sexual orientation, or sexual
identity of the parties. For same sex couples, in particular, Section 4(c) can, without any violence to
fundamentals, be read as a single age-restriction, be it 18 or 21;
d. The reference to "widow" and "widower" in Schedules 11 and 111 includes "widow or widower" and "widower or
widow", as the case may be, and shall not be construed to impose any disabilities based on gender, sexual
orientation, or sexual identity of the parties. (This phraseology is entirely consistent with an interpretation which
treats any surviving spouse in a same-sex marriage as a widow/widower.) e. References to "bride" and
"bridegroom" in Schedules III and IV includes "bride or bridegroom", as the case may be, and shall not be
construed to impose any disabilities based on gender, sexual orientation, or sexual identity of the parties. (This
phraseology is entirely consistent with an interpretation which treats any spouse in a same-sex marriage as a
bride/bridegroom.)
965. In the alternative, assuming without conceding, that at the time the SMA was passed, it was mainly, or
possibly only, heterosexual couples that were within the contemplation of the framers, it is entirely permissible as an
interpretive technique to expand the existing words of a statute from its original intent to subsume the evolutionary
Court held that the word "handwriting" in Section 45 of the Evidence Expert (which deals with expert evidence) would
be read to include "handwriting science", thus bringing typewriting experts within its ambit. In doing so, the Supreme
Court applied the principle of updating construction, quoting Francis Bennion on statutory interpretation for the
proposition that "the interpreter is to make allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since the Act's
passing, in law, social conditions, technology, the meaning of words, and other matters." (para 10, emphasis
supplied) In Laxmi Theatre Video, supra, para 7, similar logic was deployed to hold that the word "cinematograph"
covered video cassette players.
966. It is respectfully submitted that this principle is followed the world over. In the specific context of marriage
equality, the US Supreme Court in Obergefell V. Hodges 576 U.S. 644 (2015) p.20, noted that "...in interpreting the
Equal Protection Clause, the Court has recognized that new insights and societal understandings can reveal unjustified
inequality within our most fundamental institutions that once passed unnoticed and unchallenged." In Fitzpatrick V.
Sterling Housing Association Ltd., [1999] UKHL 42, the UK House of Lords held that the word "family" under the
Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (Restrictions) Act included same-sex couples, eloquently observing that "it is
not the meaning which has changed but that those who are capable of falling within the words have changed." (para
26) Following on from this, in Godin V. Ghaidan Mendoza, [2004] UKHL 30, the House of Lords approved a Court of
Appeal judgement that had interpreted the phrase "as his or her wife or husband" under the Rent Act of 1977 to mean
as if they were his wife or husband", so as to include same-sex couples (para 51, speech of Lord Steyn).
967. It is therefore respectfully submitted that the original intent of the SMA notwithstanding, the principle of
updating construction justifies the granting of the declaratory relief, prayed for in the terms above.
968. Respondent objects to this relief on the basis that it would make unworkable a range of other laws such as the
Domestic Violence Act, the maintenance provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Dowry Prohibition Act,
Indian Penal Code provisions pertaining to cruelty, and so on (Counter-affidavit, para 27), as these provisions are
not gender neutral. It is respectfully submitted that all of Respondent's examples are of laws where gendered
language exists in order to address structural imbalances of power between men and women within the family (such
as, for example, dowry and maintenance). While there is a separate, ongoing debate about whether and which of
these provisions should be made gender neutral, that has no bearing on the question of same-sex marriage.
Respondent further submits that anomalies may be caused in Christian and Muslim marriage and divorce law
(Counter-affidavit, paragraph 28); it is respectfully submitted that these anomalies have no bearing on the
interpretation of the SMA, and in any event, if necessary, are easily resolved using the same interpretive technique
for example, the words "husband and wife" can be read to mean "as if they are husband and wife", as has been done
by the UK House of Lords (supra).
B. On the Constitutionality of the (Notice-and-Objections Regime
969. Sections 5 9 of the SMA stipulate a set of procedural preconditions to the solemnisation of special marriages
["the notice-and-objections regime"]. The "notice-and-objections regime" requires the following:
a. An intimation of the intended marriage to the Marriage Officer (in the district in which one of the parties has
resided for at least thirty days prior to the notice), given at least thirty days before the solemnisation of the
marriage [section 5].
b. The notice to be entered by the Marriage Officer in a Marriage Notice Book, which is open to inspection by
anyone, and to be affixed in a "conspicuous place" in the Marriage Officer's office [section 6].
C.
A process by which any person may object to the intended marriage, on the ground that it contravenes one of
the preconditions under section 4 of the SMA [section 7].
d. The Marriage Officer to look into - and adjudicate the validity of - the objection, within a further thirty days
[sections 8 and 9]. It is important to note that the SMA does not define "objection", and consequently, even if
the said "objection" is frivolous, irrelevant, or outside the scope of Section 4, the Marriage Officer is still duty-
bound to investigate it. This, indeed, is how the statute works on the ground.
e.
Furthermore, if the marriage is not solemnised within three months, a new notice must be provided, with the
process restarting. It is respectfully submitted that no other law places such a "ticking clock" for people to
solemnise their marriage.
970. The notice-and-objections regime thus compels individuals to affirmatively publicise their intention to marry.
This publicity is ongoing and continuous, for a period of at least thirty days before the solemnisation of the
marriage. Furthermore, this compelled publicising is indiscriminate, and to the world at large.
971. Petitioners respectfully submit that the notice-and-objections regime is unconstitutional, as it violates Articles
14, 15, and 21 of the Constitution. Petitioners further submit that the grant of declaratory relief - as prayed for in
Section I of these written submissions - without adequately addressing the notice-and-objections regime will render
this Hon'ble Court's relief illusionary for queen couples who are already vulnerable to economic and social pressure
from their immediate family or kinship structures. It is respectfully submitted that, for the reasons outlined below, the
effective exercise of the constitutional rights to equality and intimate decision-making will be possible only if
declaratory relief is accompanied by an invalidation or judicial modification of the notice-and-objections regime.
972. This is because, first, while marriage is undoubtedly a social institution and arguably carries with it a
reasonable expectation of publicity (the precise contours of which may be debated), the notice-and-objections regime
compels publicity of the intention to marry. The thirty-day notice period segregates the intention to marry and the
solemnisation of the marriage. It therefore forces individuals to undergo public - and indiscriminate scrutiny of their
intimate choices, for an extended period of time, before their formal entry into the social institution of marriage. Thus,
it constitutes a disproportionate invasion into an individual's right to privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution [1].
973. Secondly, it is respectfully submitted that, while examining the constitutionality of the notice-and-objections
regime, this Hon'ble Court can - and indeed, must - take into account well-known and incontrovertible social realities.
In large swathes of our society, non-State actors - backed by social and community forces - exert significant and - at
times - debilitating pressure upon individual choice, especially in the context of marriage. This is especially the case
when a marriage is deemed to violate social mores and transgress social boundaries, whether it is a queen marriage,
an inter-caste marriage, or an inter-faith marriage. The notice-and-objections regime, therefore, in effect, acts as a
barrier upon the effective exercise of decisional autonomy under Article 21 of the Constitution (11).
974. Thirdly, when examined in the context of social realities, the notice-and-objections regime is discriminatory. It
disproportionately impacts vulnerable and marginalised couples, who do not have the resources to withstand social
pressure (pressure that could take the form of blackmail, threats, social boycotts, and so on). These vulnerabilities
exist at the intersection of caste, class, gender, religion, and sexual orientation, among others. In effect, therefore, the
notice-and-objections regime violates Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution. (111).
975. In a nutshell, the present case is indubitably more about choice, individual autonomy, privacy, and individual
dignity, than any other constitutional value. Parodoxically, there is no greater intrusion into and no greater decimator
of these core constitutional values than the 30 day pre-marriage notice period which de facto constitutes a dangerous
invitation to society at large to disrupt, obstruct, and indeed nullify the core choices involved in the relatively bold
decision of a same-sex marriage. Indeed, this is neither theoretical nor apocryphal : there are already diverse
paradigms of physical intrusions and mental torture coupled with extreme family pressure, including destruction of life
and liberty, in inter-faith marriages in India, including many that are solemnised under the SMA.
976. The only legitimate aim of the notice period under SMA would appear to be to bring to light potential breaches
of the conditions of eligibility under Section 4 SMA. If that be so, firstly, that object is sufficiently subserved by
mandatorily requiring prior to registration a comprehensive affidavit/declaration certifying or declaring that the parties
meet each of the conditions stipulated under Section 4. Secondly, the possible benefit of a pre-marriage notice period
of 30 days has to be weighed in the calculus of the humongous drawbacks which have been itemised in the previous
paragraphs, and clearly in that comparative matrix, it is a disproportionate restriction. Thirdly, if for example,
bigamous marriages or underage marriages are illegal, they are in any case invalid, voidable, or void, as the case may
be, by the operation of law, and a notice period is of relatively limited importance to something already declared by
law to be illegal. The self-affidavit and declaration would constitute a sufficient substitute without the corresponding
danger of physical and mental harassment of an extreme kind. Therefore, as will be argued below, there exist less
restrictive means that can achieve the same goal, without compromising on privacy and equality (IV).
977. Petitioners also note that the Respondent's Counter-affidavit (as filed in March 2023) does not address these
submissions.
I. Privacy
978. It has long been accepted that the protection of intimate decisions from (non-consensual public scrutiny is at
979. The right to privacy is not limited to private spaces (such as the home). The right belongs to persons (see
privacy must be exercised in public spaces. In Navtej Johan V. Union of India, supra, Chandrachud J. - as he then was
observed that:
The right to sexual privacy, founded on the right to autonomy of a free individual, must capture the right of
persons of the community to navigate public places on their own terms, free from state interference (paragraph
62).
980. It is respectfully submitted that the phrase "on their own terms" is crucial to understanding the contours of
the right to privacy in the present case. In Navtej Johan V. Union of India, supra, Chandrachud J. was referring to how
relegating same-sex relations to the putative "private" sphere or "behind closed doors", is insufficiently attentive to
the interaction between the public and private, and would entrench the "ambient heterosexism of the public
space" (Navtej Johar, para 471, supra, quoting Saptashi Mandal, "'Right to Privacy in Naz Foundation : A Counter-
Heteronormative Critique" (2009) 2 NUJS Law Review 553). The context of Navtej Johar, therefore, required a critical
interrogation of the public/private divide while applying the lens of privacy to same-sex relations.
981. The present case, it is respectfully submitted, is the mirror image of Navtej Johar, supra. While in Navtej
Johar, supra Chandrachud J.'s conception of privacy required building an environment in which consensual same-sex
relations could be expressed in public spaces (free of harassment or State interference), the present case involves the
ability of and individual to engage with a public institution (and a public space) while preserving their right to privacy.
982. It is submitted that the pivot upon which this mirror turns is "the right of persons of the LGTBQ+ community
to navigate public places on their own terms." (para 471, Navtej Johar, supra) In one set of situations, this will entail
articulation and expression. In another set of situations, it will require silence and anonymity. The vision of privacy -
flowing from Navtej Johan supra - accommodates both the mirror and its image.
983. It is respectfully submitted that a further facet of the right to privacy is the right to informational self-
determination (Justice K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India, supra, para 248). The right to informational self-
determination vests in each individual the ability to set the terms upon which intimate information about the self can
be shared with the public. The notice-and-objections regime deprives individuals of informational self-determination in
a domain where it is critical : the choice of a life-partner, and - in particular -the mutual decision of when - and if - a
relationship is to crystallise into marriage and to whom, and at what stage, the intent of this crystallisation is to be
communicated to.
984. Petitioners reiterate that this is not a case about anonymous marriages, i.e. the striking down of a 30-day
notice period that the marriage will not be in public domain. There would be an official certificate of registration and
the marriage itself will be publicised amongst those the couple wishes to know. Shortly after marriage, the information
will be further disseminated. Far from therefore desiring an anonymous/secretive alliance, the Petitioners' object is to
prevent dangerous, illegal, unwarranted intrusion by meddlesome interlopers, over-aggressive family members, self-
anointed protection groups, and society at large.
985. Without entering into the merits of the argument, Petitioners concede that slightly different considerations
might apply at the point of entry into the social institution and afterwards. What is at stake here is the ability of
individuals to exercise their right or privacy over their intention to marry - the intimate decision to enter the social
institution - and their ability to control how they choose to share such deeply personal information with the world.
986. For the reasons advanced above, it is therefore submitted that the notice-and-objections regime violates the
right to privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution.
11. Decisional Autonomy
987. It is respectfully submitted that this Hon'ble Court has long held that constitutional adjudication must take
place with a keen awareness of the social context in which laws exist and operate. To this is allied the long-standing
doctrine of this Hon'ble Court that when assessing a law's constitutionality, what matters is its effect, and not its
intention or form (see Chandrachud, J. as he then was in Navtej Johar, supra, para 34 specifically with respect to
queer lives).
988. Chandrachud J. went on to note that a facially neutral law would nonetheless be unconstitutional if its effect
was to target certain communities (paragraph 42). Relying upon on-ground evidence - brought before the Court
through affidavits and personal testimony Chandrachud J. held that it had been established that Section 377 of the
IPC created "a systemic pattern of disadvantage, exclusion and indignity for the LGBT community, and for individuals
who indulge in non-heterosexual conduct." (paragraph 42) Chandrachud J. specifically referred to the "possibility of
persecution" (paragraph 48), "blackmail" (paragraph 48), and -crucially - the impossibility of redress through law,
even though these acts were illegal (paragraph 48). Summing up the position, it was then held that:
While this behaviour is not sanctioned by Section 377, the existence of the provision nonetheless facilitates it by
perpetuating homophobic attitudes and making it almost impossible for victims of abuse to access justice.
(paragraph 51)
989. This Hon'ble Court has also recognised the possibility of systematic abuse of a rights-infringing measure, and
read that into its assessment of such a measure's constitutionality under the doctrine of proportionality (Gujarat
Civil Appeal No. 8819/2022, paras 48-51). Following the judgement of Chandrachud, CJI in Gujarat Mazdoor Sabha
that welded safeguards against abuse into this Hon'ble Court's doctrine of proportionality, this Hon'ble Court
in
Ramesh Chandra summed up the position of law as follows:
State action that leaves sufficient room for abuse, thereby acting as a threat against free exercise of fundamental
rights, ought to necessarily be factored in in the delicate balancing act that the judiciary is called upon to do in
determining the constitutionality of such state action - whether legislative, executive, administrative or otherwise.
(paragraph 51)
990. Therefore, in view of this Hon'ble Court's authoritative holding, it is not open for the Respondents to defend
the constitutionality of the notice-and-objections regime without regard to the on-ground evidence of its abuse by
private actors.
991. Petitioners rely upon this insight, and respectfully submit that it applies squarely to the notice-and-objections
regime. In the accompanying writ petition, Petitioners have adduced detailed evidence to demonstrate how the notice-
and-objections regime has enabled the persecution of individuals whose choice of a life partner is in conflict with the
social expectations of their family and broader kinship and community structures. (ref. Annexures P2, P3, P4, p.34-53,
containing news reports of such harassment; and Annexure P5, p.57, containing extracts from the 242nd Law
Commission Report noticing this problem).
992. Adopting the language of Navtej Johar, supra, para 458 Petitioners respectfully submit that the notice-and-
objections regime does not sanction persecution, but facilitates it by its operation in a society and an environment in
which the use of familiar, caste, and community power to override individual choice in matters of marriage is both
normalised and widespread.
993. It is in this fashion, therefore, that the notice-and-objections regime violates the right to decisional autonomy
under Article 21 of the Constitution. To be sure, the notice-and-objections regime does not, on its own terms, stop a
marriage. However, to limit the analysis to just that would be to view this provision in vacuum. The jurisprudence of
this Hon'ble Court is clear that effect and context are vital in interpreting a law from the perspective of fundamental
rights violations. It is respectfully submitted that the effect of the notice-and-objections regime, in context, makes it
pellucidly clear that it acts as a significant barrier between individuals and the effective exercise of their right to
decisional autonomy.
111. Equality
994. Drawing from the submissions in the previous section, Petitioners respectfully submit that the notice-and-
objections regime is discriminatory.
995. Different individuals have differing abilities to withstand familial, social, caste, and community pressure (as
outlined above). However, this difference in ability is not random or arbitrary : it is directly linked to an individual's
ascriptive identity (including, but not limited to, their socio-economic status). For example, individuals who are
economically dependent on their families will be less able to withstand familial pressure than individuals who are
economically independent. Individuals who belong to contexts in which kinship and community structures are
important sources of support, will be less able to withstand a threat of social boycott than individuals whose access to
basic goods is not mediated through community. At an even simpler level, individuals belonging to dominant social
groups (for example, dominant caste groups) will be more able to withstand pressure than individuals belonging to
already vulnerable or marginalised groups.
996. Consequently, the harm wrought by the notice-and-objections regime lies at the interface of two (related)
concepts of discrimination : indirect discrimination and intersectional discrimination.
997. Indirect discrimination refers to the phenomenon where a neutrally-worded statute is discriminatory in its
998. It is respectfully submitted that the term "social and economic" is carefully chosen, and ought to be given full
effect to.
999. Intersectional discrimination, on the other hand, is a more complex concept. It is based upon the insight that
individuals habitually occupy multiple axes of oppression simultaneously, and in such circumstances, the
discrimination that they experience does not come packaged separately by axis, and non is it a simple sum of
individual forms of discrimination. Intersectional discrimination is a unique experience that - as the term suggests - is
located at the intersection of one or more ascriptive identities.
1000. Intersectional discrimination has been recognised by this Hon'ble Court. In Navtej Johar, supra,
Chandrachud J. (as he then was) held that it was important to take into account "the intersectional nature of sex
discrimination, which cannot be said to operate in isolation of other identities, especially from the sociopolitical and
343, paras 22, 24). Repeatedly, therefore, this Hon'ble Court has stressed upon "social and economic context" as
prerequisites for understanding intersectional discrimination.
1001. It is respectfully submitted that the (facially neutral) notice-and-objections regime is an instance of indirect,
intersectional discrimination. The notice-and-objections regime operates unequally on individuals who occupy the
intersection of ascriptive identities gender, sexual orientation, caste, religion, and class -and places the benefits of
the SMA beyond their reach. For these reasons, it is respectfully submitted that the SMA violates Articles 14 and 15 of
the Constitution.
IV. Proportionality
1002. It is well-settled that a law that violates Article 21 must conform to the five-pronged test of proportionality
in order to pass muster. The five prongs are:
a. A legitimate state aim.
b. A rational nexus between the rights-infringing measure and the State aim ["suitability"].
C. The rights-infringing measure should be the least restrictive measure open to the State to achieve its goals
["necessity"] ].
d. There should be a balance between the extent and severity of the infringement, and the State aim
["proportionality stricto sensu"].
e. There should be provided sufficient safeguards against the possibility of abuse of the rights-infringing measure
["safeguards against abuse"].
1003. As submitted above, Petitioners do not dispute that there may exist a legitimate State aim, i.e., to prevent
violations of the section 4 pre-conditions upon solemnisations of SMA marriages (such as bigamy, etc.). It is also
correct that there exists a rational nexus between the requirement of publicity, and the State aim of ensuring that
SMA marriages are compliant with section 4.
1004. Petitioners submit, however, that the notice-and-objections regime fails at the prong of necessity.
Completely stripping away the right to privacy of individuals for a one-month period before the solemnisation of the
marriage is not the "least restrictive alternative" open to the State. This is obvious from the fact that for non-SMA
marriages - such as, for example, under Hindu customary law, or Christian personal law - there is no requirement of
State-mediated publicity (under Christian personal law, for example, registration is mandatory, but publicity is not;
under Hindu customary law, registration is not mandatory).
1005. Relatedly, therefore, it is evident that ex ante compelled publicity is not the only way to check abuse.
Indeed, for most laws, the State does not resort to ex ante prohibitions, but rather, achieves the goals of prevention,
deterrence, and control through prosecution and punishment for law-breaking. It is open to the legislature to modulate
the penalty in order to ensure maximum compliance, and should this Hon'ble Court hold the notice-and-objections
regime to be unconstitutional, the legislature could well alter the punishment for violating section 4 in order to achieve
deterrence and prevention. It is respectfully submitted, however, that ex post penalties are adequate - and less
restrictive - methods of achieving the State aim, rather than an ex ante deprivation of privacy of every individual who
wishes to get married under the SMA. Indeed, it is this mechanism that the State follows for ensuring compliance with
pre-conditions for marriage under personal laws; consequently, not only does a less restrictive alternative exist in
theory, but it also exists - and has been deployed - in practice.
1006. It is further submitted that, for related reasons, the notice-and-objections regime fails the fourth prong of
the proportionality standard. In order to catch the few individuals who might attempt to use the cloak of secrecy in
order to get married in violation of section 4 conditions, the notice-and-objections regime strips every individual of
their privacy under the SMA. This - effectively - amounts to a presumption of criminality : the notice-and-objections
regime assumes that every individual who wishes to get married under the SMA is a potential violator of section 4.
1007. It is respectfully submitted that this jurisprudence of suspicion was held to fail the fourth prong of the
491, 1323); in that case, this Hon'ble Court held that the mandatory linking of Aadhaar with SIM cards was
unconstitutional, as it presumed that every citizen was a potential terrorist, and was therefore a tool of prevention. It
is respectfully submitted that the notice-and-objections regime is premised on the same assumption of general,
potential criminality.
1008. Finally, the Inotice-and-objections regime is vulnerable to and has in fact been the site of rampant abuse by
various private actors. It is a well-known fact that couples marrying outside the bounds of conventional morality have
been killed, attacked at their homes, and separated, by anti-social elements and their own family members using the
device of the public notice required under the SMA. The fifth prong of the proportionality test does not leave it open for
the Respondents to claim that abuse of a law is irrelevant to an assessment of its constitutionality, when the law itself
does not safeguard against such abuse in any manner.
1009. It is therefore submitted that the notice-and-objections regime constitutes a disproportionate invasion of
Article 21, and ought to be struck down as unconstitutional by this Hon'ble Court.
C. On the Relief
1010. In light of the above, this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue appropriate directions, writs, orders,
directions, or other relief as set out below.
a. Declare, particularly, that same-sex marriages are covered under the ambit of marriages that may be solemnised
and registered under the SMA;
b. Issue a writ of mandamus, or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring that the provisions of
solemnization and registration under the SMA extend to all marriages between any persons otherwise eligible
under the SMA, irrespective of the parties' gender, sexual orientation, and sexual identity. In particular, this
Hon'ble Court may declare that the words "man" and "woman" u/s 2(b); "male" and "female" u/s 4(c); "wife"
and "husband" u/s 12(2), 15(a), 22, 23, 25, 27, 36, 37, 44, and the Fifth Schedule; "widower" and "widow"
under the Second Schedule; and "bride" and "bridegroom" under the Third and Fourth Schedules be interpreted
as "any two persons", along the lines of S.4 of the Act.
1011. In the alternative, the Court may strike down gendered words in the SMA that restrict marriage between
persons of opposite gender as violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of the Constitution of India. The gendered words
in issue are listed separately for the convenience of this Hon'ble Court in Appendix 111.
1012. Similarly, issue a declaratory writ of mandamus, or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring
that the provisions of solemnization and registration under the FMA extend to all marriages between any persons
solemnised under the Act, irrespective of the parties' gender, sexual orientation, and sexual identity. An interpretation
to the contrary, restricting marriage between persons of opposite gender would be violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and
21 of the Constitution of India.
1013. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
and 10 of the SMA as unconstitutional, illegal, and void for all persons.
1014. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order, or direction, declaring Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
and 10 of the FMA as unconstitutional, illegal, and void for all persons.
1015. Issue any other writ, order, or direction as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper to do complete justice
in the circumstances of the case
Drafted By:
Filed By:
Gautam Bhatia, Adv.
Shadan Farasat,
Shadan Farasat, Adv.
Advocate for the Petitioner
Hrishika Jain, Adv.
Utkarsh Saxena, Adv.
Abhinav Sekhri, Adv.
Aman Sharma, Adv.
Settled By:
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Place : New Delhi
Date 12th March, 2023
Appendix-
Vertical rights conferred or liabilities removed by the State itself for those enjoying the State-sanctioned
status of marriage
Adoption
Regulation 5, Adoption Regulations, 2022 enacted under the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Child) Act, 2015, stipulates only a married couple
or
single individuals as eligible candidates for adoption.
Surrogacy
Section 2(1)(h) read with Section 4 of the Surrogation (Regulation) Act, 2021
allows only a married couple or a single widow/divorcee woman to avail
surrogacy.
Intestate succession
Intestate succession under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, Hindu Succession
Act, 1956, as well as Muslim personal law only covers relations by marriage,
consanguinity, or adoption.
Tax exemption for gifts received
Under Section 56(2)(v) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, gifts made by a person to
a
from spouse
spouse are exempt from income tax.
Tax deductions for diverse
For instance, Section 80D of the Income Tax Act, 1961 allows an assessee to
expenditures made for one's
deduct expenditure on health premia made only for his spouse or dependent
spouse
children. Similar provisions have also been enacted for other diverse
expenditures.
Norms
for
compassionate
For instance, the Scheme for Compassionate Appointment in the Registry of the
appointments
in
government
Supreme Court of India, 2006 makes provisions for compassionate appointment
posts
of a spouse in case of the death of a Court Officer while in service. Similar
provisions exist for numerous other posts in State institutions.
Compensation to dependents for
For instance, under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, only persons
death of kin under various
related by marriage or lineage are considered 'dependents' of the deceased
legislations
entitled to compensation (ref. Section 2(1)(d), Workmen's Compensation Act,
1923).
Appointment of nominee for
Rules 19, 21 of All India Services (Death-cum-Retirement) Benefit Rules, 1958
receipt of post-retirement
consider only persons related by marriage, blood, or adoption as eligible
benefits, pension, etc. after the
nominees for receipt of a deceased government employee's gratuity.
death of a government employee
Privilege
in
spousal
Section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 makes communication between a
communication
married couple made during the subsistence of the marriage, privileged.
Right to bodily remains of
In case of death, police/other authorities are often reluctant to return the
deceased kin
deceased's bodily remains to persons not in a 'legal' relationship (such as
marriage or lineage) with the deceased
State protection from social
For example, the Rajasthan Prohibition of Interference with the Freedom of
harassment, violence, and
Matrimonial Alliances in the Name of Honour and Tradition Bill, 2019 was passed
honour killings' granted
to
by the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly to protect couples who are married or who
couples marrying outside the pale
intend to marry, from harassment by community/families,
of conventional morality
Spousal maintenance
Persons in a live-in or other long-term relationship without the stamp of marriage
are not entitled to maintenance from their partner under Section 125, CrPC or
under the diverse family legislations. Indeed, the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 which recognises live-in relationships "in the nature
of marriage" provides for maintenance only in cases of domestic violence. Even in
such cases, the 2005 Act has no protection for couples who would not be
469 para 31).
Protection of the law to victims of
The special penal provision for domestic violence, i.e. Section 498A Indian Penal
domestic violence
Code 1860 covers only violence within marriages. The Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005, albeit covering live-in relationships in the nature of
marriage, also seemingly applies only to heterosexual relationships.
Horizontal rights conferred or disabilities removed by private entities on those enjoying the State-
sanctioned status of marriage
Family insurance coverage
Most insurance companies cover only the legally married spouse (and other
blood/adoptive relations) of a policy-holder under family floater insurance
policies.
Renting homes
The housing market strongly prefers married couples and conventional families.
Opening of joint bank accounts
Most banks facilitate joint savings accounts for legally married couples and other
recognised family types.
Bereavement or care-giving leave
For instance, bereavement leaves of many private companies only extend to
policies in private employment
death of loved ones recognised by the law as family, i.e. married spouse and
other members of the immediate conventional family225
225
Right to be involved in the
Hospitals and healthcare centres generally provide information about a patient's
partner's healthcare and right to
condition to, and consult in that regard with, only legally-recognised family
make medical decisions in that
members of the patient, including a married spouse and other relations by
regard
blood/adoption.
Appendix
Comparison of solemnisation, registration, and marriage validity provisions of HMA and SMA
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
Special Marriage Act, 1954
Solemnization
HMA allows for the solemnization of a marriage
SMA does not allow for the solemnization of a
without any notice, objection, or inspection
marriage unless notice, objection, and inspection
requirements being completed.
requirements u/s 5-10 of the Act are met.
As per Section 7 of HMA, "a Hindu marriage may
These sections require that (i) a notice period of
be solemnised in accordance with the customary
30 days be provided to the Marriage Officer of the
rites and ceremonies of either party thereto" and
District where one of the parties has resided (S.
"where such rites and ceremonies include the
5), (ii) that such notice of intended marriage be
saptpadi, the marriage becomes complete and
affixed to a "conspicuous place", (S.6 (3)) (iii)
binding when the seventh step is taken"
that the details of the parties giving such notice
be entered in a Marriage Notice Book that is
available for inspection to any person (S. 6(2)),
and (iv) any person has the authority to object to
the solemnization of the marriage during notice
period (S. 7).
In case of no objections, it may be solemnised
only after the expiration of 30-day notice period
In case of objections, the marriage officer cannot
solemnise a marriage unless they have inquired
into the objection and satisfied themselves that
they "ought not to prevent the solemnization of
the marriage" (8(1))
Registration
Even at the stage of registration, a marriage
Registration of a marriage under SMA arises only
solemnised under the HMA is not subject to any
after notice, objection, and inspection
notice and objection requirements
requirements are met for solemnization.
Section 8 of HMA allows state governments to
U/s 13(1) of the SMA, "when the marriage has
make rules related to marriage registration. For
been solemnised" (after following notice,
example, Delhi passed The Delhi (Compulsory
objection, and inspection requirements) the
Registration of
marriage officer issues a marriage certificate in
Marriage) Order, 2014 which does not have any
the form specified in the Fourth Schedule. As per
notice, objection, or inspection requirements for
13(2), this certificate is "deemed to be conclusive
the registration of marriages under the HMA. For
evidence of the fact that a marriage under this
such marriages to be registered, only a
Act has been solemnised"
verification of documents and appearance before
The Marriage Notice Book maintained u/s 6(1) of
the SDM is necessary. The marriage certificate is
the SMA needs to be available for inspection
issued on the same day the parties appear before
before the marriage is solemnised or registered.
the SDM.
S. 8(1) and 8(4) of HMA require that a Hindu
Marriage Register be maintained and be open to
inspection at all reasonable times after the
marriage is registered.
Validity
The lack of registration of a marriage does not
Marriages under the SMA cannot be solemnised
strike at the validity of a marriage per S. 8(5) of
(and are hence invalid) without adhering to the
HMA. Hence, a marriage is valid without meeting
notice and objection prerequisites
any notice and objection requirements under the
HMA.
Section 8(5) of the HMA opens with a non-
obstante clause to hold:
"notwithstanding anything in this section, the
validity of any Hindu marriage shall in no way be
affected by the omission to make the entry [in a
Hindu Marriage Register]"
Appendix 111
List of gendered words used in the Special Marriage Act 1954 that require reading down to non-gendered
terms such as 'spouse' or 'person'
Provision
Extract
Section 2(b) Definitions
(b) "degrees of prohibited relationship" a man and any of the persons
read with First Schedule
mentioned in Part I of the First Schedule and a woman and any of the
persons mentioned in Part 11 of the said Schedule are within the degrees of
prohibited relationship.
Explanation .-Relationship includes,-
(a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;
(b) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;
(c) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; and all terms of relationship in
this Act shall be construed accordingly.
Explanation 11. "Full blood" and "half blood"-two persons are said to be related
to each other by full blood when they are descended from a common ancestor by
the same wife and by half blood when they are descended from a common
ancestor but by different wives.
Explanation ."Uterine blood"- persons are said to be related to each
other by uterine blood when they are descended from a common ancestress but
by different husbands.
Explanation IV.-In Explanations II and III, "ancestor" includes the father and
"ancestress" the mother".
Part I of the First Schedule mentions only female kin, while Part II of the First
Schedule mentions only male kin. To that extent, the relationships may be read
down to include their gender-neutral corresponding parts.
Sections 4(c), (d) Conditions
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
relating to solemnisation of
relating to the solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two persons
special marriages
may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the following
conditions are fulfilled, namely: -
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age
of eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a
marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding
that they are within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
Section 12 Place and form of
(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the Marriage Officer, or at
solemnization
such other place within a reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may
desire, and upon such conditions and the payment of such additional fees as may
be prescribed.
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose
to adopt : Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties
unless each party says to the other in the presence of the Marriage Officer and
the three witnesses and in any language understood by the parties,-' (A),
take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband)"
Section 15 Registration
of
Any marriage celebrated, whether before or after the commencement of this Act,
marriages celebrated in other
other than a marriage solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of
forms
1872), or under this Act, may be registered under this Chapter by a Marriage
Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely: - (a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the
parties and they have been living together as husband and wife ever since
Section
22
Restitution
of
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse,
Conjugal Rights
withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply by
petition to the district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on
being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that
there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Section 23 Judicial Separation
(1) A petition for judicial separation may be presented to the district court either
by the husband or the wife
Section 25 Voidable marriages
Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be voidable and may be annulled
by a decree of nullity if, -
(iii) the consent of either party to the marriage was obtained by coercion or
fraud, as defined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872):
Provided further that in the case specified in clause (iii), the court shall not grant
a decree if,
(a) proceedings have not been instituted within one year after the coercion had
ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or
(b) the petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with the other party to
the marriage as husband and wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the case
may be, the fraud had been discovered.
Section 27 Divorce
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a
petition for divorce may be presented to the district court either by the
husband or the wife on the ground that the respondent-
Section 44 Punishment of Bigamy
Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, during the
lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts any other marriage shall be
subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), for the offence of marrying again during the lifetime of
a husband or wife, and the marriage so contracted shall be void.
Second Schedule Notice of
May be read down to the extent that it uses 'widower' and 'widow'.
Intended Marriage
Third Schedule Declaration to be
May be read down to the extent that it uses 'bridegroom', 'bride', 'widow',
Made by the Bridegroom
'widower'.
Declaration to be Made by the
Bride
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
TRANSFER CASE (CIVIL) NO. 12/2023
In the Matter of:
Zainab Patel Petitioner
V.
Union of India and Anr Respondents
Table of Contents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
INTRODUCTION
SUBMISSIONS
I. THE CONSTITUTIONAL SCHEME AS APPLICABLE TO MARRIAGE
[A] Fundamental Right to Choose a Partner Under Article 21
[B] Choice of Partner and Self-Defined Gender Identity are a Form of Expression Protected by Article 19
[C] Article 14 provides for the Right to Equality before law to all citizens, irrespective of their gender or sexual
orientation
[D] Transgender Persons have a Right against Discrimination Under Articles 15 and 16
11. DEFINITION OF TRANSGENDER AND IMPACT OF THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF
RIGHTS) ACT, 2019
[A] The Right to Marry is Enjoined by the TG Act, 2019
111. THE UNION'S CLASSIFICATION BETWEEN 'BIOLOGICAL' AND TRANSGENDER PERSONS IN ITS
COUNTER- AFFIDAVIT IS UNTENABLE
IV. MATRIMONIAL STATUTES OUGHT TO BE INTERPRETED PURPOSIVELY
CONCLUSION
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
TRANSFER CASE (CIVIL) NO. 12/2023
In the Matter of:
Zainab Patel
Petitioner
V.
Union of India and Anr
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
1016. The Petitioner has moved this Hon'ble Court seeking the following reliefs:
a. Issue a writ, order, or declaration in the nature of a declaration under Article 226 of the Constitution of India that
the right to marry a person of one's choice under Article 21 of the Constitution of India applies with full force to
transgender and other LGBT persons;
b. Issue a writ, order, or declaration in the nature of mandamus under Article 226 of the Constitution of India directing
the Respondent to recognize the Petitioner's civil union under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969;
C. Issue a writ, order, or declaration in the nature of a declaration under Article 226 of the Constitution of India that
the provisions of matrimonial statutes including the rules and regulations framed thereunder, to the extent that they
are construed as requiring one 'male' or 'bridegroom' and one 'female' or 'bride' for the solemnization of marriage be
read as neutral as to gender identity and sexual orientation;
d. Issue a writ of mandamus declaring that all marriages between couples in which either one or both partners are
transgender or gender non-conforming or who otherwise do not identify with the sex assigned to them at birth, may
be solemnized under matrimonial statutes regardless of their gender identity and sexual orientation; and
e. Any other Order as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and necessary in the interest of justice.
1017. By way of an amendment application proposed to be filed in the subject case, the Petitioner seeks to
incorporate a prayer in addition and as an alternative to the aforementioned prayers, which is reproduced herein:
"Alternatively, if the matrimonial statutes being Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, Section 4 of the
Special Marriage Act, 1954 and Section 4 of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 are to be SO construed as excluding
marriage of transgender, gender non-conforming and same sex couples, declare the statutes as unconstitutional,
being discriminatory and a violation of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India."
INTRODUCTION
1018. The Petitioner was born in Mumbai in a conservative Catholic family on 14.01.1981 and was assigned male
sex at birth. From an early age, the Petitioner identified as a woman and sought to express herself in her preferred
gender identity. Her attempts at self-expression were met with backlash and stigma from her family as well as society,
causing her to become depressed to the point where she became suicidal in her adolescent years. On one occasion,
she was admitted to KEM Hospital, Mumbai after she ingested poison. Following this incident, the Petitioner left her
family home and started living separately in search of work and a community of people who could understand, accept
and support her. In her time of struggle, the Petitioner had also resorted to begging on the streets for survival.
1019. Despite facing hardships and suffering from an early age, the Petitioner was able to overcome such hurdles
and went on to become a leading HR professional and a renowned activist for the rights of transgender persons. She
is
a member of the National Council for Transgender Persons under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
appointed vide Gazette Notification dated 21.08.2020 bearing S.O. No. 2849(E) constituted under Section 16 (i) of the
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. The Petitioner has worked for multiple organizations working on
LGBTQ issues including the "Humsafar Trust" and "Avert". The Petitioner has also worked nationally as well as
internationally with UNDP and is at present employed with KPMG, India as Director for Inclusion and Diversity.
1020. The Petitioner met her partner on 06.12.2012 when she was 30 years old, and by the beginning of 2013,
they had started a long-term committed and loving relationship. She and her husband/spouse entered into a civil
union on 14.01.2016 in South Africa. As India does not recognize same-sex civil unions or marriages, the Petitioner
did not seek registration of her civil union in India at that time.
1021. The Petitioner thereafter underwent a gender reaffirming surgery in 2017, and legally changed her name and
gender. The Petitioner took her spouse's name, and added her spouse and his family to her medical insurance which
she continues to this date.
1022. However, as the marriage of the Petitioner was not recognized in India, she faced many hurdles in accessing
State benefits and services and suffered discrimination from government officials and due to discriminatory policies.
For example, when the Petitioner sought to change her name and gender in her passport by informing the concerned
officials at the Regional Passport Office (RPO) that she had entered into a civil union in South Africa, the RPO officials
advised her to write that she was single in her application and declined to accept her certificate of civil union on
record. Consequently, her passport does not carry her husband's name which created difficulties whenever she tried to
obtain spousal visas for her husband/partner to accompany her on travels.
1023. Thereafter, in 2020, the Petitioner separated from her husband/partner. However, she still enjoys a cordial
relationship with him and her in-laws and even extends medical insurance to them. The failure of the Respondent to
recognize the Petitioner's relationship has created legal impediments for the Petitioner to enjoy a matrimonial
relationship and has also placed emotional, financial and social strain upon her relationship. The Petitioner is prevented
from full and free self-expression on account of non-recognition of her union.
SUBMISSIONS
1. THE CONSTITUTIONAL SCHEME AS APPLICABLE TO MARRIAGE
[A] Fundamental Right to Choose a Partner Under Article 21
a.
A fundamental aspect of the right to live with dignity and with personal liberty under Article 21 of the
Constitution is the right to choose one's partner free from coercion or fear of reprisal. This facet of the right(s)
flowing from Article 21 have been elucidated in a catena of judgements and apply to persons of all genders with
held that gender and sexuality cannot form the basis of lawful discrimination in so far as rights flowing from
Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21 are concerned. It was held as under:
82. Article 14 has used the expression "person" and the Article 15 has used the expression "citizen" and "sex"
SO also Article 16. Article 19 has also used the expression "citizen". Article 21 has used the expression "person".
All these expressions, which are "gender neutral" evidently refer to human-beings. Hence, they take within their
sweep Hijras/Transgenders and are not as such limited to male or female gender. Gender identity as already
indicated forms the core of one's personal self, based on self-identification, not on surgical or medical procedure.
Gender identity, in our view, is an integral part of sex and no citizen can be discriminated on the ground of
gender identity, including those who identify as third gender.
b. Therefore, there can be no quarrel with the proposition that the rights assured under Article 21 of the
Constitution will extend to all persons including transgender persons. The State is therefore obligated to assure
these rights and, further, any provision or statute that cannot be read in consonance with Article 21, would be
ultra-vires.
C. In this context, some pertinent, recent pronouncements recognising the right to marry a person of one's choice
as an integral part of the bundle of rights under Article 21 of the Constitution are enumerated in subsequent
paragraphs.
humiliation at the hands of both private persons and by the criminal justice system on account of her inter-caste
marriage. This Hon'ble Court was pleased to uphold the right of a citizen who had attained majority, to marry
whoever she likes:
14. This case reveals a shocking state of affairs. There is no dispute that the petitioner is a major and was at
all relevant times a major. Hence she is free to marry anyone she likes or live with anyone she likes.
17. This is a free and democratic country, and once a person becomes a major he or she can marry
whosoever he/she likes.
e.
individual is a constitutionally protected right falling under Article 21 of the Constitution and is a part of the
freedoms guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. In Para 323 of the majority judgment authored by Justice
DY Chandrachud, Privacy was held to include:
"at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of family life, marriage, procreation,
the home and sexual orientation. Privacy also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards individual
autonomy and recognises the ability of the individual to control vital aspects of his or her life. Personal choices
governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy. Privacy protects heterogeneity and recognises the plurality and
diversity of our culture."
[Emphasis supplied]
f. A Petition filed in Public Interest by "Shakti Vahini" seeking directions to the State and Central Government to
combat honour crimes, led to the judgment of a three judge bench in Shakti Vahini V. Union of India, (2018) 7
together, this choice has protection under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. This Hon'ble Court held that the
right to choose one's life partner:
"has the sanction of the Constitutional Law and once that is recognised, the said right needs to be protected
and it cannot succumb to the conception of class honour or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion
that remotely does not have any legitimacy." [Para 43]
g. This Hon'ble Court in Para 44 of the aforesaid judgment held that a right to life and liberty is meaningful when
individual dignity and choice of life partner are also assured and further stated in Para 45:
45. The choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there
is erosion of choice. True it is, the same is bound by the principle of constitutional limitation but in the absence
of such limitation, none, we mean, no one shall be permitted to interfere in the fructification of the said choice. If
the right to express one's own choice is obstructed, it would be extremely difficult to think of dignity in its
sanctified completeness. When two adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they consummate
their relationship; they feel that it is their goal and they have the right to do SO. And it can unequivocally be
stated that they have the right and any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation.
h.
In Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M (2018) 16 SC 368), this Hon'ble Court was approached under its Criminal
Appellate jurisdiction against Orders passed by the Kerala High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution,
pertaining to the marriage of one "Hadiya" with Shafin Jahan. The Hon'ble High Court had directed an inquiry
into Shafin Jahan's antecedents and directed that the marriage certificate not be issued by the concerned
authority and later held the marriage to be a sham. This was in spite of the assertion of the spouses that the
marriage was contracted by choice. This Hon'ble Court held that the approach of the High Court was not in
consonance with principles governing the issuance of habeas corpus writs, which are concerned only with
ensuring that no one is deprived of their liberty without legal sanction. In an important elucidation of the right to
choose a partner under Article 21, the Court held:
86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. This right cannot be taken away except through a law which is substantively and
procedurally fair, just and reasonable. Intrinsic to the liberty which the Constitution guarantees as a fundamental
right is the ability of each individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness.
The
Constitution protects the ability of each individual to pursue a way of life or faith to which she or he seeks to
adhere. Matters of dress and of food, of ideas and ideologies, of love and partnership are within the central
aspects of identity. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional compliance) the conditions of a valid
marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be ended or annulled. These remedies are
available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on whether they should accept each other into a
marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to play in determining our choice of
partners.
[Emphasis added]
i. It is submitted that the State must not, and indeed cannot formulate and implement laws that facilitate the
fundamental rights of only a certain section of society, while depriving other sections of the same. Such an
exercise is violative of Part 111 of the Constitution, and goes against the root of fundamental rights therein, i.e.,
the right to equality and the right against discrimination.
j. In Shafin Jahan (supra), this Hon'ble Court further relied upon Justice K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union Of India, (2017)
on matters close to one's life is an inviolable aspect of the human personality" In K.S. Puttaswamy (supra), this
Hon'ble Court held as under:
"298. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life.
The intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom of thought, the
freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination The family, marriage, procreation
and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual.
j. Shafin Jahan and Shakti Vahini were relied upon in Navtej Singh Johan V. Union of India (AIR 2018 SC 4321) to
hold that the "right to sexual intimacy" includes "the individual's right to the choice of partner as well as the
freedom to decide on the nature of the relationship that the individual wishes to pursue". Further, the Court held
that every individual has a right to a union under Article 21 of the Constitution, which was interpreted as
companionship in every sense of the word; physical, emotional, mental or sexual, and not just union of marriage:
167. The above authorities capture the essence of the right to privacy. There can be no doubt that an
individual also has a right to a union under Article 21 of the Constitution. When we say union, we do not mean
the union of marriage, though marriage is a union. As a concept, union also means companionship in every sense
of the word, be it physical, mental, sexual or emotional. The LGBT community is seeking realisation of its basic
right to companionship, SO long as such a companionship is consensual, free from the vice of deceit, force,
coercion and does not result in violation of the fundamental rights of others.
k.
The decision of this Hon'ble Court in inter alia Shafin Jahan is in consonance with International Covenants, to
which India is a signatory. The protections and elucidation of rights of persons contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
enjoin a duty upon the State to, firstly, not interfere with the right of a person to marry and have a family as per
their choice and, secondly, to protect the familial rights of all persons without discrimination on the basis of inter
alia sexuality, race, religion.
I. Pertinently, Article 16 of the UDHR, states as under:
(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry
and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
(3) The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and
the State.
m.
It has been clarified that Article 16 of the UDHR is not restricted to marriage between heterosexual persons
alone, but also applies to all formulations of family, including marriage between same-sex persons.
n. The opening words of the UDHR, that "All persons are born free and equal in dignity and rights" will govern the
interpretation of subsequent Articles, including Article 16, as was clarified in a fact sheet issued by the Office of
the High Commissioner of Human Rights, United Nations in May, 2017. Therefore, equal rights of marriage
elucidated under Article 16 UDHR will apply with equal force in the case of transgender persons. Therefore, the
opening phrase of Article 16 which refers to "Men and Women" must be read to include LGBT persons and is not
limiting in nature.
O. It is respectfully submitted that matrimonial statutes in India must similarly be read as inclusive of all gender
identities and sexualities, in view of authoritative pronouncements of this Hon'ble Court in NALSA and Navtej
Johar. Such a reading is necessary to ensure that the said statutes pass muster on the touchstone of
Fundamental Rights under Part 111 of the Constitution.
p. Indeed, courts across the country, as well as State Policies and welfare schemes, have recognised and accorded
equal status to unions between LGBTQ persons. A necessary corollary of the right to self-identify gender is to
then be able to express personal preference in terms of choice of partner, and, therefore a marriage entered into
by a transgender person must be fully recognised by the State.
q.
The Madras High Court in Arunkumar V. Inspector General of Registration (AIR 2019 Mad 265, paragraphs 4 &
16) held that every person has a right to self-identify one's own gender and thus the expression 'bride' occurring
in Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 will have to include not only a woman but also a transgender
woman. The Hon'ble Madras High Court held that the state could not disallow gender expression, and a marriage
solemnized between a male and a transwoman who are both Hindus is valid under the Hindu Marriage Act:
4. / am unable to agree with the stand of the learned Government Advocate appearing for the respondents 1
to 3. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner, the issue on hand is no
India), the Hon'ble Supreme Court upheld the transgender persons' right to decide their self identified gender.
The central and State governments were directed to grant legal recognition of their gender identity such as male,
female or third gender. This path breaking judgment has been cited with approval in the Nine Judges Bench of
Union of India)
16. Seen in the light of the march of law, the expression "bride" occurring in Section 5 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 will have to include within its meaning not only a woman but also a transwoman.
It would also include an intersex person/transgender person who identifies herself as a woman. The
only consideration is how the person perceives herself. (Emphasis supplied)
r. In S. Sushma V. V. Commissioner of Police [W.P. No. 7248 of 2021], the Hon'ble Madras High Court was seized of
a writ petition filed by a lesbian couple seeking protection from coercive action by the police pursuant to missing
person FIRs lodged by each of their parents, who did not accept their relationship. In a radical and alternative
approach, the Court urged the parents of the petitioners to undergo counselling to help them come to terms with
their daughters' sexuality and choice of partner. Hon'ble Justice Anand Venkatesh himself went to counselling,
having admitted a lack of exposure or personal experience that limited his understanding of homosexuality. The
Hon'ble Judge acknowledged his own prejudice and undertook a journey towards substantively changing his
mindset, albeit the rights of the Petitioners had already been assured by the judgment of this Hon'ble Court in
Navtej Johan (supra).
S. The Hon'ble Madras High Court in S. Sushma (supra) held as under:
"38. After the decision in Navtej Singh Johar (cited supra), it is no longer open to doubt that Article 21 of the
Constitution protects and guarantees to all individuals, complete autonomy over the most intimate decisions to
their personal life, including their choice of partners. Such choices are protected by Article 21 of the Constitution
as the right to life and liberty encompasses the right to sexual autonomy and freedom of expression. That apart,
sexual autonomy is an essential aspect of the right of privacy which is another right recognised and protected
under Article 21 of the Constitution. LGBTQIA+ persons, like cis persons, are entitled to their privacy and have a
right to lead a dignified existence, which includes their choice of sexual orientation, gender identity, gender
presentation, gender expression and choice of partner thereof. This right and the manner of its exercise are
constitutionally protected under Article 21 of the Constitution. Furthermore, the enactment of the Transgender
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 is a clear pointer that Parliament has recognized varying forms of sexual
identity. This is clear from the definition of transgender in Section 2(k) which is defined to mean "a person whose
gender does not match with the gender assigned to that person at birth and includes trans-man or trans-woman
(whether or not such person has undergone Sex Reassignment Surgery or hormone therapy or laser therapy or
such other therapy), person with intersex variations, genderqueer and person having such socio-cultural
identities as kinner, hijra, aravani and jogta. Under these circumstances, this Court, as the sentinel on the qui
vive, must exercise its jurisdiction to protect the rights of the petitioners, which are constitutionally guaranteed
under Articles 14, 15 and 21."
The Court proceeded to issue guidelines to the police and other State Authorities for the protection of LGBTQ
couples and to spread awareness and ameliorate sex and sexuality-based prejudice and discrimination.
seized of a petition filed under 482 CrPC seeking police protection where the petitioner was in love with Janifer, a
transgender person older to him in age and got married to her on 25.07.2018. The petitioner's parents and some
persons belonging to a political outfit were harassing and threatening the Petitioner. The Hon'ble Madras High
Court while granting police protection to the couple and after placing on record its profound appreciation to the
petitioner for his courage in coming forward to marry a transgender person has held as under:
instrumentalities of the State should encourage inter-caste and inter-religious marriage and give the couples
sufficient police protection. This Court is of the view that, to the said list, the marriage with transgender also
deserves to be included for police protection. Accordingly, this Court directs the petitioner to submit a
representation to the 1 respondent and on such representation being given, the 1 respondent is directed to
conduct enquiry and ensure that no harm befalls the petitioner and his wife.
a certificate of Gender Dysphoria. The petitioner and his partner had attained the age of majority and had
decided to stay together and be life partners. The petitioner contended that even assuming that a same-sex
couple who is living together in a 'live-in relationship' is not competent to enter into wedlock, they still have the
right to live together outside the wedlock. The family members of the petitioner's partner were going to forcibly
arrange her marriage with someone else, even though the petitioner's partner had categorically and emphatically
stated that she wants to join the petitioner without any further delay. The Hon'ble Orissa High Court while
allowing the writ petition, held that the petitioner has the right of self-determination of sex/gender and also has
the right to have a live-in relationship with a person of his choice even though such person may belong to the
same gender as the petitioner. The Hon'ble Orissa High Court observed that:
"10. From the Yogyakarta principles, it is evident that all humans have the universal right of enjoyment of
human rights, right to equality and non-discrimination, the right to recognition before the law, right to life, the
right to privacy and right to treatment with humanity while in detention etc. It was also repealed that all forms of
crime that have the purpose or effect of prohibiting consensual sexual activity among persons of the same sex,
who are over the age of consent and, until such provisions are repealed, never impose the death penalty on any
person convicted under them; remit sentences of death and release all those currently waiting execution for
crimes relating to consensual sexual activity among persons who are over the age of consent.
11. The recognition of one's gender identity lies at the heart of the fundamental right to dignity. Gender
constitutes the core of one's sense of being as well as an integral part of a person's identity: legal recognition of
gender identity is, therefore, part of the right to dignity and freedom guaranteed under the Constitution. The
personal autonomy includes both the negative right of not to be subject to interference by others and positive
rights of individuals to make decisions about their life, to express himself and to choose what activity take part
in. Self Determination of gender is an integral part of personal autonomy and self expression and falls within the
realm of personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. The most important gift to the common
person given by the Constitution is fundamental rights which may also be called Human Rights. The concept of
equality in Article 14 and also the meaning of words life, liberty and law in Article 21 has been considerably
enlarged by judicial decision. Anything, which is not reasonable, just and fair, is not treated equally and is,
therefore, violative of Article 14.
13. There is hardly any scope to take a view other than holding that the petitioner has the right of self-
determination of sex/gender and also he has the right to have a live-in relationship with a person of his choice
even though such person may belong to the same gender as the petitioner.
14. Therefore, we allow the writ application (criminal) and direct that the petitioner and the daughter of the
Opposite Party No. 5 have the right to decide their sexual preferences including the right to stay as live-in
partners. The Opposite Party No. 2 to clear the way by taking appropriate administrative/police action to facilitate
Rashmi to join the society of the petitioner.
petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus filed by the sister of a transgender man, wherein the petitioner had
sought directions to produce the person or body of her brother. The Hon'ble Madras High Court noted the
submissions of the Ld. Additional Public Prosecutor that the detenu had become a major on 30.11.2020, and also
acknowledged and recognised the wishes of the detenu, who on being produced before this Hon'ble Court on
10.12.2020, stated that he had joined with another transgender person of his own volition and was residing with
them and had no wish to join with the petitioner. Hence the writ petition was dismissed.
W.
The Hon'ble Patna High Court in Veera Yadav V. The Chief Secretary, Government of Bihar (CW No. 5627 of
2020) tried to define the nature of the duty cast upon the State to assimilate the members of the transgender
community into the mainstream of society and, reduce, progressively, and eliminate discrimination against the
transgender community. It was held that the State is under a constitutional as well as statutory obligation to
protect the transgender community from the pervasive discrimination that the members of transgender
community are facing. As citizens of India, transgender persons have all rights under the golden triangle of the
Indian Constitution, i.e. Articles 14, 19 and 21, as recognized by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra), and a duty
is cast upon the State by judgments, statute and international instruments to to give full effect to such rights.
The Hon'ble Court further held that beneficial treatment to persons of the transgender community extends
beyond employment opportunities and welfare measures, and it is the duty of the State to root out
discrimination within general public through awareness, sensitization programmes, educational reforms and
training.
X. Recently, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Vithal Manik Khatri V. Sagar Sanjay Kamble, Crl. W.P. No. 4037 of
2021 decided on 16.03.2023, interpreted the definition of aggrieved persons under the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (DV Act) in broadest possible terms to include a transgender woman. In the
instant case, the respondent had converted her gender from Transgender to female by performing surgery. Later,
she got married to the Petitioner, however due to differences, the respondent filed an application under the DV
Act along with an application seeking interim maintenance and the same was granted by the concerned court.
Feeling aggrieved by the grant of maintenance, the Petitioner moved the Hon'ble Bombay High Court submitting
that the respondent does not fall within the definition of aggrieved person as such right has been conferred on
"women" in a domestic relationship. Dismissing the said submission, the Hon'ble High Court relied on NALSA and
held as follows:
"11.
India. Therefore, while interpreting the definition of aggrieved persons in tune with the object and
purpose of the Act, such definition needs to be interpreted with the broadest possible terms. The word
'woman' in section 2(a) is no more limited to the binary of women and men and includes the
transgender person also who has changed her sex in tune with her gender characteristics. Therefore,
in my opinion, the Transgender who has performed surgery to change gender to a female, needs to be
termed as an aggrieved person within the meaning of Section 2(a) of the Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
It is, therefore, held that a person who has exercised his right to decide the self-identified gender of women is an
aggrieved person within the meaning of Section 2(a) of the Domestic Violence Act, 2005. (Emphasis supplied)
Thus, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court not only recognised the right to self-determined genden identity but
also the marital union of a transgender person as well as the rights that flow thereof.
y. The aforesaid pronouncements recognise the right of all persons, including transgender persons, to choose their
partner. Further, recognition and constitutional protection has been accorded by the Courts to same-sex unions.
A further, necessary step for the implementation of the law as enunciated by the judgements of this Hon'ble
Court in NALSA and Navtej Singh Johar is to accord recognition and protection to all manner of unions through
marriage, a state recognised institution which assures a bundle of rights to persons and families.
Z. In a landmark decision, the Constitutional Court of South Africa held in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie [2005]
ZACC 19 that same-sex couples have a constitutional right to marry. The Court deliberated on the importance
and impact of marriage, and elucidated the bundle of rights that flow from formalization of marriages. The court
unanimously held:
[69] It should be added that formalisation of marriages provides for valuable public documentation. The
parties are identified, the dates of celebration and dissolution are stipulated, and all the multifarious and socially
important steps which the public administration is required to make in connection with children and forward
planning, are facilitated. Furthermore, the commitment of the parties to fulfil their responsibilities is solemnly
and publicly undertaken. This is particularly important in imposing clear legal duties on the party who is in the
stronger position economically. Marriage stabilises relationships by protecting the vulnerable partner and
introducing equity and security into the relationship.
[71] The exclusion of same-sex couples from the benefits and responsibilities of marriage, accordingly, is not
a small and tangential inconvenience resulting from a few surviving relics of societal prejudice destined to
evaporate like the morning dew. It represents a harsh if oblique statement by the law that same-sex couples are
outsiders, and that their need for affirmation and protection of their intimate relations as human beings is
somehow less than that of heterosexual couples. It reinforces the wounding notion that they are to be treated as
biological oddities, as failed or lapsed human beings who do not fit into normal society, and, as such, do not
qualify for the full moral concern and respect that our Constitution seeks to secure for everyone. It signifies that
their capacity for love, commitment and accepting responsibility is by definition less worthy of regard than that
of heterosexual couples.
[72] It should be noted that the intangible damage to same-sex couples is as severe as the material
deprivation. To begin with, they are not entitled to celebrate their commitment to each other in a joyous public
event recognised by the law. They are obliged to live in a state of legal blankness in which their unions remain
unmarked by the showering of presents and the commemoration of anniversaries so celebrated in our culture. It
may be that, as the literature suggests, many same-sex couples would abjure mimicking or subordinating
themselves to heterosexual norms. Others might wish to avoid what they consider the routinisation and
commercialisation of their most intimate and personal relationships, and accordingly not seek marriage or its
equivalence. 82 Yet what is in issue is not the decision to be taken, but the choice that is available. If
heterosexual couples have the option of deciding whether to marry or not, so should same-sex
couples have the choice as whether to seek to achieve a status and a set of entitlements and
responsibilities on a par with those enjoyed by heterosexual couples. It follows that, given the
centrality attributed to marriage and its consequences in our culture, to deny same-sex couples a
choice in this respect is to negate their right to self-definition in a most profound way.
[73] Equally important as far as family law is concerned, is the right of same-sex couples to fall back
upon state regulation when things go wrong in their relationship. Bipolar by its very nature, the law of
marriage is invoked both at moments of blissful creation and at times of sad cessation. There is nothing to
suggest that same-sex couples are any less affected than are heterosexual ones by the emotional and material
consequences of a rupture of their union. The need for comprehensive judicial regulation of their
separation or divorce, or of devolution of property, or rights to maintenance or continuation of
tenancy after death, is no different. Again, what requires legal attention concerns both status and
practical regulation. [Emphasis Supplied]
aa. Almost ten years later, the Supreme Court of the United States in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S 644 held
that state bans on same-sex marriage and on recognizing same-sex marriages duly performed in other
jurisdictions are unconstitutional under the due process and equal protection clauses of the Fourteenth
Amendment to the US Constitution. The same is of relevance to Indian Constitutional jurisprudence as Article 21
forbids the deprivation of life and liberty "except according to procedure established by law," analogous to the
"due process" required under American Constitutional Law. Equal protection under the Indian Constitution
Scheme would necessitate an examination of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution, discussed in subsequent
sections.
bb. Apart from enumerating the social, political and economic importance of the institution of marriage, the
United States Supreme Court linked the crucial fundamental right of individual autonomy with marriage in
Obergefell (supra). The Court justified the need for protection of same-sex marriages and held as under:
A first premise of the Court's relevant precedents is that the right to personal choice regarding marriage is
inherent in the concept of individual autonomy.
Choices about marriage shape an individual's destiny. As the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts has
explained, because "it fulfils yearnings for security, safe haven, and connection that express our common
humanity, civil marriage is an esteemed institution, and the decision whether and whom to marry is among
life's momentous acts of self-definition.' Goodridge, 440 Mass., at 322, 798 N.E. 2d, at 955.
The nature of marriage is that, through its enduring bond, two persons together can find other
freedoms, such as expression, intimacy, and spirituality. This is true for all persons, whatever their
sexual orientation. There is dignity in the bond between two men or two women who seek to marry and in
their autonomy to make such profound choices. Cf. Loving, supra, at 12 ("[T]he freedom to marry, or not
marry, a person of another race resides with the individual and cannot be infringed by the State").
A second principle in this Court's jurisprudence is that the right to marry is fundamental because it
supports a two-person union unlike any other in its importance to the committed individuals. This point was
central to Griswold V. Connecticut, which held the Constitution protects the right of married couples to use
contraception. 381 U. S., at 485.
A third basis for protecting the right to marry is that it safeguards children and families and thus
draws meaning from related rights of childrearing, procreation, and education. See Pierce V. Society of
Sisters 268 U.S. 510 (1925); Meyer, 262 U. S., at 399. The Court has recognized these connections by
describing the varied rights as a unified whole: "[T]he right to 'marry, establish a home and bring up children"
is a central part of the liberty protected by the Due Process Clause." Zablocki, 434 U. S., at 384 (quoting
Meyer, supra, at 399). Under the laws of the several States, some of marriage's protections for children and
families are material. But marriage also confers more profound benefits. By giving recognition and legal
structure to their parents' relationship, marriage allows children "to understand the integrity and closeness of
their own family and its concord with other families in their community and in their daily lives." Windsor,
supra, at (slip op., at 23). Marriage also affords the permanency and stability important to children's best
interests. See Brief for Scholars of the Constitutional Rights of Children as Amici Curiae 22 27.
CC. The importance of marriage in Indian society needs no enumeration, and the decision and reasoning of the
South African Constitutional Court as well as of the United States Supreme Court are both exceedingly relevant
and persuasive in the Indian Context. As a first step, recognition of marriages that "break the mould" is crucial
as a bundle of rights and legal remedies would flow therefrom, including for the protection of the family as
a
unit. In fact, State recognition, normalisation and formalization of marriage by and between LGBTQ persons is
necessary for full, integrated citizenship and for the protection of the family unit, including the well-being of
children if any.
dd. It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kattukandi Edathil Krishnan V. Kattukandi Eathil Valsan, AIR
2022 SC 2841 that long cohabitation gives rise to a presumption of marriage and any children born out of such
union would be presumed to be legitimate, and the same ought to be true for same-sex couples and couples
where one or both partners are transgender, however due to non-recognition, such couples and their children
could arbitrarily be deprived of their rights.
ee. As elucidated by the Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, family law
also protects and regulates the consequences of the failure of such marriages, be it due to separation, divorce or
death, by providing for rights and regulations relating to, amongst others, devolution of property, custody, right
to maintenance and alimony, inheritance, and continuation of tenancy after death. If marriages where both
partners are of the same sex, or either or both partners are gender non-conforming, are not given legal
recognition, it would lead to increased vulnerability, uncertainty of status of such persons and also create an
impractical situation where the rights and obligations of an arbitrarily decided class of persons in consensual and
loving marriages are completely unregulated and unprotected.
ff. Over 32 countries worldwide, including Mexico, Taiwan, United Kingdom, Canada accord complete
recognition to marriages between persons of the same sex. The right to found a family and marry a person of
choice, be they from the same sex or a different sex, is well-established by reference to international law. Given
the pronouncements of this Hon'ble Court discussed above and noting the evolution of international law in so far
as sexual autonomy, gender self-determination, and same-sex marriage, it is submitted that the State can no
longer deny recognition and protection to marriages and unions between any two persons, regardless of the
sexual orientation and gender/sexual identity of the participants.
gg. Principle 24 of Yogyakarta Principles recognises the valuable "Right to Found a Family", and states as
under:
Right to Found a Family
Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Families exist
in diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or gender
identity of any of its members.
The Yogyakarta Principles have been upheld and relied upon by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA and Johar
(supra) and are in conformity with Constitutional Principles. As a first step to following this principle as well,
the option to contract a legally valid marriage must be available to all persons.
hh. In fact, in NALSA (supra), this Hon'ble Court held that, given the unfortunate absence of legislation
protecting the rights of transgender persons, India is obligated to follow international laws and conventions to
ameliorate discrimination faced by the community in various spheres of public and private life. It was held in
Para 53 as under:
53. The Indian law, on the whole, only recognises the paradigm of binary genders of male and female,
based on a person's sex assigned by birth, which permits gender system, including the law relating to
marriage, adoption, inheritance, succession and taxation and welfare legislations. We have exhaustively
referred to various articles contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 1966 as well as the Yogyakarta Principles. Reference was also made to the legislations enacted in other
countries dealing with rights of persons of transgender community. Unfortunately, we have no legislation in
this country dealing with the rights of transgender community. Due to the absence of suitable legislation
protecting the rights of the members of the transgender community, they are facing discrimination in various
areas and hence the necessity to follow the international conventions to which India is a party and to give due
respect to other non-binding international conventions and principles. The Constitution-makers could not have
envisaged that each and every human activity be guided, controlled, recognised or safeguarded by laws made
by the legislature. Article 21 has been incorporated to safeguard those rights and a constitutional court cannot
be a mute spectator when those rights are violated, but is expected to safeguard those rights knowing the
pulse and feeling of that community, though a minority, especially when their rights have gained universal
recognition and acceptance.
ii. It is submitted that, from the pronouncement in NALSA, the following principles emerge : Firstly, if there
was any contradictory Indian law in existence, the Courts may be bound to follow the same over international
treaties and covenants. However, in the case of matrimonial law relating to transgender persons, there is no
contradictory law of the land and International treaties to which India is a signatory as well as foreign case law
cited in Indian jurisprudence have to be followed. Secondly, the pronouncements of this Hon'ble Court in relation
to the absolute right under Article 21 to choose a partner in marriage will apply will equal force irrespective of
the genden identity and sexual orientation of the spouses and, to save existing matrimonial laws from the vice of
unconstitutionality, they must be interpreted in a manner that accommodates non-conforming marriages as well.
In the alternative, if the matrimonial statutes are to be so construed as excluding marriages of transgender,
genden non-conforming and same sex couples, such statutes ought to be declared as unconstitutional being
discriminatory and a violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
jj. This Hon'ble Court has previously been pleased to issue guidelines in cases where there existed a lacuna to
241 addressed the importance of judicial legislation and of issuing guidelines where there was a gap in the law
and held that international conventions that were not inconsistent with Indian law should be read into such
guidelines, to enlarge their meaning and content. Additionally, this Hon'ble Court made a reference to the Beijing
Statement of Principles of the Independence of the Judiciary in the LAWASIA region, which were accepted by the
Chief Justices of Asia and the Pacific at Beijing in 1995 as a reminder for the scope of intervention and powers
under Article 32 of the Constitution, particularly to give effect to the full spectrum of rights enshrined within the
right to life, liberty and dignity:
3 Right to life means life with dignity. The primary responsibility for ensuring such safety and dignity
through suitable legislation, and the creation of a mechanism for its enforcement, is of the legislature and the
executive. When, however, instances of sexual harassment resulting in violation of fundamental rights of
women workers under Articles 14, 19 and 21 are brought before us for redress under Article 32, an effective
redressal requires that some guidelines should be laid down for the protection of these rights to fill the
legislative vacuum.
7. In the absence of domestic law occupying the field, to formulate effective measures to check the evil of
sexual harassment of working women at all workplaces, the contents of international conventions and norms
are significant for the purpose of interpretation of the guarantee of gender equality, right to work with human
dignity in Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution and the safeguards against sexual harassment
implicit therein. Any international convention not inconsistent with the fundamental rights and in harmony
with its spirit must be read into these provisions to enlarge the meaning and content thereof, to promote the
object of the constitutional guarantee. This is implicit from Article 51(c) and the enabling power of Parliament
to enact laws for implementing the international conventions and norms by virtue of Article 253 read with
Entry 14 of the Union List in Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.
11. The obligation of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for the enforcement of these
fundamental rights in the absence of legislation must be viewed along with the role of judiciary envisaged in
the Beijing Statement of Principles of the Independence of the Judiciary in the LAWASIA region. The
objectives of the judiciary mentioned in the Beijing Statement are:
"Objectives of the Judiciary:
10. The objectives and functions of the Judiciary include the following:
(a) to ensure that all persons are able to live securely under the rule of law;
(b) to promote, within the proper limits of the judicial function, the observance and the attainment of
human rights; and
(c) to administer the law impartially among persons and between persons and the State."
conventions such as the UDHR, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966; and statutes such as
the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act and international judgments and issued a list of 11 guidelines regarding the
arrest of a person which were to be followed by the police before proceeding to an arrest, which guidelines were
hitherto unknown in Indian law.
II. It is submitted that the nature of law, the Constitution and the rights guaranteed by it do not exist in silos
and they co-exist harmoniously to strengthen each other. In Puttuswamy, this Hon'ble Court held:
291. Having noticed this, the evolution of Article 21, since the decision in Cooper [Rustom Cavasjee Cooper
longer regarded as isolated silos or watertight compartments. In consequence, Article 14 has been held to
animate the content of Article 21. Second, the expression "procedure established by law" in Article 21 does
not connote a formalistic requirement of a mere presence of procedure in enacted law. That expression has
been held to signify the content of the procedure and its quality which must be fair, just and reasonable. The
mere fact that the law provides for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is not sufficient to conclude its
validity and the procedure to be constitutionally valid must be fair, just and reasonable..
SC 27 : 1950 SCR 88] which held the field in M.P. Sharma [M.P. Sharma V. Satish Chandra, AIR 1954 SC
300 : 1954 Cri LJ 865 : 1954 SCR 1077] time, rights and demand to be read as overlapping rather than in
silos, SO that Part 111 is now conceived as a constellation of harmonious and mutually reinforcing guarantees.
Part 111 does not attempt to delineate rights specifically. / take the right to privacy, an indispensable part of
personal liberty, to have this character. Such a view would have been wholly untenable in the A.K. Gopalan
mm. It is evident that this Hon'ble Court has often taken up the responsibility of filling in gaps in legislation to
protect fundamental rights and interpreting such legislations to reflect evolving social realities. Transgender
persons are societally discriminated against and are often the subject of ridicule and harassment at the hands of
people around them, and are denied access to basic rights and opportunities that cis-gender persons have access
to. This stems from a fundamental misunderstanding of and stigma attached to transgender people. There exists
an inherent bias in society against gender identity that goes beyond male and female.
[B] Choice of Partner and Self-Defined Gender Identity are a Form of Expression Protected by Article 19
a. Three critical freedoms that are protected under Article 19(1), as elucidated in judgements of this Hon'ble Court,
may be summarised as follows:
1. To marry a partner of one's choice
2. To self-defined genden identity
3. To sexual orientation, be it homosexual, bisexual or heterosexual b. In addition to attracting the protective
cover of Article 19(1) of the Constitution, the aforementioned freedoms/rights of an individual also form part
of the right to a life with dignity under Article 21, including a right to privacy. The aforesaid freedoms strike at
the core of an individual and are an indelible aspect of their private life. Not only can the State not interfere in
these choices, there is also a positive obligation on the State to spread awareness and ensure that the
aforementioned fundamental rights of a person are not abrogated by any institution or authority [Reliance
placed on Johan (supra) Paras 265 & 370].
Freedom to marry a partner of one's choice:
C. The choice of partner and making public that choice is a pivotal moment in a person's life and the exercise of that
choice is a momentous act of self-expression. Ceremony associated with this expression, especially the ceremony
of marriage, involves the co-mingling of families and friends and the signalling of a commitment. Whether to
marry or not, who to marry are matters of personal choice. For those choosing to marry, the performative,
celebratory and cementing nature of the union is often paramount.
d. There can be no limitation on the choice of one's partner, save and except for restrictions based on age and
relationship. This Hon'ble Court has, in upheld the right to choose a partner as a facet of the freedom of
expression guaranteed under Article 19(1), since marriage is an expression of choice by an individual. Such
constitutionally protected choice cannot be subordinated to majoritarian views and cannot be limited
unreasonably.
e.
In this regard, reliance is placed on the decision of this Hon'ble Court in Asha Ranjan V. State of Bihar (2017) 4
Para 61 as under:
choice of a woman in choosing her partner in life is a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded
on
individual choice that is recognised in the Constitution under Article 19, and such a right is not expected to
succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group thinking". It is because the sense of class honour has no
legitimacy even if it is practised by the collective under some kind of notion. Therefore, if the collective interest
or the public interest that serves the public cause and further has the legitimacy to claim or assert a fundamental
right, then only it can put forth that their right should be protected.
Ergo, it is only if a person's choice of partner, be it a same-sex or opposite sex or intersex or transgender or
genderqueer spouse, impinges on the fundamental rights of another or on the collective right of a group of
persons, can the same be abrogated from.
f. In Saroj Rani V. Sudarshan Kumar Chadha, AIR 1984 SC 1562, this Hon'ble Court had occasion to consider the
constitutionality and effect of Section 9 (restitution of conjugal rights) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956. This
Hon'ble Court considered the right of a spouse to the company of the other and held as under:
15. In India it may be borne in mind that conjugal rights, i.e. right of the husband or the wife to the society of
the other spouse is not merely creature of the statute. Such a right is inherent in the very institution of marriage
itself. See in this connection Mulla's Hindu Law - 15th Edn. P. 567 - Para. 443. There are sufficient safeguards in S.
9 to prevent it being a tyranny. The importance of the concept of conjugal rights can be viewed in the light of Law
Commission - 71st Report on the Hindu Mariage Act, 1955 "Irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground of
divorce, Pra 6.5 where it is stated thus:
"Moreover, the essence of marriage is a sharing of common life, a sharing of all the happiness that
life has to offer and all the misery that has to be faced in life, an experience of the joy that comes
enjoying, in common, things of the matter and of the spirit and from showering love and affection on
one's offspring. Living together is a symbol of such sharing in all its aspects...
[emphasis supplied]
g. Such being the characterisation of marriage under Indian law, the right to marry cannot be denied to any person
in the ordinary course as it is essential to both autonomy and expression. To impose any limitation on who can
marry and who cannot, the restriction would have to satisfy the test of reasonableness in Article 19(2). It is
submitted that the Union cannot argue the validity of any such restriction as being justified by indecency or
immorality, since that would constitute discrimination. Such a stand is impermissible in view of the judgments of
this Hon'ble Court in NALSA and Johar (supra).
h. In view of the above-cited cases, it is submitted that the freedom to choose a partner in marriage would be
covered under Article 19(1)(a) as an expression; under Article 19(1)(c) which is the freedom to form
associations or unions2 or cooperative societies; and Article 19(1)(e), to reside and settle in any part of the
territory of India.
[emphasis supplied].
i. Further, it is submitted that choice of one's faith and the freedom to express it has also been held to be protected
under Article 19(1) of the Constitution and Article 25 explicitly guarantees to every person the right to profess,
practice and propagate any religion of their choosing. The performance and solemnization of marriage in
accordance with personal/religious laws is an expression of faith and religion, which is protected under Article 19
of the Constitution.
j.
In Arunkumar (supra), the Hon'ble High Court of Madras upheld the right transgender person to marry under the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, in accordance with Hindu Rites and Customs. It was further held in Arunkumar as
under:
"15. Both the petitioners herein profess Hindu Religion. Their right to practice Hindu Religion is
recognised under Article 25 of the Constitution of India. The Hindu Marriage Act is a personal law of
the Hindus. When the right of the transgender persons to marry has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, in the very nature of things, they cannot be kept out of the purview of the Hindu
Marriage Act. One can have a civil marriage. One can also have a sacramental marriage. The petitioners'
marriage was solemnized in a temple. Therefore, their fundamental right under Article 25 has also been infringed
in this case".
(Emphasis supplied)
k. Persons belonging to the LGBTQ community are no less entitled to freedom of conscience and free profession,
practice and propagation of their religion than any other person. The sacramental aspects of marriage, its place
in the religious life of a person, and the importance of the institution of marriage in communities, customs and
society at large have been recognised by Constitutional Courts of this country. The legal position emerging from
the rights delineated within Article 19(1) and 25 lead to the irresistible conclusion that failure to recognise the
marriage of all persons under their respective personal laws as well as under the Special Marriage Act, would not
pass muster in terms of Article 19(2) of the Constitution.
Freedom to express one's self-defined gender identity and sexual orientation:
I. It has been settled by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA, that "the freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 19
(1) (a) includes the freedom to express one's chosen gender identity..." through dress, personal appearance and
in
any other form subject to restrictions contained in Article 19(2) of the Constitution. The Court further held:
72. Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal identity, gender expression and presentation
and, therefore, it will have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. A transgender's
personality could be expressed by the transgender's behaviour and presentation. State cannot prohibit, restrict
or interfere with a transgender's expression of such personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often
the State and its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest the innate character and identity
of such persons. We, therefore, hold that values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy and personal integrity are
fundamental rights guaranteed to members of the transgender community under Article 19(1)(a) of
the
Constitution of India and the State is bound to protect and recognise those rights.
m. It is argued that, a direct corollary of this Hon'ble Court's ruling in NALSA (supra) is that any unreasonable
restriction that would limit self-identified gender expression would fall foul of Article 19(1) of the Constitution.
Marriage, with all its social and economic trappings, is one such expression protected by Article 19(1) of the
Constitution.
n. This Hon'ble Court has held that self-identified gender can be expressed through dress, words, action or
behaviour, or any other form (paragraph 13). A transgender person's personality can be expressed by behaviour
and presentation. The values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy, and personal integrity are fundamental rights
guaranteed to members of the transgender community under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and the State
is bound to protect and recognize those rights.
O. Sexual orientation, like gender identity, will also be covered as a form of expression under Article 19(1)(a) and
relationships between persons, be they same-sex or otherwise, will further be protected under Article 19(1)(c). It
was held in Johan (supra) in Para 268.7 as under:
268.7 Sexual Orientation is one of the many biological phenomena which is natural and inherent in
an individual and is controlled by neurological and biological factors. The science of sexuality has
theorised that an individual exerts little or no control over who he/she gets attracted to. Any
discrimination on the basis of one's sexual orientation would entail a violation of the fundamental
right of freedom of expression.
(Emphasis supplied)
"As this Court held in Lawrence, same-sex couples have the same right as opposite sex couples to
enjoy intimate association. Lawrence invalidated laws that made same sex intimacy a criminal act. And it
acknowledged that "[w]hen sexuality finds overt expression in intimate conduct with another person, the conduct
can be but one element in a personal bond that is more enduring." 539 U.S., at 567. But while Lawrence
confirmed a dimension of freedom that allows individuals to engage in intimate association without criminal
liability, it does not follow that freedom stops there. Outlaw to outcast may be a step forward, but it does
not achieve the full promise of liberty."
(Emphasis supplied)
q. Furthermore, expressions of gender identity as well as sexual orientation would both find protection by virtue of
Article 19(1)(a) and these 'attributes' are related and overlapping. For example, a transgender person may be
attracted to a person of the same sex/gender expression or otherwise. The protections that attach to the gender
identity and sexual orientation of a person, therefore, must necessarily extend to judicial and State protection of
their relationships. Without this, the decriminalisation of homosexuality and declaration of rights of transgender
persons would be rendered nugatory in so far as their ability to enter and formalize committed relationships is
concerned.
[C] Article 14 provides for the Right to Equality before law to all citizens, irrespective of their gender or
sexual orientation
a. Article 14 of the Constitution states that the State shall not deny to 'any person' equality before law or the equal
protection of law within the territory of India. The language of Article 14 does not say 'man/woman' or
'male/female':
14. Equality before law. -The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India.
b. Article 14 simply states that the right to equality applies to all persons. In furtherance of the same, this Hon'ble
Court in NALSA categorically held:
"61. Article 14 does not restrict the word "person" and its application only to male or female.
Hijras/Transgender persons who are neither male/female fall within the expression "person" and hence, entitled
to legal protection of laws in all spheres of State activity, including employment, healthcare, education as well as
equal civil and citizenship rights, as enjoyed by any other citizen of this country."
C. This Hon'ble Court while upholding the right to self-determination also recognized the identity of transgender
persons, and extended the rights and protections under Article 14 to transgender persons. Therefore, by
contending that marriage is an institution only for "biological" men and women, the Union has taken a stand that
is violative of Article 14, as is detailed in subsequent paragraphs.
Excluding Transgender Persons from Matrimonial Statutes fails the Two-Pronged test of "intelligible
differentia" and "rational nexus":
d.
It
is submitted that the interpretation of the words "any person" in Article 14 is no more res integra and has
been held to apply to all persons irrespective of sexual orientation and gender. Article 14 prohibits any
classification or distinction that is not comprehensible for the purpose of legislation.
e. To introduce an inequality by, say, restricting the right to marry to a class of persons, that class must, firstly, be
based on an intelligible differentia, some real and substantial distinction, which distinguishes the persons so
grouped. Secondly, the differential adopted as the basis for classification must have a reasonable or rational
nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
f. It is submitted that neither gender identity nor sexual orientation can form the basis for formulation of a class
that is legally permitted to get married in India. This is because Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution apply with
equal force to persons belonging to the LGBTQ community.
g. This Hon'ble Court has held that Article 14 of the Constitution embodies the principle of non-discrimination and is
not a free-standing provision. Article 14 has to be read in conjunction with the rights conferred by other Articles
like Article 21 and Article 19 of the Constitution.
227
h. In the context of the present case, any attempt to restrict matrimonial laws as applicable only to 'biological men
and women' and excluding transgender persons is discriminatory and unconstitutional as the same fails the two-
pronged test of intelligible differentia and rational nexus under Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The
reasons for this are enumerated in subsequent paragraphs, below.
There is no intelligible differentia to rationalise including only Biological Men and Women within the class
of persons who may marry under applicable / Indian statutes:
i. For there to be any valid classification or distinction, there should be a well-defined 'class' founded on an
intelligible differentia which distinguishes the subject-matter from others. Such differentia must have a rational
nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the legislation. As held by this Hon'ble Court in Dharam Dutt V.
"56. Article 14 of the Constitution prohibits class legislation and not reasonable classification for the purpose
of legislation. The requirements of the validity of legislation by reference to Article 14 of the Constitution are
:
that the subject-matter of legislation should be a well-defined class founded on an intelligible differential which
distinguishes that subject-matter from the others left out, and such differentia must have a rational relation with
the object sought to be achieved by the legislation. The laying down of intelligible differentia does not, however,
mean that the legislative classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete.
j. There is no intelligible differentia for the classification created by the Union with respect to matrimonial statutes
between a trans man and a 'biological man', or a trans woman and a biological woman'. There is no test in any
matrimonial statute to determine who is a biological male, female or otherwise. Persons opting to get married or
seeking matrimonial reliefs are not required by any law to prove their gender before any Executive Officer or the
Courts. The reliance placed by the Union on matrimonial statutes to interpret 'male' and 'female' as biological
man' and biological woman' is thus ill-placed and incorrect.
k. In fact, such a formulation is directly contrary to the right of a person to self-determine their gender identity. It
was held by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA that a sex re-affirmation surgery on treatment is not a pre-requisite for
expressing a gender of choice. The TG Act, various schemes of State government as applicable to transgender
persons, and other State authorities do not make a distinction between "biological" sex and assigned/chosen sex
of a person. It is reiterated that there is no test in law to determine who is or is not a "biological" man/woman.
I.
The Social Justice Department of the Kerala Government provides marriage assistance for legally married couples
who have undergone sex reassignment surgery (SRS). Couples where one or both persons are transgendered and
have a Transgender Identity card are eligible to receive financial assistance of Rs. 30,000/- from the State 6
months to 1 year after their marriage. Notably, the criteria for eligibility does not require the candidate to declare
whether they have undergone SRS, which is not required to acquire a Transgender Identity Card under Section 4
of the TG Act. Therefore, the stand of the Union before this Hon'ble Court in the present proceedings would be
contrary to such State Government Schemes, which are welfarist in nature and stem from the TG Act itself.
m. It is submitted that the differentia sought to be created must be constitutionally permissible. In K.S.
(Cri) 1] presents a de minimis rationale when it asserts that there have been only two hundred prosecutions for
violating Section 377. The de minimis hypothesis is misplaced because the invasion of a fundamental right is not
rendered tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number of persons, are subjected to hostile treatment. The
reason why such acts of hostile discrimination are constitutionally impermissible is because of the chilling effect
which they have on the exercise of the fundamental right in the first place...
n. Further, in Navtej Singh Johar, this Hon'ble Court held:
"608. LGBT individuals living under the threats of conformity grounded in cultural morality have been denied
a basic human existence. They have been stereotyped and prejudiced. Constitutional morality requires this Court
not to turn a blind eye to their right to an equal participation of citizenship and an equal enjoyment of living.
Constitutional morality requires that this Court must act as a counter-majoritarian institution which discharges
the responsibility of protecting constitutionally entrenched rights, regardless of what the majority may believe.
[Arvind Narrain, "A New Language of Morality : From the Trial of Nowshirwan to the Judgment in Naz
Foundation", The Indian Journal of Constitutional Law, Vol. 4 (2010).] Constitutional morality must turn into
a
habit of citizens. By respecting the dignity of LGBT individuals, this Court is only fulfilling the foundational
promises of our Constitution."
O. This Hon'ble Court has time and again upheld the importance of constitutional morality and the importance of
creating a classification based on intelligible differentia that is constitutionally permissible. It submitted that on
the basis of precedent, this Hon'ble Court will not find the classification based on the ability to procreate either
constitutionally permissible or intelligible.
There is no rational nexus to the object of the laws in question:
p. The unfounded distinction between transpersons and 'biological' men and women also lacks any rational nexus to
the object of the laws in question. The object of matrimonial statutes is to codify and enable the processes of
marriage and divorce, and to provide legitimacy to children of couples, whether heterosexual or homoesexual.
The objects and reasons of matrimonial acts do not specify between 'biological' men and women, or transgender
persons. They simply facilitate the process of entering into marriages, or consequently, exiting them.
q. Additionally, Courts have also held matrimonial statutes to be gender neutral, and have interpreted traditionally
gendered terms in matrimonial statues to include transpersons. The Madras High Court in Arunkuman (supra)
held:
16. Seen in the light of the march of law, the expression "bride" occurring in Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 will have to include within its meaning not only a woman but also a transwoman. It would also include
an intersex person/transgender person who identifies herself as a woman. The only consideration is how the
person perceives herself.
r. Much of the language of matrimonial statutes remains gender neutral, particular in so far as the Statement of
Objects and Reasons, the long title and Application is concerned. For example, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is
"An Act to amend and codify the law relating to marriage among Hindus." Section 2 of the Act relates to its
Application and Section 2(1)(a states:
This Act applies -
i. To any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments.
S. Under Section 5, the "Conditions for a Hindu Marriage" are enumerated, all of which barring sub-section (iii) are
couched in gender neutral terms.
Even Section 5(iii) cannot be said as limiting marriage to a heteronormative, cisgendered couple and it merely
prescribes a minimum age for the bride/bride groom to enter into marriage. It doesn't specify that the spouses
to the marriage have to be of opposite gender. Section 5(iii) requires: the bridegroom has completed the age of
twenty one years and the bride, the age of eighteen years at the time of marriage". It is respectfully submitted
that this Section ought to be interpreted as merely requiring female parties to marriage to be at least 18 years of
age, and male contracting parties to be at least 21 years of age.
t. The Anand Marriages Act, 1909 and the Jammu and Kashmir Anand Marriages Act, 2011 are also general neutral,
and the only marriage invalidated by the said acts are those between related persons, as per Sikh customs. It is
the Government registration forms that in fact serve to specify that the marriage is to be between persons of
opposite sex/gender.
u. To exclude transgender persons from the scope and ambit of matrimonial statues would require a restricted
reading of statutes, which is not in consonance with the requirements of Article 14.
V. The object of matrimonial statues is to facilitate unions or marriages of citizens of India who may or may not
reside in India, who may or may not belong to the same religion, and does not create any purpose for a
distinction between a biological man/woman and a transgender person. It gives both a mechanism for
solemnization and also specifies certain rights and remedies available to spouses and their children in case of a
breakdown of marriage. None of these purposes are frustrated if the persons entering into the union are
members of the LGBTQ community.
W. Whether or not a person chose to transition to a sex different to the one assigned at birth or presented at the
time of marriage, is absolutely irrelevant to the object of matrimonial statutes. The significant gap between the
object of the statute and the distinction created by the Union means that there is no rational nexus between the
two, making the basis of the classification created by the Union unfounded, contrary to the Constitution and
indeed, discriminatory.
[D] Transgender Persons have a Right against Discrimination Under Articles 15 and 16
a. Article 15 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, religion, race, caste, place of birth. The language of Article
15, in fact, provides for affirmative action towards backward classes:
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.-(1 The State shall
not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
In reality however, transgender persons are regularly denied the access to public spaces that persons
belonging to the gender binary (i.e male and female) effortlessly enjoy.
(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent
the State from making,- (a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of
citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5);
b.
Article 16 prohibits discrimination in matters of employment and appointment to office on the basis of sex,
religion, race, caste, descent, place of birth or residence. The language of Article 16 also provides for affirmative
action in matters of employment of backward classes:
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.-(1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all
citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of
appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not
adequately represented in the services under the State.
C. The denial of the right to marry hinders the rights of transgender persons that flow form marriage, such as
employment benefits, or declaration of marital status for the purpose of standing for office, sharing of insurance
or healthcare benefits etc.
d. Keeping in mind the text, purpose and interpretation of Articles 15 and 16, this Hon'ble Court was pleased to
interpret these rights as gender neutral and inclusive of all citizens, in NALSA:
"82. Article 14 has used the expression "person" and the Article 15 has used the expression "citizen" and
"sex" so also Article 16. Article 19 has also used the expression "citizen". Article 21 has used the expression
"person". All these expressions, which are "gender neutral" evidently refer to human-beings. Hence, they take
within their sweep Hijras/Transgenders and are not as such limited to male or female gender. Gender identity as
already indicated forms the core of one's personal self, based on self identification, not on surgical or medical
procedure. Gender identity, in our view, is an integral part of sex and no citizen can be discriminated on the
ground of gender identity, including those who identify as third gender."
The expression 'sex' used in Articles 15 and 16 was not limited to "biological" men or women, and interpreted
as inclusive of people who considered themselves to be neither male or female. It is thus inclusive of transgender
identities. Excluding transgender persons from the scope of matrimonial statutes discriminates against
transgender persons based on their sex and gender identity, thus making it violative of Articles 15 and 16.
e. Articles 15 and 16 covers at least 5 types of discrimination. Pertinent among them to the present case, is the
right against discrimination on the grounds of sex:
Articles 15 and 16 cover the right against sex discrimination and gender identity discrimination:
f.
In NALSA, Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution were interpreted as being inclusive of transgender persons, and
not just people who identify as male or female. The Court, in fact, extended under the ambit of Articles 15 and
16 the right against discrimination on the basis of gender identity:
64. Article 15 states that the State shall not discriminate against any citizen, inter alia, on the ground of sex,
with regard to:
"15. (2) (a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of
State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public. The requirement of taking affirmative action for the
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens is also provided in this Article.
65. Article 16 states that there shall be equality of opportunities for all the citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State. Article 16(2) of the Constitution of India reads as
follows:
"16. (2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any
of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or office under the State."
Article 16 not only prohibits discrimination on the ground of sex in public employment, but also imposes a
duty on the State to ensure that all citizens are treated equally in matters relating to employment and
appointment by the State.
66 Articles 15 and 16 sought to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex, recognising that sex discrimination
is a historical fact and needs to be addressed. The Constitution-makers it can be gathered, gave emphasis to the
fundamental right against sex discrimination SO as to prevent the direct or indirect attitude to treat people
differently, for the reason of not being in conformity with stereotypical generalisations of binary genders. Both
gender and biological attributes constitute distinct components of sex. The biological characteristics, of course,
include genitals, chromosomes and secondary sexual features, but gender attributes include one's self-image,
the deep psychological or emotional sense of sexual identity and character. The discrimination on the ground of
"sex" under Articles 15 and 16, therefore, includes discrimination on the ground of gender identity. The
expression "sex" used in Articles 15 and 16 is not just limited to biological sex of male or female, but intended to
include people who consider themselves to be neither male nor female.
67. TGs have been systematically denied the rights under Article 15(2), that is, not to be subjected to any
disability, liability, restriction or condition in regard to access to public places. TGs have also not been afforded
special provisions envisaged under Article 15(4) for the advancement of the socially and educationally backward
classes (SEBC) of citizens, which they are, and hence legally entitled and eligible to get the benefits of SEBC.
State is bound to take some affirmative action for their advancement so that the injustice done to them for
centuries could be remedied. TGs are also entitled to enjoy economic, social, cultural and political rights without
discrimination, because forms of discrimination on the ground of gender are violative of fundamental freedoms
and human rights. TGs have also been denied rights under Article 16(2) and discriminated against in respect of
employment or office under the State on the ground of sex. TGs are also entitled to reservation in the matter of
appointment, as envisaged under Article 16(4) of the Constitution. State is bound to take affirmative action to
give them due representation in public services.
68. Articles 15(2) to (4) and Article 16(4) read with the directive principles of State policy and various
international instruments to which India is a party, call for social equality, which TGs could realise, only if
facilities and opportunities are extended to them SO that they can also live with dignity and equal status with
other genders.
g. It is submitted that in light of the judgment of this Hon'ble Court in NALSA, the State is bound to not only
prohibit acts of discrimination on the basis of sex and gender identity against transgender people, but also
provide for affirmative action in socio-cultural and economic spheres of life (including employment), to make up
for the years of injustice faced by them. Transgender persons have the same social, cultural and political rights
as any other citizen of the country. The State must extend the right to marriage to transgender persons (as its
denial is sex discrimination strictly prohibited under Articles 15 and 16), or run the risk of violating the
Constitution, specifically Articles 15 and 16.
Article 15 provides for a right against sex stereotyping:
h. It is submitted that Article 15 of the Constitution of India prohibits discrimination founded directly or indirectly
on a stereotypical understanding of sex. This Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johar discourages the adoption of a
formalistic view of the prohibition in Article 15 and held:
431. This formalistic interpretation of Article 15 would render the constitutional guarantee against
discrimination meaningless. For it would allow the State to claim that the discrimination was based on sex and
another ground ("Sex plus") and hence outside the ambit of Article 15. Latent in the argument of the
discrimination, are stereotypical notions of the differences between men and women which are then used to
justify the discrimination. This narrow view of Article 15 strips the prohibition on discrimination of its essential
content. This fails to take into account the intersectional nature of sex discrimination, which cannot be said to
operate in isolation of other identities, especially from the socio-political and economic context. For example, a
rule that people over six feet would not be employed in the army would be able to stand an attack on its
disproportionate impact on women if it was maintained that the discrimination is on the basis of sex and height.
Such a formalistic view of the prohibition in Article 15, rejects the true operation of discrimination, which
intersects varied identities and characteristics."
438. A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A discrimination will not survive
constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the
grounds prohibited in Article 15(1). If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or indirect is founded on
a
stereotypical understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which
is prohibited by Article 15 on the grounds only of sex. If certain characteristics grounded in stereotypes, are to be
associated with entire classes of people constituted as groups by any of the grounds prohibited in Article 15(1),
that cannot establish a permissible reason to discriminate. Such a discrimination will be in violation of the
constitutional guarantee against discrimination in Article 15(1). That such a discrimination is a result of grounds
rooted in sex and other considerations, can no longer be held to be a position supported by the intersectional
understanding of how discrimination operates. This infuses Article 15 with true rigour to give it a complete
constitutional dimension in prohibiting discrimination.
i. Any act of discrimination must pass the test of constitutional scrutiny. As held by this Hon'ble Court has in
Navtej Singh Johar, an act that perpetuates characteristics grounded in stereotypes to an entire class of people
shall not be distinguishable from discrimination on the grounds prohibited under Article 15.
Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is also prohibited under Articles 15 and 16:
j. This Hon'ble Court has further interpreted the right against sex discrimination to include the right against
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. This Hon'ble Court first dealt with the subject of sexual
orientation in NALSA, wherein it clarified that gender identity and sexual orientation were different concepts, and
that transgender persons too have sexual orientations, which may or may not change after transitioning:
22. Sexual orientation refers to an individual's enduring physical, romantic and/or emotional attraction to
another person. Sexual orientation includes transgender and gender-variant people with heavy sexual orientation
and their sexual orientation may or may not change during or after gender transmission, which also includes
homosexuals, bisexuals, heterosexuals, asexual, etc. Gender identity and sexual orientation, as already indicated,
are different concepts. Each person's self-defined sexual orientation and gender identity is integral to their
personality and is one of the most basic aspects of self-determination, dignity and freedom and no one shall be
forced to undergo medical procedures, including SRS, sterilisation or hormonal therapy, as a requirement for
legal recognition of their gender identity.
377. Section 377 has consigned a group of citizens to the margins. It has been destructive of their identities.
By imposing the sanctions of the law on consenting adults involved in a sexual relationship, it has lent the
authority of the State to perpetuate social stereotypes and encourage discrimination. Gays, lesbians, bisexuals
and transgenders have been relegated to the anguish of closeted identities. Sexual orientation has become a
target for exploitation, if not blackmail, in a networked and digital age. The impact of Section 377 has travelled
far beyond the punishment of an offence. It has been destructive of an identity which is crucial to a dignified
existence.
k. This Hon'ble Court has often considered precedent set internationally to liberally interpret constitutional rights. In
Navtej Singh Johar, a host of international cases were cited by this Hon'ble Court to read down Section 377 of
the Indian Penal Code. A judgment by the United States Court of Appeals (Kimberly Hively V. Ivy Tech
Community College of Indiana [Kimberly Hively V. Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana, 830 F 3d 698 (7th Cir
2016), was cited favourably by this Hon'ble Court where it was held that discrimination amongst employees
based on their sexual orientation amounts to discrimination based on sex.
OnLine US SC 2 deliberated on the issue of whether the Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, 1964 which prohibits
employment discrimination "because of sex" encompassed discrimination based on sexual orientation. The case
was filed by a gay man, Gerald Bostock, who had worked for Clayton County, Georgia as a child services welfare
coordinator for 10 years. Shortly after him participating in a gay recreational softball league, he was reprimanded
and his employment was terminated for 'conduct unbecoming of its employees'. In this landmark case where the
United States Supreme Court took up the issue of employment discrimination, it held:
"The statute's message for our cases is equally simple and momentous : An individual's homosexuality or
transgender status is not relevant to employment decisions. That's because it is impossible to
discriminate against a person for being homosexual or transgender without discriminating against
that individual based on sex. Consider, for example, an employer with two employees, both of whom
are attracted to men. The two individuals are, to the employer's mind, materially identical in all
respects, except that one is a man and the other a woman. If the employer fires the male employee for
no reason other than the fact he is attracted to men, the employer discriminates against him for traits
or actions it tolerates in his female colleague. Put differently, the employer intentionally singles out an
employee to fire based in part on the employee's sex, and the affected employee's sex is a but-for cause of his
discharge. Or take an employer who fires a transgender person who was identified as a male at birth but who
now identifies as a female. If the employer retains an otherwise identical employee who was identified as female
at birth, the employer intentionally penalises a person identified as male at birth for traits or actions that it
tolerates in an employee identified as female at birth. Again, the individual employee's sex plays an
unmistakable and impermissible role in the discharge decision. We agree that homosexuality and transgender
status are distinct concepts from sex. But, as we've seen, discrimination based on homosexuality or transgender
status necessarily entails discrimination based on sex; the first cannot happen without the second."
(Emphasis supplied)
m. The notion that only persons of 'opposite sex' can marry each other, and that only persons who conform to
stereotypical notions of genden identity ('biological men/women') ought to marry perpetuates stereotypes of
gender roles and procreation. This amounts to discrimination, being hinged on underpinning sex with biology
(which formulation seeks to exclude transgender persons), and is therefore violative of Articles 15 and 16 of the
Constitution.
11. DEFINITION OF TRANSGENDER AND IMPACT OF THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS)
ACT, 2019
[A] The Right to Marry is Enjoined by the TG Act, 2019
a. While the TG Act is under challenge before this Hon'ble Court in Swati Bidhan Baruah V. Union of India [W.P. (C.)
No. 51/2020], the Act as it stands enjoins and indeed compels the Union to recognize the comprehensive socio-
economic rights of transgender persons, including the right to marry.
b. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act states as under:
1. "Transgender community is one of the most marginalised communities in the country because they do not fit
into the general categories of gender of male or female. Consequently, they face problems ranging from social
exclusion to discrimination, lack of education facilities, unemployment, lack of medical facilities and so on.
3.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, vide its order dated 15th April, 2014, passed in the case of National Legal
Services Authority V. Union of India, inter alia, directed the Central Government and State Governments to
take various steps for the welfare of transgender community and to treat them as a third gender for the
purpose of safeguarding their rights under Part 111 of the Constitution and other laws made by Parliament and
the State Legislature.
4. The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill, 2019 seeks to-
(b) prohibit discrimination against transgender persons;
(c) confer right upon transgender persons to be recognised as such, and a right to self-perceived gender
identity;
C. Hence, the very purpose of the TG Act is to remove discrimination faced by the transgender community because
they do not fit into general categories of "male" and "female". The Act also seeks to bring the directions of this
Hon'ble Court in NALSA under the rubric of statutory law, and further to prohibit discrimination and to recognize
the right of transgender persons to their self-perceived gender identity.
d. In furtherance of the said objective and reasons, Section 8 of the Act puts an obligation on the appropriate
government to take steps to secure full and effective participation of transgender persons and their inclusion in
society. The TG Act, is a legislation with provisions to protect rights of transgender persons in various spheres of
life and marriage as an institution forms an integral part of the society. It provides a sense of social security to a
union of two persons who wish to form a family in accordance with law. Hence, recognition of right to marriage of
transgender persons is enshrined within the provisions of the Act.
e. Accordingly, Section 3 of the Act categorically provides for prohibition against discrimination towards
transpersons in all spheres of life and states that:
3. Prohibition against discrimination.- person or establishment shall discriminate against a transgender
person on any of the following grounds, namely:-
(a) the denial, or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, educational establishments and services thereof;
(b) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, employment or occupation;
(c) the denial of, or termination from, employment or occupation;
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare services;
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, access to, or provision or enjoyment or
use of any goods, accommodation, service, facility, benefit, privilege or opportunity dedicated to the use of the
general public or customarily available to the public;
(f) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right of movement;
(g) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right to reside, purchase, rent, or
otherwise occupy any property;
(h) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, the opportunity to stand for or hold public or private
office; and (i) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, Government or private
establishment in whose care or custody a transgender person may be.
f. Marriage confers a bundle of rights on individuals and recognizing the right to marry has a cascading effect on the
rights sought to be protected under the TG Act. Denial of the right to marry impedes the transgender population
from availing the benefits of existing government welfare schemes, employment benefits, insurance and related
benefits, healthcare benefits and decision-making power, enjoyed by married couples and their families, which
are enjoyed by married couples. For instance, all employment statutes provide numerous protections to married
couples in matters of pension, compassionate appointment, maternity and child care leave, health insurance, etc.
It is not possible for the State to provide full and equal employment to transgender persons, in conformity with
its obligations under Section 3(b), without recognizing their right to marriage. Denial of recognition to marriages
of same-sex or gender-non-conforming couples g. Similarly, the right to accommodation under Section 3(g)
cannot be met without guaranteeing the right to married gender non-conforming couples. Further, to stand for
public office, a person is required to declare their marital status and also the assets of their spouse. Thus,
transgender persons cannot have an equal opportunity to stand for elections if their right to marriage is not in
turn recognized by the State.
h. Further, Section 4 of the TG Act recognizes the right to self-perceived gender identity:
Recognition of identity of transgender person.-(1 A transgender person shall have a right to be recognised as
such, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) A person recognised as transgender under sub-section (1) shall have a right to self-perceived gender
identity.
i. The right to recognition of a persons' self-perceived gender identity extends to recognition of their gender identity
in the event of their marriage. For instance, a person who presents or identifies as male at the time of their
marriage may marry a female under the extant law, and then transition to any of the gender identities
recognized under Section 2(k). The Union cannot then refuse to recognize the person's marriage or declare that it
becomes void as a result of the transition.
j. While the TG Act provides for an onerous procedure for a person to transition to their self-identified gender, the
TG Act itself confers upon transgender persons the right to be perceived as their preferred gender and a right to
their self-perceived gender identity. Section 4 of the TG Act gives a transgender person a right to be perceived as
such and a right to their self-perceived gender identity and Sections 5, 6 and 7 prescribe the procedure for
recognition as a transgender person and change in gender identity.
k. In Hina V. State, the Kerala High Court recognized that the TG Act placed an obligation on the appropriate
Governments and establishments to "provide full and effective participation of transgender persons and their
The Court further held that:
15. In view of the specific provisions in the 2019 Act by which a transgender person has a right to be
recognized not only as a transgender but also a right to self perceived gender identity, / am of the opinion that
the petitioner who has opted for the female gender and has undergone sex reassignment surgeries for aiding her
self perception as a member of the said gender would definitely be entitled to enrollment in the NCC unit
reckoning her as a transgender and further as a member of her self perceived gender, that is, the female gender.
The fact that the provisions of the NCC Act do not recognize the third gender or that detailed guidelines are
required to be drawn up for the intearation of persons of the third gender into the Armed Forces or the National
Cadet Corps cannot, according to me, be a justification for denying admission to the petitioner to the NCC unit
on the basis of the Identity Card obtained by her.
I. Indian Courts have, without bias, begun to interpret transwomen as women and transmen as men. There is no
test in law or statute to determine the difference between a 'biological' man/woman and men/women who have
transitioned. It is argued that there is no coherent difference between 'biological' men and women, and
transgender men and women. The TG Act itself paves the way for expression of gender identity as is self-
perceived, and indeed, it's Statement of Objects and Reasons paves the way for grant of the full spectrum of
rights available under Part 111 of the Constitution.
m. Moreover, the TG Act also imposes an obligation upon the government to take steps to ensure integration of
transgender persons in society, free of discrimination and stigmatisation. However, without recognising the right
to marry of transpersons, regardless of their or their partner's gender identity or sexual orientation, it would not
be possible to ensure the full spectrum of rights guaranteed to transpersons by the statute and judicial
pronouncements. Denial of the right to marriage to transgender persons is against the scheme of the TG Act;
needless to say, the Union by arguing against the right to marriage is going against its own statute.
111. THE UNION'S CLASSIFICATION BETWEEN 'BIOLOGICAL' AND TRANSGENDER PERSONS IN ITS COUNTER
-AFFIDAVIT IS UNTENABLE
a. The Union of India in its Counter Affidavit argues that marriage must be between a biological man' and
a
biological woman':
"18. It is submitted that the legislative understanding of marriage in the Indian statutory and personal law
regime is very specific viz. marriage between a biological man and a biological woman as well. According to penal
laws also marriage is between a biological "man" and a biological "woman" only. It is submitted that the Hindu
Marriage Act and other family laws and penal laws at numerous places, provide clear indications towards the
same through specific references to opposite sexes referred to as "husband" and "wife; "male" and female";
"bride" and "bridegroom"; "father" and "mother"; "minor son", "minor daughter"; "him" and "her"; "himself';
"full blood" and "half blood"; "uterine blood"; "ancestress", etc. It is submitted that all these indicate that in
India, marriage is a bond between a biological man and a biological woman.
19. It is submitted that provisions and concepts under the General Clauses Act, 1897 cannot apply in view of
the express legislative intent and the purpose of family laws and penal provisions narrated concerning marriage,
etc. Any other interpretations except treating 'husband' as a biological man and 'wife' as a biological woman will
make all statutory provisions unworkable. In a same sex marriage, it is neither possible nor feasible to term one
as "husband" and the other as "wife" in the context of legislative scheme of various Statutes. Resultantly the
statutory scheme of many statutory enactments will become otiose."
b.
It is evident that such averments are expressly contrary to settled law and statute as delineated above. While
matrimonial statutes refer to 'husband', 'wife', 'male and female', etc., they do not distinguish between so-called
'biological' man and woman and transgender persons. It is submitted any such usage of the terms 'male and
female', 'bridegroom and bride', husband and wife' ought to be construed as gender neutral, as any other
construction would render the statutes unconstitutional being a violation of Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution.
C. It is submitted that the Respondent, in creating a new class of 'biological' men and women violates both its own
TG Act and Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21 of the Constitution, as also the judicial pronouncement of this Hon'ble
Court in NALSA, where it was categorically held that biology is not essential to gender identity as sex and gender
and sexual orientation and gender identity are distinct from one another. Suffice to say at this stage that a
classification between so-called 'biological' gender and transgender echoes the classification between 'natural'
and 'unnatural' sex in Section 377 IPC which was squarely rejected in Johar.
d. The Union in their Counter Affidavit has erroneously averred that the Indian family unit concept of a husband, a
wife and children necessarily presuppose a biological man as a 'husband', a biological woman as a 'wife' and the
children born out of the union between the two. This postulation is clearly incorrect since it neglects all other
kinds of unions that form a family, which have been socially and legally recognised. Queen relationships have
long been a part of the Indian society and post the decriminalisation of Section 377 Indian Penal Code, such
relationships have come out in the public ethos. There is no such requirement in both law and society to be a
'biological' man to be a father and 'biological' woman to be a mother. In this regard, a judgment of this Hon'ble
Court in Deepika Singh V. Central Administrative Tribunal SLP (C) No. 7772 of 2021, dealing with a dispute with
regards to entitlement to maternity leave for children born out of a previous marriage of the spouse of the
appellant therein and for the biological child of the appellant, is relevant wherein it was observed that:
"The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that
it
consists of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time)
and their children. This assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change
in one's familial structure, and the fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin
with. Familial relationships may take the form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queen
relationships. A household may be a single parent household for any number of reasons, including the death of
a
spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the guardians and caretakers (who traditionally occupy the
roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may change with remarriage, adoption, or
fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be typical but they are as real as their
traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally deserving not only
of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The black
letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional ones. The
same undoubtedly holds true for women who take on the role of motherhood in ways that may not find a place in
the popular imagination."
e. Marriage is also not entered into for procreation alone, and infertile men or women can still marry. The State has
not and indeed cannot deny equality in marriage to persons who either on account of choice or biology, do not
have children. Therefore, the formulation of family by the State is extremely limited and narrow, and does not
even take within its sweep all legal heterosexual marital unions.
f.
If the contention of the Respondent that 'male' and 'female' as provided in statutes are to be construed as to
refer to cisgender males and females is accepted, it would lead to absurd and unjust outcomes in
implementation of several laws. For instance, the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 defines an 'heir' as any person
'male or female' entitled to succeed the property of an intestate under the Act. It is submitted if the
Respondent's argument is taken to be correct, it would lead to a situation that a transgender heir of a person
who has died intestate would not be able to inherit the property, even if they happen to be the sole heir. Such
argument cannot logically be allowed to stand and the terms 'male or female' have to therefore be read as
gender neutral so as not to be violative of constitutional principles and the pronouncement of this Hon'ble Court
in NALSA.
g. Transgender persons have not only been living in socially accepted family units, marriages of transgender
persons have been duly recognized by courts and State Governments, many of whom have, in furtherance of the
same, also devised state policies providing assistance to marriages of transgender persons. For instance, as
mentioned hereinabove, Social Justice Department of the Kerala Government introduced a scheme which
provides marriage assistance for legally married transgender couples who have undergone sex reassignment
surgery.
h. Many transgender couples even go on to perform weddings which are recognized by state functionaries. For
instance, in the year 2019, 15 couples solemnised their marriage in the state of Chhattisgarh with the bleassing
of the Chief Minister; all the brides in these marriages belonged to the transgender community. The said
marriages were performed with the support from the government and other political leaders of the state.
Similarly, in the state of Tamil Nadu, self-respect marriage (marriages conducted without the presence of
priests) are performed by transgender couples and such marriages are registered under the "Tamil Nadu Act 021
Of 1967 : Hindu Marriage (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1967".
i. Therefore, the averment of the Respondent that the marriage is between a 'biological' male and 'biological' female
is not only blatantly erroneous, but also flies in the face of constitutional principles, settled law and accepted and
prevalent social realities and values.
j. The Union's reference to social impact and public opinion is further misplaced as majority opinions can never be a
barometer for determining minority rights. This principle has been stated by this Hon'ble in a catena of
judgements, including in NALSA, Johar and Puttaswamy (supra).
IV. MATRIMONIAL STATUTES OUGHT TO BE INTERPRETED PURPOSIVELY
a. In an evolving society, law cannot remain immutable or static (per Puttaswamy), it should march in tune with
social evolution. It is submitted that the provisions of matrimonial statutes ought to be read purposively in order
to ensure social justice and bridge the gap between law and society. The principle of purposive interpretation
requires the law to be interpreted in a manner that advances constitutional values and benefits the masses. This
Hon'ble Court while considering a conflict between a literal interpretation and purposive interpretation in Abhiram
"Ordinarily, if a statute is well drafted and debated in Parliament there is little or no need to adopt any
interpretation other than a literal interpretation of the statute. However, in a welfare State like ours, what is
intended for the benefit of the people is not fully reflected in the text of a statute. In such legislations,
a pragmatic view is required to be taken and the law interpreted purposefully and realistically so that
the benefit reaches the masses." (Emphasis supplied)
b. Similarly, this Hon'ble Court has recognised the principle of purposive interpretation in the context of evolving
social and political values and has emphasised that the manner of interpretation of provisions be such that it
advances the spirit and conscience of the Constitution. In the case of State (NCT of Delhi) V. Union of India
has categorically held that the constitutional interpretation has to be purposive taking into consideration the
need of time and constitutional principles. The same principle is applicable to interpretation of statute which are
under review on the vires of Constitutional principles. This Hon'ble Court notes in para 284.11 as under:
"In the light of the contemporary issues, the purposive method has gained importance over the literal
approach and the constitutional courts, with the vision to realise the true and ultimate purpose of the
Constitution not only in letter but also in spirit and armed with the tools of ingenuity and creativity, must not shy
away from performing this foremost duty to achieve constitutional functionalism by adopting a pragmatic
approach. It is, in a way, exposition of judicial sensibility to the functionalism of the Constitution which we call
constitutional pragmatism. The spirit and conscience of the Constitution should not be lost in grammar and the
popular will of the people which has its legitimacy in a democratic setup cannot be allowed to lose its purpose in
simple semantics."
C. It is submitted that a literal interpretation of the gendered terms in matrimonial statutes such as 'male', 'female',
'bride' and 'bridegroom' exclude same-sex couples, and couples where one or both partners are transgender or
gender non-conforming and the same violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India and is inconsistent with the
principles and rights propounded in NALSA and Navtej Johar. However, a purposive interpretation of the same
saves the provisions from being ultra vires and allows for an interpretation that retains the workability of the
provisions for all persons belonging to, inter alia, the LGBTQ community.
CONCLUSION
1024. The Petitioner is like any other in that she lives, loves, and laughs in the company of her family and friends.
She is unique in that the gender assigned to her at birth is different from the gender she feels and presents today. The
Petitioner's journey is an arduous one, and the State is legally tasked with leasing the way by eliminating prejudice
and discrimination. One subsisting discrimination is in the right of the Petitioner and of other members of the LGBTQI
community to marry a partner of choice and to found a family in any manner she may please. That choice can be the
Petitioner's alone, and the State has an obligation to recognise, assure and protect the choice. The State is also
disentitled from interfering in the exercise of a person's choice and preferences in a manner that would infringe their
privacy. Failure to assure marriage equality is both a failure to act and an unlawful interference in private relations by
the State.
1025. In view of the submissions advanced on behalf of the Petitioner, it is respectfully submitted that the State
cannot raise any tenable objection to extending the right to marry to persons belonging to the LGBTQI Community,
including to transgendered persons. There is no legitimate basis to restrict the application of matrimonial statutes to
heterosexual unions between cisgendered persons alone. Such a reading would not survive judicial review on the
cornerstone of Part 111 of the Constitution. Therefore, a purposive interpretation of the statutes is necessary to save
them from the vice of unconstitutionality.
1026. Equally, the State is enjoined by International Covenants and treaties to assure equal treatment to all
persons, irrespective of religion, sexual orientation and gender identity. Comity of nations and India's international
obligations demand that marriages solemnised or registered in Countries outside India be recognised as legally valid
under the Foreign Marriages Act.
Drawn By:
Arundhati Katju, Tara Narula, Aparajita Sinha,
Sonal Chopra and Shivangi Sharma, Advocates
Settled By:
Mr. KV Vishwanathan, Sr. Adv.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3025 OF 2022
In the Matter of:
Mr. Joydeep Sengupta & Ors Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ors Respondents
AND
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3007 OF 2022
And in the Matter of:
Mellissa Ferrier & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India and Ors
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS DATED 26.2.2023
The present submissions are a summary of arguments to be presented by Karuna Nundy, Counsel for
the Petitioners (2 hrs)
1027. The Petitioners seek legal recognition for queer, non-heterosexual, and same-sex marriages under secular
legislations for marriage including the Citizenship Act, 1955, the Foreign Marriage Act 1969 ("FMA") and the Special
Marriage Act 1954 ("SMA"). In the process of rights-based transformation the Petitioners seek that their freedom to
choose their spouse be upheld and their love be granted the dignity it is due, in law and in life.
I. THE RIGHT TO BE A 'SPOUSE' UNDER THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
1028. Both Petitions seek a declaration that a spouse of foreign origin of an Indian Citizen or Overseas Citizen of
India ('OCI') cardholder is entitled to apply for registration as an Overseas Citizen of India under Section 7A(1)(d) of
the Citizenship Act, 1955 ("Citizenship Act") regardless of the gender, sex or sexual orientation of the applicant
spouse. Section 7A(1)(d) of the Citizenship Act is ex facie neutral as to gender, sex and sexuality.
7A. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.-(1) The Central Government may, subject to such
conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an application made in this behalf, register as an
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder-
(d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of an Overseas Citizen of India
Cardholder registered under section 7A and whose marriage has been registered and subsisted for a
continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the application under
this section:
Provided that for the eligibility for registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, such spouse shall
be subjected to prior security clearance by a competent authority in India.
II. MARRIAGE EQUALITY QUEERNESS AND GENDER FLUIDITY IN MARRIAGE
1029. Petition No. 1 (brought by Joydeep Sengupta et al.) seeks complete marriage equality, and a broader
recognition of "Queen Marriage" that includes, but is not restricted to "same-sex" or "homo-sexual marriage", taking
into consideration the spectrum of gender identities and sexualities that persons across this country identify with.
1030. "Queer228, in Joydeep Sengupta (henceforth Petition No. 1) is used as an inclusive, umbrella term for people
who identify as Gender fluid, Non-binary or Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Intersex, Queer, Asexual, and other
related identities (LGBTQIA+). Queen marriage is broader in scope than "Same Sex" Marriage because the latter does
not cover marriage between two persons who don't conform to the fixed, socially prescribed categories of "male" and
"female"'ma or 'woman' at the point of marriage, even if such gender was not assigned at birth.
1031. The First Petition hence seeks that the phrases "person", "spouse" or similar terms that have been used in
the Special Marriage Act, 1954, The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 (and all other laws, rules and regulations related to
marriage) ought to be interpreted in a gender, sex and sexuality neutral manner.
1032. In this manner the law may:
1) Recognize marriage between persons of any gender identity, sex or sexuality and
2)
transcend the requirement that a particular genden be cemented for all time at the point of marriage.
7. The Special Marriage Act, 1954
a. The Special Marriage Act, in Sections 12, 15, 22, 23, 25 and 27, which use the terms "husband" and "wife"
when providing for the solemnization, registration and nullity of marriage, and Section 44, which provides the
punishment for bigamy, the Petitioners pray that this Court read the relevant part of the provision as
"husband or wife or spouse", with "or spouse" being implied terms in the legislation, interpreted by this
Court to save the Special Marriage Act from unconstitutionality. Relevant parts of Section 12, 22 and 27 and
how the Petitioners seek them to be interpreted, are reproduced below as examples:
"12. Place and form of solemnization.- The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the Marriage
Officer, or at such other place within a reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may desire, and upon such
conditions and the payment of such additional fees as may be prescribed. (2) The marriage may be solemnized
in any form which the parties may choose to adopt : Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the
parties unless each party says to the other in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in
any language understood by the parties,-"I, (A), take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband)" (to be read
as "...my lawful wife (or husband) (or spouse)")
22. Restitution of conjugal rights.-When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse,
withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district court for
restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such
petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree restitution of
conjugal rights accordingly. (...) (to be read as "When either spouse has, without reasonable excuse,
withdrawn...")
27. Divorce.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition for divorce
may be presented to the district court either by the husband or the wife on the ground that the respondent-
(...)"
(to be read as ...court by either spouse")
b. The terms "Bride" and "Bridegroom" have been used in the Third and Fourth Schedule for the declarations by
both parties and certification of marriage. It is submitted that both terms be read to include the word
"spouse" in line with the above.
The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969:
a. "Bride" and "Bridegroom" are used in Section 4 relating to the age of the parties at time of solemnisation and the
Third and Fourth Schedule for the declarations by both parties and certification of marriage. The same
stipulations are given for both the "bride" and the "bridegroom" in the Third and Fourth Schedule. The relevant
part of Section 4 is:
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages.-A marriage between parties one of whom at least
is a citizen of India may be solemnized under this Act by or before a Marriage Officer in a foreign country, if, at
the time of the marriage, the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(c) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty-one years and the bride the age of eighteen years at the
time of the marriage.
b.
The terms "husband" and "wife" are used in Section 13 and 18 in relation to the solemnisation of marriage and
provisions where matrimonial reliefs under the Special Marriage Act are available under the Foreign Marriage Act.
The Petitioners pray that this Court read the relevant part of the provisions as "husband or wife or spouse", with
"or spouse" being implied terms in the legislation, interpreted by this Court to save the Foreign Marriage Act
from unconstitutionality, in the same manner as discussed in relation to the SMA above.
1033. Notably, both the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 have certain protective
provisions that apply only to the wife. Under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, Section 27(1)(1A) and 31 provide special
conditions for divorce by "wife", and Sections 36 and 37 only provide for alimony to be given to a "wife" by a
"husband". Under the Foreign Marriage Act, Section 18(3)(a)(ii) and (b) (ii) conditions that will allow a court to decree
dissolution and annulment respectively are laid down which refer exclusively to the wife.
1034. This differential and heightened protections for women is enabled constitutionally by Article 15(1). "Sex" in
Article 15(1) has now been interpreted to include gender and sexuality in a catena of judgements. NALSA V. Union of
India [2014] 5 S.C.R 119 [para 59, SCR p. 210] protects transgender people and non-heterosexual persons under
Article 15(1) of the Constitution of India. Hence, the protective and enabling characteristics of the legislation in which
biological women have been protected may mirror that inclusion of transgender people and non-heterosexual persons.
111. PETITION NO. 1: Joydeep Sengupta V. Union of India
1035. Petitioners 1 and 2 are a married same sex couple, with a baby named Maya. Their marriage has been
dignified by recognition in three countries : the United States, France and Canada. They have a certificate of
registration of marriage issued by the Office of the City Clerk of New York dated 6th August, 2012 and apostille
certificate of the same date issued by the Special Deputy Secretary of State, New York. [pg 161-162, pdf 165-167]
They seek the same rights in India. Petitioner 1 is Joydeep Sengupta, a lawyer admitted to the Bars of New York, Paris
and Ontario, Canada. He specialises in cross-border investigations, compliance and regulatory matters for some of the
world's largest financial institutions and global corporations. He was an Indian citizen by birth, and is now an OCI.
Petitioner no. 2 is Blaine Stephens, his husband, is a well known economist who has advised among others, the
Reserve Bank of India. Petitioner No. 2 wishes to apply for OCI status under Section 7A(1)(d) of the Citizenship Act,
as a spouse of an OCI Cardholder.
1036. Mr. Stephens has deep roots in India, yet he must apply for temporary or business visas every time he visits.
During the covid-19 pandemic, several times, Mr. Stephens and other foreigners were prohibited from entering the
country. However, there were exemptions for OCI card holders. Since they aren't citizens of India, they approached
Petitioner No. 3, to file RTIs on the issue. Petitioner No. 3 filed three RTIs, one with the MHA itself one with the MHA
Foreigners Division and one with the MEA, Consular, Passport and Visa Division, all seeking the meaning of term
"registered" marriage in Section 7A(1)(d) and the list of countries whose marriages are legally recognized by India.
However, these RTIs were transferred back and forth by the Ministries, as a result of which the queries were never
answered. [pg 231-268, pdf p. 235-272]. The complex procedures remain as a hurdle, every time the Petitioners'
family want to visit Mr. Sengupta's widowed mother, brother and other extended family in the country.
1037. The Ministry of Home Affairs notification F. No. 26011/CC/05/2018-OCI dated 4th March 2021 [pg189
paperbook, pdf 193] will allow lifelong multiple entry visa for Petitioner No. 2 if he also has an OCI card. Without
Petitioner No. 2's recognition as Petitioner No. 1's marital partner, Petitioner No. 2 will not qualify for OCI status and
cannot reach his husband, baby or family members in India at short notice in case of illness or other urgent need.
1038. Mario Da Penha, Petitioner No. 3, is an Indian citizen, a queen rights academic and activist, currently
pursuing a PhD at Rutgers University, USA on the history of hijras in eighteenth and early nineteenth century western
India. He is a founder of Anjuman, the first queer students' collective in Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi in
2003. As a member of Voices Against 377, he was party to the legal challenge to Section 377 of the IPC, which led to
the eventual decriminalisation of homosexuality in Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of India ('Navtej Singh Johar') [2018]
7 SCR 379. Petitioner No. 3 identifies as queer.
1039. The FMA applies only to marriages where at least one of the parties is an Indian citizen. Hence, it does not
apply to the marriage of Petitioner nos. 1 and 2. As per the MHA, Foreigners Division, a registered marriage certificate
of a marriage solemnised in a foreign country is on its own sufficient to enable an OCI card holder's spouse of foreign
origin to apply for OCI status, as long as the Indian mission/post certifies/apostles the marriage certificate.
1040. Without prejudice to the same, it is pertinent to note that Section 23 of the Foreign Marriage Act provides
that the Central government may declare, vide notification in the official gazette that the marriages solemnised under
the law in force in a foreign country shall be recognized by courts in India as valid if the law in such a foreign country
contains provisions similar to those contained in the FMA. Further, under Section 17 of the FMA parties of whom at
least one was a citizen of India can seek to have their marriage duly solemnised in a foreign country registered by the
Marriage Officer. It is explicit however, as stated in section 17(2), that "No marriage shall be registered under the
section unless at the time of registration it satisfies the conditions mentioned in section 4. Section 4 pertains to the
solemnisation of a marriage by an Indian citizen before a Marriage Officer, where registration is sought at the first
instance. One of the conditions for such marriages, under Section 4(1)(c) specifically requires the parties to be a
'bride' and a 'bridegroom', i.e., to be female and male.
1041. All three Petitioners seek marriage equality.
IV. PETITION NO. 2: Mellissa Ferrier V. Union of India
1042. Mellissa Ferrier, Petitioner no. 1 and Kamakshi Raghavan Petitioner no. 2 are a married, same-sex couple,
who have been living together since the last 22 years. The Petitioners's marriage was registered in 2018 in Australia,
they now live in Bengaluru, India. By way of the present petition, the Petitioners are seeking recognition of their
matrimony in India to afford their relationship dignity and the legal rights that come with marriage.
1043. Ms. Ferrier is an Australian citizen who moved from New South Wales to Melbourne in 1995. Ms. Raghavan
was born an Indian citizen, and acquired Australian citizenship after she moved there in 1995 - she is now an OCI
(Overseas Citizen of India) Card holder.
1044. The Petitioners met each other in the year 2000, and started living together in February, 2001, in Victoria,
Australia. Subsequently, the Petitioners left Australia in June, 2002, and moved to London. In November 2004, the
Civil Partnership Act, 2004 was passed by the Westminster Parliament, which allowed same-sex couples to register
their marriages as civil partnerships. The Petitioners acquired the same in 2005. [Certificate dated 06.08.2005 at
Page No. 99]. The Petitioners subsequently purchased an apartment and lived in England till December, 2006.
However, in January, 2007, Ms. Raghavan moved back home to India and Ms. Ferrier followed the year after to be with
her partner.
1045. Ms. Ferrier, Petitioner No. 1 applied for many jobs but she did not have work authorization, and set up her
own company, which allowed her to be self-employed and gave legitimacy to her stay in India. However, Petitioner No.
1 had to leave India every six months due to the fact that she was staying in India on a business visa. Eventually,
Petitioner No. 1 got a work permit from a Mumbai based Company, however, even that required frequent work travel
to Mumbai. In 2012, while expecting a child, the Petitioners moved to Bengaluru to be closen to the family of Ms.
Raghavan.
1046. In 2013, a baby girl i.e. Lara Amrutha Ferrier Raghavan, was born to the Petitioners. [Birth Certificate
dated 17.04.2018 as proof of birth on 02.02.2013 at Page No. 111]. The Birth Certificate only records the name
of Ms. Raghavan as the mother of Lara, and Lara's other mother, Mellissa Ferrier is not legally recognized as a parent.
Ms. Ferrier then joined Wipro in 2014 in Bengaluru and took LGBTQ+ Global Lead. In 2016, the Petitioners had a
second child through IUI process. Ms. Ferrier this time, gave birth to Arjun Robbie Ferrier Raghavan on 24.10.2016
[Birth Certificate dated 10.11.2016 as proof of birth on 24.10.2016 at Page No. 112]. It is noteworthy that the
Birth Certificate only records the name of Ms. Ferrier as the mother of Arjun, and Ms. Raghavan is not legally
recognized as a parent.
1047. In 2017, Australia legalised queen marriages via the amendment in the Marriage Act, 1961. On 23.12.2018,
Petitioners got married in Victoria, Australia [Marriage Certificate dated 02.01.2019 issued in Melbourne,
Victoria, at Page No. 118].
1048. If Indian laws recognize the marriage of the Petitioners, Mellissa Ferrier and both children of Petitioners
would be eligible for OCI, and would be able to stay and live together as family with all legal rights and privileges of
being a family. Accordingly, Ms. Ferrier submitted her application for OCI as spouse of Ms. Raghavan (already an OCI
Card holder) on 07.09.2021 [OCI Application of Petitioner No. 1 at Page Nos. 119-125]. However, on
17.09.2021, at the time of verification of documents before FRRO, Bangalore, she was informed that the above
application would not be allowed since same-sex marriage is not recognized in India. No formal/written rejection was
granted to the Petitioner No. 1, but she was told orally that her marriage could not be recognised, and despite various
follow ups, no response was received on the above OCI application. [Emails dt. 17.09.2021, 20.09.2021 and
21.09.2021 at Page Nos. 126-128]
1049. That due to their marriage not being recognised the Petitioners face numerous disabilities such as ineligibility
for becoming nominees as spouses for group insurance and provident fund, superannuation. The following benefits are
not be available to queen or same sex spouses:
i) spousal privilege under Section 122 of the Evidence Act, 1872 protects married couples from being compelled to
disclose communications between the spouses during the course of the marriage;
(ii) under the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 the spouse is entitled to a family pension after the death of their spouse
who was working as a civil servant
(iii) the Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana, passed under the Unorganized Workers' Social Security Act,
2008 is a voluntary pension scheme for unorganised workers that gives minimum assured pension of Rs. 3000/-
after a subscriber attains 60 years of age. The scheme allows the spouse of the beneficiary to receive half the
pension as family pension if the beneficiary passes away.
(iv) Section 39(7) of the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, accords nominees who are immediate family
members such as spouse parents or children the status of beneficial nominee. If any of these persons are made a
nominee, the death benefit will be paid to these persons and other legal heirs will have no claim over the money.
(v) Section 10A(4) of the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923 allows the Commissioner under the Act to inform the
dependents of a deceased workman about the possibility of claiming compensation. Section (1)(d) of the
Employees' Compensation Act, 1923 defines "dependent" to include the surviving spouse.
1050. Petitioner No. 1 is required to return to Australia every 5 years for renewal of her visa, and the Residence
Permit (RP) is required to be renewed each year. Such impermanence in lifestyle affects the minor children of the
Petitioners. If the Residence Permit of Petitioner No. 1 is rejected, she and their son i.e. Arjun, would have to depart
India. Moreover, the process of renewal of the RP itself is an arduous experience, and humiliating, too, where the
Petitioner No. 1 and the minor son i.e. Arjun, have to justify being part of a family with Petitioner No. 2 and their
daughter Lara, and in fact, being part of a single family through same-sex relationship, which relationship is not given
the sanctity of recognition in India, till date. It is noteworthy that the Petitioners have lived as partners and spouses,
and with their children, have lived as a family and suffered losses and successes in life. However, despite the
foregoing, the Petitioners are still denied the recognition of being a married couple in India, which not only puts
enormous burden, but also disabilities, on their spousal life and the future of their family.
V. UNION OF INDIA'S REPLY IN PETITION NO. 1
1051. The Respondent No. 1 Union of India filed a reply to Petition 1 referring to their reply to W.P. (C) No.
6371/2020 wherein they took the stand that marriage between two individuals of the same gender is neither
recognized non accepted in any uncodified personal laws or any codified statutory laws and that the question of such
recognition must be decided by the legislature. Specific contentions on unconstitutionality of the impugned provisions
have not been responded to by Respondent No. 1. Respondent No. 1 stated that allowing the registration of same-sex
marriages will create family issues and have more ramifications than mere legal recognition and that this question
must be decided by the legislature.
VI. GROUNDS
A. THE RIGHT TO BE A 'SPOUSE' UNDER SECTION 7A(1)(d) OF THE CITIZENSHIP ACT 1955
1052. Section 7A(1)(d) of the Citizenship Act, 1955 entitles a spouse of foreign origin of an OCI Cardholder, (1)
whose marriage has been registered; and (2) subsisting for at least two years to qualify for OCI status. As per a
notification F. No. 126011/Misc./47/2019-OCI dated 15.11.2019 with FAQs issued by the MHA, Foreigners Division,
[pg. 213-230, pdf 217-234] in the case of a marriage solemnised in a foreign country, the spouse of an OCI or
Indian citizen applying for OCI may present the said marriage certificate for such a marriage, which must be apostilled
or certified by the concerned Indian mission or post. The Petitioners' marriages satisfy all these conditions.
1053. Citizenship Act uses the word "spouse" : Section 7A(1)(d) which allows spouses of OCI card-holders to
be granted OCI cards, is gender, sex and sexuality neutral; as distinct from the FMA and SMA.
1054. The absence of any conditions qua gender/sex/sexuality of the parties is a casus omissus in the
statute. The Court cannot supply a casus omissus into a statute by judicial interpretation. except in
circumstances of clear necessity : All Indian statutes pertaining to registration of marriages, require either the
marriage to be performed in India (the SMA), or atleast one party to be a citizen of India (the FMA).
1055. Section 7A(1)(d) was enacted in 2015, i.e. after the enactment of the SMA, FMA, and other marriage laws,
and deals with inter alia, marriages not covered under the FMA - i.e., for instance, a marriage between a non-citizen
OCI card holder, and a foreigner, is solemnized and registered outside India under a foreign law. Thus, the omission of
any conditions qua the gender/sex/sexuality of the parties in the marriage between the OCI card holder and spouse of
foreign origin is a casus omissus that cannot be supplied by judicial interpretive process, and even a same sex spouse
of such an OCI Cardholder must be eligible to apply for OCI status.
1056. If the conditions under Section 7A(1)(d) are satisfied, additional grounds that are not based on any law or
rule cannot be read in to deny any applicant OCI card:
(1) In Niddi Endurance Ezeh V. Union of India, 10066/2018 (Delhi High Court), the Petitioner's application
for OCI card had been rejected because he was an illegal migrant at the time of the marriage. The Delhi High
Court held that since the conditions under Section 7A(1)(d) had been complied with the Respondent had to
consider the application. [pg. 2, paras 7-8]
Indian citizen was aggrieved by the refusal of respondent, FRRO, Bengaluru to consider her application for OCI.
paras 1-2], The Delhi High Court held that the imposition of any requirement on OCI card applicants that are not
Person of Indian origin (PIO) card was married to an Indian citizen. The PIO scheme had been replaced with the
OCI card under the Citizenship Act. Petitioner's application for OCI was rejected. Respondent said that this is
High Court held that the Petitioner satisfied all requirements, and without any material to believe that
disqualifications under Section 7D(f) (marriage has been dissolved, adultery) were applicable to the case, the
1057. The recognition of the foreign marriage between two non-citizens is a mere ministerial Act : In the
case of Section 7A(1)(d) of the Citizenship Act, there is no power to examine whether the marriage in question is in
accordance with Indian law or not and as long as the marriage is validly registered in the jurisdiction where it was
performed and the other conditions of the provision are met, the foreign origin spouse is entitled to apply of OCI
status.
1058. The Israeli Supreme Court's decision in Yossi Ben-Ari V. Director of Population Administration, Ministry of
Interior, [2006] (2) IsrLR 283 [p. 292, para 7, p. 302, para 15; p. 308-309, para 23] is instructive as to the nature of
certification of a marriage that validly took place in a foreign jurisdiction. The court held that where a couple has a
marriage certificate from abroad, the Israeli registry official must register the marriage and that in effect its only a
ministerial Act. The court did not rule upon the legal status of non-heterosexual marriages in Israel. However, it held
that the purpose of the population registry was to record statistics and the role of the registration official was to collect
statistical material for the purpose of managing the registry and that the official was not competent to examine the
validity of a marriage. Without prejudice to the submission that same-sex marriages should be granted legal
recognition by Indian law, it is submitted that even in the present case, there is no reason for the state or its agencies
to deny legal recognition of marriage to same sex couples who are legally married in foreign jurisdictions and have
valid marriage certificates.
1059. Only the substantive law of the foreign jurisdiction is relevant: Where a marriage has been solemnised
in a foreign jurisdiction, the substantive law to be applied to such marriage or matrimonial disputes is the law of that
jurisdiction. Hence, it is submitted that the requirement in Section 7A(1)(d) that the marriage of the spouse of the
OCI cardholder be registered refers to legal registration in the jurisdiction the parties were married in, and the
substantive law of that jurisdiction is the only relevant law in this regard.
held that:
"20. The jurisdiction assumed by the foreign court as well as the grounds on which the relief is
granted must be in accordance with the matrimonial law under which the parties are married.
21. The parties do and ought to know their rights and obligations when they marry under a particular law.
In
Surinder Kaur Sandhu V. Harbax Singh Sandhu, [1984] 3 S.C.R 422, [SCR p. 427C-H] this Court held that, The
modern theory of Conflict of Laws recognises and, in any event, prefers the jurisdiction of the State which has the
most intimate contact with the issues arising in the case. That is to say, for example, that in matters relating to
matrimony and custody, the law of that place must govern which has the closest concern with the well-being of the
spouses and the welfare of the offsprings of marriage.
1061. In Obergefell V. Hodges, Director, Ohio Department of Health 576 U.S. 644 (2015) [internal pg. 27-28], the
US Supreme Court held that held that the equal protection clause of the US Constitution, i.e. the 14th Amendment
requires that a US State licence a marriage between a same-sex couple when the said marriage was lawfully
performed and licensed out of that State even if that State did not allow same-sex marriages.
B. RECOGNITION UNDER THE FOREIGN MARRIAGE ACT OF MARRIAGES SOLEMNISED IN FOREIGN
JURISDICTIONS
1062. Section 7A(1)(d) specifically uses the word "spouse" which, if read in light of this Hon'ble Court's
judgements, has a gender ineutral/queer/inclusive meaning in law as detailed hereinabove. The provision allows OCI
cards for spouses of OCI card-holders, as discussed in Ground A. Notably it also grants OCI cards to the "spouse of
foreign origin of a citizen of India".
10 This terminology is in contradistinction with the language of Section 4 of the FMA, the requirements of which
need to be satisfied, in terms of Section 17(2) of the FMA, for registration of foreign marriages. Section 4 lays down
the conditions necessary to be fulfilled for solemnisation of a foreign marriage before a Marriage Officer in a foreign
country; one of such conditions specified under Section 4(c) requires that "the bridegroom has completed the age of
twenty-one years and the bride the age of eighteen years at the time of the marriage..."
1064. The Petitioner submits that if would be manifestly arbitrary contrary to Article 14, for the law to accord a
larger ambit/scope for registration of marriages to an OCI than to a citizen of the country married in a foreign
jurisdiction, and to the extent of the inconsistency a harmonious construction of the FMA with the Citizenship Act is
required. And further, as discussed below, the word "spouse" may be read into Section 4 of the FMA in order to save it
from being struck down as unconstitutional under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21.
1065. Indeed section 7A(1)(d) was inserted in the Citizenship Act, in January 2015 subsequent to the
promulgation of the FMA [and its sec 4(c)] in 1969. It is well established that a subsequent statute/law may be
pressed in aid in interpreting, in case of any doubt, the provisions of an earlier statute relating to the same subject.
[SirSilk India Ltd. V. Textiles Committee [1988] Supp. 2 S.C.R 880, p. 905 C]
1066. Here too Yossi Ben Ari (supra) and Obergefell (supra) are instructive as they pertain to registration of
marriages solemnised in foreign jurisdictions, and effectively treat such registration as a ministerial act.
C. RECOGNITION OF QUEERNESS AND GENDER FLUIDITY IN MARRIAGE EQUALITY
1067. The normativity of cisgender identities and heterosexuality has been rejected by law, and there is
legal recognition of gender identities and sexualities that exist on a spectrum after the judgements of this
Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra) and Navtej Singh Johar (supra). The denial of full citizenship rights, particularly the
right to marriage goes against such legal recognition of identities outside the binary and heterosexuality. This Hon'ble
Court has recognised the inherent rights of such marginalised identities and the denial of such rights will amount to
treating them as third-class citizens.
1068. Hence the present Petition No. 1 seeks complete marriage equality, a broader recognition of "Queen Marriage"
that includes but is not restricted to "same-sex" or "homo-sexual marriage" taking into consideration the spectrum of
gender identities and sexualities.
1069. This Court legally recognised gender minorities in NALSA (supra) and decriminalised the expression of
intimacy between sexual minorities in Navtej Singh Johan (supra) In NALSA, affirmed by Navtej Singh Johar, this court
held that "Transgender is generally described as an umbrella term for persons whose gender identity, gender
expression or behavior does not conform to their biological sex. [T]he term "transgender", in contemporary usage, has
become an umbrella term that is used to describe a wide range of identities and experiences, including but not limited
to pre-operative, post-operative and non-operative transsexual people, who strongly identify with the gender opposite
to their biological sex; male and female." [SCR p. 168-169, SCR para 11]
1070. Following the lead of this Hon'ble Court in recognising the equal rights and dignity of the members of the
queer community, constitutional courts across the country have recognised the fluidity of gender and provided relief to
(2019) 4 Mad 503 recognised that sex and gender are not one and the same when holding that a marriage
solemnised between a male and a transwoman is a valid marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ("HMA"). The
court expanded the expression "bride" in Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 holding that the statute cannot
have static meaning and must be interpreted in light of the existing legal system. The Ld. Single judge affirmed the
right of marriage of a male and transgender person to marry, under Articles 14, 19(1)(a), 21 and 25 of the
1071. In Ganga Kumari V. Rajasthan, Writ Petition No. 14006/2016 [p. 10] the Rajasthan High Court directed the
appointment to a female petitioner to the post of Constable because "she has claimed herself to be a female and
merely because she has been found to be a unisex - Hermaphrodite, it cannot be said that the petitioner's claim
regarding gender was incorrect, as she has been found to be having characters of both the sexes. As a matter of fact
the petitioner's claim in relation to her gender is correct, as she has been claiming herself to be a female and she has
a right to decide, which gender she belongs to." The Rajasthan High Court drawing from principles upheld in NALSA
(supra) further held that, "The contemporary term "transgender" arose in the mid 1990s from the grassroots
community of gender-different people. In contemporary usage, transgender has become an "umbrella" term that is
used to describe a wide range of identities and experiences, including but not limited to transsexual people : male and
female cross-dressers (sometimes referred to as "transvestites," "drag queens" or "drag kings"); intersexed
individuals; and men and women, regardless of sexual orientation, whose appearance or characteristics are perceived
to be gender atypical. In its broadest sense, transgender encompasses anyone whose identity or behavior falls outside
of stereotype gender norms." [p. 12]
1072. This Hon'ble Court has also emphasised the importance of legal recognition of all/non-traditional
OnLine para 26], this Hon'ble Court held 'The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law
and in society is that it consists of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over
time) and their children. This assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change
in one's familial structure, and the fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin
with. Familial relationships may take the form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queen relationships.
These manifestations of love and of families may not be typical but they are as real as their traditional
counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally deserving not only of protection
under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The black letter of the law must
not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional ones."
Hon'ble Court held The law must remain cognizant of the fact that changes in society have ushered in significant
changes in family structures. Societal reality, as observed by this Court in Deepika Singh (supra), indicates the need
to legally recognize non-traditional manifestations of familial relationships. Such legal recognition is necessary to
enable individuals in nontraditional family structures to avail of the benefits under beneficial legislation, including the
MTP Act."
D. RIGHT OF LGBTQIA+ PERSONS TO CHOOSE THEIR MARITAL PARTNER
1074. The right of LGBTQIA+ Persons to choose their own marital partner follows as a natural sequitur from this
Hon'ble Courts decisions recognizing individual autonomy as regards sexual identity and orientation in Navtej Singh
Johan (supra), Justice K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India [2017] 10 S.C.R. 569 as well the recognition of the right to
choose one's marital partner in Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M. [2018] 4 S.C.R. 955 [Chandrachud J. (as he was then) p.
999 para 19] and Shakti Vahini V. Union of India [2018] 3 S.C.R. 770 [SCR p. 797, SCR para 44].
1075. The right to privacy in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (supra) was interpreted in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [Dipak
Misra CJI, SCR p. 497, SCR para 149], to protect the right to self-determination and autonomy in one's sexual
orientation and sexual identity. This Hon'ble Court, in Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M. [2018] 4 S.C.R. 955 [Chandrachud
J. (as he was then) p. 999 para 19], held that the right to marry a person of one's choice was within the exclusive of
domain of each individual and was protected by a core zone of privacy that is inviolable under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. In Shakti Vahini V. Union of India [2018] 3 S.C.R. 770 [SCR p. 797, SCR para 44], this Hon'ble
Court held that the right to choose and marry a person of one's choice as a component of the right to dignity within
Article 21 and that any infringement of this right would be a constitutional violation.
has recognized that members of the LGBTQIA+ Community are entitled to the full range of constitutional rights and
liberties protected by the Constitution, choice of whom to partner with, not be discriminated against on the basis of
sexual orientation, benefits of equal citizenship and equal protection of law. The right to legal recognition of marriage
falls within these rights.
1077. The Hon'ble High Court of Madras in a petition by a lesbian couple seeking protection from harassment, Ms.
"under Article 21 of the Constitution LGBTQIA+ persons, like cis persons, are entitled to their privacy and have a right
to lead a dignified existence, which includes their choice of sexual orientation, gender identity, gender presentation,
gender expression and choice of partner thereof."
1078. In Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [SCR p. 745, SCR para 20], Indu Malhotra, J. held that the criminalisation of
sexual relations of the LGBTQIA+ community resulted in a denial of fundamental rights under Articles 14, 15 and 21,
that the community has already suffered grave injustice for centuries, due to delay in providing redressal for the
ignominy they have suffered, stemming from society's ignorance in understanding that homosexuality is after all, a
natural condition. It is most respectfully submitted that this Hon'ble Court, by granting legal recognition to queen
marriages would thus be taking a significant step towards remedying the injustice that LGBTQIA+ persons have long
suffered.
E. MARRIAGE AS A RIGHT TO LIFE UNDER ARTICLE 21 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
1079. The right to legal recognition of marriage is a necessary consequence of and part of the legal
legitimacy already granted by courts of India to (i) sexual intimacy (ii) live-in relationships, and (iii)
heterosexual marriages between queer partners: The right to companionship and sexual intimacy of non-
heterosexual persons under Article 21 was recognised by this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Singh Johan [then CJI Dipak
sexual intimacy. Legal recognition of this relationship invites rights and liabilities for both parties. Indian courts have
found similar rights and liabilities to exist even in live-in relationships that in the nature of marriages, recognising that
it is the social circumstances that make a marriage. To deny non-heterosexuals the right to marriage, but recognise
their right to intimacy, prevents them from having families and allows such relationships to exist like marriages
without rights and liabilities.
with whom they share companionship and a home. The Ld. Single judge held that consensual co-habitation between
two individuals of the same gender identity is a right under Article 21 of the Constitution and it is the court's duty to
protect the right to self-determination and freedom to choose their sexual orientation and partner. When live-in
relationships in the nature of marriage are recognised and live-in relationships between queen partners have been
recognised, the jurisprudence of the courts is leading towards the recognition of the right to marriage of non-
heterosexual persons.
in relationship. They argued that even if they are not allowed to enter in wedlock, they have the right to live together
outside the wedlock. The Hon'ble Orissa High Court held that "the petitioner has the right of self-determination of
sex/gender and also he has the right to have a live-in relationship with a person of his choice even though such person
may belong to the same gender as the petitioner."
1082. Several other high courts have recognised the legitimacy of non-heterosexual relationships and marital
partners after Navtej Singh Johar (supra) and have accorded them protection under habeas corpus jurisdiction. The
following is a list of such cases for reference:-
(i) Hon'ble Delhi High Court orden dated 1.10.2018 in Sadhana Sinsinwan V. State W.P. (Crl) 3005/2018. [p. 2]
(iii) Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat, Ahmedabad order dated 23.07.2020 in Vanitaben Damjibhai Solanki V. State of
Gujarat in Special Criminal Application No. 3011 of 2020. [p. 2, para 3]
1083. The right to make choices re intimate matters of life like marital partner and family life are
protected by the right to privacy and right to dignity under Article 21: The right to life guaranteed under Article
21 includes the right to privacy and dignity which allows an individual sovereignty over their own body. As observed
by Chandrachud, J. (as he was then) in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (supra) [p. 814, para 157] family, marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual. The intimate choice of an individual
to enter into marriage with a queen or non-heterosexual partner is within their right to privacy and right to live with
dignity. Nariman, J. in Navtej Singh Johan (supra) [SCR p. 585, SCR para 79] citing this Hon'ble Court's judgement in
Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (supra) recognised the right to make intimate choices within the right to privacy and right to
live with dignity.
1084. The right to marry of queer or non-heterosexual persons as recognised as part of the law in the United States
in Obergefell (supra) was cited in the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (supra)
4
decision that the fundamental right to marry is guaranteed to same-sex couples by both the Due Process Clause and
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Justice Kennedy authored the majority opinion (joined by
Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotamayor and Kagan): "Indeed, the Court has noted it would be contradictory to
recognize a right of privacy with respect to other matters of family life and not with respect to the decision
to enter the relationship that is the foundation of the family in our society.""
1085. This Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra) [SCR p. 214-215, SCR para 69] referred to its judgement in Anuj Garg
V.
that personal autonomy includes both the negative right to not be subject to interference by others and the positive
right of individuals to make decisions about their life, to express themselves and to choose which activities to take part
in.
1086. Changes in the social institution of marriage must be reflected in law: Marriage as a social institution
has developed over time and heteronormative, cisgender and patriarchal norms that uphold only heterosexual
marriages as valid marriages are outside the purview of the Constitution. In Joseph Shine V. Union of India [2018] 11
S.C.R. 765, a constitution bench of this Hon'ble Court recognised the change in the social institution of marriage and
opined that law regulating this institution must reflect the right to privacy and dignity of citizens under the
1087. A.K Sikri, J., quoting Aharon Barak (former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Israel), in the case of Jeeja
Ghosh V. Union of India [2016] 4 S.C.R. 638 observed that the constitutional value of human dignity has a central
normative role. Human dignity as a constitutional value is the factor that unites human rights into one whole. Human
dignity as a constitutional factor is the factor that unites the human rights into one whole. Going on, he opined that
1088. Interference in a personal relationship would constitute a serious encroachment into the right to freedom of
choice of two individuals, as has been held by the Hon'ble Allahabad High Court in Salamat Ansari V. State of UP 2020
and Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (supra) it held that an individual on attaining majority is statutorily conferred a right to
choose a partner, which if denied would not only affect his/her human right but also his/her right to life and personal
13-14].
F. MARRIAGE AS A RIGHT TO FREE EXPRESSION UNDER ARTICLE 19 (1) (a)
1089. Article 9(1) : In Navtej Singh Johan (supra) [SCR p. 534, SCR para 253(vii)] this Hon'ble Court recognised
that the expression of an individual's sexuality or sexual orientation or right to choose a partner is protected under
Article 19(1)(a) and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation will violate Article 19(1)(a).
1090. Non-heterosexuals persons have the right to express their intimacies, companionship and personality to the
world and the law through marriage and restriction of such right would fall foul of Article 19(1)(a). The choice of a
marital partner is an expression of choice and exercise of freedom under Article 19(1)(a) In NALSA (supra) [SCR p.
212, SCR para 62], the Hon'ble Supreme Court recognised that an individual's gender identity is a reflection of their
choose who to marry is protected under Article 19 and cannot be restricted due to group thinking or class honour.
1091. The violation is not saved by Article 19(2) : The restrictions on non-heterosexual marriages, denying the
right to marriage only on the basis of their gender identity or sexual orientation is excessive and arbitrary. In Navtej
Singh Johar (supra) [then CJI, Dipak Misra, SCR p. 530, SCR para 246-247] this Hon'ble Court found that Section 377
of the Indian Penal Code 1860 was violative of Article 19(1)(a) as it was an unreasonable restriction on sexual
intercourse between consenting adults and did not harm public decency or morality. In S. Khushboo V. Kanniammal
[2010] 5 S.C.R. 322 [SCR p. 353-355, SCR para 29], this Hon'ble Court held that while decency and morality may be
grounds on which reasonable restrictions can be imposed, this should not be beyond a rational or logical limit and
must be tolerant of unpopular social views.
1092. A queer person's right to marry an individual of their choice is a freedom that they must be
allowed to exercise under Article 19 read with Article 21. J. Chandrachud (as he then was), speaking for the
majority in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (supra) [SCR p. 831, SCR para 169] held that the right to privacy under Article
21 read with Article 19 allows them the inviolable right to determine how this freedom is exercised.
G. RIGHT TO MARRIAGE UNDER ARTICLES 14 AND 15
1093. Unequal treatment of heterosexual and non-heterosexual couples is violative of Article 14: In
Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [SCR p. 528, SCR para 240] then CJI Dipak Mishra recognised the need to treat individuals
belonging to the LGBT community equally with the same human, fundamental and constitutional rights as other
citizens.
1094. In NALSA (supra) [SCR p. 218, SCR para 77], this Hon'ble Court concluded that "discrimination on the basis
of sexual orientation or gender identity includes any discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference, which has the
effect of nullifying or transposing equality by the law or the equal protection of laws guaranteed under our
Constitution".
1095. There is no reasonable classification due to which non-heterosexual persons can be treated
differently in relation to marriage There is no constitutionally permissible intelligible differentia which can justify
treating (non-heterosexuals and heterosexuals differently for the right to marriage.
1096. The only distinguishing factor between queen marriages and heterosexual marriages is the ability for both
parties in a heterosexual couple to reproduce. However, all heterosexual marriages are valid regardless of the ability to
have biological children, nor does having the ability to have biological children act as a qualification for registration of
a marriage. In NALSA (supra) [SCR p. 215, SCR para 70], this Hon'ble Court accorded legal recognition to transgender
persons who are neither men or women and may or may not have reproductive capacities. This Hon'ble Court also
recognised that such persons have issues with marriage and adoption and held that it was essential for the state to
accord them full civil and citizenship rights (which includes the right to marriage).
1097. Further, if any alleged majoritarian support of heterosexual marriage and opposition to queer marriage is
cited as a classification-the "test of popular acceptance" that was used by this Court in Suresh Kumar Kaushal V. Naz
then) SCR p. 735-738, SCR para 124-128] and Navtej Singh Johan (supra) [SCR p. 644 SCR para 55].
1098. The non-existence of frameworks for regulation (inheritance divorce, maintenance etc.) cannot act as a bar
to
legal recognition and accordance of constitutionally mandated rights. In Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [SCR p. 466, SCR
para 65], it was argued that there will be a cascading effect on other laws such as marriage laws, divorce laws, sexual
crimes and open a floodgate of social issues. Despite this, the right of LGBTQIA+ persons to have sexual relationships
was recognised and Section 377, IPC was decriminalised. In NALSA (supra) [SCR p. 205-206, SCR para 49] persons
who did not come within the current framework of law were given space under the law and all consequent civil rights.
"Indian Law, on the whole, only recognizes the paradigm of binary genders of male and female, based on a person's
sex assigned by birth, which permits gender system, including the law relating to marriage, adoption, inheritance,
succession and taxation and welfare legislations. Due to the absence of suitable legislation protecting the rights of the
members of the transgender community, they are facing discrimination in various areas. a constitutional Court cannot
be a mute spectator when those rights are violated, but is expected to safeguard those rights"
1099. Manifest Arbitrariness under Article 14: In Shayara Bano V. Union of India [2017] 9 S.C.R. 797, this
Court held that "Manifest arbitrariness, therefore, must be something done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally
and/or without adequate determining principle. Also, when something is done which is excessive and disproportionate,
such legislation would be manifestly arbitrary. We are, therefore, of the view that arbitrariness in the sense of manifest
arbitrariness as pointed out by us above would apply to negate legislation as well under Article 14." [SCR p. 1138,
SCR para 55] A constitution bench of this Hon'ble Court in Joseph Shine (supra) held that provisions of law that
postulate a notion of marriage that subverts equality is manifestly arbitrary and bad in law [Per Chandrachud, J, SCR
p. 897, SCR para 35-36] In the same judgement, this Hon'ble Court held that if the purported rationale of the
provision has outlived its purpose and/or doesn't square with constitutional morality, the same would be manifestly
arbitrary. [Per Nariman, J, SCR p. 858, SCR para 23] There is no adequate determining principle to rejecting the right
of marriage to queen couples.
1100. Further, the denial of equal marriage rights is arbitrary because it privileges the institution of marriage over
the privacy, dignity and autonomy of queen persons as protected by Article 21. In Joseph Sine (supra) this court held
that even the familial structures are not private spaces where constitutional rights can be violated. [SCR p. 907, SCR
para 50]
1101. Denial of the right to marriage is discrimination under Article 15(1): "Sex" under Article 15 includes
para 15.1] Discrimination against non-heterosexuals is discrimination on the basis of gender, sex and sexual
orientation and is violative of Article 15(1).
H. RIGHT OF QUEER PERSONS NOT TO SUFFER DISABILITIES UNDER ARTICLE 15(2) DUE TO THE DENIAL
OF THE RIGHT TO MARRIAGE
1102. Without legal recognition of their marriage, queen persons are also denied access to commercial
establishments and public spaces and there is a violation of their rights under Article 15(2). They do not have the
entitlements of a marital partner in privately accessed necessities and activities like insurance, hospitalisation and
booking of hotels.
1103. For example Section 39(7) of the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, accords nominees who are
immediate family members such as spouse, parents or children the status of beneficial nominee. If any of these
persons are made a nominee, the death benefit will be paid to these persons and other legal heirs will have no claim
over the money. Similarly, Section 10A(4) of the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923 allows the Commissioner under
the Act to inform the dependents of a deceased workman about the possibility of claiming compensation. Section 2(1)
(d) of the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923 defines "dependent" to include the surviving spouse.
1104. Further, discrimination of queen couples by private establishments providing services should be held violative
of rights under Article 15(2) of the Constitution. In Indian Medical Association V. Union of India [2011] 6 S.C.R. 599
[SCR p. 714-718, SCR paras 113-116], this Hon'ble Court on an examination of Constituent Assembly debates held
that "shops" under Article 15(2) should be interpreted broadly to not just refer to physical shops, but also any
provision of goods or services in the market. The Supreme Court further held that the private sector cannot conduct
services in a manner that is discriminatory. Article 15(2) can be interpreted to mean that such establishments do not
have to just refrain from discrimination, but also make sure that their rules of access do not perpetuate social
disadvantages.
1105. In Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan [1997] Supp. 3 SCR 404 [SCR p. 413G-414B], private and public
employers were held to the constitutional obligation of providing a framework for protection against sexual
harassment. The state was recognised to have the constitutional duty to protect individuals from sexual harassment in
the workplace and due to the void of legislation, the Supreme Court issued guidelines for both private and public
workplaces.
1106. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Indian Young Lawyers Assn. V. State of Kerala [2018] 9 S.C.R 561 held that
equality of all human beings entails being free from the restrictive and dehumanising effect of stereotypes and being
entitled equally to the protection of the law. [SCR p. 775, SCR para 56]
1.
INTERPRETING THE WORD BRIDE" AND "BRIDEGROOM" AND "MAN" AND "WOMAN" IN THE FMA AND
SMA
1107. In NALSA (supra) this Hon'ble Court directed the Central and State Governments to grant legal recognition
of transgender persons including "third gender" persons: It is only with this recognition that many rights attached to
the sexual recognition as 'third gender' would be available to this community more meaningfully viz. the right to vote,
the right to own property, the right to marry, the right to claim a formal identity through a passport and a ration card,
a driver's license, the right to education, employment, health SO on." [SCR p. 234, SCR para 113]
1108. This Parliament then enacted the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 and the
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Rules, 2020. The object of the 2019 Act is to "provide for protection
of rights of transgender persons and their welfare and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto." Section
2(k) of the Act defines a "transgender person" as "a person whose gender does not match with the gender assigned to
that person at birth and includes trans-man or trans-woman (whether or not such person has undergone Sex
Reassignment Surgery or hormone therapy or laser therapy or such other therapy), person with intersex variations,
genderqueer and person having such socio-cultural identities as kinner, hijra, aravani and jogta." The form for the
Transgender Identity card under the 2020 Rules even envisages the details for the "spouse" of a transgender person.
1109. Following the lead of this Hon'ble Court in recognising the equal rights and dignity of the members of the
queen community, courts across the country have recognised the fluidity of gender and provided relief to queen
litigants. The Madras High Court in Arunkumar V. Inspector General of Registration (supra) recognised that sex and
gender are not one and the same when holding that a marriage solemnised between a male and a transwoman is a
valid marriage. It further held, "Beyond the man-woman binary, there are as many as 58 gender variants. Of course,
[pp. 18-19, paras 75-76], Rajasthan High Court in Order dated 13.11.2017 in Ganga Kumari V. Rajasthan, Writ
Petition No. 14006/2016 p.14] et al. have all stepped in to direct the government to provide recognition for
transgender persons in fields such as education and employment because despite legal recognition, transgender
persons still do not enjoy full citizenship rights.
1110. Marriage is one such citizenship right where courts such as in Arunkumar (supra) have had to step in,
because marriage statutes do not specifically provide for marriage of transgender persons.
1111. In Independent Thought V. Union of India [2017] 13 S.C.R. 821, this Court invalidated the marital rape
exception as applicable to married girls between the ages of 15 and 18 on grounds of:
1) unconstitutionality [SCR p. 834, 919 SCR para 1, 88] and;
2) harmonious construction of Exception 2 to Section 375 IPC with the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
Act, 2012 the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and the Prohibition of Child Marriage
Act, 2006 [SCR p. 878, 919, SCR para 103, 88].
1112. This Hon'ble Court has settled jurisprudence on reading down provisions of an Act, to save it from
unconstitutionality. In Corp. of Calcutta V. Liberty Cinema, [1965] 2 S.C.R. 477, this court read the narrow
construction of the word "fees" to mean "tax" to save section 548 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 from
unconstitutionality. [SCR p. 483D-484G] Similarly, in Express Newspapers Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC
578, 'the criteria of the capacity of the industry to pay' was held to be an essential condition for fixation of wages and
was
interpreted to be part of the criteria given under section 9(i) of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service)
India, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 669, this court held that the words "after" in section 6 Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act of
1956 to have the meaning "in the absence of" to subserve the needs of the statute. [SCR p. 686, SCR paras 24-25;
SCR p. 689-690, SCR paras 7-10]Through purposive interpretation this Court has also widened the applicability of
120-121.
1113. It is trite that it should not be lightly assumed that what the Parliament has given with one hand, it took
away with the other. [Central Bank of India V. Ravindra, [2001] Supp. 4 S.C.R 323, SCR p. 355D] The rule of
harmonious construction used to give effect to different provisions of the same enactment has also been applied when
different statutes conflict with each other. This Court in Jugal Kishore V. State of Maharashtra [1988] Supp 3 S.C.R
270 emphasised the need to a constructive approach to interpretation to avoid contradiction in different acts: Unless
the Acts [Maharashtra Agricultural Land (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961 and the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural
Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958], with the intention of implementing various socio-economic plans, are read in
such complementary manner, the operation of the different Acts in the same field would create contradiction and
would become impossible. It is, therefore, necessary to take a constructive attitude in interpreting provisions of these
types and determine the main aim of the particular Act in question for adjudication before the court." [SCR p. 274E-F]
1114. This was also done in Independent Thought (supra), where this Court held, "Long ago, it was said by Lord
Denning that when a defect appears, a judge cannot fold his hands and blame the draftsman but must also consider
the social conditions Viewed from any perspective, there seems to be no reason to arbitrarily discriminate against a
girl child who is married between 15 and 18 years of age. On the contrary, there is every reason to give a harmonious
and purposive construction to the pro-child statutes to preserve and protect the human rights of the married girl
child." [SCR p. 876, 878 SCR para 99, 103]
1115. In the same manner, to harmonise the legal rights of transgender community and sexual minorities
recognised by this court, various high courts and the legislature in the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act,
2019, this Court may interpret the relevant provisions of the SMA and the FMA to specifically include transgender
persons in the following way:-
1) This court may interpret Sections 12, 15, 22, 23, 25 and 27 of the SMA which use the terms "husband" and
"wife" when providing for the solemnization, registration and nullity of marriage, and Section 44, which provides
the punishment for bigamy, as "husband or wife or spouse", with "or spouse" being implied terms in the
legislation, interpreted by this Court to save the SMA from unconstitutionality. The terms "Bride" and
"Bridegroom" that have been used in the Third and Fourth Schedule of the FMA for the declarations by both
parties and certification of marriage be read to include the word "spouse" in line with the above.
2) The terms "husband" and "wife" are used in Section 13 and 18 of the Foreign Marriage Act in relation to the
solemnisation of marriage and provisions where matrimonial reliefs under the Special Marriage Act are available
under the Foreign Marriage Act. This Court read the relevant part of the provisions as "husband or wife or
spouse", with "or spouse" being implied terms in the legislation, interpreted by this Court to save the Foreign
Marriage Act from unconstitutionality, in the same manner as discussed in relation to the SMA above.
J. FOREIGN JUDGEMENTS ON MARRIAGE EQUALITY
1116. This Hon'ble Court in NALSA (supra) relied upon various foreign judgements and international conventions to
highlight that the principle of guarantee to equality and non-discrimination on the basis of gender is gaining
prominence in international law and thus may be applied in India. [SCR p. 186, 204-205, SCR para 25, 47-48]
1117. As stated earlier, the Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of Obergefell V. Hodges 576 U.S. 644
(2015) granted legal recognition to same sex marriages. Thus, now all states in the US are now required to issue
marriage licenses to same sex couples and recognize same sex marriage validly performed in other jurisdictions. While
doing so, it upheld several relevant principles which can be applied in the context of India. Important principles
upheld in the judgement are:
(i) the right to personal choice regarding marriage is inherent in the concept of individual autonomy and the right to
privacy with respect to this matter must be recognized as it is for other family matters [p. 12, para 3];
(ii) a legally recognized marriage was the source for various other rights and privileges and that non-recognition of
same-sex marriages was resulted in denial of these rights to that community [pp. 14-15, para 3];
(iii) in Lawrence V. Texas 539 U.S. 558 (2003), the court had drawn upon principles of liberty and equality to
decriminalise private sexual conduct between gays and lesbians. The same rationale will apply to same-sex
marriages and that the challenged laws abridged the central precepts of equality and that the right to marry is a
fundamental right inherent in the liberty of the person [p. 14, para 2];
(iv) the Due Process and Equal protection clauses of the fourteenth amendment to the US Constitution invalidate
the state laws under challenge to the extent that they excluded same-sex couples from civil marriage on the
same terms and conditions as opposite sex couples [p. 23, para 3];
(v) the dynamic of the American constitutional system was such that individuals need not await legislative action
before asserting a fundamental right and that an individual could invoke a right to constitutional protection when
he or she was harmed, even if the broader public disagreed and even if the legislature refused to act [p. 24, para
2].
1118. The Constitutional Court of South Africa, in the case of Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie with Doctors For Life
International (first amicus curiae), John Jackson Smyth (second amicus curiae) and Marriage Alliance of South Africa
(third amicus curiae) CCT 60/04, declared that the common law definition of marriage was inconsistent with the
Constitution and invalid to the extent that it did not permit queen couples to enjoy the status and the benefits coupled
with responsibilities available to heterosexual couples. The court further declared that the omission of the words "or
spouse" after the words "or husband" in Section 30(1) of the Marriage Act, in South Africa was inconsistent with the
Constitution [p. 52, para 82]. The Marriage Act was declared invalid to the extent of this inconsistency. The court
directed the Parliament of South Africa to frame necessary legislation to grant legal recognition to non heterosexual
marriages. It suspended the declaration of invalidity for a period of 12 months and held that if the Parliament would
not correct the defects within this period, Section 30(1) of the Marriage Act 25 of 1961 will forthwith be read as
including the words "or spouse" after the words "or husband" as they appear in the marriage formula. [p. 102, para 2]
The Supreme Court, in the case of Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [Chandrachud, J. (as he was then) SCR p. 688, SCR
para 118] relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court of Nepal in the case of Sunil Babu Pant V. Nepal Government
Writ No. 914 of the year 2064 BS (2007 AD), wherein it was held, in the context of samesex marriages that one adult
had the right to enter into marital relations with another adult wilfully. The Supreme Court of Nepal directed the
Nepalese government to enact new legislation or amend existing legislation to ensure that persons of all sexual
orientations and gender identities could enjoy equal rights [pp. 285-286].
1119. The Supreme Court of India, in the case of Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [Chandrachud, J. (as he was then)
SCR p. 688, SCR para 119], also cited a decision of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Oliari V. Italy
276 [2015] ECHR 716 277, wherein it was affirmed that same-sex couples "are in need of legal recognition and
protection of their relationship" [p. 50 para 165]. The ECtHR concluded that gay couples are equally capable of
entering into stable and committed relationships in the same way as heterosexual couples [pp. 51-52, para 169]. The
ECtHR examined the domestic context in Italy, and noted a clear gap between the "social reality of the applicants",
who openly live their relationship, and the law, which fails to formally recognize same-sex partnerships [p. 53, para
173]. The ECtHR held that in the absence of any evidence of a prevailing community interest in preventing legal
recognition of same-sex partnerships, Italian authorities "have overstepped their margin of appreciation and failed to
fulfil their positive obligation to ensure that the applicants have available a specific legal framework providing for the
recognition and protection of their same-sex unions" 55-56, para 185].
1120. Indu Malhotra J. in her judgement in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) [SCR p. 720, SCR para 10] recognized the
global trend towards the right to marry : "631. The trend of decriminalizing anti-sodomy laws world over has gained
currency during the past few decades since such laws have been recognised to be violative of human rights. In 2017,
the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association noted in its Annual State Sponsored
Homophobia Report that 124 countries no longer penalise homosexuality. The change in laws in these countries was
given effect to, either through legislative amendments to the statutory enactments, or by way of court judgments.
Relationships between same-sex couples have been increasingly accorded protection by States across the world. As
per the aforesaid Report, a total of 24 countries now allow same-sex couples to marry, while 28 countries legally
recognise partnerships between same-sex couples. Several countries have enacted enabling legislations which protect
LGBT persons from discrimination, and allow them to adopt children
1121. The United States Supreme Court, in United States V. Windsor 570 U.S. 744 (2013) while examining the
effect of S.3 of the Defence of Marriage Act in excluding same-sex couples from the federal definition of "marriage"
and "spouse" held the same to be unconstitutional. Observing that the exclusion places same sex couples in an
untenable position of being in a second-tier marriage. It further observed that this differentiation demeans the couple,
whose moral and sexual choices the Constitution protects [pp. 22-23].
K. INTERNATIONAL LAW AND MARRIAGE EQUALITY
1122. Several international law instruments recommend that states legally recognize marriage equality and not
deny civil rights on the basis of sexual orientation.
1123. The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) released a Report of the Independent Expert
on
protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity
A/HRC/35/36" dated 19th April, 2017 which stated, "21. Other provisions (e.g. article 7 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights) reaffirm
the right to equality before the law and equal protection of the law without discrimination. The stricture against
discrimination was deliberated upon by the Human Rights Committee in regard to a seminal case, Toonen V. Australia,
that concerned the presence of a local law that prohibited same-sex relations. The Committee found that the local law
in question violated article 17 of the Covenant in regard to the right to privacy, and that the reference to "sex" in
article 2(1) (as well as in art. 26) covered sexual orientation." [p. 8, para 21]
1124. The Inter American Court of Human Rights ("IACtHR"), upon being requested by the Republic of Costa Rica
gave
Advisory Opinion Oc-24/17 Of November 24, 2017, titled "Gender Identity, And Equality And Non-
Discrimination Of Same-Sex Couples State Obligations Concerning Change Of Name, Gender Identity, And
Rights Derived From A Relationship Between Same-Sex Couples (Interpretation And Scope Of Articles (1),
3, 7, 11 (2), 13, 17, 18 And 24, In Relation To Article 1, Of The American Convention On Human Rights)" and
concluded: 7. The State must recognize and ensure all the rights derived from a family relationship between same-sex
couples in accordance with the provisions of Articles 11(2) and 17(1) of the American Convention, as established in
paragraphs 200 to 218." "8. Under Articles 1(1), 2, 11(2), 17 and 24 of the Convention, States must ensure full access
to all the mechanisms that exist in their domestic laws, including the right to marriage, to ensure the protection of the
rights of families formed by same-sex couples, without discrimination in relation to those that are formed by
heterosexual couples, as established in paragraphs 200 to 228." [p. 83, para 7]
L. THE TRANSFORMATIVE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
1125. The nature of our constitution is transformative and rights thereunder aim to develop with society and
change as society changes. The right to marry for queer persons, which was not recognised before, should be
recognised now. This transformative constitutionalism allows the Constitution to be a living document that breathes
rights into communities which have been previously social and legally marginalised. The Constitution must be
interpreted in a manner to protect rights of all individuals regardless of their gender identity or sexual orientation.
1126. This Hon'ble Court, in the case of Navtej Singh Johan (supra), discussed the concept of "transformative
constitutionalism" and relied upon a number of its own previous judgements to hold that the Constitution is an
151]
1127. In NALSA (supra) this Hon'ble Court recognised the social and cultural identities of the Hijra, Arvani and
Jogappa communities. These communities have their own established institutions of family, household and kinship
that are not based on marriage, but rather on their own institutionalised practices. Several other queen communities
are based on relationships of love, belonging and shared experiences that reject the traditional cisgender heterosexual
patriarchal family. Conceptions of family and kinship under law, hence should recognise communities of people who
may vary in their personal identities but live together in a shared experience of queerness and love to not participate
in the compulsory heteronormative family. The practices and relationships of queen people deserve to be recognised,
as much as heterosexual relationships are, in society and in law. By the same token, voluntary relationships of
marriage between same sex and queen persons must be recognised under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21.
1128. Our courts have time and again cast a positive obligation upon states to take active measures to protect and
ensure the fulfilment of the right to life and personal liberty under Article 21. In Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan AIR
women at the workplace was absent, effective measures with respect to the same were to be put in place and
implemented to protect fundamental rights [SCR p. 413H, 414B]. Similarly, in Ms. S. Sushma V. Commissioner of
Police (supra), the Hon'ble High Court of Madras issued a slew of guidelines/directions to the police, Union
Government, State Governments as well as certain ministries/departments to protect same-sex couples from
1129. Constitutional courts must protect constitutional morality and disregard social morality. It is the duty of the
courts to ensure that queen persons, however small in number or disregarded by society, are given the full protection
of rights under the Constitution. In Navtej Singh Johan (supra) the then CJI Dipak Mishra held that in the garb of
social morality, members of the queen community cannot be denied their fundamental rights. [SCR p. 487, SCR para
121-122]
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) No. 10 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Vaibhav Jain & Anr Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Anr Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MS. GEETA LUTHRA, SENIOR ADVOCATE, FOR THE PETITIONERS
Index
I. BACKGROUND OF THE PETITIONERS
11. PRAYER
111. SUBMISSIONS
A. FMA affords rights and protections that are appurtenant to Indian citizenship
The FMA applies based on citizenship, not domicile
B. All citizens including LGBTQIA+ citizens are entitled all rights available to Indian citizens, even if
they are abroad
(a) Article 19 and 21 of the Constitution guarantee all persons the right to marry a person of their
choice, including LGBTQIA+ citizens
(b) Article 21 : The impugned statute violates the right to dignity and decisional autonomy of
LGBTQIA+ persons
(c) Article 15 : Excluding LGBTQIA+ persons from the SMA discriminates based on their (i) their
sexual orientation, and (ii) the sex of their partner
(i) Discrimination based on sexual orientation
(ii) Discrimination on the basis of sex
(d) Article 14 The impugned statutes deny LGBTQIA+ persons (a) the equal protection of laws (b)
are manifestly arbitrary and (c) fail the rational nexus test
(i) Equal protection of laws
(ii) Manifest Arbitrariness
(iii) Rational Nexus Test
C. Recognition of marriage of same-sex and genden non-conforming couples under the FMA furthers
the comity of nations
D. The grant of reliefs as prayed for does not render unworkable the provisions of the FMA or other
statutes employing gendered terminology
E. The Petitioners were refused registration under the FMA on grounds outside of Section 17
The FMA is a complete Code
I. BACKGROUND OF THE PETITIONERS
1130. Vaibhav Jain and Parag Mehta are an Indian citizen and OCI cardholder, respectively. They have been a
couple for about eleven years. In 2017, the Petitioners solemnized their marriage in the District of Columbia, United
States of America under the Religious Freedom and Civil Marriage Equality Amendment Act, 2009. Their marriage was
solemnized by Justice Sri. Srinivasan, Chief United States Circuit Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit, who was then the highest ranking Indian-American person in the American judicial system
[Annexure P-4 @ Pg. 104].
1131. Petitioners also had a ceremony by Jain rites and rituals in Killen, Texas in March 2019, and a wedding
reception in New Delhi in November 2019, attended by all their friends and family members.
1132. Before the pandemic, the Petitioners who have roots in India, visited their families annually during Diwali
and Dussehra festivals. Amidst the lockdowns during the Covid pandemic, all foreigners including OCI cardholders
were restricted from entering the country. Relaxations brought to the same in May, 2020, were restricted to certain
classes of OCI cardholders such as those persons whose spouse was an Indian national, or those whose parents were
Indian nationals. So even though Parag (2nd Petitioner) was an OCI cardholder and Vaibhav's spouse, he could not
travel to India despite the relaxations as his marriage was not recognized under Indian law.
1133. On 18.02.2020, Petitioners applied to the Consulate General of India, New York (2nd Respondent) seeking
registration of their marriage under S. 17 of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 ("FMA") [Annexure P-9 @ Pg. 169].
Officers of the 2nd Respondent refused to even receive the Petitioner's application, although the Petitioners fulfilled all
the conditions prescribed under S. 17 of the FMA. On inquiring from the officer whether they were denied registration
because they are a same-sex couple, the officer replied in the affirmative. On 07.03.2020, Vaibhav wrote an email to
the 2nd Respondent noting the events that transpired at the Consulate and pointing out that the refusal to register the
Petitioners' marriage constituted sexual orientation discrimination under the Indian Constitution. [Annexure P-10 @
Pg. 163]. By his email dated 10.03.2020 [Annexure P-11 @ Pg. 166], the Consulate General replied:
"There is no question of discrimination by our office. Our inability to provide a particular service cannot
be
construed in any way as discrimination. [Navtej Singh Johar] is about IPC 377 and does not deal in any way with
legal provisions for registration or certification of marriages."
11. PRAYER
1134. Aggrieved by the refusal to register their foreign marriage solely on the ground that they are a same-sex
couple, the Petitioners are before this Court seeking the following reliefs [Pg. 86]:
a. Declaration that the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 inasmuch as it excludes same-sex marriages violates Article 14,
15, 19, and 21 of the Constitution of India; read down the Act to recognize marriages between consenting adults
irrespective of their gender and sexual orientation;
b. Consequently, a mandamus to the 2nd Respondent to register the marriage of the Petitioners under S. 17 of the
FMA in present case, and issue an appropriate marriage certificate.
111. SUBMISSIONS
A. FMA affords rights and protections that are appurtenant to Indian citizenship
The FMA applies based on citizenship, not domicile
1135. The FMA was enacted pursuant to the recommendations contained in the 23rd Report of the Law Commission
(August, 1962) on the law relating to foreign marriages. The object of the FMA was summarized by the Law
Commission as one to "regulate marriages performed outside India when either of the parties thereto is a citizen of
India, thereby filling a gap in the Special Marriage Act, which is limited in its application to marriages between Indian
citizens".
1136. The reality of the globalised world is that Indian citizens live and work abroad and this Act helps in providing
recognition to marriages irrespective of traditions, customs or any other restrictions. The foundational notion of the
FMA is, firstly, like the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("SMA"), to extend the legal recognition granted to marriages to
more couples who wish to marry, and secondly, to elevate recognition of the marriage of an Indian citizen abroad as a
right protected as a facet of their citizenship.
1137. The 23rd Law Commission explained the design of the FMA around the fulcrum of citizenship in the following
terms:
"10. A question which calls for decision at the very threshold is, what should be criterion or criteria on which
persons might be allowed to avail themselves of the proposed legislation. Domicile and citizenship are the two
elements which enter into a discussion on the validity of foreign marriages according to rules of private international
law.
We have given anxious thought to the question whether we should depart from the scheme of the English and
Australian Acts and require domicile as a condition for the application of this law. We have come to the
conclusion that we should on the pattern of English and Australian Acts, provide for citizenship alone
being the sole criterion. These Acts have been in force for a quite a long period and no inconvenience has
resulted from them. To introduce the element of domicile, in addition or in substitution of citizenship, as a criterion,
will result in needless complications in the law."
(emphasis supplied)
1138. Another salient object of the FMA is to provide for maximum international validity to a marriage between two
persons one of whom is an Indian citizen. The 23rd Law Commission noted in this regard as under:
"9. In our view, the proposed legislation should be enabling in character, that is to say, it should not be
obligatory on the part of the an Indian citizen entering into a marriage outside India to have it solemnized in the
mode prescribed by it; it should be open to him or to her to adopt any other mode which might be available if he or
she is satisfied that that has the requisite validity under the rules of private international law and is better suited to
him or to her. The form prescribed by the proposed legislation is not in supersession of but in addition to,
any other mode that might be permissible. We have accordingly provided that marriages performed in
a
foreign country otherwise than under this legislation should remain unaffected by it.
(emphasis supplied)
1139. The afore-stated objects of the FMA are also borne out from the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act
which reads:
"2...
The following are the salient features of the Bill-
(i) It provides for an enabling form of marriage more or less on the same lines as the Special Marriage Act, 1954,
which can be availed of outside India where one of the parties to the marriage is an Indian citizen the form of
marriage thus provided being not in supersession of but only in addition to or as an alternative to any
other form that might be permissible to the parties."
(emphasis supplied)
1140. The long title of the Act describes the Act as one to "make provision to marriages of citizens of India outside
India."
1141. Various provisions of the FMA securing these objects of the Act are under:
Section 3, Marriage Officers.- For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint such of its diplomatic or consular officers as it may think fit to be Marriage Officers for
any foreign country.
Explanation.- this section, "diplomatic officer" means an ambassador, envoy, minister, high commissioner,
commissioner, charge d' affairs or other diplomatic representative or a counsellor or secretary of an embassy,
legation or high commission.
Section 15, Validity of foreign marriages in India.-Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a
marriage solemnized in the manner provided in this Act shall be good and valid in law.
Section 27, Act not to affect validity of marriages outside of it. Nothing in this Act shall in any way
affect the validity of a marriage solemnized in a foreign country otherwise than under this Act.
1142. The Act, therefore, travels with the citizen to a foreign jurisdiction to extend its protection by recognizing the
citizen's marriage contracted under foreign law, or by allowing a citizen to solemnize their marriage under Indian law
even when they are abroad. As a consequence of choosing recognition under this Act, the citizen may avail of the
scheme and provisions for reliefs of matrimonial causes in India.
1143. The protections and benefits appurtenant to recognition under the FMA are available to all Indian citizens
abroad, who choose to come into the fold of the statute by way of solemnization/registration. The Petitioners submit
that these crucial protections extended by the Act cannot be denied to them on the basis of their sexual orientation
and gender identity.
B. All citizens including LGBTQIA+ citizens are entitled all rights available to Indian citizens, even if they
are abroad
1144. The protection and guarantees of Part 111 of the Indian Constitution inheres to every Indian citizen. The
to all these rights. The Indian Constitution and its protections does not cease to enure to a citizen merely because they
are beyond Indian territory. The Petitioners submit that all facets of Part 111 that secure the right to marry a person of
their choice available to Indian citizens are available to an Indian citizen who chooses to marry abroad. The choice and
enabling provisions of the FMA ought not to be excluded to an Indian citizen who is in a foreign country.
1145. The Petitioners submit that the following constitutional protections and guarantees renders the exclusion of
their marriage under the FMA unconstitutional:
(a) Article 19 and 21 of the Constitution guarantee all persons the right to marry a person of their choice,
including LGBTQIA+ citizens.
fact in the national interest as they will result in destroying the caste system." It is submitted that recognizing
LGBTQIA+ unions will, equally, bring about the constitutional vision of a diverse society that protects its minorities.
partner in life is founded on individual choice under Article 19:
"61. choice of woman in choosing her partner in life is a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded on
individual choice that is recognised in the Constitution under Article 19, and such a right is not expected to
succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group thinking".
[emphasis supplied]
that the choice of an individual of to marry a person of their choice is an inextricable part of dignity:
"11 the choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there is
erosion of choice. Such a right or choice is not expected to succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group
thinking".
categorically held that the right to marry a person of choice is protected under Article 21:
(DY Chandrachud, J.)
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional compliance) the conditions of a valid
marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be ended or annulled. These remedies are
available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on whether they should accept each other into a
marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to play in determining our choice of partners.
87. The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual will
have a protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside marriage."
1150. LGBTQIA+ persons enjoy the full spectrum of constitutional rights and hence the right to choose a marital
partner extends with equal force to same-sex couples. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Johar's case (cited supra) has
held that:
(Dipak Misra, CJI (as he was then))
"255. "The LGBT community possess the same human, fundamental and constitutional rights as other citizens do
since these rights inhere in individuals as natural and human rights. We must remember that equality is the edifice
on which the entire non-discrimination jurisprudence rests."
(R.F. Nariman, J.)
369. We may conclude by stating that persons who are homosexual have a fundamental right to live with
dignity, which, in the larger framework of the Preamble of India, will assure the cardinal constitutional value of
fraternity that has been discussed in some of our judgments. We further declare that such groups are entitled to
the protection of equal laws, and are entitled to be treated in society as human beings without any stigma being
attached to any of them.'
(DY Chandrachud J.)
618.2. Members of the LGBT community are entitled, as all other citizens, to the full range of constitutional
rights including the liberties protected by the Constitution;"
1151. There is no difference between persons who defy social conventions to enter into inter-religious and inter-
caste marriages and those who choose a same-sex partner. Society may disapprove of inter-caste and inter-religious
marriages but the Courts have a constitutional mandate to enforce the constitutional right of choice of marital partner,
and non-discrimination. A statute which inhibits LGBTQIA+ persons from marrying a partner of their choice violates
Articles 19 and 21.
1152. In Johar (cited supra), it was held that:
"561.6 Sexual orientation implicates negative and positive obligations on the state. It not only requires the state
not to discriminate, but also calls for the state to recognise rights which bring true fulfilment to same-sex
relationships
1153. The right to choose a marital partner places a positive obligation on the State to be fulfilled through its
marriage laws.
1154. Illustratively, the marriage officer (Respondent No. 2 herein) declined to accept Petitioners' applications
under the FMA on the ground that they are a same-sex couple, denying their fundamental right to marry. The
Petitioners seek their right to access the institution that provides legal rights to their love and companionship in the
same way as all couples do.
1155. Apart from the discriminatory state action of the Respondent-marriage officers, inasmuch as the FMA fails to
recognize same-sex marriages it also denies LGBTQIA+ persons the fundamental right to marry a person of one's
choice. The impugned legislation thus violates Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution, and ought to be read to include
all persons regardless of their gender identity and sexual orientation to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality.
(b) Article 21 : The impugned statute violates the right to dignity and decisional autonomy of LGBTQIA+
persons.
1156. The constitutional protection of choice of partner flows from the right to decisional autonomy.
1157. The right to choose a marital partner is an intrinsic part of dignity. In Shakti Vahini V. Union of India, (2018)
7
"45. The choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there is
erosion of choice. True it is, the same is bound by the principle of constitutional limitation but in the absence of
such limitation, none, we mean, no one shall be permitted to interfere in the fructification of the said choice. If the
right to express one's own choice is obstructed, it would be extremely difficult to think of dignity in its sanctified
completeness. When two adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they consummate their
relationship; they feel that it is their goal and they have the right to do so. And it can unequivocally be stated that
they have the right and any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation...
1158. The ability to make decisions on matters close to one's life, family, marriage, procreation and sexual
orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual. The 9-judge bench decision in Puttaswamy, cited supra has
elucidated this in the following way:
[DY Chandrachud, J.]
298. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of dignity. Dignity has both an intrinsic and instrumental
value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity is an entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in itself. In its
instrumental facet, dignity and freedom are inseparably intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to achieve the
other. The ability of the individual to protect a zone of privacy enables the realisation of the full value of life and
liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning of which privacy is a subset. All liberties may not be exercised in privacy. Yet
others can be fulfilled only within a private space. Privacy enables the individual to retain the autonomy of the body
and mind. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life When
these guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects all those elements which are
crucial to gender identity. The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of
the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to determine how freedom shall
be exercised.
(R.F. Nariman, J.)
"479 As case law, both in the US and India show, this concept has travelled far from the mere right to be let
alone to recognition of a large number of privacy interests, which apart from privacy of one's home
and
protection from unreasonable searches and seizures have been extended to protecting an individual's interests
in
making vital personal choices such as the right to abort a foetus; rights of same sex couples-including the right
to marry; rights as to procreation, contraception, general family relationships, child-bearing, education, data
protection, etc."
1159. This view has been affirmed by another constitution bench of the Supreme Court, in Common Cause (A
1160. Each person's self-defined sexual orientation and gender identity is integral to their personality and is one of
(paragraph 22, 81)]
1161. Excluding same-sex marriage from the FMA violates constitutional guarantees of dignity and decisional
autonomy guaranteed in Article 21 to LGBTQIA+ persons.
(c) Article 15 : Excluding LGBTQIA+ persons from the SMA discriminates based on their (i) their sexual
orientation, and (ii) the sex of their partner.
(i) Discrimination based on sexual orientation
1162. National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (cited supra) ["NALSA"], (paragraph 62-63) held that
"discrimination on the ground of "sex" under Articles 15 and 16, includes discrimination on the ground of gender
identity and sexual orientation."
11 Following NALSA, Johar (cited supra) held that sexual orientation is a protected characteristic under Article
15. All persons have a right not to be discriminated against based on their sexual orientation:
(Indu Malhotra J.)
"638.2. The term "sex", as it occurs in Article 15 has been given an expansive interpretation by this Court in
National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India [National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (2014) 5
Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also
includes their "sexual identity and character". The J.S. Verma Committee [Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law (2013).] had recommended that "sex" under Article 15 must include "sexual
orientation":
"65. Further, we are clear that Article 15(c) of the Constitution of India uses the word "sex" as including
sexual orientation."
The prohibition against discrimination under Article 15 on the ground of "sex" should therefore
encompass instances where such discrimination takes place on the basis of one's sexual orientation."
[Emphasis Supplied]
1164. Johan further held that "while assessing whether a law infringes a fundamental right, it is not the intention of
the lawmaker that is determinative, but whether the effect or operation of the law infringes fundamental rights" (para
428).
1165. The object of the FMA in adopting the schema of the SMA is to provide a uniform, civil and secular marriage
law for a couple either of whom is an Indian citizen. However, by recognizing marriages only between opposite sex
couples, the effect of the law is to deny same-sex and gender non-conforming couples the right to marry a person of
their choice, solely on grounds of their sexual orientation and gender identity.
1166. Excluding the Petitioners from marriage renders them strangers in law, even when they have been in
committed, long term relationships identical to those of opposite sex couples would can marry under the FMA. Further,
excluding same sex couples from the bundle of rights available to married couples discriminates against same sex
couples solely on the ground of sexual orientation.
(ii) Discrimination on the basis of sex
1167. Sex discrimination : FMA discriminates against same sex couples based on the sex of their partner,
prohibited under Article 15. Had Vaibhav Jain (Petitioner No. 1) wanted to marry a woman, for example, the
Respondent State would not have objected. However, as their respective partner is of the same sex as them, the
Respondents have refused to recognize their marriage. Hence, the discrimination is based on the sex of his partner,
and is constitutionally barred under Article 15 of the Constitution.
1168. Sex stereotyping : In presuming that men only want to marry women and vice-versa, the FMA perpetuates
stereotypes based on sex and gender. Article 15 prohibits discrimination based on sex stereotypes. In Johar, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:
"438. A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A discrimination will not survive
constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the
grounds prohibited in Article 15(1). If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or indirect is founded on a
stereotypical understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the discrimination
which is prohibited by Article 15 on the grounds only of sex. If certain characteristics grounded in stereotypes, are
to be associated with entire classes of people constituted as groups by any of the grounds prohibited in Article 15
(1), that cannot establish a permissible reason to discriminate. Such a discrimination will be in violation of the
constitutional guarantee against discrimination in Article 15(1). That such a discrimination is a result of grounds
rooted in sex and other considerations, can no longer be held to be a position supported by the intersectional
understanding of how discrimination operates. This infuses Article 15 with true rigour to give it a complete
constitutional dimension in prohibiting discrimination.
440. Any ground of discrimination, direct or indirect, which is founded on a particular understanding of the role
of the sex, would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which is prohibited by Article 15 on the grounds
only of sex."
(d) Article 14 The impugned statutes deny LGBTQIA+ persons (a) the equal protection of laws (b) are
manifestly arbitrary and (c) fail the rational nexus test.
(i) Equal protection of laws
1169. Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality before the law and equal protection of the laws. Johar held
that LGBTQIA+ couples are guaranteed the right to equality:
561.7.. The law cannot discriminate against same sex relationships. It must also take positive steps to achieve
equal protection." [Indu Malhotra, J.]
618.4 Members of the LGBT community are entitled to the benefit of an equal citizenship, without
discrimination, and to the equal protection of law..." [DY Chandrachud, J.]
1170. Johar further held [paragraph 561.6 and 561.7] that sexual orientation places a positive and negative
obligation on the State. The negative obligation includes non-discrimination under Article 15 of the Constitution, while
the positive obligation calls for the State to "take positive steps to achieve equal protection" and to "recognise rights
which bring true fulfilment to same sex relationships." The right to choose a marital partner is a positive obligation of
the State to be fulfilled through its existing marriage laws.
1171. Further, the institution of marriage is a bundle of rights that married couples enjoy and which the State
protects. These rights include succession, maintenance, joint ownership of assets, public employment, pension, and
health decisions. Through marriage, couples become a family with all the rights family members enjoy in matters of
employment, succession, taxation etc. The status of marriage also provides private entitlements that same sex and
gender non-conforming couples are excluded from accessing.
1172. During the COVID-19 pandemic, these exclusions made life a nightmare for the Petitioners. For instance,
before the pandemic, the Petitioners regularly visited India annually during Diwali and Dussehra festivals. Amidst the
lockdowns during the Covid pandemic, all foreigners including OCI cardholders were restricted from entering the
country. Relaxations brought to the same in May, 2020, were restricted to certain classes of OCI cardholders such as
those persons whose spouse was an Indian national, or those whose parents were Indian nationals. Same-sex couples
always fear that their wills may be challenged in probate proceedings if their legal heirs do not respect and
acknowledge their relationship.
1173. Equally, the status of being married, that results in social acceptance and respect, is also a benefit that the
State accords to a couple. It leads to self-respect, dignity, and helps nurture and sustain relationships by affirming
that the couple is part of the social fabric.
1174. The right to family, love, companionship, and commitment is available to all persons and excluding same sex
couples from this bundle of rights discriminates against them. Excluding same sex couples from the FMA gives legal
sanction to historical and social stigma faced by same-sex and gender non-conforming couples. Denying same-sex
couples the right to marry violates their right to equality before the law and denial of equal protection of laws
guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
(ii) Manifest Arbitrariness
1175. A statute is manifestly arbitrary if the provisions are irrational or without adequate determining principles, or
1176. A law may become arbitrary with the passage of time. As held in Satyawati Sharma V. Union of India (2008)
"32. It is trite to say that legislation which may be quite reasonable and rationale at the time of its enactment
may with the lapse of time and/or due to change of circumstances become arbitrary, unreasonable and violative of
the doctrine of equity and even if the validity of such legislation may have been upheld at a given point of time, the
Court may, in subsequent litigation, strike down the same if it is found that the rationale of classification has
become non-existent."
1177. Shayara Bano (CB, cited supra) held that even in spheres of marriage if a law - even a personal law - is
manifestly arbitrary or violates the principles of equality, it is the duty of the Courts to step in. [paragraph 56-58].
1178. The exclusion of same-sex couples from the FMA is manifestly arbitrary. There is no fair or reasonable
justification to exclude same-sex couples from the regime of marriage, particularly when sexual orientation is a
protected constitutional ground under Article 15.
1179. Excluding a same sex or gender non-conforming couple from the regime of marriage is as unconstitutional as
a law that made inter-caste or inter-faith marriages illegal.
(iii) Rational Nexus Test
1180. To be permissible under Article 14 a classification must satisfy two conditions, (i) it must be founded on an
intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the
group, and (ii) that differentia must have a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the statute in
1181. Section 4 of the FMA contemplates marriage between a man and a woman and "bride" and "bridegroom".
Unlike what the Union contends, no Indian statute refers to a "biological man" or "biological woman". The impugned
statutes create two classes of citizens-opposite-sex couples, and same-sex and gender non-conforming couples. The
exclusion of the latter class of citizens from the statutory institution of marriage fails the rational nexus test.
1182. There is no constitutionally valid, intelligible differentia between LGBTQIA+ and non-LGBTQIA+ persons. The
classification in the present case is solely based on the sexual orientation and gender identity of the parties to a
marriage which is impermissible.
Object of the FMA
1183. As stated above, the object of the FMA is (1) to extend the protection of the Indian Constitution and its laws
to a citizen abroad regardless of who she chooses to marry and under whichever law she chooses to do so, (2) to
provide for maximum international validity of a marriage solemnized/registered under the Act, and (3) in adopting the
framework of the SMA, to provide for a uniform, civil and secular law to govern foreign marriages.
1184. Section 4 of the FMA provides conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages, as under -
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages. - A marriage between parties one of whom
at least is a citizen of India may be solemnized under this Act by or before a Marriage Officer in a foreign country, if,
at the time of the marriage, the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a) neither party has a spouse living;
(b) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic;
(c) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty-one years and the bride the age of eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a marriage between them,
such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the degrees of prohibited
relationship.
1185. Nothing in Section 4 of the FMA justifies excluding same-sex and gender non-conforming couples from
solemnizing a special marriage. The FMA is also an enabling legislation. The Statement of Objects and Reasons
specifically alludes to that the FMA provides for an "enabling form of marriage" and that the said marriage is "more or
less on the same lines as the Special Marriage Act, 1954." The Petitioners submit that various high courts have
enunciated on these facets of the SMA which equally apply to the FMA as well.
1186. In M V. A, (2018) 248 DLT 466, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court summarized the position of law on the
application of personal law to the marriages registered/solemnized under the SMA, as under -
"10. Summary of Principles
10.1 The Special Marriage Act, 1954 provides a special form of marriage, its registration and divorce. A marriage
between any two persons belonging to any religion or creed may be solemnized under this Act. Being a secular
Act,
it plays a key role in liberating individuals from the traditional requirements of marriage. It provides for a civil law
of marriage that would enable individuals to get married outside of their respective community mandates.
10.2. The Special Marriage Act 1954 is not concerned with the religion of the parties to an intended marriage.
Under the Act any person, whichever religion he or she professes, may marry either within his or her community or
in a community other than his or her own, provided that the intended marriage in either case is in accord with the
conditions for marriage laid down in the Act. Is all this relevant here?
10.3. No religious rituals or ceremonies are required from the marriage to be completed under the Special
Marriage Act. It is up to the parties to decide whether they want to do marriage rituals or not. The marriage
solemnized under Special Marriage Act is registered and a Certificate of Marriage is given to the parties. The
Certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and witnesses which is deemed to be conclusive evidence
of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been solemnized.
10.4. The Special Marriage Act provides an option of turning an existing religious marriage solemnized in any
other form under any other law into a civil marriage by registering it under its provisions, provided that it is in
accord with the condition for marriage laid down under the Act. This provision of subsequent registration enables
parties to avail secular and uniform remedies despite the solemnization of marriage through performance of
religious ceremonies under one's own personal laws. This aids them in overcoming the constraints or discrimination
faced in their own personal laws.
10.5. The unique feature of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is compulsory registration of marriage under the Act
which protects the interest of the parties and the children born out of wedlock.
10.6. The Registration Certificate of the marriage between the parties is conclusive evidence of the fact that their
marriage was solemnised under the Special Marriage Act. Therefore, evidence with regard to the fact that their
marriage was actually solemnised under any other Act at any other time, cannot be allowed. There can be no issue
that the Special Marriage Act would apply.
10.7. When a person solemnizes marriage under this law then the marriage is not governed by personal laws but
by Special Marriage Act. The rights and duties arising out of marriage are governed by the Special Marriage Act and
the succession is governed by Indian Succession Act, 1925, and not by the personal laws.
10.8. Having married under the Special Marriage Act, if a person contracts a second marriage, he shall be
deemed to have committed an offence under Section 494 or 495 IPC."
[emphasis supplied]
1187. Furthermore, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Abdur Rahim Undre (Dr.) V. Padma Abdur Rahim Undre,
Communities irrespective of caste, creed or religion, as under
"23. It can safely be said that Special Marriage Act is in reality an Indian Marriage Act, which applies to all
Indian Communities irrespective of caste, creed or religion. The concept of marriage under the said Act, is
monogamous, that is union for life, dissoluble by judicial authorities. Under the said law all modern matrimonial
reliefs are made available to both the spouses in the event of break down of marriage on an application to the Court
of competent jurisdiction Even the religious marriages can be registered under the said Act. On such registration
the religious marriage can be converted into secular marriage. In this, context it is also pertinent to note that
between 1954 to 1969 two Indian citizens domiciled in India could have married under Special Marriage Act-even
outside India. A marriage which is monogamous in form continues to be so, where-as original religious marriage
can be converted into a secular marriage. However, a secular marriage cannot be converted into religious marriage.
Therefore if there is in the field an Indian enactment which is applicable to all the citizens of India irrespective of
their religion, then so far as secular marriages are concerned the said law will become lex domicilli of India for the
purposes of matrimonial reliefs. Such an interpretation will be in tune with Article 44 as well as the preamble of the
Constitution. It cannot also be forgotten that the establishment of a secular society is the aim and goal of Indian
Constitution. Therefore in the area and field which is secular or non-religious laws will have to be common for all
citizens of India, and that is what has been done, though to limited extent by enacting Special Marriage Act. The
said Act at least leaves a choice open which is available to all the citizens of India irrespective of their caste, creed
or religion. In Mohammedan Law Marriage is a Civil Contract. Hence so far as relationship flowing from contract of
marriage is concerned, including its dissolution, the area and field is secular in nature.
24. In this context it will have to be remembered that if two interpretations are reasonably possible regarding
the provisions of law. then the law will have to beinterpreted and applied in the perspective of Part IV of the
Constitution, which deals with directive principles of the State policy and benefit of reasonable doubt of law and
fact. if there be such doubt must go to the weaker section, in the present case to women (See AIR 1978 SC 474).
In this context a reference also could usefully be made to the decision of Karnataka High Court in AIR 1976 Kant
200, Raj Mohammad V. Saheeda, wherein E.S. Vyankataramayya J. (as he then was), has observed that our notions
of law will have to be altered in such a way as to bring them in conformity with modern social conditions."
[Emphasis supplied]
1188. As held in A (cited supra), the object of the SMA is to "liberate individuals from the traditional
marriage." The SMA's object is to remove any forms of constraints on marriage on external considerations such as
religion, caste, creed etc. These apply equally to the FMA which has adopted the SMA's schema. However, the FMA
goes a step further in extending these protections regardless of domicile, and territoriality. Accordingly, the exclusion
of same-sex and genden non-conforming couples from the FMA has no rational nexus with the object of the legislation.
Intelligible differentia
1189. Further, classifying couples based on their sexual orientation or genden identity is unreasonable because
there is no intelligible differentia between LGBTQIA+ and non-LGBTQIA+ couples. In this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme
"14. is true that a classification need not be made with mathematical precision but, if there be little or no
difference between the persons or things which have been grouped together and those left out of the
group, in that case, the classification cannot be said to be a reasonable one."
1190. It is clear from the decisions in Johar and NALSA, that classification based solely on sexual orientation or
gender identity is neither reasonable non has an intelligible differentia. In Johar, the Constitution Bench held as under
(637.3):
"the natural or innate sexual orientation of a person cannot be a ground for discrimination. Where a legislation
discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an individual, it cannot form a reasonable classification
based on an intelligible differentia."
1191. When the basis of the classification itself is discriminatory in its effect, the exclusion of same-sex and gender
non-conforming couples under the SMA fails the first part of the rational nexus test.
1192. Further, Johar (paragraph 230 and 231) held that with the passage of time and evolution of the society,
procreation is not the only reason for which people choose to come together for marriage. But even otherwise, non-
LGBT couples may have children who are biologically related to only one or even neither parent.
recognized the changing concept of "family" as under
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the
form of domestic, unmarried partnerships on queer relationships. A household may be a single parent
household for any number of reasons, including the death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly,
the guardians and caretakers (who traditionally occupy the roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may
change with remarriage, adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be
typical but they are as real as their traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family
unit are equally deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social
welfare legislation. The black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which
are different from traditional ones.
[Emphasis supplied]
1194. The contention of the Union of India that the legislative intent behind the impugned statutes is the
conception of a so-called "Indian family unit" including a "biological man and biological woman" militates against the
aforesaid finding of the Supreme Court. Rather, a marriage furnishes emotional satisfaction that may not be found in
any other relationships. Other couples who are unable to bear children, such as older couples or infertile couples, are
not excluded from the institution of marriage. Therefore, there is no rational basis for making a distinction between
same sex and gender non-conforming couples and opposite sex couples.
C. Recognition of marriage of same-sex and gender non-conforming couples under the FMA furthers the
comity of nations
1195. The FMA is a beneficial legislation intended to extend the fold of recognition under Indian law as well as
maximum international validity to a marriage between two persons, one of whom is an Indian citizen. The registration
of Petitioners' marriage and that of other same-sex and gender non-conforming couples under the FMA furthers the
comity of nations.
1196. Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed., 2019), p. 335 defines "comity" as "a practice among political entities (such
as nations, states, or courts of different jurisdictions) of mutual recognition of legislative, executive and judicial acts."
Comity of nations require that the Union of India give recognition on a mutual basis to legislative and/or judicial acts
of other friendly States.
1197. There is a growing consensus among advanced countries that give due constitutional significance to the
fundamental rights of its citizens, and that the right to marry a person of their choice cannot be denied to same-sex
and gender non-conforming couples.
1198. The FMA, which is founded on securing the protection of Indian law to a couple (one of whom is an Indian)
married in accordance with a valid foreign law, in excluding same-sex and gender non-conforming couples goes
against its object of securing maximum international validity. This object of the FMA is directly in sync with the
doctrine of comity of nations.
1199. The highest constitutional courts in various jurisdictions across the world have recognized the rights of
LGBTQIA+ persons in the context of marriage equality. These judicial declarations by the constitutional courts have
been principally founded on the inalienable rights of citizens of those jurisdictions to equality and equal protection of
laws, human dignity, freedom of choice and the right to found a family. The Petitioners submit that the fundamental
rights of citizens, including LGBTQIA+ citizens as guaranteed under Part 111 of the Indian Constitution stand on an
equal footing with the rights recognized by progressive democracies across the world. This Hon'ble Court, tasked with
the constitutional duty to interpret and protect the fundamental rights of Indian citizens ought to secure for the
citizens of India rights at par with globally recognized, inalienable rights of free citizens across the world. Moreover,
Constitutional Courts ought to recognise same-sex marriages under the FMA, not only as being consistent with the
object of the Act, but also as a matter of judicial comity in recognising the growing consensus towards marriage
equality. The said principle finds affirmation in Section 13 & 14 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 dealing with the
enforceability of a foreign judgment in India. This Court in Alcon Electronics (P) Ltd. V. Celem S.A. of France, (2017) 2
1200. There are now various countries in the world where marriage of same-sex and gender non-conforming
couples have been legally recognized. For instance, 12 out of the G20 countries (including the European Union). the
presidency of which is presently held by India, recognize same-sex marriages/union. [See, Table on Status of Same-
sex Marriage in G20 countries in Compilation-Annexure A to the Written Submissions]
1201. The following countries recognize same-sex unions:
1) Costa Rica (2020), 2) Northern Ireland (2019) 3) Ecuador (2019) 4) Taiwan (2019) 5) Austria (2019) 6)
Australia (2017) 7) Malta (2017) 8) Germany (2017) 9) Colombia (2016) 10) United States (2015) 11) Greenland
(2015) 12) Ireland (2015) 13) Finland (2015) 14) Luxembourg (2014) 15) Scotland (2014) 15) England and Wales
(2013) 16) Brazil (2013) 17) France (2013) 18) New Zealand (2013) 19) Uruguay (2013) 20) Denmark (2012) 21)
Argentina (2010) 23) Portugal (2010) 24) Iceland (2010) 25) Sweden (2009) 26) Norway (2008) 27) South Africa
(2006) 28) Spain (2005) 29) Canada (2005) 30) Belgium (2003) 31) The Netherlands (2000)
1202. The international consensus in favour of recognizing same-sex marriage is also endorsed by Constitutional
courts, including the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. This Hon'ble Court has also in its jurisprudence while
expounding on rights of sexual minorities extensively made references to judicial developments across the world in an
instance of judicial comity. The overwhelming weight of international opinion from various jurisdictions support the
grant of relief in the present petition. It is relevant to note that the constitutional bench in Johar's case, after scanning
legal developments from various jurisdictions observed that:
"5 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to another and that we must
therefore look at comparative law-making allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight of international
opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental rights for same sex couples reflects a
growing consensus towards sexual orientation equality We feel inclined to concur with the accumulated wisdom
reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees contained within the Indian
Constitution. but to provide a sound and appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about those guarantees."
1203. The Constitutional Court of Austria ruled on 04.12.2017 (G-258-259 of 2017) that denial of marriage
equality was discriminatory, legalizing same-sex marriage, and held as under:
"The distinction in the law between opposite-sex and same-sex relationships as two different legal institutions
thus violates the principle of equality, which forbids any discrimination of individuals on grounds of personal
characteristics, such as their sexual orientation."
1204. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT 60/04, and Lesbian
and Gay Equality Project V. Minister of Home Affairs, Case CCT 10/05, held that same-sex couples have a
constitutional right to marry at par with entitlements and responsibilities enjoyed by heterosexual couples. The
Constitutional Court of South Africa held as under:
"81.. A law that creates institutions which enable heterosexual couples to declare their public commitment to
each other and achieve the status, entitlements and responsibilities that flow from marriage, but does not provide
any mechanism for same-sex couples to achieve the same, discriminates unfairly against same-sex couples. It
gives to the one and not to the other. The instruments created by the legal system exclude from their reach persons
entitled to be protected by them."
1205. The Supreme Court of Nepal in Sunil Babu Pant V. Nepal Government, (2008) 2 NJA LJ 262, in relation to
same-sex marriages, have held as under:
"Looking at the issue of same sex marriage, we hold that it is an inherent right of an adult to have marital
relation with another adult with his/her free consent and according to her/his will."
1206. The US Supreme Court, in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015) (9-judge bench), read a right to same-
sex marriage into the equality clause. It was held that the Constitution entitles same-sex couples to civil marriage "on
the same terms and conditions as opposite-sex couples." Justice Anthony Kennedy speaking for the majority held
that:
"The right to marry is a fundamental right inherent in the liberty of the person, and under the Due Process and
Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment couples of the same sex may not be deprived of that right
and that liberty"
1207. The US Supreme Court further held that:
"No union is more profound than marriage, for it embodies the highest ideals of love, fidelity, devotion, sacrifice,
and family. In forming a marital union, two people become something greater than once they were. As some of the
petitioners in these cases demonstrate, marriage embodies a love that may endure even past death. It would
misunderstand these men and women to say they disrespect the idea of marriage. Their plea is that they do respect
it, respect it so deeply that they seek to find its fulfilment for themselves. Their hope is not to be condemned to live
in loneliness, excluded from one of civilization's oldest institutions. They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the law.
The Constitution grants them that right."
1208. Most recently (08.07.2022) the Constitutional Court of Slovenia (6 : 3) (Decision No. U-1-486/20, Up-
572/18) legalized same-sex marriage and adoption by same-sex couples. It was held that Slovenia's statutory
provisions allowing for only opposite-sex marriages and adoptions violated a constitutional prohibition against
discrimination. It was held that such discrimination cannot be justified by the traditional meaning of marriage as a
union of husband and wife, nor can it be justified by the special protection of the family.
1209. Therefore, societal reality indicates the need to legally recognize non-traditional familial relationships, as held
1321 (Paragraph 45).
1210. Moreover, time and again, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has recognized and relied on the Yogyakarta principles
to advance the rights of sexual minorities in India. Principle 24 of the Yogyakarta Principles which recognizes the right
to found a family of the sexual minorities is applicable to the present case. Principle 24 reads:
"The Right to Found a Family
Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Families exist in
diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation on gender
identity of any of its members."
1211. In the case of NALSA's case, this Court held:
"53. The Indian law, on the whole, only recognises the paradigm of binary genders of male and female, based on
a person's sex assigned by birth, which permits gender system, including the law relating to marriage, adoption,
inheritance, succession and taxation and welfare legislations. We have exhaustively referred to various articles
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 1966, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 as well as the Yogyakarta
Principles. Reference was also made to the legislations enacted in other countries dealing with rights of persons of
transgender community. Unfortunately, we have no legislation in this country dealing with the rights of transgender
community. Due to the absence of suitable legislation protecting the rights of the members of the transgender
community, they are facing discrimination in various areas and hence the necessity to follow the international
conventions to which India is a party and to give due respect to other non-binding international conventions and
principles. The Constitution-makers could not have envisaged that each and every human activity be guided,
controlled. recognised or safeguarded by laws made by the legislature. Article 21 has been incorporated to
safeguard those rights and a constitutional court cannot be a mute spectator when those rights are violated, but is
expected to safeguard those rights knowing the pulse and feeling of that community, though a minority, especially
when their rights have gained universal recognition and acceptance.
60. The principles discussed hereinbefore on TGs and the international conventions, including Yogyakarta
Principles, which we have found not inconsistent with the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the Indian
Constitution, must be recognised and followed, which has sufficient legal and historical justification in our country."
1212. In the above case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court endorsed the Yogyakarta Principles in accord with the doctrine
of comity of nations and this view was reiterated in Johar, (Cited supra):
"355. We may hasten to add, that the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights
Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity discussed below, which were also referred to by
constitutional view of the fundamental rights of the citizens of India and persons who come to this Court."
D. The grant of reliefs as prayed for does not render unworkable the provisions of the FMA or other statutes
employing gendered terminology
1213. The Union of India's objection of un-workability of the impugned statutes and other statutes where specific
protections have been extended to women, in the event that the reliefs sought herein are granted, is frivolous. The
Petitioners have provided a chart along with their rejoinder dated 13.04.2021 (Annexure D at Pg. 57) demonstrating
how various provisions of the FMA are workable if read in a gender-neutral fashion, where the context allows for the
same. In any case, the declaration sought by the Petitioners is to read the FMA in a manner that it does not exclude
marriages of gender non-conforming and same-sex couples. In the event, such a declaration is granted by this Hon'ble
Court, it is binding on all authorities including the Union and the States and its respective legislatures under Article
141 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, the construction of FMA would necessarily follow the declaration of this
Hon'ble Court.
1214. Moreover, the provisions that the Union has referred to in various statutes that such as the D.V. Act, 2005,
Indian Penal Code, Indian Evidence Act, and the Cr.P.C. are guided by state policy of granting additional safeguards to
women in society in the context of a patriarchal society. These protective provisions are also in line with the
constitutional mandate under Article 15 (3) The Petitioners submit that granting of relief in the present case does not
affect the application of provisions to the contexts it presently applies in any manner.
1215. A constitution bench of this Court in Shri. Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. V. Broach Borough Municipality, (1969) 2
can only be enacted legally if conditions on which the judgment is based is so fundamentally altered that the decision
could not have been given in the altered circumstances. In the event this Hon'ble grants relief as prayed for by the
Petitioners, all authorities are bound by the same and all statutes will have to be construed in accordance with the
declaration of this Court.
1216. In any case, constitutional courts including this Hon'ble Court has interpreted provisions in a gender-neutral
manner in the context of family law in the context of constitutional challenge to its vires. Illustratively,
(d) of the Cr.P.C. held that the reference to "his father or mother..." did not preclude the parents from seeking
maintenance from their daughter.
challenge to Section 2(q) of the DV Act which defined "respondent", deleted the words "adult male" prefixing
"person" to allow for a gender-neutral application of the Act.
More recent, in Arunkumar V. Registrar, the Madras High Court interpreted the provisions of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1956, particularly, the definition of "bride" to include trans-women as well as inter-sex women who identifies
as a woman.
1217. The objection of the Union in the present case regarding unworkability due to the language used in the
statutes mirror the objections based on text of the statute raised in similar cases in other jurisdictions where same-sex
marriages have been recognized by Courts:
(i) The Supreme Court of the United States of America ("SCOTUS") in United States V. Windsor, 570 US 744, was
dealing with a challenge to the constitutional vires of the Section 3 of the Defence of Marriage Act which
defined marriage and spouse as under:
"In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of any ruling, regulation, or interpretation of the
various administrative bureaus and agencies of the United States, the word 'marriage' means only a legal
union between one man and one woman as husband and wife, and the word 'spouse' refers only to
a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife."
(emphasis supplied)
SCOTUS struck down the provision as unconstitutional.
(ii) The Austrian Constitutional Court in decision G258-259/2017-9, rendered on 04.12.2017 dealt with the
Section 44 of General Civil Code which read as under:
"Section 44. Family relationships are founded by marriage contract. In a marriage contract two individuals
of different sex lawfully declare their intent to live in an inseparable companionship, to beget children, to
bring them up and to provide support to each other."
(emphasis supplied)
The Constitutional Court struck down the phrase "of different sex" appearing in the aforesaid section as being
unconstitutional, in line with the finding that same-sex couples cannot be excluded from marriage contracts for it
violates equal protection under the laws.
(iii) The Supreme Court of the United States in Pavan V. Smith, 582 U.S.
(2017) extended the benefit of
having the name of the spouse included the birth certificate of the child to same-sex couples despite the
gendered provision in the statute. The State Supreme Courts in the United States of America have also dealt
with cases arising out of the statutes using gendered language relating to benefits arising out of marriage in
the context of same-sex couples. In all these cases, the courts have taken a view that the gendered provisions
cannot come in the way of the granting benefits of marriages to same-sex couples, once the same has been
recognized as a right by the Supreme Court in Obergefell V. Hodges. Illustratively, various State Supreme
Courts in the US have dealt with local provisions governing the rule of presumption of parentage i.e. when a
woman gives birth to a child, the husband of the woman is presumed to be the father. The Court has applied
the parentage presumption in the case of the lesbian couples by extending the benefit of the presumption to
same-sex couples. Some of these cases are In re A.M., 223 A.3d 691 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2019) [Superior Court of
Pennsylvania], LC V. MG, 430 P.3d 400 (Haw. 2018) [Supreme Court of Hawai], and McLaughlin V. Jones, 401
P.3d 492 (Ariz. 2017) [Supreme Court of Arizona].
1218. Thus, faced with myriad situations of legislative exclusions by use of gendered terminology, constitutional
courts have never shied away from enforcing the fundamental rights of its citizens to await appropriate legislative
action. In fact, in Johar's case, the said objection was raised by the State to which this Hon'ble Court held as under:
"352. Another araument raised on behalf of the interveners is that change to society. if anv. can be reflected bv
amending laws by the elected representatives of the people. Thus, it would be open to Parliament to carve out an
exception to Section 377, but this Court should not indulge in taking upon itself the guardianship of changing
societal mores. Such an argument must be emphatically rejected. The very purpose of the fundamental rights
chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdrawn the subject of liberty and dignity of the individual and place
such subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments so that constitutional morality can be applied by this
Court to give effect to the rights, among others., of "discrete and insular" minorities. On such minority has knocked
the doors of this Court as this Court is the custodian of the fundamental rights of citizens. These fundamental rights
do not depend on the outcome of elections. And, it is not left to majoritarian governments to prescribe what shall
be orthodox in matters concerning social morality. The fundamental rights chapter is like the North Star in the
universe of constitutionalism in India. Constitutional morality always trumps any imposition of a particular view of
social morality by shifting and different majoritarian regimes."
1219. The Petitioners in the present case prays that the aforesaid approach be adopted by this Hon'ble Court in this
case as well and reject the Union's objections on workability of certain statutes which are not for consideration before
this Hon'ble Court.
E. The Petitioners were refused registration under the FMA on grounds outside of Section 17
The FMA is a complete Code
1220. In Abdur Rahim Undre (Dr.) V. Padma Abdur Rahim Undre, AIR 1982 Bom 341, a Division Bench of the
Bombay High Court held that:
"14. For properly appreciating the controversy raised before us it will be worthwhile if a detailed reference is
made to various provisions of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, hereinafter referred to as the said Act. It was enacted
to make a provision relating to the marriage of citizens of India outside India For properly appreciating
the
intention behind the said legislation it will be worthwhile if a reference is made to the 23rd report of the Law
Commission which deals with the foreign marriage. It appears from the said report that the object of the legislation
was to regulate marriages performed outside India when either of the parties thereto is a citizen of India, thereby
filling a gap in the Special Marriage Act, which is limited in its application to the marriages between Indian citizens.
After analysing different types of marriages which could be entered into abroad by the parties, one or both of whom
are Indian citizens, para 3 of the report explains that the object of the legislation is not only to provide for
solemnization of the marriages but also to enable the parties thereto to obtain proper matrimonial relief, such as,
dissolution of marriage and so forth. The report also makes a reference to the rules of private international law on
the subject so as to ensure as far as possible that the validity of the marriage can be recognised in other countries
besides India.
Therefore, from the Law Commission's report as well the Statement of Objects and Reasons it is quite clear that
the Foreign Marriage Act was intended as a piece of comprehensive legislation on the subject relating to foreign
marriages-Hence it is a complete Code in itself."
[Emphasis supplied]
1221. The FMA provides for detailed provisions in Chapter 11 (Sections 4 to 16) for solemnization of marriages
under the Act. Chapter III (Section 17) provides for registration of marriages that have been already solemnized in
accordance with law of a foreign country. Section 17(6) provides that marriages once registered under the Act will be
deemed to have been solemnized under the Act. Thereafter, Chapter IV (Section 18) incorporates by reference
provisions from the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (Chapters IV, V, VI and VII therein) inasmuch as it applies to foreign
marriages solemnized/registered under the Act. These incorporated Chapters relate, inten alia, matrimonial reliefs of
restitution of conjugal rights, judicial separation, nulling of marriage, and divorce with necessary adjustments for
invocation of jurisdiction.
1222. Section 17 of the FMA governs the registration of foreign marriages between two persons, one of whom is an
Indian citizen on the following conditions:
(i) S. 17(1) requires the Marriage Officer to be satisfied that the marriage has been duly solemnized in a foreign
country in accordance with the law of that country, upon payment of relevant fee.
(ii) Under S. 17(2), no marriage shall be registered unless the conditions prescribed under S. 4 of the Act are
satisfied, i.e., neither party must have a spouse living, neither party should be an idiot or lunatic, they should
not be within degrees of prohibited relationship, and ought to be of the prescribed age.
(iii) S. 17(3) provides that the Marriage Officer may refuse registration, if in his opinion the marriage is inconsistent
with international law or the comity of nations. The Marriage Officer must record his reasons for refusal in writing.
1223. The effect of registration under Section 17 is to allow a couple married under a foreign law to come within
the fold of Indian law, and thereby, secure valid recognition of their marriage in India.
1224. As held in Undre (cited supra) the FMA is a complete code. There can be no ground to refuse to register a
foreign marriage outside of those prescribed under S. 17 of the Act. A Marriage Officer cannot, under the scheme of
the FMA, refuse to register a marriage under Section 17 on the grounds that it could not have been contracted in
India. The refusal of registration of the Petitioners' marriage by the Respondents as revealed in their email
communication dated 10.03.2020 demonstrated that the denial was solely on the basis of their sexual orientation.
(See Pg. 164-66 of WP No. 7657 of 2020).
1225. In the present case, Petitioners met all the necessary conditions under Section 17. Their marriage was duly
solemnized under Section 17(1). In fact, it was solemnized by Justice Sri. Srinivasan, Chief United States Circuit
Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit under the Religions Freedom and Civil
Marriage Equality Amendment Act, 2009. The Petitioners approached the New York Consulate with their Certificate of
Marriage dated 19.01.2017 and sought registration of their marriage vide S. 17 of the FMA.
1226. Further, Section 17(2) is not violated as both the Petitioners comply with the conditions prescribed under S.
4 of the Act, viz. they are above the age of 21, not within the degree of prohibited relationship, neither has a spouse
living, and neither is an "idiot" or "lunatic"
1227. The Marriage Officer has not refused registration on the ground of Section 17(3) viz. on the ground of
international law or the comity of nations. In any case, as submitted hereinabove, that recognizing marriage of the
Petitioners would further the comity of nations.
1228. The Petitioners submit that the reliefs prayed for in the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution
of
India flow directly from the Part 111 guarantees available to all Indian citizens, including LGBTQIA+ citizens. The
decisions of this Hon'ble Court in Puttuswamy, Johar, and NALSA put beyond doubt the entitlement of the Petitioners
herein to the recognition of their fundamental right to marry under the FMA. Accordingly, the Petitioners pray that this
Hon'ble Court may be pleased to declare that the provisions of the FMA are unconstitutional inasmuch as it excludes
marriage of gender non-conforming and same-sex couples.
New Delhi
12.03.2023
Filed by
Ms. SHALLY BHASIN, Advocate for the Petitioners
Drawn By:
Mr. Govind Manoharan, Advocate
Settled By:
Ms. Geeta Luthra, Senior Advocate
Annexure A
STATUS OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IN G20 COUNTRIES
10 out of 19 countries in the G20, and 14 countries of the EU recognize same-sex marriages.
REFERENCE:
Bold : Incumbent LGBT heads of state and other ministers.
Green : Legally recognizes same-sex marriage, either through court ruling or legislation, or both.
Orange : Limited legal recognition of same-sex couples in the form of civil unions, registered partnerships, etc.
Blue [only applicable to countries of European Union] : Does not recognize same-sex relationships in any form,
but is bound by the decision of CJEU in Case C-673/16 - Relu Adrian Coman V. Inspectoratul General pentru
Imigrari, to grant full residency rights and freedom of movement to spouses in a same-sex marriage, where at least
one partner is an EU citizen.
Yellow : Does not legally recognize same-sex relationships.
S. No.
Country
Notes
1.
Argentina
Legalized same-sex marriage in 2010; first country to South America to legalize
same-sex marriage.
Governor Tierra del Fuego Province, Mr. Gustavo Melella, is openly gay
and has been in a same-sex relationship for 16 years.
2.
Australia
Since 09 December 2017 by passing of the Marriage Amendment (Definition and
Religious Freedoms) Act 2017, amending the Marriage Act 1961.
Chief Minister of Australian Capital Territory, Mr. Andrew Barr, is openly
gay; married his same-sex partner in 2019.
3.
Brazil
Second country in South America to legalize same-sex marriages; legalized since
16 May 2013.
Governor of the state of Rio Grande do Sul, Mr. Eduardo Leite, came out
as gay just before his re-election to the post in 2021. He is presently in a
domestic relationship with his same-sex partner.
Governor of the state of Rio Grande do Norte, Ms. Fatima Bezerra, also
came out as being a member of the LGBT community around the same
time.
4.
Canada
Nation-wide enactment, Civil Marriage Act, was passed on 20 July 2005,
legalizing same-sex marriage. Prior to this, same-sex marriage was legalized in 8
out of 10 provinces, and 1 out of 3 territories by various court rulings since 2003.
Previously, in the case of Mv. H, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 3, the Supreme Court held that
same-sex couples (cohabiting in common-law marriages) were entitled to receive
many of the financial and legal benefits commonly associated with marriage.
5.
China
6.
France
Legalized same-sex marriage on 18 May 2013 through legislation.
7.
Germany
First country in Central Europe to legalize same-sex marriage on 1 October 2017
through legislations. Prior to this, registered life partnerships were recognized for
same-sex couples. Through various court rulings most rights of marriage were
extended to such partnerships.
8.
India
On 06 September 2018, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India, in
homosexuality and protected the choice of LGBT person to enter into intimate
sexual relations with person of the same gender.
Live-in relationships are legal for both same-sex and opposite sex couples, but
no rights flow from it. Post Johan (supra), constitutional courts across the country
have stepped in to provide protections to same-sex couples. Marriage is allowed
only for opposite-sex couples. No provisions for registered partnerships and/or
civil unions exist in Indian law.
9.
Indonesia
10.
Italy
Recognizes same-sex civil unions since 05 June 2016. Same-sex marriages
performed outside Italy must also be registered as civil unions to avail rights and
benefits under law.
Prior to this, the decision of the ECtHR in Oliari V. Italy, 2015 ECHR 176, held
that Italy violated the European Convention on Human Rights by not recognizing
same-sex couples' right to family life.
11.
Japan
No formal recognition of same-sex marriage or civil unions. However,
municipalities issue "partnership certificates" for limited purposes such as
hospital visits, renting of apartments, etc. In November 2022, Tokyo, which is
the largest municipality in Japan, began issuing partnership certificates.
12.
Republic of Korea
A recent court ruling for the first time recognized same-sex couples as having
(South Korea)
the right to equal benefits of insurance, as those available to opposite sex
couples.
13.
Mexico
As of December 2022, all 32 states in Mexico have passed legislations to legalize
same-sex marriage.
Prior to this, in 2015 the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation held that bans
on same-sex marriage violates the Constitution of Mexico. Specifically, the Court
held that where the law defines marriage as celebrated between man and
woman, or considers the purpose of it as procreation, is unconstitutional.
14.
Russia
On 17.01.2023, in Case of Fedotova V. Russia, Application nos. 40792/10,
30538/14 and 43439/14, Grand Chamber of ECtHR held, 14 votes to 3, that by
not recognizing of same-sex marriage, Russia "has overstepped its margin of
appreciation and has failed to comply with its positive obligation to secure the
applicants' right to respect for their private and family life." The ECtHR held that
this amounts to a violation of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
Rights.
15.
Saudi Arabia
16.
South Africa
South Africa is the fifth country in the world, and first country in Africa to legalize
same-sex marriage.
The Constitutional Court of South Africa, in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie,
Case CCT 60/04, and Lesbian and Gay Equality Project V. Minister of Home
Affairs, Case CCT 10/05, held that same-sex couples have a constitutional right
to marry at par with entitlements and responsibilities enjoyed by heterosexual
couples.
The Court gave the Parliament one year to rectify the inequality in the marriage
statutes. Consequently, the Civil Union Act, 2006 came into force, allowing two
people regardless of gender to enter into marriage or civil partnership.
17.
Trkiye
18.
United Kingdom
Marriage Act 2013 was passed to allow same-sex marriage in England and Wales.
Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Act 2014 was passed to allow same-sex
marriage in Scotland.
Northern Ireland (Executive Formation etc) Act 2019 was passed inter alia
providing for legalization of same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland in line with
the rest of the UK.
19.
United
States
of
In Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015), the US Supreme Court struck down
America
all state bans on same-sex marriage, legalized it in all fifty states, and required
states to honour out-of-state same-sex marriage.
Respect for Marriage Act was signed into law on 13 December 2022, requiring
the US Federal Government and all US states and territories to recognize the
validity of same-sex and interracial marriages in the United States.
The US Secretary of Transportation, Mr. Pete Buttigieg, is openly gay. He
got married to his same-sex partner in 2018. The couple become parents
to fraternal twin babies in 2021.
Governor of Colorado, Mr. Jared Polis, is openly gay. He married his long-
time partner in 2021. The couple have two children, a son and a
daughter.
Governor of Massachusetts and attorney, Ms. Maura Healey, is openly
lesbian and is presently in a same-sex relationship. She formerly served
as Massachusetts Attorney General. Her partner served as her former
chief deputy.
Governor of Oregon, Ms. Tina Kotek, is openly lesbian and has been in a
same-sex relationship since 2005. The couple got married in 2017. Her
predecessor, Ms. Kate Brown, is openly bisexual.
20.
European Union
i.
Austria
2017 ruling of the Constitutional Court that preventing same-sex couples from
marrying violates constitutional principles of equality and non-discrimination.
Decision took effect on 01 January 2019.
ii.
Belgium
Second country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage. Legislation to grant
marriage rights to same-sex couples took effect on 01 June 2003.
iii.
Bulgaria
iv.
Croatia
The Life Partnership Act was passed in 2014, recognizing same-sex couples as
equal to traditional (opposite-sex) married couples. Unregistered same-sex
relationships, i.e., informal life partners, are also recognized under the Act if they
have cohabited for a minimum of 03 years. Life partners do not have right of full
joint adoption, but a parent's life partner may inter alia enjoy partial parental
responsibility, become partner-guardian of the child, etc.
Previously since 2003, unregistered same-sex unions have been recognized for
the purpose of inheritance and financial support.
V.
Cyprus
Civil unions have been recognized since 09 December 2015. Civil partners enjoy
several legal rights and benefits of marriage, such as hospital visitation, tax
benefits, property rights, etc., excluding adoption rights.
vi.
Czech Republic
Registered partnerships legalized since 01 July 2006, allowing partners several
rights of marriage, excluding joint adoption, joint property rights, etc.
Bill for legalizing same-sex marriage is presently pending in the Parliament.
vii.
Denmark
Legislation to legalize same-sex marriage took effect on 15 June 2012. Same-sex
marriage also legal in 2 other countries of the Danish Realm-Greenland (01 April
2016) and Faroe Islands (01 July 2017).
Previously, Denmark was the first country in the world to enact registered
partnerships in 1989, providing same-sex couples with almost all rights and
benefits of marriage.
viii.
Estonia
Registered partnerships legalized since 01 January 2016, allowing partners
several rights and obligations of marriage. Partners are required to support each
other, are granted similar property rights as married spouses, and have the right
to adopt a partner's children (stepchild adoption).
ix.
Finland
Legislation to legalize same-sex marriage took effect on 01 March 2017.
Previously since 2002, registered partnerships for same-sex couples were
recognized.
X.
France
supra
xi.
Germany
supra
xii.
Greece
Same-sex relationships have been recognized for the purpose of anti-
discrimination laws since 2005. In 2015, legislation passed allowing same-sex
couples to enter into civil partnerships and/or cohabitation agreements, and
enjoy rights at par with married couples, except adoption. Same-sex couples can
only foster children.
xiii.
Hungary
Common-law marriage/unregistered cohabitation of same-sex couples recognised
since 1996. Registered partnerships for same-sex couples have been legal since
01 July 2009, giving them as rights as married couples, except adoption, ART, or
taking a surname.
xiv.
Ireland
Legalized same-sex marriage through the Thirty-fourth Amendment of the
Constitution (Marriage Equality) Act 2015.
The Head of Government (Taoiseach) of Ireland, Mr. Leo Varadkar, is
openly gay and lives with his same-sex partner.
XV.
Italy
supra
xvi.
Latvia
Constitutional amendment specifically prohibits same-sex marriages.
In 2020, Constitutional Court of Latvia ruled that the state is required to protect
same-sex couples at par with married opposite-sex couples; granted Saeima
(Parliament) time till 01 June 2022 to enact law protecting same-sex couples,
failing which same-sex couples may apply to court to have their relationship
recognized and enjoy similar rights and benefits as married couples.
Saeima failed to approve appropriate legislation by the deadline. As of June
2022, same-sex relationships can be registered with the Administrative District
Court.
xvii.
Lithuania
xviii.
Luxembourg
Legislation to legalize same-sex marriage took effect on 01 January 2015.
Previously since 2004, partnerships for same-sex couples were recognized.
The Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Mr. Xavier Bettel, is openly gay;
married his same-sex partner in 2015.
xix.
Malta
Legislation to legalize same-sex marriage took effect on 01 September 2017.
Previously since 2014, civil unions were allowed for same-sex and opposite-sex
couples under the Civil Unions Act.
XX.
Netherlands
First country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage; legislation to legalize
same-sex marriage took effect on 01 April 2001.
Previously, cohabiting same-sex couples were recognised for rent (1979) and
inheritance tax (1981) purposes. Thereafter in 1998, registered partnerships
were introduced.
King's Commissioner of Friesland, Mr. Arno Brok, is openly gay.
xxi.
Poland
xxii.
Portugal
Legislation to legalize same-sex marriage took effect on 05 June 2010. Previously
since 2001, same-sex de facto unions were recognized in Portugal, providing
several rights and benefits of marriage.
xxiii.
Romania
xxiv.
Slovakia
XXV.
Slovenia
Slovenia is the first post-communist country to legalize same-sex marriage.
On 08.07.2022, the Constitutional Court of Slovenia (6 : 3) (Decision No. U-1-
486/20, Up-572/18) legalized same-sex marriage and adoption by same-sex
couples. It was held that Slovenia's statutory provisions allowing for only
opposite-sex marriages and adoptions violated a constitutional prohibition
against discrimination, giving the Parliament 06 months to pass appropriate
legislation. Parliament thereafter made necessary amendments to the Family
Code.
xxvi.
Spain
Third country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage. Legalized same-sex
marriage through act of Parliament on 03 July 2005.
xxvii.
Sweden
Since 01 May 2009, Sweden has adopted gender neutral laws for marriage. Prior
to this, registered partnerships were allowed for same-sex couples,
which can now be converted into marriage. Marriage is now the only form of
recognized union. The Church of Sweden has been performing same-sex
marriages since November 2009.
As of October 2021, it was confirmed that members of the Swedish royal
family may also enter into same-sex marriage without having to forfeit
the crown or lose royal titles and privileges or their place in the line of
succession.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 5 OF 2023
In the matter of:
Nikesh P.P. and Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ors
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
Contents
INTRODUCTION.
MATERIAL FACTS OF THE CASE
RELIEFS SOUGHT
THE LEGAL PREMISE
GROUNDS OF CHALLENGE
JUDICIAL REVIEW VS JUDICIAL RESTRAINT
SEPARATION OF POWERS
Judicial Review Is A Duty
Self Restraints Over Judicial Review
Violation Of Fundamental Rights Calls For Mandatory Interference Through Judicial Review
CONSTITUTIONAL ASPIRATIONS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
Organic Construction Of Constitution And The Ordinary Laws
Judicial Review As Tool For Achieving Social Justice
Judcial Review To Reflect India's Commitment To Follow International Law
IMPACT OF JUDICIAL REVIEW OVER UNCONSTITUTIONAL LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
Purposive Interpretation To Save The Statute
'Reading Down' Of Statutes
Doctrine Of Severability
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 5 OF 2023
In the matter of:
Nikesh P.P. and Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ors Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
INTRODUCTION
1229. The instant transferred case was a writ petition-WP(C) No. 2186/2020 filed before the Hon'ble High Court of
Kerala. The case stands transferred to this Hon'ble Court pursuant to the directions in Order dated 06.01.2023 in W.P
(C) No. 1011/2022 passed by this Hon'ble Court and is now numbered as T.C.(C) 5/2023.
MATERIAL FACTS OF THE CASE
1230. The Petitioners, Nikesh and Sonu are business man and an IT professional respectively. They are a gay
couple. They had met each other in May, 2018 and they had fell in love with each other. After a relationship of 2
months, they decided to get married. Being believers in God and in Hinduism, they explored the possibility of a
religious marriage. Petitioners understood that the religious/temple authorities would not solemnise their marriage or
issue a certificate of Celebration of Marriage. All their efforts to convince such persons went futile. That is when the
Petitioners decided to solemnise and register their marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 which is a secular
legislation. It is submitted that the Petitioners had turned to this country's secular law and its Constitution after being
discriminated by the religion and culture and the stereotypical homophobia that they carry. To petitioners' utter shock,
the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and its provisions are found to be discriminatory as well because the Act recognises
only marriages between persons belonging to opposite sex alone. Though the text of the Act does not exclude
homosexual unions from its ambit expressly, the Section 4 and Schedules 2-4 to the Act carry a heterosexual
undertone in its language as it shows marriage as an affair between a male and a female or between bride and
bridegroom. This is especially so because the forms appended to the Schedule Nos. 2-4 of the Act prescribing the
format of Notice of intended marriage, declarations to be made by the parties to the marriage and the certificate of
marriage - all carry heterosexual nomenclature. Thus, the statute in effect prevents a homosexual from applying for
solemnizing or registration of marriage. Therefore, the Petitioners approached the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala
challenging the impugned provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
RELIEFS SOUGHT
i) issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order declaring that Section 4 of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, to the extent that it restricts solemnization of marriage to only between a man and a woman,
is unconstitutional and void;
ii) issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order declaring that the Second, Third and
Fourth Schedule to the Special Marriage Act, 1954, to the extent that it restricts marriage to only between a
bridegroom and a bride, is unconstitutional and void;
iii) issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order declaring that the any provision or
words or phrases in Special Marriage Act, 1954, to the extent that it excludes or may imply an intention to not
recognize or solemnize or register marriage between homosexual couples, is unconstitutional and void;
iv) issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order declaring that the homosexual couples
are entitled to solemnize and register their marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954;
v) issue a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order to Respondents Nos. 2-5 and all their
agents acting under them, directing them to accept and process the Notice given by the Petitioners under
Section 5 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and to take it to its meaningful conclusion within the time limits
prescribed by the Act of 1954;
vi) issue such other further writ, direction or order as deemed fit and necessary in the circumstances;
THE LEGAL PREMISE
1231. It is submitted that in the last decade, much change has been brought to the rights regime whereby though
belatedly, certain important and intrinsic rights were declared essential for the meaningful enjoyment of fundamental
rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India under Articles 14, 19 and 21. Those rights were declared by this Hon'ble
Court to be part and parcel of the rights enjoyed under Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India. Those rights
are:
1. Right to choose one's own partner
2. Right to self determination of sexual identity and its right to be protected with dignity.
3. Right to privacy which includes right to decisional autonomy
4. Right of members of LGBTQIA+ to full protection of all civil liberties available to others
Right to choose one's own partner
1232. The right of an adult to choose one's own partner is now recognized as a fundamental right under Article 14
one's own partner is a crucial aspect of individual liberty and the state is powerless to negotiate upon the said liberty.
1233. This Hon'ble Court had held, in Re Indian Woman says gang-raped on orders of Village Court published in
citizens and an inherent aspect of Article 21 of the Constitution would be the freedom of choice in marriage. Similarly,
a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded on individual choice that is recognised in the Constitution under Article
19.
1234. In Shakti Vahini Supra, the Court specifically ruled that the consent of the family or the community or the
clan is not necessary once the two adult individuals agree to enter into a wedlock. The law declared by the Apex Court
in Shakti Vahini Supra (para 42) is reproduced thus:
"It has to be sublimely borne in mind that when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is
a manifestation of their choice which is recognized under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has
the sanction of the constitutional law and once that is recognized, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot
succumb to the conception of class honour or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely
does not have any legitimacy.
Right to self-determination of sexual identity
held that the gender identity is intrinsic to one's personality and the denial of the said identity which one is entitled to
self-determine is a violation of his/her dignity. The right to self-determination of sexual identity is a natural pre-cursor
to one's right to choose one's own partner and these are concepts which are so related and inter-twined that one
cannot outlive the other. It was further declared that "We, therefore, conclude that discrimination on the basis of
sexual orientation or gender identity includes any discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference, which has the
effect of nullifying or transposing equality by the law or the equal protection of laws guaranteed under our
Constitution, and hence we are inclined to give various directions to safeguard the constitutional rights of the
members of the TG community." (K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan (J), Para 77)
Right to Privacy
"Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of family life, marriage,
procreation, the home and sexual orientation. Privacy also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards
individual autonomy and recognises the ability of the individual to control vital aspects of his or her life. Personal
choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy. Privacy protects heterogeneity and recognises the plurality
and diversity of our culture. While the legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from the intimate zone to the
private zone and from the private to the public arenas, it is important to underscore that privacy is not lost or
surrendered merely because the individual is in a public place. Privacy attaches to the person since it is an essential
facet of the dignity of the human being". (Chandrachud (J), para 188) Right to Privacy also was held to be
inalienable even if it concerns only a minority of the populace.
Right of members of LGBTQIA+ to full protection of all civil liberties
that every person has a right to sexual identity and a right to be treated with dignity for that identification. No matter
how a person self-determines one's own identity, that identity is to be protected and recognized by law equally and
without discrimination.
1238. This Hon'ble Court had further held that members of the LGBT community are entitled to full protection of all
the civil liberties available to others and that all are entitled to equal treatment and equal rights under the Indian
Constitution.
1239. This Hon'ble Court expounded that 'A person's sexual orientation is intrinsic to their being. It is connected
with their individuality, and identity. A classification which discriminates between persons based on their innate
nature, would be violative of their fundamental rights, and cannot withstand the test of constitutional morality.' (Indu
Malhotra (J), para 522.5)
1240. It is submitted that without the ability to contract marriage and love, the right to self-determination of one's
own gender and right to sexuality are lost and stand defeated. This must be read along with declaration of law made
by this Hon'ble Court that : 'Members of the LGBT community are entitled, as all other citizens, to the full range of
constitutional rights including the liberties protected by the Constitution." (Chandrachud (J), para 508)
GROUNDS OF CHALLENGE
1241. In the light of aforestated declarations of law made by this Hon'ble Court, the petitioners contend that:
A. The impugned provisions of Special Marriage Act, 1954 fails to respect the individuality and identity of
homosexuals and discriminates them by excluding them from the institution of marriage, without any basis and
by violating their constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights. Thus, the impugned provisions of the Act of
1954 must be held as irrational and manifestly arbitrary, thus violating Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Any law that fails in its duty to protect one's self determination of sexual identity and treat that identity with
dignity disrespects individual choice and thus ought to be considered irrational and manifestly arbitrary, violating
rights guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
B. The non-recognition of marriage among homosexuals violates the rights guaranteed under Article 15(1) of the
Constitution of India. The impugned provisions of the Act of 1954 are based on irrational and discriminatory
stereotype gender roles assigned by the society to man and woman and thus cannot pass the test of
reasonableness imposed by the Constitution. The majoritarian morality that dictates that a marital union shall be
that of only of man and woman and never be comprised of a man and a man OR a woman and a woman has led
to the construction of provisions which are impugned herein. Such provisions to the extent that they refuse to
recognize unions that do not comprise of a man and a woman, fail the test of discrimination articulated by Article
15 of the Constitution of India.
C. Denial of the institution of marriage to the Petitioners and the refusal of law to recognize and accept homosexual
marital unions is also a violation of their right to freedom of expression guaranteed to them by the Constitution
of India under Article 19 (1) and are thus illegal and constitutional. The petitioners' right to expression of love
in the form that they aspire to conduct will be meaningless if their marital union is not recognized by law.
Expression of love, growth of one's personality within a relationship and development of an identity of union will
be incomplete if the law refuses to recognize same sex marriages and thereby it affects the Article 19(1) rights of
the petitioners guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a of the Constitution of India.
D. The Petitioners are denied their right to privacy which is implicit under Article 21 of the Constitution of India by
denying them access to the institution of marriage recognized by law. Non recognition of marriage of
homosexuals is an attack on individuality and autonomy which are essential to the right to privacy guaranteed to
an individual.
E. The impugned provisions of the Act of 1954 are regressive and outdated as they remain closed and opaque to
sexual minorities and recognize marital unions as a composite of only heterosexuals. These provisions kill the
idea of transformative constitutionalism.
F. The impugned provisions vitiate constitutional morality and try to fixate the majoritarian morality on the
LGBTQIA+ persons who form a minority. This is impermissible and unconstitutional.
1242. This written submission intends to, primarily, address the issue of possibility and potential of a Judicial
Review by this Hon'ble Court, by examining the contours of the Doctrine of Separation of Powers and related and
incidental issues.
JUDICIAL REVIEW vs JUDICIAL RESTRAINT
1243. It has been contended by the Centre in its Counter Affidavit that this Hon'ble Court must not enter into a
scrutiny of the impugned marriage laws and contended that the judicial review of the impugned provisions would
result in the Court entering into the province of the Parliament. The crux of the contention in the Counter Affidavit
seems to be that only the Parliament can enlarge the scope of beneficiaries of the marriage laws and whether the
members of LGBTQIA+ community can solemnise and register their marriage under the said laws are beyond the
scope of judicial review which if attempted would frustrate the Doctrine of Separation of Powers.
SEPARATION OF POWERS
1244. For a country with each organ of the governance being bestowed with clear duties and functions by a written
Constitution, the postulate of Separation of Powers under the Indian Constitution is interestingly fluid and less rigid.
With the Supreme Court acting as the final arbiter (of all constitutional and other disputes), the Court is tasked with
the crucial role of checking the excesses and vices of the Executive and the Legislature and for the same purpose,
Judicial Review of legislations and executive actions form an important tool. With the overlapping nature of some of
the functions discharged by the three bodies, much judicial literature is available already defining the contours of
Judicial Review and Judicial Restraint, thereby delicately balancing the idea of Separation of Powers.
JUDICIAL REVIEW IS A DUTY
1245. It is now very well settled that Judicial Review is an integral and basic feature of the Constitution which is
not even subject to the amending powers of the Indian Parliament. The law in this regard can be succinctly found in L.
"78. The legitimacy of the power of Courts within constitutional democracies to review legislative action has been
questioned since the time it was first conceived. The Constitution of India, being alive to such criticism, has, while
conferring such power upon the higher judiciary, incorporated important safeguards. An analysis of the manner in
which the Framers of our Constitution incorporated provisions relating to the judiciary would indicate that they were
very greatly concerned with securing the independence of the judiciary. These attempts were directed at ensuring
that the judiciary would be capable of effectively discharging its wide powers of judicial review. While the
Constitution confers the power to strike down laws upon the High Courts and the Supreme Court, it also contains
elaborate provisions dealing with the tenure, salaries, allowances, retirement age of Judges as well as the
mechanism for selecting Judges to the superior courts. The inclusion of such elaborate provisions appears to have
been occasioned by the belief that, armed by such provisions, the superior courts would be insulated from any
executive or legislative attempts to interfere with the making of their decisions, The Judges of the superior courts
have been entrusted with the task of upholding the Constitution and to this end, have been conferred the power to
interpret it. It is they who have to ensure that the balance of power envisaged by the Constitution is maintained
and that the legislature and the executive do not, in the discharge of their functions, transgress constitutional
limitations. It is equally their duty to oversee that the judicial decisions rendered by those who man the subordinate
courts and tribunals do not fall foul of strict standards of legal correctness and judicial independence. The
constitutional safeguards which ensure the independence of the Judges of the superior judiciary, are not available to
the Judges of the subordinate judiciary or to those who man Tribunals created by ordinary legislations.
Consequently, Judges of the latter category can never be considered full and effective substitutes for the superior
judiciary in discharging the function of constitutional interpretation. We, therefore, hold that the power of judicial
review over legislative action vested in the High Courts under Articles 226 and in this Court under Article 32 of the
Constitution is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution, constituting part of its basic structure.
Ordinarily, therefore, the power of High Courts and the Supreme Court to test the constitutional validity of
legislations can never be ousted or excluded."
1246. This Hon'ble Court has held that Judicial Review is in fact a duty cast upon the higher judiciary to safeguard
the Constitution and the resistance against it by the Executive as well as the Legislature by harping on 'Separation of
Powers' is nothing new and is without substance.
1247. This Hon'ble Court quoted statements of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar from the floor of Constituent Assembly in
howsoever highly placed and no authority however lofty can claim to be the sole judge of its power under the
Constitution or whether its action is within the confines of such power laid down by the Constitution. The judiciary is
the interpreter of the Constitution and to the judiciary is assigned the delicate task to determine what is the power
conferred on each branch of Government, whether It is limited, and if so, what are the limits and whether any action of
that branch transgresses such limits. It is for the judiciary to uphold the constitutional values and to enforce the
constitutional limitations. That is the essence of the rule of law, which inter alia requires that "the exercise of powers
by the Government whether it be the legislature or the executive or any other authority, be conditioned by the
Constitution and the law. "The power of judicial review is an integral part of our constitutional system and without it,
there will be no Government of laws and the rule of law would become a teasing illusion and a promise of unreality.
/
am of the view that if there is one feature of our Constitution which, more than any other, is basic and fundamental to
the maintenance of democracy and the rule of law, it is the power of judicial review and it is unquestionably, to my
mind, part of the basic structure of the Constitution."
1248. This Hon'ble Court had an occasion in Justice KS Puttaswamy Supra (para 166) to further recognize the
power of Judicial Review as a vibrant means of protecting the lives and freedoms of individuals. Therein, this Hon'ble
Court also considered Judicial Review as a tool for filtering out and identifying 'legitimate state interests' in state
actions that are impugned before it for its questionable constitutionality (para 180).
1249. The Constitution Bench of this Hon'ble Court declared, in State of West Bengal V. The Committee for
"44 (iii) : In view of the constitutional scheme and the jurisdiction conferred on this Court under Article 32 and on
the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution the power of judicial review being an integral part of the basic
structure of the Constitution, no Act of Parliament can exclude or curtail the powers of the Constitutional Courts
with regard to the enforcement of fundamental rights. As a matter of fact, such a power is essential to give
practicable content to the objectives of the Constitution embodied in Part 111 and other parts of the Constitution.
Moreover, in a federal constitution, the distribution of legislative powers between the Parliament and the State
Legislature involves limitation on legislative powers and, therefore, this requires an authority other than the
Parliament to ascertain whether such limitations are transgressed. Judicial review acts as the final arbiter not only
to give effect to the distribution of legislative powers between the Parliament and the State Legislatures, it is also
necessary to show any transgression by each entity. Therefore, to borrow the words of Lord Steyn, judicial review is
justified by combination of "the principles of separation of powers, rule of law, the principle of constitutionality and
the reach of judicial review".
1250. Thus, this Hon'ble Court has the power as well as the solemn constitutional duty to check if any
transgression is made by the Parliament by enacting the impugned provisions wherein they might have come in
conflict and in derogation of various rights protected by Part 111 of the Constitution of India. It does not constitute a
violation of the Doctrine of Separation of Power if the Court is to embark upon a legitimate judicial review of the
impugned provisions for ascertaining violations over Part 111 of the Constitution of India.
SELF RESTRAINTS OVER JUDICIAL REVIEW
1251. This Hon'ble Court, over a catena of judgments, had outlined certain provinces and areas where the
Constitutional Courts ought to not exercise the power of Judicial Review, for maintaining the constitutional propriety.
For example, in fiscal matters concerning executive choices made on financial wisdom, Judicial Review is not
1252. Similarly, issues concerning 'political questions' are traditionally considered off-limits for Judicial Review.
Brennan in Baker V. Carr, 369 US 186 wherein the US Supreme Court laid down the norms for excluding exercise of
Judicial Review on purely political questions. In Baker, Brennan J formulated that except in cases of issues touching
political questions, the Court has necessary powers to review the legality of a state action. He opined that "Prominent
on the surface of any case held to involve a political question is found a textually demonstrable constitutional
commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable
standards for resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for
nonjudicial discretion; or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of
the respect due coordinate branches of government or an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various
departments on one question."
1253. In the issues poised before this Hon'ble Court in the challenged mounted against the impugned provisions of
different marriage laws, no claim can be laid by the Union that the Court is called upon to decide a political question or
to determine the validity of fiscal matter.
VIOLATION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS CALLS FOR MANDATORY INTERFERENCE THROUGH JUDICIAL
REVIEW
1254. Whenever the rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution are in danger due to state action, the
exercise of Judicial Review is mandatory, as have been settled in law by various pronouncements of this Hon'ble Court.
that it is the solemn duty of the Courts to uphold the civil rights and liberties of the citizens against executive or
legislative invasion, and the Court cannot sit quiet in this situation, but must play an activist role in upholding civil
liberties and the fundamental rights in Part 111.
doctrine of separation of powers could not be invoked to limit the Court's power to exercise judicial review, in a case
where fundamental rights are sought to be breached or abrogated on the ground that exercise of the power would
impinge upon the doctrine.
1257. The Courts must not remain mute spectators, on the ground of Separation of Powers, when discrimination is
reported. This Hon'ble Court had held in Navtej Supra (para 449, Chandrachud (J)) that "where the validity of the law
is called into question, judicial review will extend to scrutinising whether the law is manifestly arbitrary in its
encroachment on fundamental liberties. If a law discriminates against a group or a community of citizens by denying
them full and equal participation as citizens, in the rights and liberties granted by the Constitution, it would be for the
Court to adjudicate upon validity of such a law.'
the constitutionality of Exception 2 to Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, in so far as it relates to girls aged 15 to
18 years. The resultant exercise of a judicial review would make a sexual intercourse between a man and his wife
being a girl between 15 and 18 years of age rape. Mindful of what was sought from the Court, this Hon'ble Court did
not hesitate to interfere with the statute when concluded that marital rape of a girl child was effectively nothing but
aggravated penetrative sexual assault and there was no reason why it should not be punishable under the provisions
of the Indian Penal Code. This Hon'ble Court found that there was no rationale for distinction between a girl child of
the age 15-18 years and a married girl child of the same age and this Hon'ble Court therefore held that this distinction
is a completely arbitrary and discriminatory and resultantly struck down.
is upon the judiciary to ensure that laws/enactments that propose to interfere with personal liberty must be held to
the standards set by this Hon'ble Court earlier in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) wherein such laws are made to
satisfy the three-fold test:
(i) legality, which postulates the existence of law;
(ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate State interest, and
(iii) proportionality, which ensures a rational nexus between the object and the means adopted.
1260. This Hon'ble Court found that Section 497 IPC which criminalised adultery did not survive this test and
therefore left no option for the Court but to strike it down. Similarly, in Shayara Bano V. Respondent : Union of India
Act, 1937, in so far as it seeks to recognize and enforce Triple Talaq and also the practice of Triple Talaq, for being
manifestly arbitrary.
1261. Therefore, the Constitutional Scheme, as it exists today, requires this Hon'ble Court as well as the Hon'ble
High Courts to act proactively to judicially address the issues of discrimination and other violations to rights
guaranteed under Part 111 of the Constitution of India. The exercise of Judicial Review in such cases is mandatory and
non-negotiable.
CONSTITUTIONAL ASPIRATIONS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
1262. Judicial Review, as discussed above, is intended to safeguard the rights protected under Part III of the
Constitution and also to keep the Executive and Legislature under checks and balances so to ensure that they do not
transgress their limits as set by the Constitution. Though this can be called the normative function of Judicial Review
achieved through Constitutional Courts, there are certain other aspirations for Judicial Review, as it has evolved over
time and has now become recognised goal for the process of Judicial Review.
ORGANIC CONSTRUCTION OF CONSTITUTION AND THE ORDINARY LAWS
12 The Constitution expects the Judiciary to search for solutions responsive to a changed social era involving a
search not only among competing propositions of law, or competing versions of a legal proposition, or the modalities of
an indeterminacy such as 'fairness' or 'reasonableness', but also among propositions from outside the ruling law,
corresponding to the empirical knowledge or accepted values of present time and place, relevant to the dispensing of
justice within the new parameters. [Kalpana Mehta Supra, para 28] A dynamic interpretation is needed for the
Constitution so that it gets updated and it stays relevant with time. Similarly, the ordinary laws of the land also
require a timely infusion and tricking down of constitutional tenor and odour.
1264. In K.S. Puttaswamy Supra, this Hon'ble Court held that the interpretation of the Constitution cannot be
frozen by its original understanding, for the Constitution has evolved and must continuously evolve to meet the
aspirations and challenges of the present and the future.
Court held that the constitutionality of a provision will have to be judged keeping in view the interpretative changes of
the statute affected by passage of time. Again, in State of West Bengal V. The Committee for Protection of Democratic
liberally having regard to the changed circumstances and the needs of time and polity.
interpretation and found that that Section 30 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 which prohibited employment of "any
man under the age of 25 years" or "any woman" in any part of such premises in which liquor or an intoxicating drug is
consumed by the public is a provision of law that suffers from incurable fixations of stereotype morality and conception
of sexual role and falls out with the transformative aspirations of the Constitution and thus unconstitutional.
may be quite reasonable and rational at the time of its enactment may with the lapse of time and/or due to change of
circumstances become arbitrary, unreasonable and violative of the doctrine of equality and even if the validity of such
legislation may have been upheld at a given point of time, the Court may, in subsequent litigation, strike down the
same if it is found that the rationale of classification has become non-existent." This principle found appreciation in
Joseph Shine supra and essentially echoed this Hon'ble Court's earlier opinion in John Vallamattom supra and Malpe
1268. Following the footsteps of this Hon'ble Court in the aforementioned judgments in the organic interpretation
of
ordinary laws, the Madras High Court, in Arunkumar V. Inspector General of Registration WP(MD) No. 4125 of 2019,
recognizing the solemnisation of marriage between a male and a transwoman under Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 and directing its registration, demonstrated that a statute must be interpreted in the light of the legal
system as it exists today.
1269. It is submitted that the impugned provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, in so far as it prevents same
sex couples from solemnising and registering marriage, is repugnant to the present time, contrary to the idea of
transformative constitutionalism and would fail the test of constitutionality as it would not support an organic
interpretation which would guarantee an equal space for all persons without prohibition or discrimination on the basis
of gender or sexual identity or orientation mounted upon age-old homophobic stereotypes.
JUDICIAL REVIEW AS TOOL FOR ACHIEVING SOCIAL JUSTICE
1270. The preamble to our Constitution underlines 'Social Justice' as one of constitutional ethos for the governance
of our country. Social Justice has thus naturally made its way as a cause and function for Judicial Review of State
Action aimed at taming and trimming laws/enactments to achieve its intended social goals.
1271. The American Jurist Alexander Bickel reckons that "judicial review is a counter majoritarian force in our
system, since when the Supreme Court declares unconstitutional a legislative Act or the act of an elected executive, it
thus thwarts the will of the representatives of the people; it exercises control, not on behalf of the prevailing majority,
1272. This Hon'ble Court in Asif Hameed V. State of Jammu and Kashmir AIR 1989 SC 1899 declared that "the
Legislature and the Executive, the two facets of people's will, have all the powers including that of finance. The
judiciary has no power over the sword or the purse. Nonetheless, it has power to ensure that the aforesaid two main
organs of the State function within the constitutional limits. It is the sentinel of democracy. Judicial review is a
powerful weapon to restrain unconstitutional exercise of power by the legislature and the executive. The expanding
horizon of judicial review has taken in its fold the concept of social and economic justice. The exercise of powers by the
legislature and executive is subject to judicial restraint and the only check on the exercise of power by the judiciary is
the self-imposed discipline of judicial restraint".
1273. This Hon'ble Court stressed on the importance of "social context judging" in Badshah V. Urmila Badshah
evolved by Parliament and the Supreme Court in myriad situations presented before courts where unequal parties are
pitted in adversarial proceedings and where courts are called upon to dispense equal justice. Apart from the social-
economic inequalities accentuating the disabilities of the poor in an unequal fight, the adversarial process itself
operates to the disadvantage of the weaker party. In such a situation, the judge has to be not only sensitive to the
inequalities of parties involved but also positively inclined to the weaker party if the imbalance were not to result in
miscarriage of justice'.
1274. It is submitted that non-recognition of marriage among homosexuals violates the idea of Social Justice under
the Constitution of India. The impugned provisions of the Act of 1954 are based on discriminatory stereotype gender
roles assigned by the society to man and woman and are aimed at perpetuating the non-identification of gender and
orientation of the sexual minorities. The majoritarian morality that dictates that a marital union shall be that of only of
man and woman and never be comprised of a man and a man OR a woman and a woman has led to the construction
of provisions which are impugned herein. Such provisions to the extent that they refuse to recognize unions that do
not comprise of a man and a woman, is an assault on the fundamental ethos of the Constitution of India.
1275. Social Justice would remain a distant dream for homosexuals if the law doesn't allow all the civil liberties
enjoyed by heterosexuals for the homosexuals as well. Anything less would be causation of indignity and proliferation
of the existing degraded social status of members of LGBTIQA+
JUDCIAL REVIEW TO REFLECT INDIA'S COMMITMENT TO FOLLOW INTERNATIONAL LAW
1276. Article 51 of the Constitution, which forms part of the Directive Principles of State Policy, requires the State
to endeavour to "foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with
one another."
1277. International instruments and covenants exist that require Member States to observe and respect essential
rights of LGBTIO people which includes the family rights of such people. With many member states having adopted it
in their domestic legislation, the rights of LGBTQI had been, though slowly, acquiring the colors of international law.
The United Nations Human Rights Committee [UNHRC] had, vide its Communication No. 488/1992, ruled that the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights guarantees sexual minorities the right to privacy under Article 17
and the right to sexual orientation and identity under Article 26 of the Convention. Similarly, the Declaration of
Montreal adopted on July 29, 2006, by the International Conference on LGBT Human Rights recognized the family
rights of LGBT persons as being essential and considered them to be inalienable human rights. Beyond the right of
equal access of homosexuals to institution of marriage, the Convention also demanded adoption rights for the LGBT as
well.
1278. Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) as proclaimed by the United Nations General
Assembly in Paris on 10 December 1948 vide General Assembly Resolution No. 217 (III) endorses right to family as
indispensable right of any person. It is reproduced as thus:
(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry
and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
(3) The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State.
1279. Similarly, European Convention of Human Rights vide its Article 8 (right to respect for private and family life)
and Article 12 (right to marry and to found a family) embodies the same principles as are present in Article 16 UDHR.
1280. In NALSA supra, while on the issue of the rights of transgender persons, this Hon'ble Court dealt with the
'Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Law in Relation to Issues of Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity' and expounded that the same has to be treated as part of the Indian domestic law as well. Principle 33 of the
Yogyakarta Principles states that "Everyone has the right to be free from criminalisation and any form of sanction
arising directly or indirectly from that person's actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, gender
expression or sex characteristics. Pursuant to the NALSA supra judgment, India as a State under International Law
must observe and respect and also specifically adopt and implement the Principle No. 33 of the Yogyakarta Principles
in its true spirit.
1281. In Navtej supra as well, this Hon'ble Court observed that there exists an incongruency between India's
international commitments and Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, insofar as it criminalizes consensual sexual acts
between same sex adults in private. This also was one of the many reasons why the said provision, to the extent of the
aforestated limits, was held and declared as unconstitutional.
IMPACT OF JUDICIAL REVIEW OVER UNCONSTITU LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
1282. Once Judicial Review of questionable legislative action is undertaken, if the Court comes to a finding that the
statute is in fact without legislative competency or manifestly arbitrary or disproportionate in its impact or
discriminatory or violative of rights guaranteed under Part 111 of the Constitution, the Judiciary employs three
mechanisms to deal with the offending statute:
(1) Give purposive interpretation to the offending words/phrases of the statute to bring it in consonance with the
legitimate object of the statute or with the constitution.
(2) Read down the offending part of the statute
(3) Apply Doctrine of Severability to save the unoffending part of the statute and to severe the illegality
1283. Only if all the aforestated options are exhausted and returns no results, the Judiciary is expected to strike
down the entire statute/provision.
PURPOSIVE INTERPRETATION TO SAVE THE STATUTE
1284. The tool of purposive interpretation is employed when the offending provision does not fully commit to the
object of the statute or with a constitutional mandate. Then, to save the statute, necessary interpretive changes can
be brought to the legislation by the Judiciary if the same would result in a meaningful legal construction of the said
provision.
1285. It is profitable to borrow Justice Cardozo's opinion in Panama Refining Co. V. Ryan (293 US 388 (1935))
wherein he stated that "the separation of powers between the Executive and Congress is not a doctrinaire concept to
be made use of with pedantic rigor. There must be sensible approximation. there must be elasticity of adjustment. in
response to the practical necessities of government, which cannot foresee today the developments of tomorrow in their
nearly infinite variety.
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 was under the scrutiny of this Hon'ble Court. The statute had banned and imposed
a total prohibition on the trade of ivory with an intention to protect the Indian Elephants, the petitioners who had
legally imported ivory from Africa claimed right of possession/compensation of the ivory. This Hon'ble Court, noticed
that though no provision in the statute has expressly outlawed the possession of legally obtained (imported) ivory, the
possession of any ivory must be construed as implicitly prohibited to keep the said provisions in line with the object of
the statute. This Hon'ble Court thus expanded the scope of the statute by employing a purposive interpretation.
1287. It is submitted that the impugned provisions of Special Marriage Act, 1954 can be saved from the vice of
unconstitutionality if this Hon'ble Court would conduct a purposive construction of the gender centric/heterosexual
nomenclature employed therein to include even homosexuals and transgenders, so that the object of transformative
constitutionalism and social justice, as held in NALSA supra, Puttuswamy supra and Navtej Singh supra, is achieved.
'READING DOWN' OF STATUTES
1288. The Judiciary may also employ the tool of 'reading down' the offensive parts of the impugned provision to
tone them down to meet the expectations of the Constitution as well as the legitimate object of the statute.
a first attempt at sustaining the validity of the statute by reading it down. The striking down of statute was available
oto the Court only if 'reading down' is not an option.
to Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 and Section 19 of Guardian and Wards Act, 1890 as the
provisions prevented the Mother of a child from becoming a natural guardian to the child during the life time of the
father and father alone was considered to be natural guardian. This Hon'ble Court held that:
"36. Obviously, a rigid insistence of strict statutory interpretation may not be conducive for the growth of the
child, and welfare being the predominant criteria, it would be a plain exercise of judicial power of interpreting the
law SO as to be otherwise conducive to a fuller and better development and growth of the child.
45. Be it noted further, that gender equality is one of the basic principles of our Constitution and in the event the
word 'after' is to be read to mean a disqualification of a mother to act as a guardian during the lifetime of the
father, the same would definitely run counter to the basic requirement of the constitutional mandate and would lead
to a differentiation between male and female. Normal rules of interpretation shall have to bow down to the
requirement of the Constitution since the Constitution is supreme and the statute shall have to be in accordance
therewith and not de hors the same. The father by reason of a dominant personality cannot be ascribed to have a
preferential right over the mother in the matter of guardianship since both fall within the same category and in that
view of the matter the word 'after' shall have to be interpreted in terms of the constitutional safe-guard and
guarantee SO as to give a proper and effective meaning to the words use.
46. In our opinion the word 'after' shall have to be given a meaning which would subserve the need of the
situation viz., welfare of the minor and having due regard to the factum that law courts endeavour to retain the
legislation rather than declaring it to be a void, we do feel it expedient to record that the word 'after' does not
necessarily mean after the death of the father, on the contrary, it depicts an intent SO as to ascribe the meaning
thereto as 'in the absence of-be it temporary or otherwise or total apathy of the father towards the child or even
inability of the father by reason of ailment or otherwise and it is only in the event of such a meaning being ascribed
to the word 'after' as used in Section 6 then and in that event the same would be in accordance with the intent of
the legislation viz. welfare of the child.
47. In that view of the matter question of ascribing the literal meaning to the word 'after' in the context does not
and cannot arise having due regard to the object of the statute, read with the constitutional guarantee of gender
equality and to give a full play to the legislative intent, since any other interpretation would render the statute void
and which situation in our view ought to be avoided."
1291. Here, this Hon'ble Court reading down the word 'after' within the statutory provision ensured equality of
status between the mother and the father for the purpose of natural guardianship of the child. Similar course of action
can also be taken in the instant case, wherein this Hon'ble Court could 'read down' the heterosexual undertone of the
impugned provisions to bring about equality in marriage among all persons including homosexuals and transgenders.
DOCTRINE OF SEVERABILITY
1292. Doctrine of Severability proposes to strike down the offending parts of the disputed provision/legislation
thereby saving the remainder of the statutory provision. Navtej Singh supra is a fine example where this Hon'ble Court
has employed Doctrine of Severability to strike down the consensual homosexual acts while not disturbing bestiality as
a crime under Section 377 IPC.
severing the offending part will not amount to judicial legislation and the Court is merely setting at naught the
unconstitutional portion retaining the constitutional portion.
1294. This Hon'ble Court had an occasion in Secretary Mahatama Gandhi Mission V. Bhartiya Kamgar Sena (2017) 4
enhancement of benefits or beneficiaries.
1295. This Hon'ble Court then held, quoting DS Nakara supra, that:
"The Court was then confronted with a question whether the court could grant any relief by enlarging the ambit
of the scheme. Incidentally this Court had to deal with a submission that such a course of action was
unprecedented:
40.
Alternatively, it was also contended that where a larger class comprising two smaller classes is covered by
a
legislation of which one part is constitutional, the court examines whether the legislation must be invalidated as a
whole or only in respect of the unconstitutional part. It was also said that severance always cuts down the scope of
legislation but can never enlarge it and in the present case the scheme as it stands would not cover pensioners
such as the Petitioners and if by severance an attempt is made to include them in the scheme it is not cutting down
the class or the scope but enlarge the ambit of the scheme which is impermissible even under the doctrine of
severability. In this context it was lastly submitted that there is not a single case in India or elsewhere where the
court has included some category within the scope of provisions of a law to maintain its constitutionality."
1296. This Hon'ble Court rejected this submission categorically.
"80. When Justice Mathew declared that Article 14 interdicts the State from creating inequalities, he was
stressing the obvious. Further, he articulated the remedial measures the State has been enjoined to take recourse
to eliminate the existing inequalities through positive-affirmative-action, rather than passive neutrality. "
1297. It is therefore submitted that the striking down or reading down of the heterosexual nomenclature from the
impugned provisions of Special Marriage Act, 1954, though would result in increase in the number of
beneficiaries/subjects to the Act, but the same is quite permissible as per the recognised potential consequence to a
successful Judicial Review.
1298. Therefore, it is most humbly prayed that this Hon'ble Court may allow the transferred case and order the
issuance of writs sought for therein after giving necessary declarations against the Act of 1954 as sought for.
DRAWN & SETTLED BY:
Manu Srinath, Advocate
PLACE Kochi
DATE 07.04.2023
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
(EXTRA-ORDINARY CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION)
W.P. (C) NO. 6371 OF 2020
IN
WRIT PETITION (C) 1011/2022
TRANSFERRED VIDE ORDER DATED 06.01.2023 FROM HON'BLE HIGH COURT OF DELHI TO THE HON'BLE
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA)
W.P. (C) NO. 6371 OF 2020
In the Matter of:
Abhijit Iyer Mitra & Ors
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Anr
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH:
1299. The detailed factual matrix of the case is not being reproduced herein for the sake of brevity and the same
may be read as part and parcel of the present Written Submissions.
(A) It is most humbly submitted that the contention of the present Petitioner is that Section 5 of the Hindu
Marriage Act of 1955 is clear inasmuch as it refers to any two Hindus getting married. For the convenience of this
Court, the said provision is being reproduced hereinbelow:
"5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage. A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if the
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;
(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party-
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or
(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to
such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or
(c) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of 2 [twenty-one years] and the bride, the age of 3 [eighteen years]
at the time of the marriage;
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or usage governing each
of them permits of a marriage between the two;
(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a
marriage between the two; "
(B) That it is further submitted that the Honourable Supreme Court of India has held in a catena of cases that
unless the outcome is a rank absurdity, plain meaning has to be given to the words of a statute. Some
authoritative pronouncements in this regard are reproduced hereinbelow along with the concerned citations.
"58. The words in the statute must, prima facie, be given its ordinary meaning. Where the grammatical
construction is clear and manifest and without doubt, that construction ought to prevail unless there are some
strong and obvious reasons to the contrary."
B. Premanand V. Mohan Koikal, AIR 2011 SC 1925;
"15. In Hiralal Ratanlal V. STO MANU/SC/0553/1972 AIR 1973 SC 1034, this Court observed:
In construing a statutory provision the first and foremost rule of construction is the literaly construction. All
that the Court has to see at the very outset is what does the provision say. If the provision is unambiguous and if
from the provision the legislative intent is clear, the Court need not call into aid the other rules of construction of
statutes. The other rules of construction are called into aid only when the legislative intent is not clear.
(emphasis supplied)
16. It may be mentioned in this connection that the first and foremost principle of interpretation of a statute
in
every system of interpretation is the literal rule of interpretation. The other rules of interpretation e.g. the
mischief rule, purposive interpretation etc. can only be resorted to when the plain words of a statute are
ambiguous or lead to no intelligible results or if read literally would nullify the very object of the statute. Where
the words of a statute are absolutely clear and unambiguous, recourse cannot be had to the principles of
interpretation other than the literal rule, vide Swedish Match AB V. Securities and Exchange Board, India
MANU/SC/0693/2004 : AIR 2004 SC 4219. As held in Prakash Nath Khanna V. C.I.T. MANU/SC/0134/2004
legislature is presumed to have made no mistake. The presumption is that it intended to say what it has said.
Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the words used by the legislature, the Court cannot correct or make
Where the legislative intent is clear from the language, the Court should give effect to it, vide Government of
Court should not seek to amend the law in the garb of interpretation.
17. As stated by Justice Frankfurter of the U.S. Supreme Court (see 'Of Law & Men : Papers and Addresses of
Felix Frankfurter') : Even within their area of choice the courts are not at large. They are confined by the nature
and scope of the judicial function in its particular exercise in the field of interpretation. They are under the
constraints imposed by the judicial function in our democratic society. As a matter of verbal recognition certainly,
no one will gainsay that the function in construing a statute is to ascertain the meaning of words used by the
legislature. To go beyond it is to usurp a power which our democracy has lodged in its elected legislature. The
great judges have constantly admonished their brethren of the need for discipline in observing the limitations. A
judge must not rewrite a statute, neither to enlarge non to contract it. Whatever temptations the statesmanship
of policy-making might wisely suggest, construction must eschew interpolation and evisceration. He must not
read in by way of creation. He must not read out except to avoid patent nonsense or internal contradiction.
18. As observed by Lord Granworth in Grundy V. Pinniger (1852) 1 LJ Ch 405:
'To adhere as closely as possible to the literal meaning of the words used, is a cardinal rule from which if we
depart we launch into a sea of difficulties which it is not easy to fathom.
19. In other words, once we depart from the literal rule, then any number of interpretations can be put to a
statutory provision, each Judge having a free play to put his own interpretation as he likes. This would be
destructive of judicial discipline, and also the basic principle in a democracy that it is not for the Judge to
legislate as that is the task of the elected representatives of the people. Even if the literal interpretation results
in hardship or inconvenience, it has to be followed (see G.P. Singh's Principles of Statutory Interpretations,
Edn. pp 45-49). Hence departure from the literal rule should only be done in very rare cases, and ordinarily there
should be judicial restraint in this connection.
20. As the Privy Council observed (per Viscount Simonds, L.C.):
Again and again, this Board has insisted that in construing enacted words we are not concerned with the
policy involved or with the results, injurious or otherwise, which may follow from giving effect to the language
used. (see Emperor V. Benoarilal Sarma MANU/PR/0014/1944 AIR 1945 PC 48, pg. 53).
21. As observed by this Court in CIT V. Keshab Chandra Mandal MANU/SC/0021/1950 : AIR 1950 SC 265:
Hardship or inconvenience cannot alter the meaning of the language employed by the Legislature if such
meaning is clear on the face of the statute
22. Where the words are unequivocal, there is no scope for importing any rule of interpretation vide Pandian
23. It is only where the provisions of a statute are ambiguous that the Court can depart from a literal or strict
construction vide Narsiruddin V. Sita Ram Agarwal MANU/SC/0100/2003 AIR 2003 SC 1543. Where the words
of a statute are plain and unambiguous effect must be given to them vide Bhaiji V. Sub-Divisional Officer,
24. No doubt in some exceptional cases departure can be made from the literal rule of the interpretation, e.g.
by adopting a purposive construction, Heydon's mischief rule, etc. but that should only be done in very
exceptional cases. Ordinarily, it is not proper for the Court to depart from the literal rule as that would really be
amending the law in the garb of interpretation, which is not permissible vide J.P. Bansal V. State of Rajasthan
MANU/SC/O235/2003 AIR 2003 SC 1405, State of Jharkhand V. Govind Singh : JT 2004(10) SC 349 etc.. It is
for the legislature to amend the law and not the Court vide State of Jharkhand V. Govind Singh : JT 2004(10) SC
The Court cannot legislate. under the garb of interpretation
25. Hence, there should be judicial restraint in this connection, and the temptation to do judicial legislation
should be eschewed by the Courts. In fact, judicial legislation is an oxymoron.
26. In Shiv Shakti Co-operative Housing Society V. Swaraj Developers MANU/SC/0335/2003 : AIR 2003 SC
2434, this Court observed:
It is a well settled principle in law that the Court cannot read anything into a statutory provision which is plain
and unambiguous. A statute is an edict of the legislature. The language employed in a statute is the
determinative factor of legislative intent.
27. Where the language is clear, the intention of the legislature has to be gathered from the language used
It is a cardinal principle of construction of a statute that when the language of the statute is plain and
unambiguous, then the court must give effect to the words used in the statute and it would not be open to the
courts to adopt a hypothetical construction on the grounds that such construction is more consistent with the
alleged object and policy of the Act.
29. The function of the Court is only to expound the law and not to legislate vide District Mining Officer V. Tata
the private Respondents, we will really be legislating because in the guise of interpretation we will be really
amending Rule 27(c) of the Rules.
30. In Gurudevdatta VKSSS Maryadit V. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0191/2001 AIR 2001 SC 1980, this
Court observed:
It is a cardinal principle of interpretation of statute that the words of a statute must be understood in their
natural, ordinary or popular sense and construed according to their grammatical meaning, unless such
construction leads to some absurdity or unless there is something in the context or in the object of the statute to
suggest to the contrary. The golden rule is that the words of a statute must prima facie be given their ordinary
meaning. It is yet another rule of construction that when the words of the statute are clear, plain and
unambiguous, then the Courts are bound to give effect to that meaning, irrespective of the consequences. It is
said that the words themselves best declare the intention of the law-giver. The Courts are adhered to the
principle that efforts should be made to give meaning to each and every word used by the legislature and it is
not a sound principle of construction to brush aside words in a statute as being inapposite surpluses, if they can
have a proper application in circumstances conceivable within the contemplation of the statute.
31. The same view has been taken by this Court in S. Mehta V. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0540/2001
MANU/SC/0133/2001 AIR 2001 SC 1121.
(C) That it is further most humbly submitted that the Legislature in its wisdom has not laid down any criterion
when it comes to biological genden or sex when it comes to the Hindu Marriage Act while the same legislature
has indeed laid down such a criterion qua the Special Marriage Act. It is most humbly submitted that the choice
of the Legislature must be respected.
(D) That it is also extremely pertinent to note here that the Honourable Supreme Court has laid down that in case
two interpretations are possible as far as a certain legislative provision is concerned, the correct one would be
whereby the Constitutional validity of the provision is also retained. The relevant extract is reproduced
hereinbelow:
M.L. Kamra V. The Chairman-cum-Managing Director, New India Assurance Co. Ltd., AIR 1992 SC 1072:
"4. It is thus manifest that an employee, whether permanent or temporary, has an option to leave or
discontinue by giving 30 days' notice in writing of his intention to do SO. His failure thereof shall entail
forfeiture of the pay of the month. The employee ordinarily would be superannuated on completion of his 55th
year unless the Board continues him for an extended period as may be determined from time to time. Equally
in the event of the Society not having any further need of the employee's service, whether permanent or
temporary, which should be decided by the Board, the Principal Officer shall give 30 days' notice in writing for
termination of his service or in lieu thereof, pay one month's salary including allowances upto the period of
termination. The respondent also has the right to dismiss an employee, under Rule 8, for misconduct in the
manner prescribed in the Rules. Admittedly, though action was initiated against the appellant for the charges
of embezzlement etc. which are misconduct, the charges were dropped. Taking aid of Rule 5 and without
conducting an enquiry or giving an opportunity, the appellant's service was terminated by tendering one
month's salary in lieu of notice and also a direction to pay all the allowances upto that date including the
period of his suspension. It is not necessary to go into the grounds taken in the High Court assailing the
invalidity of the termination order as they are not pressed before us. Sri. Ramamurthy, the learned Senior
counsel for the appellant placing reliance on the ratio of the majority view in D.T.C. V. D.T.C. Mazdoor
Congress Judgment today MANU/SC/0031/1991 : (1990) 3 SC 725 contended that Rule S is ultra vires of
Article 14 of the Constitution. Smt. Shyamala Pappu, the learned Senior counsel for the respondent contended
that unlike Rule 9 in D.T.C.'s case Rule S provides guidelines. The Board of Directors have to take a decision,
whether the need to continue the employee's service subsists which would be based on the relevant material.
Thereby, there would be objective consideration before taking a decision, not only regarding the need to
continue the post but also the services of the officer or the employee. Though the rule does not provide for
prior notice, post-decisional opportunity would be read into the rule. If so read, the rule is not ultra vires
Article 14. In our view the ratio in D.T.C.'s case has no application. Rule 9 of the rules of Delhi Transport
Corporation Service Regulation gives naked power to terminate the services of a permanent employee by
giving one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof. It was not the contention therein, that the rule was capable of
two constructions. It is settled law that there is a presumption of constitutionality of the rule. The court ought
not to interpret the statutory provisions, unless compelled by their language, in such a manner as would
involve its unconstitutionality, since the legislature or the rule making authority is presumed to enact a law
which does not contravene or violate the constitutional provisions.
Therefore, there is a presumption in favour of constitutionality of a legislation or statutory rule unless ex facie
it violates the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part 111 of the constitution. If the provisions of law or the rule
is construed in such a way as would make it consistent with the Constitution and another interpretation would
render the provision or the rule unconstitutional, the court would lean in favour of the former construction. In
view of this settled legal position, the question emerges whether the language in Rule S would be capable to
be
construed consistent with the fundamental rights in Part 111. As stated earlier, the phrase "in the event of the
Society not having any further need of any employee's service whether permanent or temporary which shall be
decided by the Board" is susceptible of two interpretations. The one interpretation put up by Sri. Ramamurty is
that the Board may unilaterally and arbitrarily decide that there is no need for the services of a particular
employee, in given facts and circumstances, though the post which the employee is occupying may continue and
would be put to an end by giving one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof. In that event the rule per se is
arbitrary offending Article 14. The other view capable to be construed from the language employed would be that
the Board of Management may form an objective opinion, on the basis of the material, that the post which the
officer or the employee is occupying no longer is in need. Thereby, the post would be abolished. This would be a
policy decision depending on the exigencies. In consequence the service of the employee also would become
redundant or surplus. In that event his service would no longer be needed. The officer or employee may be
permanent or temporary but the absence of the need for the continuance of the post would necessitate to
terminate the service of an employee or officer. It must not be a pretext or a rouse to get rid of the service of an
inconvenient officer or of an employee. If that be so, it would become colourable exercise of power and would be
liable to be quashed as offending Article 14. Once the Board reaches a decision to abolish the post, in
consequence the service of the officer/employee occupying couched in Rule 5 also is capable of that
interpretation. In that light we are of the opinion that Rule 5 does not become arbitrary, unreasonable or void
offending Article 14. Accordingly, we hold that the rule is valid."
(E) That it is most humbly submitted that while it is correct on the part of the Respondent No. 1 to state that it is
not within the domain of the Judiciary to legislate, it is indeed within the domain of the judiciary to strike down
a
legislation that is unconstitutional or for that matter read down a legislation in case where the same words can
be interpreted in a manner as to render them Constitutionally valid.
L. Chandra Kumar V. Union of India (UOI), AIR 1997 SC 1125:
"77. We find that the various factors mentioned in the test evolved by Chandrachud, J. have already been
considered by decisions of various Benches of this Court that have been referred to in the course of our
analysis. From their conclusions, many of which have been extracted by us in toto, it appears that this Court
has always considered the power of judicial review vested in the High Courts and in this Court under Articles
226 and 32 respectively, enabling legislative action to be subjected to the scrutiny of superior courts, to be
integral to our constitutional scheme. While several judgments have made specific references to this aspect
[Gajendragadhkar, CJ in Special Reference case, Beg, J. and Khanna, J. in Kesavananda Bharti's case,
Chandrachud, CJ and Bhagwati, J. in Minerva Mills, Chandrachud, CJ in Fertiliser Kamgar, K.N. Singh, J. in
Delhi Judicial Service Association, etc.] the rest have made general observations highlighting the significance
of this feature.
78. The legitimacy of the power of Courts within constitutional democracies to review legislative action has
been questioned since the time it was first conceived. The Constitution of India, being alive to such criticism,
has, while conferring such power upon the higher judiciary, incorporated important safeguards. An analysis of
the manner in which the Framers of our Constitution incorporated provisions relating to the judiciary would
indicate that they were very greatly concerned with securing the independence of the judiciary. These
attempts were directed at ensuring that the judiciary would be capable of effectively discharging its wide
powers of judicial review. While the Constitution confers the power to strike down laws upon the High Courts
and the Supreme Court, it also contains elaborate provisions dealing with the tenure, salaries, allowances,
retirement age of Judges as well as the mechanism for selecting Judges to the superior courts. The inclusion
of such elaborate provisions appears to have been occasioned by the belief that, armed by such provisions, the
superior courts would be insulated from any executive or legislative attempts to interfere with the making of
their decisions. The Judges of the superior courts have been entrusted with the task of upholding the
Constitution and to this end, have been conferred the power to interpret it. It is they who have to ensure that
the balance of power envisaged by the Constitution is maintained and that the legislature and the executive
do not, in the discharge of their functions, transgress constitutional limitations. It is equally their duty to
oversee that the judicial decisions rendered by those who man the subordinate courts and tribunals do not fall
foul of strict standards of legal correctness and judicial independence. The constitutional safeguards which
ensure the independence of the Judges of the superior judiciary, are not available to the Judges of the
subordinate judiciary or to those who man Tribunals created by ordinary legislations. Consequently, Judges of
the latter category can never be considered full and effective substitutes for the superior judiciary in
discharging the function of constitutional interpretation. We, therefore, hold that the power of judicial review
over legislative action vested in the High Courts under Articles 226 and in this Court under Article 32 of the
Constitution is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution, constituting part of its basic structure.
Ordinarily, therefore, the power of High Courts and the Supreme Court to test the constitutional validity of
legislations can never be ousted or excluded."
(F) That it is again most humbly submitted that the contention of the Respondent to the effect that the Indian or
Hindu family unit has always been restricted to one biologically male husband, one biologically female wife and
their children is also a claim that does not survive closer scrutiny.
(G) A perusal of the relevant textual authorities from the Rig Veda Samhita would reveal that the Vedic God Agni
who is the Lord of Fire and also the deity to which the second highest number of hymns are dedicated-next only
to Lord Indra-was also brought up in a family unit that consisted of two women. [Padma Purana, translated N.A.
Deshpande (Delhi Motilal Banarsidass, 1990), VI. 21. 2-8, pages 2396-97] (H) That it is further most humbly
submitted that by opposing something like gay marriage, the Respondent No. 1 is unnecessarily trying to live up
to the stereotyped caricature of regressive and homophobic 'Hindu nationalism'. It is however, reiterated that the
demand for legalization of LGBTQIA marriage from the present Petition is rooted in ancient Indian tradition that
dates back to a time when indigenous Indian culture was in a state of efflorescence and also uncorrupted by the
depredations of foreign invaders.
(I) That it is pertinent to also mention here the story of Prince Bhagiratha of the Ikshvaku Dynasty who is revered in
Indian tradition as one of the ancestors of Lord Rama.
(J) It is also important to mention here further that the said monarch is otherwise remembered as the one whose
penance brought the Ganga river to earth. Quite a few authoritative textual sources including the Krittivasa
Ramayana as well as the Padma Purana indicate that he was born to the wives of King Dilipa after they
established conjugal relations with each other post the latter's death. [Padma Purana, translated N.A. Deshpande
(Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass, 1990), VI. 21. 2-8, pages 2396-97]
(K) In "Same-Sex Love in India, A Literary History", Rev. Edn. Penguin 2008 by Ruth Vanita and Saleem
Kidwai:
(Pages 18-19)
"Agni, one of the most important deities in the Rig Veda (Indra, the largest numbers of hymns address him to),
is repeatedly described as 'child of two births' (dvijanman), 'child of two mothers' (dvimatri), and occasionally 'child
of three mothers' (the three worlds). Agni, the God of fire is identified as the principle of light, heat, purification,
and life. His two mothers are sometimes Heavens and Earth (the Sun, Moon, and Stars are the fires of heaven) and
sometimes the two stick from which fire was generated for the sacrifice. These two parents sometimes are identified
as father and mother but, far more often, as two mothers. The gender of the firesticks (arani), in Sanskrit, is
feminine. The lower arani is laid flat, and the upper arani (referred to as 'the Matron' in the following hymn) is
rapidly rubbed against it. The fire sticks developed into a small swastika-shaped wooden machine. In either case, it
is fractioned, not penetration, that generates fire. Numerous hymns celebrate this process of creating life from two
female figures:
1. Here is the gear for the friction, here tinden made ready for the spark. Bring though the Maptron : we will rub
Agni ancient fashion forth.
13. Mortals have brought to life the God.
The sisters ten, unwedded and united, together grasp the bebe, the new born infant.
(111 XXIX)
Agni is not only born of two mothers but also is nourished by group of mothers. He is suckled by Day and
Night, produced from the fire sticks by the ten figures who are personified as ten maidens, the daughters of the
divine artisan, Tvastri:
1. To fair goals travel Two unlike in semblance each in succession nourishes an infant. One bears a Godlike babe
of golden colour : bright and fair-shining is he with the other.
2. Twashtar's ten daughters, vigilant and youthful, produced this Infant borne to sundry quarters,
(I XCV)
A recurrent metaphor for the pairs of mothers is that of two sister cows. These COWS are spontaneously
generative, like the later Surabhi - they become fruitful without being impregnated. The cow-calf/mother-child
unit emerges as an autonomous one, with no father or an entirely shadowy and insignificant father in the
background. The pairs of mothers are envisioned as loving not only their children, but each other:
4.
One Mother rests; another feeds the Infant. Great is the Gods' supreme and soul dominion.
11. Ye, variant Pair, have made yourselves twin beauties : one of the Twin is dark, bright shines the other;
And yet these two, the dark, the red, are Sisters. Great is the Gods' supreme and soul dominion.
(IILV)
The vision of multiple motherhood here provides the worshipper with the reinsuring sense of a nurturing
universe. Whether embodying natural and social forces or both, the Gods as sons of mothers are comforting figures.
Agni embodies, among other things the principle of nurturing friendship. Although he is also addressed as
conqueror and protector, the emphasis is on warm and loving friendship: 'Safe be my bliss, O Agni, in thy
friendship' (III XXXIV 21), in contrast to Indra, warrior and slayer or foes. Other natural forces, such as rivers,
also are personified as couped mothers who seek each other and live and move together, without male companions:
1. Forth from the bossom of the mountains, eager as two swift mares with loosened rein contending, Like two
bright mother COWS who lick their youngling, Vipas Sutudri speed down there waters.
(III XXXIII)
The Rig Veda tend to celebrate the individual deities but when it does celebrate pairs, they are predominantly
same-sex pairs-twins, sisters, comothers, friends-rather than conjugal couples."
(111 XXIX) - Griffith, III : 343
XCV) Griffith, I : 124
(111 : XXXIII) - Griffith, 353. The river Vipas is the modern Beas; the other river, Sutudri, is the modern
Sutlej.
(L) In Same-Sex Love in India, A Literary History", Rev. Edn. Penguin 2008 by Ruth Vanita and Saleem
Kidwai:
(Pages 115-119)
"Krittivasa Ramayana : The Birth of Bhagiratha (Bengali)
Introduced by Ruth Vanita
This text, which even today is the most popular Bengali version of the Ramayana, is ascribed to the fourteenth-
century poet Krittivasa; however, additions to it continued to be made well into the eighteenth century. The sage
Bhagiratha is famed for having succeeded in river Ganga down to earth from heaven. Three of his forefathers had
tried and failed to perform this task. Even today, in many Indian languages the term Bbagiartha Prayaina is the
equivalent of a 'Herculean enterprise.
In the Puranas, Bhagiratha was born when his parents worship Surabhi, the wish-fulfilling divine COW. However,
the medieval text extracted below ascribes Bhagiratha's birth to divinely blessed sexual intercourse between two
women. This text draws on the ancient medical text Sushruta Samhita, which declares that a child born to two
women will have no bones.
Krittivasa Ramayana, Version /
Translated by Kumkum Roy
Dilipa ruled like Indra, the king of the Gods, but was sad as he did not have a son. Leaving behind his two wives
in the city of Ayodhya, Dilipa went in search of the Ganga.
He performed a severe penance for countless years, living on water and fasting, but he neither found the Ganga
non became free of his sorrow. King Dilipa died and went to Brahma's world. On his death the city of Ayodhya was
kingless. In heaven, Brahma and Indra were worried: 'We have heard that Vishnu will be born in the family of the
sun. How will this be possible if the line comes to an end?"
All the Gods consulted together and decided to send the three eved God, Shiva, to Ayodhya. Riding his bull,
Shiva went to Dilipa's two queens and said to them: 'By my blessings one of vou will have a son.' Hearing Shiva's
words, the two women said: 'We are widows, how can we have a child?' Shankara replied: 'You two have intercourse
with one another. By my blessings one of vou will have a lovely child.' Having bestowed this boon, the God who
destrovs the three worlds went his way.
The two wires of Dil1pa took a bath. They lived extreme love. After some davs, one of them menstruate both of
them knew one another's intentions and enjoyed love play, and one of them conceived. Ten months passed, it was
time for the birth. The child emerged as a lump of flesh. Both of them cried with the son in their lap:
'Why did the three-eved one bless us with such a son? He has no bones, he is a lump of flesh, he cannot
mOve about. Seeing him, the whole world will laugh at us.'
Weeping they put him in the basket and went to the bank of the river Sarayu to throw him into the water. Tbe
sage Vashishta saw them and understood everything through his powers of meditation. He said: 'Leave the child
on the road. Someone will have compassion on him, seeing him helpless.'
The two of them left their son on the road and went home. Just then the sage Ashtavakra came along for his
bath. Bent at eight places, the sage walked with great difficulty. Seeing the child from a distance, Ashtavakra
thought: 'If you are mimicking me in order to make fun of me, may your body be destroyed by my curse. If,
however, your body is naturally as it appears, may vou, blessing, become like Madanmohan, the God of erotic
love.
Ashtavakra was as powerful as Vishnu, so neither his curses nor his blessings failed to bear fruit. He was a sage
endowed with great and miraculous powers. The prince stood up. Through his powers of meditation, the sage came
to know that this son of Dilipa was an auspicious one, a great man.
The sage called the two queens, who took their son and returned home, delighted. The sage came too and
performed all the sacred rituals because he was born of two vulvas (bhagas) he was named Bhagiratha. The great
poet Krittivasa is a recognized scholar. In this Adi Kanda he sings of the birth of the Bhagiratha. [When the child
was five years old, he was sent to study with the the sage Vashishta. One day, when the children were quarrelling,
another child called him a bastard. The child was deeply hurt and did not return home. His mother grew worried
and went in search of him. She wiped his tears what ailed him. He told her that he had been insulted; and asked to
what caste he belonged and whose son he was. His mother then told him the truth that he was named Bhagiratha
because he was born through divine blessing, of two bhagas or vulvas that his father had died before his
conception, while trying to bring down Ganga and that he belong to the race of the sun, in the city of Ayodhya. At
this, Bhagiratha laughed with pleasure and said that if he wished, he would definitely be able to bring the Goddess
Ganga down. He declared his intention to set out the very next day to perform austerities. At this, his mothers grew
anxious and tried to dissuade him, but he disregarded them, took Guru Vashishta's blessing and set out.]
The Bengal Padma Purana and Another Version of the Krittivasa Ramayana
Following the publication of the first edition of this book, / found that the story also occurs in other texts
produced in Bengal. Among these texts are the Bengal manuscripts of the Swarga Khanda section of the Padma
Purana (in Sanskrit but written in the Bengali script), various versions of the Krittivasa Ramayana, Bhavananda's
Harivansha, composed in Bengal around the sixteenth or seventeenth centuries, Mukundarama Chakravartin's
Kavikankanachandi, and Adbhutacharya's sixteenth century Ramayana. Other manuscripts of the Sanskrit Padma
Purana, in the Devanagari script, and other Puranas too, produced in other parts of the country, relate that
Bhagiratha was born in the regular way to his father, Dilipa, king of Ayodhya. Here is an extract from another
version of the Krittivasa Ramayana, found in only one manuscript* In this version, the co-wives, named Chandra
and Mala, make love without any intention of producing a child. Also, the child is born healthy and with bones. For a
complete translation of the narrative from this text and a detailed analysis see chapter six of Love's Rite : Same-
Sex Marriage in India and the West.
Krittivasa Ramayana, Version 2
Translated by Anannya Dasgupta
The king's body was lifeless and the women grieved inside the palace.
The kingless kingdom became unruly and civil life was disrupted. The Gods in heaven congregated to address the
matter.
Lord Brahma conferred with all the Gods and decided to summon Sage Vasishtha.
He requested Vasishtha to help Chandra and Mala get a son. 'Vishnu, Vishnu,' said the sage, covering his ears,
and refused to comply with their wishes.
After Vasishtha's refusal they called upon Madan [Kama, God of love, desire and beauty].
Brahma directed Madan to make haste and make a son be born from the stomachs of Chandra and Mala. Obeying
Brahma's bidding, Madan went straight into the inner quarters of the palace.
As Madan reached the king's palace the two queens began menstruating.
Three days later they took the purifying bath, entered their husband's palace, and lay down there.
The sky was overcast with clouds, the swans sang and the peacocks danced.
The skies darkened and a stormy rain followed.
Burning with desire induced by Madan, Chandra and Mala took each other in embrace, and each kissed the other.
Chandravati played the mand and Mala woman; the two women dallied and made love [Dui nari mono ronge
rongo krira kori].
God's blessing had enabled the two women to play the game of love and energy of Madam entered the womb of
Malavati.
When Malavati realized she was pregnant she began to weep and say:
'/ have not been with a man - how can / be pregnant?
/ will be denounced as a woman of ill repute.
So / will drown myself in the Sarayu river.'
She stepped into the Sarayu to end her life but Brahma stopped her.
'Listen carefully to me,' he said, 'Unless the lineage of
Suryavansha carries on, the word itself will be lost.
Lord Narayana must be born in your line of descent, which is why the Gods had to plan this strategy.
They sent Madan to your inner chamber, to make it possible for two queens to make love.
It was Madan's energy that impregnated you, SO the son in your womb will be beautiful.
If there is any demerit Ipaap] within you, let me bear it and you can go home free of it.
Your son will be the incarnation of God and his able hands will save the world.'
Content, the queen returned to her palace and ten months passed.
In an auspicious hour a beautiful boy was born.
The fair skinned boy rapidly grew, his beauty was unequalled in the three worlds.
Six months later, his naming ceremony was conducted, following the instructions of holy books. Born of the
union of two vaginas [bhaga) he was named Bhagiratha by Brahma.
He read the fourteen Vedas and at the age of twenty, became king and ruled his people.
See, for example, Padma Purana, translated N.A. Deshpande (Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass, 1990), VI. 21. 2-8,
pages 2396-97. See also Kurma Purana translated Ganesh Vasudeo Tagare (Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass, 1981), I.
21.8-9a, p. 186. As is standard in patrilineages, these texts do not mention his mother's name. Nalinikanta
Bhattasali ed. Ramayana-Adikanda (Dacca : P.C. Lahiri, Secretary, Oriental Texts Publication Committee, University
of Dacca, 1936).
(M) It is further most humbly submitted that on page 19 of the majority judgement rendered by the Supreme Court
of the United States, the right of same sex couples to marry is something that has been read into the right to
equal protection of laws as well as 'Due Process'. It is most humbly submitted that both of these doctrines have
been adopted into Indian Constitutional law; Global Energy Ltd. V. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,
AIR 2009 SC 3194. In this view of the matter, it may be said with the utmost certitude that a Constitutional
right to same sex marriage exists in India as well.
"EPILOGUE
43. The law sometimes can be written in such subjective manner that it affects efficiency and transparent
function of the government. If the statute provides for point-less discretion to agency, it is in essence
demolishing the accountability strand within the administrative process as the agency is not under obligation
from an objective norm, which can enforce accountability in decision-making process. All law making, be it in the
context of delegated legislation or primary legislation, have to conform to the fundamental tenets of transparency
and openness on one hand and responsiveness and accountability on the other. These are fundamental tenets
flowing from Due Process requirement under Article 21, Equal Protection clause embodied in Article 14 and
Fundamental Freedoms clause ingrained under Article 19. A modern deliberative democracy can not function
without these attributes. The constitutive understanding of aforementioned guarantees under the Fundamental
Rights chapter in the Constitution does not give rise to a mere rhetoric and symbolic value inhered by the polity
but has to be reflected in minute functioning of all the three wings of state - executive, legislature and judiciary.
When we talk of state action, devil lies in the detail. The approach to writing of laws, rules, notifications etc. has
to showcase these concerns. The image of law which flows from this framework is its neutrality and objectivity
:
the ability of law to put sphere of general decision-making outside the discretionary power of those wielding
governmental power. Law has to provide a basic level of "legal security" by assuring that law is knowable,
dependable and shielded from excessive manipulation. In the context of rule making, delegated legislation
should establish the structural conditions within which those processes can function effectively. The question
which needs to be asked is whether delegated legislation promotes rational and accountable policy
implementation.
While we say so, we are not oblivious of the contours of the judicial review of legislative acts. But, we have
made all endeavours to keep ourselves confined within the well-known parameters.
A subjectively worded normative device also enables the agency to acquire rents. It determines the degree
of
accountability and responsiveness of officials and of political and judicial control of the bureaucracy.
However, when the provision inherently perpetuates injustice in the award of licenses and brings uncertainty
and arbitrariness it would be best to stop the government in the tracks. Since the vires of the regulation is under
challenge, we took the opportunity to consider the propriety and constitutionality of generic decision-making
process encapsulated under the impugned legislation. Amongst others, in this context, we strike down the
impugned clause."
Obergefell et al V. Hodges, Director, Ohio Department of Health, et al:
These considerations lead to the conclusion that the right to marry is a fundamental right inherent in the
liberty of the person, and under the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment
couples of the same-sex may not be deprived of that right and that liberty. The Court now holds that same-sex
couples may exercise the fundamental right to marry. No longer may this liberty be denied to them. Baker V.
Nelson must be and now is overruled, and the State laws challenged by Petitioners in these cases are now held
invalid to the extent they exclude same-sex couples from civil marriage on the same terms and conditions as
opposite sex couples."
(N) That it is further most humbly submitted that Article 14 of the Constitution of India mandates that if at all
classification is made then the same can be made only on the basis of intelligible differentia and that the said
intelligible differentia must have a rational nexus with the object of the legislative instrument.
(O) That it is most humbly submitted that if only biological males are allowed to marry biological females then the
said classification would not have any rational nexus with the object of the Hindu Marriage Act.
(P) It is humbly submitted that the purpose of the Act is to codify the law related to marriage amongst Hindus as
per the bare wording of the statute itself. Nowhere does the same say that the purpose of the Act is to ensure
that only biological males marry biological females.
(Q) That it is again most humbly submitted that there is no intelligible differentia that can be drawn to distinguish
biological males and biological females. A biological man may identify as a woman while a biological woman
might identify as a man.
(R) That it is most humbly submitted that the right to marry has been held to be a Fundamental Right read under
Article 21 of the Constitution by the Honourable Supreme Court in the case of Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M.;
"77. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. This right cannot be taken away except through a law which is substantively and
procedurally fair, just and reasonable. Intrinsic to the liberty which the Constitution guarantees as a fundamental
right is the ability of each individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness. Matters of
belief and faith, including whether to believe are at the core of constitutional liberty. The Constitution exists for
believers as well as for agnostics. The Constitution protects the ability of each individual to pursue a way of life or
faith to which she or he seeks to adhere. Matters of dress and of food, of ideas and ideologies, of love and
partnership are within the central aspects of identity. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional
compliance) the conditions of a valid marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be
ended or annulled. These remedies are available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on
whether they should accept each other into a marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to
play in determining our choice of partners.
(S) That it is again most humbly submitted that with regard to the alleged unworkability of some provisions that
has been cited by the Respondent No. 1 in its affidavit, the present Petitioners would like to adopt the arguments
made by the Petitioners in the Kavita Verma case.
(T) That it is humbly submitted that in the absence of any legal recognition of marriage, a lot of non cis gender and
non heterosexual couples face a lot of difficulty when it comes to financial affairs. The same have also been
adverted to by the Petitioner in the main Writ Petition and the same may be read herein.
(U) That it is again most humbly submitted that the Honourable Supreme Court of India has laid down in the Navtej
Singh Johan judgement inter alia that the word sex that occurs in Article 15 of the Constitution of India also
includes sexual orientation.
"523. Section 377 is violative of Article 15
Article 15 prohibits the State from discrimination against any citizen on the grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex, or place of birth. The object of this provision was to guarantee protection to those citizens who had suffered
historical disadvantage, whether it be of a political, social, or economic nature.
523.1. The term 'sex', as it occurs in Article 15 has been given an expansive interpretation by this Court
in
National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India (referred to as the NALSA judgment) to include sexual identity.
Paragraph 66 of the judgment reads thus:
66.
Both gender and biological attributes constitute distinct components of sex. The biological
characteristics, of course, include genitals, chromosomes and secondary sexual features, but gender attributes
includes one's self-image, the deep psychological or emotional sense of sexual identity and character. The
discrimination on the ground of sex Under Article 15 and 16, therefore includes discrimination on the ground of
gender identity. The expression sex used in Articles 15 and 16 is not just limited to biological sex of male and
female, but intended to include people who consider themselves neither male nor female.
Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also
includes their "sexual identity and character".
The J.S. Verma Committee303 had recommended that 'sex' Under Article 15 must include 'sexual orientation':
65. We must also recognize that our society has the need to recognize different sexual orientations a human
reality. In addition to homosexuality, bisexuality, and lesbianism, there also exists the transgender community.
In view of the lack of scientific understanding of the different variations of orientation, even advanced societies
have had to first declassify 'homosexuality' from being a mental disorder and now it is understood as a triangular
development occasioned by evolution, partial conditioning and neurological underpinnings owing to genetic
reasons. Further, we are clear that Article 15(c) of the constitution of 52 India uses the word "sex" as including
sexual orientation.
The prohibition against discrimination Under Article 15 on the ground of 'sex' should therefore encompass
instances where such discrimination takes place on the basis of one's sexual orientation.
In this regard, the view taken by the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations in Nicholas Toonen V.
Australia304 is relevant to cite, wherein the Committee noted that the reference to 'sex' in Article 2, Paragraph 1
and Article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights would include 'sexual orientation'.
523.2. In an Article titled "Reading Swaraj into Article 15 : A New Deal For All Minorities"305 Tarunabh Khaitan
notes that the underlying commonality between the grounds specified in Article 15 is based on the ideas of
'immutable status' and 'fundamental choice'. He refers to the following quote by John Gardener to provide context
to the aforesaid commonality:
Discrimination on the basis of our immutable status tends to deny us [an autonomous] life. Its result is that
our further choices are constrained not mainly by our own choices, but by the choices of others. Because these
choices of others are based on our immutable status, our own choices can make no difference to them
And
discrimination on the ground of fundamental choices can be wrongful by the same token. To lead an autonomous
life we need an adequate range of valuable options throughout that life. there are some particular valuable
options that each of us should have irrespective of our other choices. Where a particular choice is a choice
between valuable options which ought to be available to people whatever else they may choose, it is a
fundamental choice. Where there is discrimination against people based on their fundamental choices it tends to
skew those choices by making one or more of the valuable options from which they must choose more painful or
burdensome than others. 306
Race, caste, sex, and place of birth are aspects over which a person has no control, ergo they are immutable. On
the other hand, religion is a fundamental choice of a person.30 Discrimination based on any of these grounds
would undermine an individual's personal autonomy.
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which is pari materia to Article 15 of the Indian Constitution.
Section 15(1). of the Canadian Charter like Article 15 of our Constitution. does not include "sexual orientation" as
a prohibited ground of discrimination. Notwithstanding that, the Canadian Supreme Court in the aforesaid decisions
has held that sexual orientation is a "ground analogous" to the other grounds specified Under Section 15(1).
Discrimination based on any of these grounds has adverse impact on an individual's personal autonomy, and is
undermining of his personality.
A similar conclusion can be reached in the Indian context as well in light of the underlying aspects of
immutability and fundamental choice.
The LGBT community is a sexual minority which has suffered from unjustified and unwarranted hostile
discrimination, and is equally entitled to the protection afforded by Article 15."
(V) That the Madras High Court in a recent judgement Arunkumar V. The Inspector General of Registration has also
been pleased to rule in favour of a same sex couple seeking to enforce the right to marriage. Relevant extracts
from the said judgement are also being reproduced hereinbelow.
Arunkumar V. The Inspector General of Registration; AIR 2019 Mad 265
"14. Both the petitioners herein profess Hindu Religion. Their right to practice Hindu Religion is recognised
under Article 25 of the Constitution of India. The Hindu Marriage Act is a personal law of the Hindus. When the
right of the transgender persons to marry has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the very nature of
things, they cannot be kept out of the purview of the Hindu Marriage Act. One can have a civil marriage. One can
also have a sacramental marriage. The petitioners' marriage was solemnized in a temple.
Therefore, their fundamental right under Article 25 has also been infringed in this case.
25. Since this Court has held that the fundamental rights of the second petitioner guaranteed under Articles
14, 19(1)(a), 21 and 25 of the Constitution of India have been infringed, the orders impugned in this writ
petition stand quashed and the third respondent is directed to register the marriage solemnized between the
petitioners on 31.10.2018 at Arulmighu Sankara Rameswara Temple, Tuticorin. The fourth respondent is directed
to issue a G.O. prohibiting the performance of sex reassignment surgery on intersex infants and children."
(W) That as per the judgement of the Honourable Supreme Court in the case of Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India
what is relevant is not the form of the action taken by the State but its impact. In the present case, the denial of
the right to live with dignity with one's partner in a marriage is something that takes away from the dignity of
the individual and hence, is a violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Insert extract when it comes to
right to live with dignity.
"13. Articles dealing with different fundamental rights contained in Part 111 of the Constitution do not
represent entirely separate streams of rights which do not mingle at many points. They are all parts of an
integrated scheme in the Constitution. Their waters must mix to constitute that grand flow of unimpeded and
impartial Justice (social, economic and political), Freedom (not only of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship, but also of association, movement, vocation or occupation as well as of acquisition and possession of
reasonable property), of Equality (of status and of opportunity, which imply absence of unreasonable or unfair
discrimination between individuals, groups and classes), and of Fraternity (assuring dignity of the individual and
the unity of the nation), which our Constitution visualises. Isolation of various aspects of human freedom, for
purposes of their protection, is neither realistic nor beneficial but would defeat the very objects of such
protection.
53.
Article 21 occurs in Part 111 of the Constitution which confers certain fundamental rights. These
fundamental rights had their roots deep in the struggle for independence and, as pointed out by Granville Austin
in 'The Indian Constitution Cornerstone of a Nation', "they were included in the Constitution in the hope and
expectation that one day the tree of true liberty would bloom in India". They were indelibly written in the sub-
conscious memory of the race which fought for well-nigh thirty years for securing freedom from British rule and
they found expression in the form of fundamental rights when the Constitution was enacted. These fundamental
rights represent the basic values cherished by the people of this country since the Vedic times and they are
calculated to protect the dignity of the individual and create conditions in which every human being can develop
his personality to the fullest extent. They weave a "pattern of guarantees on the basic structure of human lights"
and impose negative obligations on the State not to encroach on individual liberty in its various dimensions. It is
apparent from the enunciation of these rights that the respect for the individual and his capacity for individual
volition which finds expression there is not a self fulfilling prophecy.
73.
These rights represent the basic values of a civilised society and the Constitution makers declared that
they shall be given a place of pride in the Constitution and elevated to the status of fundamental rights. The long
years of the freedom struggle inspired by the dynamic spiritualism of Mahatma Gandhi and in fact the entire
cultural and spiritual history of India formed, the background against which these rights were enacted and
consequently, these rights were conceived by the Constitution makers not in a narrow limited sense but in their
widest sweep, for the aim and objective was to build a new social order where man will not be a mere plaything
in the hands of the State or a few privileged persons but there will be full scope and opportunity for him to
achieve the maximum development of his personality and the dignity of the individual will be fully assured. The
Constitution makers recognised the spiritual dimension of man and they were conscious that he is an
embodiment of divinity, what the great Upanishadic verse describes as "the children of immortality" and his
mission in life is to realise the ultimate truth. This obviously he cannot achieve unless he has certain basic
freedoms, such as freedom of thought, freedom of conscience, freedom of speech and expression, personal
liberty to move where he likes and SO on and so forth.
79. We may begin the discussion of this question by first considering the nature and significance of the right
to go abroad. It cannot be disputed that there must exist a basically free sphere for man, resulting from the
nature and dignity of the human being as the bearer of the highest spiritual and moral values. This basic
freedom of the human being is expressed at various levels and is reflected in various basic rights.
125. To sum up, 'procedure in Article 21 means fair, not formal procedure. 'Law' is reasonable law, not any
enacted piece. As Article 22 specifically spells out the procedural safeguards for preventive and punitive
detention, a law providing for such detentions should conform to Article 22. It has been rightly pointed out that
for other rights forming part of personal liberty, the procedural safeguards enshrined in Article 21 are available.
Otherwise, as the procedural safeguards contained in Article 22 will be available only in cases of preventive and
punitive detention, the right to life, more fundamental than any other forming part of personal liberty and
paramount to the happiness, dignity and worth of the individual, will not be entitled to any procedural safeguard
save such as a legislature's mood chooses.
THROUGH:
R.Awasthi
RAGHAV AWASTHI & MUKESH SHARMA
Counsels for Petitioners
E-17, Masjid Moth, Greater Kailash-III
New Delhi-110048
Phone No. 8368465287 & 9873289394
New Delhi
Email : raghav35@gmail.com
Date : 26.02.2023
advo.mukeshsharma@gmail.com
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
(EXTRA-ORDINARY CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION)
W.P. (C) NO. 6371 OF 2020
IN
WRIT PETITION (C) 1011/2022
TRANSFERRED VIDE ORDER DATED 06.01.2023 FROM HON'BLE HIGH COURT OF DELHI TO THE HON'BLE
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA)
W.P. (C) NO. 6371 OF 2020
In the Matter of:
Abhijit Iyen Mitra & Ors
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Anr Respondents
ADDITIONAL WRITTEN-SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH:
1300. That it is humbly submitted that in some quarters, it has been demanded that while the Special Marriage Act
of 1954 can be read in such a manner as to enable LGBTQIA couples to get their marriage registered, the same cannot
be said of the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 because the same would amount to an interference with Hindu tradition and
custom.
1301. That it is humbly submitted that the scheme of the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 and specifically Section 4 of
the same would make it clear that when it comes to subjects qua which provision has been made under the said Act, it
is a complete code in itself and since it is a complete code in itself, the only touchstone upon which the validity of the
marriage of an LGBTQIA couple is to be tested under the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 is whether it violates or offends
the provisions of the Act. The relevant provision is reproduced herewith:
"4. Overriding effect of Act- Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act(a) any text rule or interpretation
of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act
shall cease to have effect with respect to any matter for which provision is made in this Act; (b) any other law in
force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect in SO far as it is inconsistent with
any of the provisions contained in this Act.
1302. That it is further most humbly submitted that where the Hindu Marriage Act differs from the Special Marriage
Act is that as per section 8 (5) of the said Act, non-registration of the marriage does not affect the validity of the same
if the requirements of Section 7 of the Act are met. Both of the provisions are also reproduced hereinbelow:
"7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.-
(1) A Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance with the customary rites and ceremonies of either party
thereto.
(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi (that is, the taking of seven steps by the bridegroom
and the bride jointly before the sacred fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding when the seventh
step is taken.
8. Registration of Hindu marriages.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the validity of any Hindu marriage shall in no way be
affected by the omission to make the entry."
1303. That on the other hand, a perusal of Sections 5 to 13 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 would indicate that
the procedure in this regard is that notice has to be served upon the Competent Authority by a couple intending to
marry and the marriage attains finality after the perfectly secular procedure prescribed therein comes to a conclusion
and a marriage certificate is issued which is meant to be conclusive evidence of the marriage having taken place. For
the convenience of this Hon'ble Court, the said provisions are being reproduced herewith:
"5. Notice of intended marriage. when a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the parties to
the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Second Schedule to the Marriage Officer
of the district in which at least on eof the parties to the marriage has resided for a period of not less than thirty
days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given.
6. Marriage Notice Book and publication.-
(1) The marriage Officer shall keep all notices given under Section 5 with the records of his office and shall also
forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice in a book prescribed for that purpose, to be called the
Marriage Notice Book, and such book shall be open for inspection at al reasonable times, without fee, by any
person desirous of inspecting the same.
(2) The Marriage Officer shall cause every such notice to be published by affixing a copy thereof to some
conspicuous place in his office.
(3) Where either of the parties to an intended marriage is not permanently residing within the local limits of the
district of the Marriage Officer to whom the notice has been given under section 5, transmitted to the Marriage
Officer of the district within whose limits such party is permanently residing, and that Marriage Officer shall
thereupon cause a copy thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous place in his office.
7. Objection to marriage.-
(1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date on which any such notice has been
published under sub-section (2) of section 6, object to the marriage on the ground that it would contravene
one or more of the conditions specified in section 4.
(2) After the expiration of thirty days from the date on which notice of an intended marriage has been published
under sub-section (2) of section 6, the marriage may be solemnized, unless it has been previously objected to
under sub-section (1).
(3) The nature of the objection shall be recorded in writing by the Marriage Officer in the Marriage Notice Book,
be ready over and explained, if necessary, to the person making the objection and shall be signed by him or
on his behalf.
8. Procedure on receipt of objection.-
(1) If an objection is made under section 7 to an intended marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the
marriage until he has inquired into the matter of the objection and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the
solemnization of the marriage or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it; but the Marriage Officer
shall not take more than thirty days from the date of the objection for the purpose of inquiring into the matter
of the objection and arriving at a decision.
(2) If the Marriage Officer upholds the objection and refuses to solemnize the marriage, either party to the
intended marriage may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such refusal, prefer an appeal to the
district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has his office, and the decision of
the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the
decision of the court.
9. Powers of Marriage Officers in respect of inquiries.-
(1) For the purpose of any inquiry under section 8, the Marriage Officer shall have all the powers vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath;
(b) discovery and inspection;
(c) compelling the production of documents;
(d) reception of evidence on affidavits; and
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; and any proceeding before the Marriage Officer shall
be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of
1860).
Explanation.- For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of any person to give evidence, the local limits of
the jurisdiction of the Marriage Officer shall be the local limits of his district. (2) If it appears to the Marriage
Officer that the objection made to an intended marriage is not reasonable and has not been made in good faith
he may impose on the person objecting costs by way of compensation not exceeding one thousand rupees and
award the whole or any part thereof to the parties to the intended marriage, and any order for costs so made
may be executed in the same manner as a decree passed by the district court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has his office.
10. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Officer abroad.- Where an objection is made under
section 7 to a Marriage Officer outside the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an intended marriage
outside the said territories and the Marriage Officer, after making such inquiry into the matter as he thinks fit,
entertains a doubt in respect thereof, he shall not solemnize the marriage but shall transmit the record with such
statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the Central Government, and the Central Government, after
making such inquiry into the matter and after obtaining such advice as it thinks fit, shall give its decision thereon in
writing to the Marriage Officer who shall act in conformity with the decision of the Central Government.
11. Declaration by parties and witnesses.-
Before the marriage is solemnized the parties and three witnesses shall, in the presence of the Marriage
Officer, sign a declaration in the form specified in the Third Schedule to this Act, and the declaration shall be
countersigned by the Marriage Officer.
12. Place and form of solemnization.-
(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the Marriage Officer, or at such other place within a
reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may desire, and upon such conditions and the payment of such
additional fees as may be prescribed.
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties, unless each party says to the other in the
presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by the parties, (A),
take thee (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband)
13. Certificate of marriage.-
(1) When the marriage has been solemnized, the Marriage Officer shall enter a certificate thereof in the form
specified in the Fourth Schedule in a book to be kept by him for that purpose and to be called the Marriage
Certificate Book and such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and the three witnesses.
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, the Certificate shall be
deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been solemnized and that all
formalities respecting the signatures of witnesses have been complied with."
1304. That it is further most humbly submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has in the case of S. Nagalingam
V. Sivagami, AIR 2001 SC 3576, has held as follows:
"18. Section 7 applies to any marriage between two Hindus solemnized in the presence of relatives, friends or
other persons. The main thrust of this provision is that the presence of a priest is not necessary for the performance
of a valid marriage. Parties can enter into a marriage in the presence of relatives or friends or other persons and
each party to the marriage should declare in the language understood by the parties that each takes other to be his
wife or, as the case may be, her husband, and the marriage would be completed by a simple ceremony requiring
the parties to the marriage to garland each other or put a ring upon any finger of the other or tie a thali.
1305. That a perusal of the said judgement would indicate that the big difference between the requirements of
Section 7 of the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 on the one hand and those of the Special Marriage Act of 1954 on the
other is that with respect to the former, the only requirement is that both the parties should be Hindus inasmuch as
they have faith in the tenets of the Hindu religion and also that there is no non-negotiable requirement when it comes
to rituals. The parties are free to choose the ceremony they would like to follow and as long as the profession of mutual
love and the intention to spend the respective lives together is in place, the same is enough to fulfil the requirements
of the said Act as interpreted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
1306. That however, if the traditionalist position is to be taken into account, what it would imply is that if one is a
cis-gender heterosexual couple then the profession of faith in the chosen ceremony would be enough while on the
other hand, if one is an LGBTQIA couple, the same would not be enough for marriage to be valid under the Hindu
Marriage Act. Essentially, what we would be telling the LGBTQIA persons is that by virtue of their sexual orientation,
they are children of a lesser God and even if both of them profess the Hindu religion, they would have to necessarily
go through the procedure prescribed by the Special Marriage Act and go through the rigmarole set out therein. It is
humbly submitted that given the fact that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation has been outlawed after
a discriminatory approach cannot be countenanced by this Constitutional Court. This position also has echoes of the
state-sanctioned discrimination meted out to the Ahmadiyya community in countries like Pakistan wherein even
though the community per se considers itself to be Muslim, the State does not allow them to style themselves as such.
It is humbly submitted that the religious faith or belief of any person is her or his or its own and no authority whether
secular or religious or a mishmash of the two has the right to pronounce judgement on the validity of the same.
1307. That it is finally most humbly submitted that if the aforesaid incorrect approach is followed, then it would
also be a violation of the Constitutional mandate laid down under Article 25 of the Constitution of India. In this view of
the matter, the observations of the Hon'ble Madras High Court in Arun Kumar V. The Inspector General of Registration,
WP(MD) No. 4125 of 2019 are important. Paras 14 to 15 of the said judgement are reproduced herein:
"14. Both the petitioners herein profess Hindu Religion. Their right to practice Hindu Religion is recognised under
Article 25 of the Constitution of India. The Hindu Marriage Act is a personal law of the Hindus. When the right of the
transgender persons to marry has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the very nature of things, they
cannot be kept out of the purview of the Hindu Marriage Act. One can have a civil marriage. One can also have a
sacramental marriage. The petitioners' marriage was solemnized in a temple. Therefore, their fundamental right
under Article 25 has also been infringed in this case.
15 Seen in the light of the march of law, the expression "bride" occurring in Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 will have to include within its meaning not only a woman but also a transwoman. It would also include an
intersex person/transgender person who identifies herself as a woman. The only consideration is how the person
perceives herself."
THROUGH:
R. Awasthi
RAGHAV AWASTHI & MUKESH SHARMA
Counsels for Petitioners
E-17, Masjid Moth, Greater Kailash-III
New Delhi-110048
Phone No. 8368465287 & 9873289394
New Delhi
Email : raghav35@gmail.com
Date : 09.04.2023
advo.mukeshsharma@gmail.com
IN THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 93 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Kajal & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MR. RAJU RAMACHANDRAN, SENIOR ADVOCATE
INDEX
S. No.
Heading
I
Introduction and Relief sought by the Petitioners
11
Brief Propositions Advanced by the Petitioners
111
Background of the Petitioners' Relationship
IV
Legislative History of SMA, 1954
V
Impact of Non-Recognition of Marriage on LGBTQIA+ couples
VI
Recognition of Same-Sex Marriage in International Law
VII
Petitioners are entitled to the Fundamental Right to Marry
VIII
Exclusion of the Petitioners from Marriage under the SMA, 1954 defeats the very object of the legislation
IX
Denial of the Petitioners' Right to Marry under SMA, 1954 is unconstitutional
X
Marriage is the source of most Socio-Economic Rights
XI
No Compelling State Interest to Deny the Right to Marry
XII
The Notice, Publication and Objection Regime under SMA, 1954 is violative of Part 111 of the Constitution
XIII
Natal Family Violence and the Need for a Protocol
XIV
Power of Judicial Review
1. I Introduction and Relief Sought by the Petitioners
1308. The present petition involves the fundamental questions of constitutional import affecting the lives and
freedom of the Petitioners, citizens belonging to the LGBTQIA+ community, who have been denied their innate dignity
and equality by lack of recognition of their intimate relationships in the form of marriage. The Petitioners approach this
Hon'ble Court for the following reliefs:
a. "Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that Section 4(c) of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, to the
extent it excludes LGBTQIA+ couples, is unconstitutional;
b. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that the words "wife" and "husband" in the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, would be substituted by the word "party", to the extent of its application to marriage that is
solemnized where at least one of the parties to the marriage is an LGBTQIA+ person;
C. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Special Marriage Act,
1954 are unconstitutional;
d. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that all rights, entitlements and benefits associated with
the solemnisation and registration of marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 would be applicable to
LGBTQIA+ persons;
e. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to the Respondent to adopt a protocol to be followed by all States,
district and police authorities concerning the cases involving adult and consenting LGBTQIA+ persons, married or
unmarried, who require protection from their families; and
f. Pass such other or further orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of
the present case."
11. Brief Propositions Advanced by the Petitioners
a) The Petitioners have a fundamental right to marry a person of one's own choice under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and
25 of the Constitution, and any exclusion or discrimination, as incorporated in Section 4(c) and other provisions
of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ('SMA, 1954') is ultra-vires the Constitution.
b) The exclusion of the Petitioners from the institution of civil marriage under SMA, 1954, is inconsistent with the
very object of the law, i.e., to facilitate any marriage between two Indians, irrespective of caste, creed or religion.
c) The absolute denial of the Petitioners' right to marry under SMA, 1954 violates their right to equality and equal
opportunity before law, right to non-discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation, the right to choose one's
sexual partner, the right to sexual privacy, dignity, decisional autonomy, health and the right to found a family
as well as the right to 'conscience' guaranteed under Articles 14, 15(1) & (2), 19(1)(a), 21 and 25 of the
Constitution.
d) The exclusion of the Petitioners from the institution of marriage, which is a source of most socio-economic rights
in India, results in their denial from the plethora of rights and entitlements that the State provides to
heterosexual married couples.
e) There exists no compelling State interest to exclude the Petitioners from the institution of marriage, and the
State cannot resort to archaic ideas of procreation and gender-stereotypes as well as religious considerations
to
deny the fundamental right of marriage to LGBTQIA+ couples.
f) The procedural requirements of notice, publication of notice, inviting objections from public at large to the
proposed marriage and the powers of the Marriage Registrar to conduct an inquiry into such objections under
Section 5, 6, 7 and 8 of SMA, 1954 constitute serious impediments on the right of the individuals to exercise
their choice of partner, and to solemnise marriage under the Act. These restrictions have a disproportionate
impact on the LGBTQIA+ couples like the Petitioners who are already battling years of natal family violence and
abuse.
g) The systemic nature of natal family violence in the lives of LGBTQIA+ persons, owing to their sexual or gender
identity, and the misuse of the criminal law machinery by the families, often in collusion with local police, makes
it imperative for this Hon'ble Court to frame guidelines/protocol concerning the police action in dealing with
cases of adult and consenting queen and transgender persons.
h) The powers of judicial review under Article 32 of the Constitution casts a duty on this Hon'ble Court to strike
down the Section 4(c), along with other corresponding provisions of SMA, 1954, to the extent that they exclude
LGBTQIA+ couples, including the Petitioners, from marriage under SMA, 1954, as well as declare Sections 5-8,
SMA, 1954, to the extent that they impose arbitrary and unreasonable restrictions on the exercise of the
fundamental right to marry under the law, as violative of the Constitution, thereby rendering them to be void.
111. Background of the Petitioners' Relationship
1309. The Petitioners are two adult women who have been in love with each other for over five years, and have
been battling natal family violence and harassment from the Petitioner No. 2's family, owing to disapproval of their
sexual orientation, and their relationship. They hail from working class and marginalised caste backgrounds, with the
Petitioner No. 2 being Dalit, while the Petitioner No. 1 belonging to an OBC.
1310. Owing to the unabating natal family violence, and coercion to get married to a man, the Petitioner No. 2 was
constrained to leave her house in April, 2019 and come to Delhi to stay in a shelter home. The Petitioners approached
the Hon'ble Delhi High Court on 12.04.2019 in Bhawna V. State, W.P. (Criminal) No. 1075 of 2019, and were granted
interim police protection.
1311. Despite the Petitioner No. 2's family undertaking not to interfere in her relationship with the Petitioner No. 1,
the Petitioners faced constant harassment and surveillance from them. The Petitioner No. 2 completed her graduation
in B.Com. (Hons.) from the University of Delhi, while being escorted by a LGBTQIA+ activist and another individual
from her lawyers' office, as her parents were waiting outside the college gate to forcibly take her back. As a result, the
Petitioners were unable to stay in one residence for longer than five months, and were time and again compelled to
come back and stay at the shelter home in Delhi for long periods.
1312. The Petitioners currently live as a couple in Chandigarh and take great pride in having overcome the
adversities over the past few years and cherish their relationship with each other. At the same time, their shared life is
extremely fragile and could be pulled out from under their feet at any moment. Having no de jure recognition of their
relationship makes it a herculean task to access even basic services like putting their partner's name as a nominee in
insurance or bank accounts. For the Petitioners, marriage is not just a tool for legal recognition, but a protective shield
from the constant scrutiny from the public at large about the nature of their relationship as well as a bulwark against
family intervention and harassment. The Petitioners want to ensure that their choice of partner and relationship is
respected by all, throughout their lives and even after their death, which is only possible through recognizing the
equality of their relationship at par with heterosexual couples.
IV. Legislative History of SMA, 1954
1313. In India, marriage was governed by religious law, customs and usage till the early 19th century.
However,
concerns grew about the validity of marriages solemnised by British persons in India, as the status of British persons
entering into marriages in India, their property and the legitimacy of their children, had to be settled. In 1850, the
Second Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the State and Operation of the Law of Marriage, East
India Marriages, was presented to the Parliament in Britain, proposing to make the law in India relating to marriage
involving British persons similar to that prevailing in Britain.
1314. Consequently, An Act for Marriages in India, 1851 was enacted by the British Parliament, and made
applicable to India through Act No. V of 1852 passed by the President of the Council of India. The law applied to
marriages where one or both of the parties were Christian. Marriage registrars were empowered to issue certificates,
after which marriages could be solemnised in a church, chapel or before the registrars themselves. Though the law
applied only to Christians, it created for the first time the possibility of a civil marriage before a registrar in India.
Thereafter, the Indian Marriage Act, 1865 was passed, again applicable only to the Christians in India, which was
subsequently repealed by the Christian Marriage Act, 1872.
1315. By the 1860s, the social reforms movement, especially those spearheaded by the leaders of Brahmo Samaj
and Satyashodak Samaj, had begun to challenge the hegemonic Brahminical practices and subjugation of women
within the Hindu religion. In 1868, Keshub Chanda Sen petitioned the colonial Government of India on behalf of the
Brahmo Samaj for the legal recognition of Brahmo marriages that were devoid of certain rituals, and could be
solemnised between persons of different castes. In response, Henry Maine, a member of the Council of the Governor
General of India, proposed a law of marriage between any two Indians, who did not wish to marry in accordance with
religious rites. Consequently, after many versions of the Bill being deliberated, the Special Marriage Act, 1872 ('SMA,
1872') was passed, which provided a form of marriage for persons who do not profess the Christian, Jewish, Hindu,
Muhammadan, Parsi, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion. In effect, to marry under the SMA, 1872, one had to renounce
their religion entirely. The Act also provided for the appointment of 'Registrars of Marriage', and the parties were free
to determine the ceremonies that they wished to undertake, if any.
1316. However, the mandatory disassociation of one's religion made the SMA, 1872 unpopular, even amongst
members of the Brahmo Samaj, who considered themselves Hindu. Accordingly, the SMA, 1872 was amended in 1923,
wherein it was made applicable to Hindus, Jains, Sikhs, and Buddhists, but Muslim, Parsi, Jewish and other
communities were excluded. Even amongst Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists, marriage under SMA, 1872 resulted in
severance from the joint family, and inability to adopt (available only to the Hindus), among other consequences.
[See: Love and the Law : Love-Marriage in Delhi" by Perveez Mody published in, Modern Asian Studies, Feb.,
2002, Vol. 36, No. 1 (Feb., 2002), pp. 223-256; "English Law, Brahmo Marriage, and the Problem of Religious
Difference : Civil Marriage Laws in Britain and India", by Nandini Chatterjee published in Comparative Studies in
Society and History 2010;52(3) : 524-552; and "Ambedkar's illegal marriage : Hindu nation, Hindu modernity
and the legalization of intercaste marriage in India", by Saptarshi Mandal published in the Indian Law Review,
2, 147-169, 2022]
1317. After independence, efforts to reform religious personal laws and to make them in consonance with the
Constitution gathered more momentum, and the Special Marriage Bill, 1952 became the site for envisioning greater
individual control over matters of marriage and property [See Rajya Sabha Debate on the Special Marriage Bill,
1952 on 28.07.1952, and Report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Special Marriage Bill dated
March, 1954]. Consequently, the SMA, 1954 was passed by Parliament to allow "any person in India" to get married
irrespective of their faith", underscoring the intention to make a system of marriage that was universally accessible to
all Indians. However, the Act retained the provision on severance of a Hindu, Sikh, Jain or Buddhist person married
under the Act from their joint family, which was eventually amended in 1976, wherein it permitted two Hindu,
Buddhist, Sikh, or Jain persons to get married under the SMA, 1954 without severance from their joint family [See
Law Commission of India's 59th Report on Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Special Marriage Act, 1954 (March,
1974)].
1318. Pertinently, there were no discussions on the possibility of marriage amongst LGBTQIA+ persons, either
during the debates on the SMA, 1872 or during the legislative deliberations on the SMA, 1954. Neither the legislators
nor the religious and/or civil society groups sought explicit prohibition on same-sex marriage or marriage involving
LGBTQIA+ persons.
1319. The SMA, 1954, in effect, was envisioned as a universal law of marriage applicable to all Indians, irrespective
of caste, creed or religion, as held by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Dr. Abdur Rahim Undre V. Padma Abdur
Rahim Undre [AIR 1982 Bom 341]. In the same vein, the Law Commission of India had recommended in 2008 that
the word 'special' be removed from the title of the SMA, 1954, to reinforce the idea that the SMA, 1954 provided for
the law of general marriage in India, and it was marriage under religious personal law that was 'special' [See Law
Commission of India's 212th Report titled 'Laws of Civil Marriages in India - A Proposal to Resolve certain
Conflicts' (2008) at page 14].
1320. Though SMA, 1954 is considered as a universal form of marriage applicable to all Indians, irrespective of
caste, creed and religion, it will not truly be a universal form of marriage, unless it is applicable to LGBTQIA+ couples.
While Section 4 mentions marriage between any "two persons", the gendered requirement of one party being male
and the other female, is evident in Section 4(c) which states:
"the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years"
1321. This is reinforced by the use of gendered terms in the Second, Third and Fourth Schedule, including 'bride'
and 'bridegroom', 'widow' and 'widower', as well as in the text of the declarations to be made by the parties under
the
proviso to Section 12(2).
V. I impact of Non-Recognition of Marriage on LGBTQIA+ Couples
1322. The exclusion of the Petitioners from marriage, as recognised by the SMA, 1954, sends out a clear message
to the world that their relationship is illegitimate and does not deserve the same respect and legitimacy as that of a
heterosexual relationship. This in turn reaffirms the homophobic and transphobic notion that relationships, and
marriages, can only be entered into by a man and a woman This Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johan V. Union of India
"384. Gay and lesbian relationships are sustained and nurtured in every aspect which makes for a meaningful
life. In understanding the true nature of those relationships and the protection which the Constitution affords to
them, it is necessary to adopt a perspective which leads to their acceptance as equal members of a humane and
compassionate society. Forming a holistic perspective requires the Court to dwell on, but not confine itself, to
sexuality. Sexual orientation creates an identity on which there is a constitutional claim to the entitlement of
a
dignified life."
[emphasis supplied]
1323. Similarly, the Constitutional Court of South Africa in a pathbreaking decision in the Minister of Home Affairs
V. Fourie [(2006) 1 SA 524 (CC) ('Fourie')], while recognizing same-sex marriage, had noted the disastrous impact of
non-recognition of marriages on LGBTQIA+ couples:
"[78] Indeed, what the applicants in this matter seek is not the right to be left alone, but the right to be
acknowledged as equals and to be embraced with dignity by the law. Their love that was once forced to be
clandestine, may now dare openly to speak its name. The world in which they live and in which the Constitution
functions, has evolved from repudiating expressions of their desire to accepting the reality of their presence, and
the integrity, in its own terms, of their intimate life. Accordingly, taking account of the decisions of this Court, and
bearing in mind the symbolic and practical impact that exclusion from marriage has on same-sex couples, there can
only be one answer to the question as to whether or not such couples are denied equal protection and subjected to
unfair discrimination. Clearly, they are, and in no small degree. The effect has been wounding and the scars are
evident in our society to this day. By both drawing on and reinforcing discriminatory social practices, the law in the
past failed to secure for same-sex couples the dignity, status, benefits and responsibilities that it accords to
heterosexual couples."
[emphasis supplied]
1324. In 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States of America in Obergefell V. Hodges [576 US 644 (2015)
('Obergefell'), while upholding the fundamental right of the same-sex couples to marry, observed that:
"It is now clear that the challenged laws burden the liberty of same-sex couples, and it must be further
acknowledged that they abridge the central precepts of equality. Here the marriage laws enforced by the
respondents are in essence unequal same-sex couples are denied all the benefits afforded to opposite-sex couples
and are barred from exercising a fundamental right. Especially against a long-standing history of disapproval of
their relationships, this denial to same-sex couples of the right to marry works a grave and continuing harm. The
imposition of this disability on gays and lesbians serves to disrespect and subordinate them."
[emphasis supplied]
1325. The Petitioners have endured years of verbal abuse, blackmail, and aggravated threats to their safety from
the family members of the Petitioner No. 2. Without the formal recognition of their relationship, they are unable to
settle their respective statuses vis--vis each other, as well as the world at large, leaving them vulnerable to continued
violence and harassment. The Petitioners are always deeply fearful that their families would continue to interfere in
their lives, and if one is physically or mentally unwell, they would take control over their lives and exclude the partner
from all aspects. The ease with which their relationship can be erased or the partner can be excluded, owing to the
complete lack of recognition of their relationship in law, terrifies the Petitioners.
1326. The Petitioners' experience with natal family violence and moving cities is not an isolated one, but a common
pattern amongst LGBTQIA+ couples. Encouraged by the landmark decisions of this Hon'ble Court, a large number of
LGBTQIA+ individuals have sought to assert their rights to be in relationships contrary to the wishes of their parents.
Very often this requires them to move to different cities or states in order to get support and other resources to be
able to live their lives. LGBTQIA+ individuals and couples, however, are being harassed in numerous ways by their
natal families, including on the purported basis that they are missing or been kidnapped. Individuals are called to the
police station, interrogated about their relationships, and given prescriptions to obey their parents. Without being able
to enter into marriage, every interaction with the police or any other authority requires them to be convinced of the
legitimacy of the relationship. On many occasions, the individuals are separated and placed into shelter homes till the
issues are resolved. [See : Towards Gender Inclusivity - A Study on Contemporary Concerns Around Gender",
by Sunil Mohan and Sumathi Murthy, published Alternate Law Forum and LesBiT, 2013; "Breaking the Binary :
Understanding Concerns and Realities of Queer Persons Assigned Gender Female at Birth across a Spectrum
of Lived Gender Identities", by LABIA, 2013; excerpts from "Vio Map Documenting and Mapping Violence &
Rights Violation Taking Place in lives of Sexually Marginalised Women to Chart Out Effective Advocacy
Strategies : A Feminist Qualitative Research", published by Sappho for Equality (2011); "Count Me In! Research
Report on Violence against Disabled, Lesbian and Sex Working Women in Bangladesh, India and Nepal",
published by CREA, Delhi (2012); Ranade Ketaki et. al., "Making Sense : Familial journey towards Acceptance of
Gay and Lesbian Family Members in India", the Indian Journal of Social Work, 77(4), 437-458, October 2016;
"Queen Women and the Law in India" by Arasu P and Thangarajah P. in Arvind Narrain and Alok Gupta (eds), Law
Like Love : Queer Perspectives on Law (Yoda Press 2011); a chapter from Maya Sharma, Footprints of a Queer
History, Life-Stories from Gujarat, Yoda Press, 2023]
1327. Legal exclusion of diverse marriages involving LGBTQIA+ persons has resulted in LGBTQIA+ persons being
forced into cisgender heterosexual marriages, with natal families not accepting the sexual identity of queer persons
and forcing them to get married against their wishes. In particular, lesbian women, bisexual women and transgender
men are especially vulnerable to forced separation of their partners of choice, and coerced into marriages to men. This
has resulted in many individuals facing years of abuse and mental cruelty for hiding their true selves as well as in
several cases of suicides by lesbian women.
VI. Recognition of Same Sex Marriage in International Law
1328. The progress of the international human rights law jurisprudence on the rights of same-sex couples to marry
has been gradual, though there is no explicit provision prohibiting the right of same-sex couples to marry. However, a
meaningful interpretation of the right to marry provisions in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
('UDHR'); International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 ('ICCPR'), and International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966 (ICESCR), amongst others, as well as in the European Convention on
Human Rights, 1950 ('ECHR'), and the American Convention on Human Rights, 1969 ('ACHR') requires the States to
affirm the freedom to marry of same-sex couples.
1329. It is evident from the travaux preparatoires of Article 16, UDHR, which forms the basis of the right to marry
provisions in the ICCPR, ECHR and ACHR, that the phrase "men and women" was included in these provisions, in order
to promote gender equality in marriage, and not to exclude same-sex couples from marriage. According to Wolfson et.
al.,
"at the suggestion of the Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Human Rights' Drafting
Committee changed the language of the right to marry in the UDHR from the general "everyone" to the specific
"men and women" to emphasise that women, as well as men, have the right to marry. The use of "men and
women" was also intended to underscore that marriage should be contracted between adults, not children.
The
travaux preparatoires for the UDHR, ICCPR, ECHR and ACHR, moreover, do not document any discussions on
whether the right-to-marry provisions should or should not apply to same-sex couples." [See : Evan Wolfson,
Jessica Tueller and Alissa Fromkin, "The Freedom to Marry in Human Rights Law Worldwide : Ending the
Exclusion of Same-Sex Couples from Marriage" Indiana International and Comparative Law Review Vol 32(1)
2022 at page 21]
1330. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Fourie, while rejecting the notion that the phrase "men and
women" in international human rights law necessarily implied a heterosexual marriage, noted that:
"100. The reference to "men and women" is descriptive of an assumed reality, rather than prescriptive of a
normative structure for all time. Its terms make it clear that the principal thrust of the instruments is to forbid child
marriages, remove racial, religious or nationality impediments to marriage, ensure that marriage is freely entered
into and guarantee equal rights before, during and after marriage."
[emphasis supplied]
1331. Principle 24 of the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity ('Yogyakarta Principles') explicitly refers to the right to found a family,
irrespective of sexual orientation or genden identity, and calls upon the States,
e. to take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that in States that recognise
same-sex marriages or registered partnerships, any entitlement, privilege, obligation or benefit available to
different-sex married or registered partners is equally available to same-sex married or registered partners";
f. 'to take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that any obligation, entitlement,
privilege, obligation or benefit available to different-sex unmarried partners is equally available to same-sex
unmarried partners".
1332. The Yogyakarta Principles have been endorsed by this Hon'ble Court in many cases, including in National
355).
1333. In the last few years, the Human Rights Committee ('HRC'), the body tasked with monitoring the
implementation of the ICCPR, has urged the State parties to recognise marriage for same-sex couples, in order to
fulfill their treaty obligations to eliminate discrimination based on sexual orientation, pursuant to Articles 2(1) and 26
of ICCPR. In Young V. Australia, the HRC noted that:
"10.4.
The State party provides no arguments on how this distinction between same-sex partners, who are
excluded from pension benefits under law, and unmarried heterosexual partners, who are granted such benefits, is
reasonable and objective, and no evidence which would point to the existence of factors justifying such a distinction
has been advanced. In this context, the Committee finds that the State party has violated article 26 of the
Covenant by denying the author a pension on the basis of his sex or sexual orientation" [See
:
[CCPR/C/78/D/941/2000, date of decision : 18.09.2003]
1334. This decision was reiterated in Xv. Colombia [CCPR/C/89/D/1361/2005 date of decision : 18.05.2007], and
in CV. Australia [CCPR/C/119/D/2216/2012, date of decision : 01.11.2017 at para 8.4-8.6].
1335. Similarly, the HRC has noted the discriminatory marriage laws in many countries, including Australia,
Bulgaria, Hungary and Mauritius, and the exclusion of same-sex couples from marriage and family arrangements, and
called upon the States to take all measures to eradicate discrimination against LGBTQIA+ persons with regard to
marriage or civil partnerships [See Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Australia
[CCPR/C/AUS/CO/6, date : 01.12.2017); Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Mauritius
(CCPR/C/MUS/CO/5 date : 11.12.2017); Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Hungary
(CCPR/C/HUN/CO/6, date : 09.05.2018); and Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of
Bulgaria (CCPR/C/BGR/CO/4, date 15.11.2018)].
1336. The European Court of Human Rights ('ECtHR') has also gradually affirmed the issue of legal recognition of
same-sex unions, while dealing with the margin of appreciation left to the States in enacting their domestic laws. In
Schalk and Kopf V. Austria (Application No. 30141/2004, date : 22.11.2010), while the ECtHR held that same-sex
couples are just as capable as different-sex couples of entering into stable, committed relationships, and that they are
in a relevantly similar situation to a different-sex couple as regards their need for legal recognition and protection of
their relationship, it fell short of recognizing the right to marry of same-sex couples on the basis of a lack of a
'European consensus'. However, in Oliari V. Italy [Application No. 18766/2011, date : 21.07.2015, and in Orlandi V.
Italy [Application No. 26431/2012, date : 14.12.2017], the ECtHR narrowed the margin of appreciation available with
the States and held that Italy had failed to fulfill their positive obligation under Article 8 to ensure that the applicants
had a specific legal framework providing for the recognition and protection of their same-sex unions.
1337. In Fedotova V. Russia [Application No. 40792/2010, date : 13.07.2021], while considering the issue of non-
recognition of same-sex relationships in Russia, the ECtHR observed that:
"51. The Court notes the applicants' submission that without formal acknowledgment same-sex couples are
prevented from accessing housing or financing programmes and from visiting their partners in hospital, that they
are deprived of guarantees in the criminal proceedings (the right not to witness against the partner), and rights to
inherit the property of the deceased partner (see paragraph 40 above). That situation creates a conflict between the
social reality of the applicants who live in committed relationships based on mutual affection, and the law, which
fails to protect the most regular of "needs" arising in the context of a same-sex couple. That conflict can result in
serious daily obstacles for same-sex couples.
54
The Court, however, cannot discern any risks for traditional marriage which the formal acknowledgment of
same-sex unions may involve, since it does not prevent different-sex couples from entering marriage, or enjoying
the benefits which the marriage gives.
55. In the light of the above the Court cannot identify any prevailing community interest against which to
balance the applicants' interests as identified above. It finds that the respondent State has failed to justify the lack
of any opportunity for the applicants to have their relationship formally acknowledged. It therefore cannot conclude
that a fair balance between competing interests was struck at the case at hand.
[emphasis supplied]
1338. In 2017, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ('IACtHR') gave a landmark advisory opinion (OC-
24/17, date of decision : 24.11.2017), as requested by the Republic of Costa Rica on gender identity, and equality and
non-discrimination of same-sex couples, whereby the IACtHR found that the freedom to marry without discrimination
on the ground of sexual orientation is protected under the right to privacy and family life (Article 11(2) read with
Article 17) as well as under the right to equality and non-discrimination (Articles 1 and 24). The advisory opinion has
been directly implemented in Chile, Costa Rica and Ecuador and is the basis for on-going litigation and advocacy in
many Latin American countries.
1339. In Halpern V. Canada (AG) [65 O.R. (3d) 161 (2003), Court of Appeal for Ontario], the Court in a
pathbreaking judgment, while recognizing same-sex marriage, held that:
"107. In this case, same-sex couples are excluded from a fundamental societal institution-marriage. The societal
significance of marriage, and the corresponding benefits that are available only to married persons, cannot be
overlooked. Indeed, all parties are in agreement that marriage is an important and fundamental institution in
Canadian society. It is for that reason that the claimants wish to have access to the institution. Exclusion
perpetuates the view that same-sex relationships are less worthy of recognition than opposite-sex relationships. In
doing so, it offends the dignity of persons in same-sex relationships.
108. Based on the foregoing analysis, it is our view that the dignity of persons in same-sex relationships is
violated by the exclusion of same-sex couples from the institution of marriage. Accordingly, we conclude that the
common-law definition of marriage as "the voluntary union for life of one man and one woman to the exclusion of all
others" violates S. 15(1) of the Charter. The next step is to determine whether this violation can be justified under
S. 1 of the Charter."
[emphasis supplied]
1340. Consequent to this decision, in July, 2005, the Parliament of Canada passed a law allowing same-sex couples
to marry on an equal basis throughout the territory of Canada.
1341. Similarly, in December, 2005, the Constitutional Court of South Africa in Fourie struck down the common
law and Section 30(1) of the Marriage Act, 1961 as being inconsistent with the right to equal protection of law
(Section 9(1)) and the right to dignity (Section 10) to the extent they excluded same-sex couples from enjoying the
same status, entitlements and responsibilities accorded to heterosexual couples through marriage. The Court held
that:
[81] A law that creates institutions which enable heterosexual couples to declare their public commitment to
each other and achieve the status, entitlements and responsibilities that flow from marriage, but does not provide
any mechanism for same-sex couples to achieve the same, discriminates unfairly against same-sex couples. It gives
to the one and not to the other. The instruments created by the legal system exclude from their reach persons
entitled to be protected by them. It is those instruments that stand to be identified as being inconsistent with the
Constitution, and not 'the law' as an abstraction.
[82] The conclusion is that when evaluated in the context of the legal regime as a whole, the common law
definition and section 30(1) are under-inclusive and unconstitutional to the extent that they make no appropriate
provision for gay and lesbian people to celebrate their unions in the same way that they enable heterosexual
couples to do."
[emphasis supplied]
1342. In Obergefell, the United State Supreme Court, while striking down the State laws that excluded same-sex
couples from civil marriage on the same terms and conditions as opposite sex couples, held that:
"the right to marry is a fundamental right inherent in the liberty of the person, and under the Due Process and
Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment couples of the same-sex may not be deprived of that right
and that liberty The Court now holds that same-sex couples may exercise the fundamental right to marry. No
longer may this liberty be denied to them."
[emphasis supplied]
1343. In Taiwan and in Nepal, the Constitutional Courts upheld the right of same-sex couples to live a life of
dignity and without discrimination [See : J.Y. Interpretation No. 748 (2017), and Suman Panta V. Ministry of Home
Affairs et. al. (Case No. 073-WO-1054, date of decision : 23.10.2017)].
VII. The Petitioners are Entitled to the Fundamental Right to Marry
1344. The fundamental rights of human dignity, equality and freedom as entrenched in the Constitution, include
the right to marry a person of one's own choice under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25. This Hon'ble Court in several
landmark decisions have upheld the right of adult individuals to choose their marital partner. In Lata Singh V. State of
violence by families in case of inter-caste marriages, held that:
"17. This is a free and democratic country, and once a person becomes a major he or she can marry whosoever
he/she likes. If the parents of the boy or girl do not approve of such inter-caste or inter-religious marriage the
maximum they can do is that they can cut-off social relations with the son or daughter, but they cannot give
threats or commit or instigate acts of violence and cannot harass the persons who undergoes such inter-caste or
inter-religious marriage."
[emphasis supplied]
1345. This Hon'ble Court has reiterated Lata Singh on numerous occasions, including in Arumugam Servai V. State
"61. choice of woman in choosing her partner in life is a legitimate constitutional right. It is founded on
individual choice that is recognised in the Constitution under Article 19, and such a right is not expected to
succumb to the concept of "class honour" or "group thinking."
[emphasis supplied]
-judge bench decision, while emphatically upholding the fundamental right to privacy, noted that:
"298. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life.. The
guarantee of equality is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. It prevents the State from discriminating
between individuals. The intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom
of thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination. The marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual."
[emphasis supplied]
1347. In Shakti Vahini, this Hon'ble Court in a far-reaching decision again upheld the right to choose a life partner
as part of the fundamental rights protected under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution, and issued preventive,
remedial and punitive measures to be followed by the State authorities to facilitate the exercise of the said right by
adult couples. This Hon'ble Court noted in categorical terms:
"43. when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a manifestation of their choice which
is
recognised under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has the sanction of the constitutional law
and once that is recognised, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot succumb to the conception of class
honor or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely does not have any legitimacy."
[emphasis supplied]
wherein it was held:
"84. The Constitution recognises the liberty and autonomy which inheres in each individual. This includes the
ability to take decisions on aspects which define one's personhood and identity. The choice of a partner whether
within or outside marriage lies within the exclusive domain of each individual. Intimacies of marriage lie within a
core zone of privacy, which is inviolable. Neither the state non the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the
free ability of every person to decide on these matters. They form the essence of personal liberty under the
Constitution.
86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. This right cannot be taken away except through a law which is substantively and
procedurally fair, just and reasonable. Intrinsic to the liberty which the Constitution guarantees as a fundamental
right is the ability of each individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness. Matters of
dress and of food, of ideas and ideologies, of love and partnership are within the central aspects of identity."
[emphasis supplied]
1349. The Hon'ble Madras High Court in Arun Kumar V. Inspector General of Registration, Chennai (AIR 2019 Mad
265) has upheld the right of transgender persons to marriage by holding that the term 'bride' in Section 5, HMA
includes transgender women. Similarly, the word 'wife' as well as the word 'bride' in the Third Schedule under Section
11 in SMA should include both cis women and transgender women.
1350. The Petitioners thus have a fundamental right to marriage, and any exclusion or discrimination, as
incorporated in Section 4(c) and other provisions of SMA, 1954 is ultra-vires the Constitution.
VIII. Exclusion of the Petitioners From Marriage under the SMA, 1954 Defeats the very Object of the
Legislation
1351. The SMA, 1954 has been enacted by the Parliament to enable any two Indians living wheresoever, and
whether professing the same or different religions or no religion at all, to solemnise their marriage, provided the
conditions for marriage under Section 4 are fulfilled. Importantly, there exists no explicit prohibition on marriages
involving LGBTQIA+ persons under SMA, 1954.
1352. Section 4(c), while referring to the minimum age of the parties as a condition for valid marriage, uses the
terms "male" and "female". Further, the terms "wife" and "husband" are mentioned throughout the statute, including
Section 2 (Definitions of 'full-blood' and 'half-blood'), Section 12 (Place and form of solemnization), Section 15
(Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms), Section 22 (Restitution of conjugal rights). Section 23 (Judicial
Separation), Section 25 (Voidable Marriage) and Section 27 (Divorce), amongst others, while the Third Schedule under
Section 11 uses the terms "bride" and "bridegroom".
1353. The parliamentary debates, including the Report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Special
Marriage Bill, 1952, reveal that there was no discussion on same-sex marriage or any discussions on limiting the
institution of civil marriage only to heterosexual couples. The lawmakers merely assumed that marriage involved only
heterosexual individuals, and enacted the SMA, 1954 accordingly, but this does not indicate in any manner,
whatsoever, that the definition and scope of marriage was determined for all times to come. The law has to evolve with
the changing times.
1354. In Halpern, the Ontario Court of Appeal had noted:
"46. In our view, "marriage" does not have a constitutionally fixed meaning. the term "marriage" as used in S.
91(26) of the Constitution Act, 1867 has the constitutional flexibility necessary to meet changing realities of
Canadian society without the need for recourse to constitutional amendment procedures."
[emphasis supplied]
1355. In Obergefell, the United State Supreme Court too observed:
The history of marriage is one of both continuity and change. That institution-even as confined to opposite-sex
relations-has evolved over time. For example, marriage was once viewed as an arrangement by the couple's parents
based on political, religious, and financial concerns; but by the time of the Nation's founding, it was understood to
be
a
voluntary contract between a man and a woman. These and other developments in the institution of marriage
over the past centuries were not mere superficial changes. Rather, they worked deep transformations in its
structures affecting aspects of marriage long viewed by many as essential."
[emphasis supplied]
1356. The fundamental right to choice and autonomy in deciding one's own partner dehors one's religious, caste or
community affiliation, lies at the heart of the SMA, 1954. To restrict this fundamental element of decisional autonomy
in matters relating to marriage and partnership to heterosexual couples, to the exclusion of LGBTQIA+ persons, would
do injustice to the object of the law, i.e., to enable consenting adults to enter into marriage, irrespective of their
religious or customary norms and rituals. This is exemplified in Section 12(2) that allows the parties to solemnize the
marriage in any form which the parties may choose to adopt, provided that the mandatory declaration as mentioned in
the proviso to Section 12(2), i.e., "I (A), take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband)" is stated by the parties. If
this freedom is allowed with regard to the solemnization of marriage, then there is no reason why this freedom cannot
be extended to the parties involved, i.e., there is no reason why the right of marriage cannot be extended to
LGBTQIA+ persons.
1357. Thus, Section 4(c) and other provisions of SMA, 1954, to the extent that they exclude LGBTQIA+ persons
from marriage, are inconsistent with the objects of SMA.
IX. The Denial of the Petitioners' Right to Marry under SMA, 1954 is Unconstitutional
Right to Equality under Article 14
1358. The Petitioners are excluded from SMA, 1954 solely owing to their sexual orientation, which is discrimination
simplicitor, and is impermissible. The Petitioners are entitled to legal protection of laws in all spheres of State activity,
including employment, healthcare, education as well as equal civil and citizenship rights, as enjoyed by any
heterosexual couple in India.
1359. This Hon'ble Court in NALSA held that:
"62. Discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation or gender identity, therefore impacts equality before law
and equal protection of law and violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
83. We, therefore, conclude that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity includes any
discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference, which has the effect of nullifying or transposing equality by the
law or the equal protection of laws guaranteed under our Constitution."
1360. This Hon'ble Court in Puttaswamy further held:
"144.
Sexual orientation is an essential attribute of privacy. Discrimination against an individual on the basis of
sexual orientation is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality demands that the
sexual orientation of each individual in society must be protected on an even platform. The right to privacy and the
protection of sexual orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the
Constitution."
[emphasis supplied]
1361. It is well-settled that Article 14 envisages substantive equality, and not just formal equality. In Navtej
Johar, this Hon'ble Court held:
"409. Article 14 has a substantive content on which, together with liberty and dignity, the edifice of the
Constitution is built. Simply put, in that avatar, it reflects the quest for ensuring fair treatment of the individual in
every aspect of human endeavour, and in every facet of human existence"
[emphasis supplied]
1362. The test of substantive equality was considered in detail by this Hon'ble Court in Joseph Shine V. Union of
"171. In consonance with constitutional morality, substantive equality is directed at eliminating individual,
institutional and systemic discrimination against disadvantaged groups which effectively undermines their full and
equal social, economic, political and cultural participation in society.
172. The primary enquiry to be undertaken by the Court towards the realization of substantive equality is to
determine whether the provision contributes to the subordination of a disadvantaged group of individuals. The
focus of such an approach is not simply on equal treatment under the law, but rather on the real impact of the
legislation."
[emphasis supplied]
13 The exclusion of the Petitioners from the secular institution of civil marriage under SMA, 1954 on the ground
of sexual orientation is manifestly arbitrary, and irrational, and thus violates Article 14. In Shayara Bano V. Union of
"101. Manifest arbitrariness, therefore, must be something done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally
and/or without adequate determining principle. Also, when something is done which is excessive and
disproportionate, such legislation would be manifestly arbitrary."
1364. Pertinently, post the decision of this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johar, the Petitioners have a right to be in a
romantic and sexual relationship with each other, without State's interference. But to deny them legal recognition of
their relationship, simply because of their sexual orientation, is manifestly arbitrary and disproportionate. This Hon'ble
Court in Navtej Johan had held:
"417. Section 377 is based on a moral notion that intercourse which is lustful is to be frowned upon. It finds
the
sole purpose of intercourse in procreation. In doing so, it imposes criminal sanctions upon basic human urges,
by targeting some of them as against the order of nature. It does so, on the basis of a social hypocrisy which the
law embraces as its own. It would ask of a section of our citizens that while love, they may, the physical
manifestation of their love is criminal. This is manifest arbitrariness writ large."
[emphasis supplied]
1365. While the Petitioners are allowed to love, be in a long-term relationship and have a joint life, the legal
recognition of their love and relationship is absent, rather denied. This is manifest arbitrariness writ large.
Right to non-discrimination on the ground of 'sexual orientation" under Articles 15(1) & (2)
1366. It is well-settled that the term 'sex' in Articles 15(1) and 15(2) of the Constitution have been interpreted to
include 'sexual orientation' and 'genden identity'. In NALSA, this Hon'ble Court noted that:
" Articles 15 and 16 prohibit discrimination against any citizen on certain enumerated grounds, including the
ground of 'sex'. In fact, both the Articles prohibit all forms of gender bias and gender-based discrimination.
66. Articles 15 and 16 sought to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex, recognizing that sex discrimination
is a historical fact and needs to be addressed. The discrimination on the ground of 'sex' under Articles 15 and 16,
therefore, includes discrimination on the ground of gender identity. The expression 'sex' used in Articles 15 and 16
is not just limited to biological sex of male or female, but intended to include people who consider themselves to be
neither male or female."
1367. This Hon'ble Court in multiple cases has struck down sex and gender stereotypes that animate many of the
laws existing in the country today. The prohibition on sex stereotyping was discussed in great detail in Navtej Johan
and Joseph Shine. In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court held that:
"438. A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A discrimination will not survive
constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the grounds
prohibited in Article 15(1). If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or indirect is founded on a stereotypical
understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which is prohibited by
Article 15 on the grounds only of sex... This infuses Article 15 with true rigour to give it a complete constitutional
dimension in prohibiting discrimination."
[emphasis supplied]
permanent commissions for women officers in the Indian Navy, on the issue of sex stereotyping, held that:
"78. The battle for gender equality is about confronting the battles of the mind. History is replete with examples
where women have been denied their just entitlements under law and the right to fair and equal treatment in the
workplace. In the context of the Armed Forces, specious reasons have been advanced by decision makers and
administrators. They range from physiology, motherhood and physical attributes to the male dominated hierarchies.
A hundred and one excuses are no answer to the constitutional entitlement to dignity, which attaches to every
individual irrespective of gender, to fair and equal conditions of work and to a level playing field. A level playing
field ensures that women have the opportunity to overcome their histories of discrimination with the surest of
responses based on their competence, ability and performance. [emphasis supplied]
1369. It is thus submitted that Section 4(c), SMA, 1954, discriminates against LGBTQIA+ persons, including the
Petitioners, by limiting the institution of civil marriage only to heterosexual couples. Underlying this exclusion is a sex
stereotype that marriage is essentially a union between a cis man and a cis woman, which is prohibited under Article
15(1).
Freedom of Sexual Expression protected under Article 19(1)(a)
1370. It is well-settled that the freedom of expression under Article 19(1)(a) includes the right to express one's
sexual identity and to choose a sexual partner. In NALSA, this Hon'ble Court categorically held:
"69.
Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution states that all citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and
expression, which includes one's right to expression of his self-identified gender. Self-identified gender can be
expressed through dress, words, action or behavior or any other form. No restriction can be placed on one's
personal appearance or choice of dressing, subject to the restrictions contained in Article 19(2) of the Constitution.
71. the freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) includes the freedom to express one's
chosen gender identity through varied ways and means by way of expression, speech, mannerism, clothing etc.
[emphasis supplied]
1371. In Navtej Johar, while striking down Section 377, IPC, this Hon'ble Court held:
"268.16. An examination of Section 377 IPC on the anvil of Article 19(1)(a) reveals that it amounts to an
unreasonable restriction, for public decency and morality cannot be amplified beyond a rational or logical limit and
cannot be accepted as reasonable grounds for curbing the fundamental rights of freedom of expression and choice
of the LGBT community. Consensual carnal intercourse among adults, be it homosexual or heterosexual, in private
space, does not in any way harm the public decency or morality. Therefore, Section 377 IPC in its present form
violates Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
1372. The exclusion of the Petitioners from SMA, 1954 constitutes a grave violation of their fundamental right to
speech and expression, which includes the right to express one's self-identified sexuality and to choose a partner.
Despite the Petitioners not falling foul of the essential conditions of marriage, i.e., not being minors, having no other
spouse and not being in the prohibited relationships, they are not being able to marry solely on account of their sexual
orientation goes against the teeth of the constitutional rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a).
Right to privacy, intimacy and dignity under Article 21
1373. It is well-settled that the fundamental right to privacy under Article 21 creates a protected space against
State interference. In Puttaswamy, this Hon'ble Court held:
"323. Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of family life, marriage,
procreation, the home and sexual orientation. Privacy also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards
individual autonomy and recognises the ability of the individual to control vital aspects of his or her life. Personal
choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy."
1374. In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court formulated the idea of 'sexual privacy' as part of the right to privacy
under Article 21, wherein it held:
"468. it is imperative to widen the scope of the right to privacy to incorporate a right to "sexual privacy" to
protect the rights of sexual minorities. Emanating from the inalienable right to privacy, the right to sexual privacy
must be granted the sanctity of a natural right."
469. In order to ensure to sexual and gender minorities the fulfilment of their fundamental rights, it is
imperative to 'confront the closet' and, as a necessary consequence, confront 'compulsory heterosexuality.
Confronting the closet would entail "reclaiming markers of all desires, identities and acts which challenge it. It
would also entail ensuring that individuals belonging to sexual minorities, have the freedom to fully participate in
public life, breaking the invisible barrier that heterosexuality imposes upon them. The choice of sexuality is at the
core of privacy. But equally, our constitutional jurisprudence must recognise that the public assertion of identity
founded in sexual orientation is crucial to the exercise of freedoms."
[emphasis supplied]
1375. In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court further emphasized the notion of the "right to intimacy", which is an
integral part of the individual's sexual agency, as follows:
"479, By criminalising consensual acts between individuals who wish to exercise their constitutionally-protected
right to sexual orientation, the State denying its citizens the right to intimacy. The right to intimacy emanates from
an individual's prerogative to engage in sexual relations on their own terms. It is an exercise of the individual's
sexual agency, and includes the individual's right to choice of partner as well as the freedom to decide on the
nature of the relationship that the individual wishes to pursue.
482. Consensual sexual relationships between adults, based on the human propensity to experience desire
must be treated with respect. In addition to respect for relationships based on consent, it is important to foster a
society where individuals find the ability for unhindered expression of the love that they experience towards their
partner. This "institutionalized expression to love" must be considered an important element in the full actualisation
of the ideal of self-respect. Social institutions must be arranged in such a manner that individuals have the freedom
to enter into relationships untrammeled by binary of sex and gender and receive the requisite institutional
recognition to perfect their relationships."
[emphasis supplied]
1376. The Petitioners cannot be denied the public manifestation of their relationship, either through the form of
legally recognised marriage or through the legal recognition of their relationship in all State spheres. The Petitioners
cannot be forced back into the 'closet', by making their relationship invisible in law, and being condemned to a life of
perennial instability. This blanket exclusion sends a clear message that queer couples and their relationships do not
have the inherent dignity and are not worthy of the respect and recognition accorded to heterosexual relationships.
1377. It is well-settled that human dignity is a constitutionally protected interest in itself, and is an integral aspect
of privacy and freedom. In Puttaswamy, this Hon'ble Court held:
"119. To live is to live with dignity. The draftsmen of the Constitution defined their vision of the society in which
constitutional values would be attained by emphasizing, among other freedoms, liberty and dignity. So fundamental
is dignity that it permeates the core of the rights guaranteed to the individual by Part III. Dignity is the core which
unites the fundamental rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve for each individual the dignity of
existence. Privacy with its attendant values assures dignity to the individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed
with dignity can liberty be of true substance."
[emphasis supplied]
1378. The lack of legal recognition of their relationship subjects the Petitioners to deep indignity and humiliation
every day of their lives, when they have to disguise their relationship as 'friends' or 'cousins' It impairs the intrinsic
dignity and personhood of the Petitioners who have to hide the true nature of their relationship from the world at
large, and still invite constant scrutiny from the State and the society.
1379. Marriage is one of the central institutions around which the social order is organized. The symbolic value of
marriage, especially for individuals from marginalized backgrounds, which have hitherto been criminalized for
centuries, cannot be underestimated. In Halpern, the Court of Appeal rightly noted:
"5. Marriage is, without dispute, one of the most significant forms of personal relationships. For centuries,
marriage has been a basic element of social organization in societies around the world. Through the institution of
marriage, individuals can publicly express their love and commitment to each other. This public recognition
and
sanction of marital relationships reflect society's approbation of the personal hopes, desires and aspirations that
underlie loving, committed conjugal relationships."
[emphasis supplied]
1380. Though the Petitioners are no longer 'outlaws', following the decision of this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johar,
the Petitioners are still considered as 'outcasts' in State and public sphere, with no aspect of their relationship having
legal recognition or acceptance. They are 'strangers' to each other in law, and are living in a legal void, which is a clear
anathema to their fundamental rights.
1381. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Fourie observed:
"[72] the intangible damage to same-sex couples is as severe as the material deprivation. To begin with, they
are not entitled to celebrate their commitment to each other in a joyous public event recognised by the law. They
are obliged to live in a state of legal blankness in which their unions remain unmarked by the showering of presents
and the commemoration of anniversaries so celebrated in our culture. It follows that, given the
centrality
attributed to marriage and its consequences in our culture, to deny same-sex couples a choice in this respect is to
negate their right to self-definition in a most profound way."
[emphasis supplied]
1382. Similarly, in Obergefell, the United States Supreme Court noted:
"As the State itself makes marriage all the more precious by the significance it attaches to it, exclusion from the
status has the effect of teaching that gays and lesbians are unequal in important respects. Same-sex couples, too,
may aspire to the transcendent purposes of marriage and seek fulfillment in its highest meaning. [emphasis
supplied]
1383. The Petitioners are thus being denied this crucial opportunity to celebrate and publicly declare their love and
commitment to each other by the Respondent, solely on the ground of sexual identity, which is impermissible.
Right to health under Article 21
1384. It is well-established that the fundamental right to health is an integral part of the right to life and liberty
under Article 21, which includes the right to emergency medical care and the right to maintenance and improvement
of public health. In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court held:
"488. Sexuality is a natural and precious aspect of life, an essential and fundamental part of our humanity.
Sexual rights are entitlements related to sexuality and emanate from the rights to freedom, equality, privacy,
autonomy, and dignity of all people. For people to attain the highest standard of health, they must also have the
right to exercise choice in their sexual lives and feel safe in expressing their sexual identity. However, for some
citizens, discrimination, stigma, fear and violence prevent them from attaining basic sexual rights and health."
[emphasis supplied]
"315. the concept of dignity and right to bodily integrity, which recognises legal right of autonomy and choice
to the patient (or even to his relations in certain circumstances. particularly when the patient is unconscious or
incapacitated to take a decision) may lead to exercising his right of euthanasia."
[emphasis supplied]
1386. Thus, the right to health also includes decisional autonomy in deciding who will take medical decisions, if one
is incapacitated. Petitioners, having no legal recognition of their relationship, are deeply fearful of the future that is
beset with uncertainty and fragility, thereby frequently suffering from anxiety and stress that if anything were to
happen to one of them, how would the other person navigate the current sphere of legal blankness that affects their
relationship. Further, the Petitioners have no right to undertake medical decisions for each other, if, unfortunately, one
of them becomes mentally incapacitated. This blatant legal exclusion from each others' lives in the times of crisis
deeply impairs their right to mental integrity, and violates their right to health under Article 21.
Right to found a family under Article 21
1387. The Constitution protects diverse forms of families, based on the inherent claims of dignity and autonomy of
('Deepika Singh')] emphatically noted:
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the form of
domestic, unmarried partnerships or queen relationships. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally
deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The
black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional ones".
[emphasis supplied]
1388. Reiterating Deepika Singh, this Hon'ble Court in V. Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare
"45. Societal reality, as observed by this Court in Deepika Singh (supra), indicates the need to legally recognise
non-traditional relationships. Such legal recognition is necessary to enable individuals in non-traditional family
structures to avail of the benefits under beneficial legislation, including the MTP Act."
[emphasis supplied]
1389. Merely because the Petitioners are in a same-sex relationship, they cannot be denied their fundamental right
to found a family on their own terms, establishing, enjoying and benefiting from a family life, which is different from a
heterosexual family. In fact, the State ought to protect the non-traditional families more, as they risk the wrath of the
majoritarian community values.
Right to freedom of conscience guaranteed under Article 25
1390. Article 25 of the Constitution guarantees the freedom of conscience to all persons. Conscience is not
necessarily limited to religious beliefs, but refers to the moral compass of a person with respect to her core beliefs,
thereby entitled to protection under Article 25. This Hon'ble Court in Puttaswamy has referred to J.S. Mill's essay 'On
Liberty' (1959), which stated:
"This, then is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises, first, the inward domain of consciousness;
demanding liberty of conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute
freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative, scientific, moral or theological" [paras
408 and 523]
[emphasis supplied]
1391. Article 1 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) states:
"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience,
and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood."
1392. Accordingly, the freedom of conscience guaranteed under Article 25 extends to the entire consciousness of a
human, including beliefs of her sexual identity, which, in fact, go to the core of each individual's sense of self, as well
as the intensely personal nature of her own sexual orientation. Thus, the exclusion of the Petitioners from the secular
institution of civil marriage under SMA, 1954 grossly impairs their freedom of conscience that inheres in each
individual, and the ability to take decisions on matters that are central to the pursuit of happiness.
X. Marriage is the Source of most Socio-Economic Rights, from which the petitioners are excluded
Material Benefits of Marriage
1393. It is well-settled that marriage is not just a piece of paper, but a status in rem vis--vis society at large as
well as a bundle of rights and entitlements that affect the individuals from "cradle to grave", and even after death. In
Fourie, it was held:
"[70] the rights and obligations associated with marriage are vast. Besides other important purposes served by
marriage, as an institution it was the only source of socio-economic benefits such as the right to inheritance,
medical insurance coverage, adoption, access to wrongful death claims, spousal benefits, bereavement leave, tax
advantages and post-divorce rights. "[emphasis supplied]
1394. Again, in Obergefell, it was succinctly stated that:
"Indeed, while the State are in general free to vary the benefits they confer on all married couples, they have
throughout our history made marriage the basis for an expanding list of governmental rights, benefits, and
responsibilities. These aspects of marital status include : taxation; inheritance and property rights; rules of
intestate succession; spousal privilege in the law of evidence; hospital access; medical decision making authority;
workers' compensation benefits; health insurance; and child custody, support and visitation rights."
[emphasis supplied]
of loss of spousal consortium in motor accidents' cases, and held that:
"46 In legal parlance, "consortium" is the right of the spouse to the company, care, help, comfort, guidance,
society, solace, affection and sexual relations with his or her mate. That non-pecuniary head of damages has not
been properly understood by our courts. The loss of companionship, love, care and protection, etc., the spouse is
entitled to get, has to be compensated appropriately... By loss of consortium, the courts have made an attempt to
compensate the loss of spouse's affection, comfort, solace, companionship. society, assistance, protection, care and
sexual relations during the future years."
[emphasis supplied]
1396. In India too, the entire legal framework for partner benefits revolves around the institution of marriage,
which privileges only heterosexual marital relations, to the exclusion of all others. The exclusion of the Petitioners from
SMA, 1954 thus not just interferes with their fundamental right to marry, but also denies them the plethora of rights
and entitlements that the State provides to heterosexual married couples. Most LGBTQIA+ persons, including the
Petitioners, have no access to state, social or family support, especially those who are most vulnerable like Dalits,
Muslims, persons with disability, and persons living with HIV, amongst others. For them, marriage is the only avenue
to access rights and gain societal acceptance, otherwise they would spend their whole lives at the margins, bereft of
any rights or entitlements, and battling for bare survival.
1397. Many LGBTQIA+ persons have limited access to legal advice or financial resources to protect their
relationship and/or partner through other means like executing a will or a gift deed. In fact, many queer individuals do
not have the wherewithal to even think about their future, let alone plan for a secure future, as their lives are ravaged
by the scarcity of resources, and fragility of status. It is, often not a choice for LGBTQIA+ persons to marry, but a very
mode of survival.
1398. At the same time, this Hon'ble Court has slowly recognised relationships outside the bounds of marriage, and
that rights and welfare entitlements too have to transcend marriage. In X V. Principal Secretary, this Hon'ble Court
held that:
"49. the law has emphasized that unmarried women have the same rights as married women in terms of
adoption, succession, and maternity benefits. Importantly, these legislations also signify that both married and
unmarried women have equal decisional autonomy to make significant choices regarding their own welfare."
[emphasis supplied]
XI. No Compelling State Interest to Deny the Right to Marry
1399. There exists no legitimate State interest, much less a compelling one, in limiting the right to marry only to
heterosexual couples, to the exclusion of LGBTQIA+ couples like the Petitioners. The Petitioners cannot be kept out of
an important societal and legal institution, owing to archaic ideas of procreation and sex-stereotypes as an entitlement
to marriage. This Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johan had emphatically noted:
"478. Sexuality cannot be construed as something that the State has the prerogative to legitimize only in the
form of rigid, marital procreational sex. Sexuality must be construed as a fundamental experience through which
individuals define the meaning of their lives. Human sexuality cannot be reduced to a binary formulation. Nor can it
be defined narrowly in terms of its function as a means to procreation. To confine it to closed categories would
result in denuding human liberty of its full content as a constitutional right. The Constitution protects the fluidities
of sexual experience. It leaves it to consenting adults to find fulfilment in their relationships, in a diversity of
cultures, among plural ways of life and in infinite shades of love and longing. [emphasis supplied]
1400. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Fourie, while rejecting the State's contention of lack of
procreative potential in same-sex couples, held that:
[86] however persuasive procreative potential might be in the context of a particular religious world-view, from
a legal and constitutional point of view, it is not a defining characteristic of conjugal relationships.. [87] It is clear,
then, that the procreation argument cannot defeat the claim of same-sex couples to be accorded the same degree
of dignity concern and respect that is shown to heterosexual couples."
[emphasis supplied]
1401. Thus, from a constitutional standpoint, procreation is not a valid basis for differential treatment, as is evident
from heterosexual married couples who cannot or do not want to procreate or want to adopt. In any case, the
LGBTQIA+ couples can choose to have children through other means, including adoption, surrogacy and donor
insemination.
1402. Similarly, the Petitioners' right to marry and to enjoy the same status, entitlements and responsibilities as
heterosexual married couples under SMA, 1954 cannot be defeated on the ostensible basis of religious freedom. The
fact that the SMA, 1954 was enacted by the Parliament to facilitate inter-faith, inter-caste and choice-based
marriages, irrespective of religious affiliation, makes it foremost a secular law on marriage and divorce, which cannot
discriminate against individuals based on their sexual orientation. A secular State cannot treat its citizens unfairly and
unequally in the garb of protection of religious personal laws.
XII. The Notice, Publication and Objection Regime under SMA, 1954 is Violative of Part III Of The
Constitution
1403. Though the SMA, 1954 is revolutionary in its vision, the procedural requirements of notice, publication of
notice and invitation of objections have placed an unreasonable restriction on individuals, particularly those that do not
conform to social mores, to access the institution of civil marriage, which is as follows:
i. those seeking to get married are required to give the Marriage Officer, appointed under Section 3, notice of
intended marriage in a district where at least one of the parties has resided for a minimum of 30 (thirty) days
(Section 5);
ii. the notices are to be kept in Marriage Notice Book, as well as affixed in a conspicuous place in the office of the
Marriage Officer (Section 6(1) & (2));
iii. In case of one party not being a permanent resident of the district, the Marriage Officer will also send the notice
to the district where the individual is a permanent resident (Section 6(3));
iv. A person may object to the marriage within 30 (thirty) days of the publication of the notice on the ground that it
would convene a condition for valid marriage under Section 4 (Section 7);
V. The Marriage Officer is required to decide the objection and determine whether or not to solemnize the marriage
(Section 8), as per the powers of inquiries (Section 9).
1404. The imposition of a notice period prior to the marriage under the SMA, 1954 is entirely discriminatory as
there is no such requirement under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 or the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936. The
requirement of prior notice is only found under the Christian Marriage Act, 1872, which is currently 4 (four) days under
proviso (1) to Section 17 and proviso to Section 41. This requirement of notice can be traced back to the Crown's
attempt to prevent marriages against social norms or commonly called 'undesirable marriages' under Act for the better
Preventing of Clandestine Marriages, 1753, which is entirely the opposite of the intention of the SMA, 1954 to facilitate
marriages for all persons.
1405. Pertinently, the notice period under the SMA, 1954 is the longest it has ever been in history and places an
unreasonable restriction on persons getting married under the Act. The historical development of the notice period is
set out below:
Law
Pre-Notice Domicile
Notice Period
England
An Act for the better Preventing
Four weeks
Three Sundays (2 weeks)
of Clandestine Marriages, 1753
An Act for Amending the Laws
15 days
Three Sundays (2 weeks)
Respecting the Solemnisation of
Marriages in England, 1823
An Act for Marriages in England,
7 days
21 days without a license or 7 days with
1836
license
India
An Act for Marriages in India,
5 days
Unspecified and 14 days in some cases
1851 and Act No. V of 1852
The Special Marriage Act, 1872
14 days
14 days
The Special Marriage Bill, 1952
30 days
30 days
Joint Parliamentary Committee
14 days
30 days
Recommendations on the Special
Marriage Bill, 1952
The Special Marriage Act,
30 days
30 days
1954
1406. Both the High Courts and the Law Commission of India have noted the deleterious effects of the notice-
publication-objection regime on the right of inter-faith couples to marry as per their choice, as it exposes them to the
wrath of the community, thereby facing grave threats to their safety and security. In Pranav Kumar Mishra V. Govt. of
notices to the residential addresses of parties, noted that:
"9. It is to be kept in mind that the Special Marriage Act was enacted to enable a special form of marriage for any
Indian national, professing different faiths, or desiring a civil form of marriage. The unwarranted disclosure of
matrimonial plans by two adults entitled to solemnise it may, in certain situations, jeopardise the marriage itself. In
certain circumstances. it may even endanger the life or limb of one or the other party due to parental interference.
[emphasis supplied]
1407. In a series of published case studies on the repercussions faced by women exercising their agency in
choosing their romantic and sexual partners, it has been documented that the procedural requirements of the SMA,
1954 have posed a barrier even to couples who have the option of accessing the institution of marriage, such as inter-
faith couples [See : "Facing Reality : A Journey on the Path of Choice. A Compilation of Case Studies." by
Association for Advocacy and Legal Initiative (AALI), 2010].
1408. Similarly, the Law Commission of India (LCI') in 2012, while noting the tremendous difficulties faced by
inter-faith couples, stated that:
"9.1.. it is desirable that the procedure under the Special Marriage Act is simplified. The time gap between the
date of giving notice of marriage and the registration should be removed and the entire process of registration of
marriage should be expedited. The domicile restriction should also be removed. [See : LCI's 242nd Report titled
Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances (in the name of Honour and
Tradition) : A suggested Legal Framework (August, 2012)].
1409. These recommendations were again reiterated in 2018 by LCI, where it noted.
"2.110. While the SMA, 1954 has often been considered a model law, it suffers from various serious lacunae. One
of
the major problems highlighted in the series of consultations held by the Commission was that the 30-day notice
period after the registration of marriage under the Act is often misused. The 30-days period offers an opportunity to
kin of the couple to discourage an inter-caste or an inter-religion marriage. It is of paramount importance in the
current scenario that couples opting into cross-community marriages are adequately protected.
2.113. Thus, while the 30-day period was retained, bearing in mind that this would also aid in transparency,
particularly if facts about previous marriage, real age, or a virulent disease were concealed from either spouse, the
object of the Act was to enable couples to marry by their own will and choosing. Increasingly, with moves to
announce such a notice online, or with registrars directly contacting parents of the couple, the purpose of the Act,
1954 is being defeated.
2.114 Steps for the protection of the couples can be taken, if there is reasonable apprehension of threat to
their life or liberty, and the couple request for the same. Thus, the requirement of a thirty days notice period from
sections 5, 6, 7, and 16 needs to be either deleted or adequate protections for the couple need to be in
place." [See: Consultation Paper on Reform of Family Law' (2018)].
OnLine All 19] read down the provisions of Section 6 and Section 7, SMA, 1954 as directory at the instance of the
parties, and not mandatory. It was held that:
"50. The interpretation of Sections 6 and 7 read with Section 46 containing the procedure of publication of notice
and inviting objections to the intended marriage in Act of 1954 thus has to be such that would uphold the
fundamental rights and not violate the same. In case the same on their simplistic reading are held mandatory, as
per the law declared today, they would invade in the fundamental rights of liberty and privacy, including within its
sphere freedom to choose for marriage without interference from state and non-state actors, of the persons
concerned However, under Sections 6 and 7 of Act of 1954 the persons intending to solemnize a marriage are
required to give a notice and the Marriage Officer thereafter is made duty bound to publish the notice for a period of
30 days and invite objections with regard to the same. Any person can object to the marriage on the ground that it
violates any of the condition of Section 4 of Act of 1954. None of the conditions under Section 4 of Act of 1954 is
such, violation of which would impact rights of any person in any manner different than the same would in case of a
marriage under any personal law. Even if a marriage takes place in violation of any of the conditions of Section 4,
legal consequences would follow and the courts can decide upon the same, including declare such a marriage to be
void, as they do under the personal laws. There is no apparent reasonable purpose achieved by making the
procedure to be more protective or obstructive under the Act of 1954, under which much less numbers of marriages
are taking place, than procedure under the other personal laws, more particularly when this discrimination violates
the fundamental rights of the class of persons adopting the Act of 1954 for their marriage.
51 Therefore, the requirement of publication of notice under Section 6 and inviting/entertaining objections
under Section 7 can only be read as directory in nature, to be given effect only on request of parties to the intended
marriage and not otherwise."
[emphasis supplied]
1411. The requirement of the notice prior to the marriage, will particularly endanger LGBTQIA+ individuals who
very often face violence and disapproval from their family members. It is the common experience for LGBTQIA+
individuals, especially lesbian women, bisexual women and transgender persons that they have to leave their homes
suddenly to avoid being coerced into a marriage by their families. Where a couple runs away together and wishes to
get married, under the SMA, 1954, they would have to reside in the new city for 30 days and then provide notice of
intended marriage for another 30 days, leaving them vulnerable to being separated and harassed in the meantime as
well as being highly restrictive and discriminatory.
1412. Most natal families cannot even accept the sexual identity or gender identity of queer persons and impose
stereotypical sexual or gender norms on them. Families relentlessly pursue them, if they somehow manage to leave
their abusive homes, through filing false missing complaints and false criminal cases, with active support of the State
machinery as well as extra-judicial actors. In this regard, if a queer couple is required to give notice of 30 days, reside
for a minimum of 30 days in a district where they intend to marry, and face the prospect of families being given ample
time to object to their relationship, then no queer person would ever dream of solemnizing a civil marriage, but would
fall prey to touts promising purported valid marriage ceremony and certificate of registration.
1413. It is well-settled that in assessing constitutional validity, Courts may take into consideration subsequent
events and circumstances, which were non-existent at the time that the law was enacted. The law although may be
constitutional when enacted but with passage of time, the same may be held to be unconstitutional in view of the
"32. It is trite to say that legislation which may be quite reasonable and rationale at the time of its enactment
may with the lapse of time and/or due to change of circumstances become arbitrary, unreasonable and violative of
the doctrine of equality and even if the validity of such legislation may have been upheld at a given point of time,
the Court may, in subsequent litigation, strike down the same if it is found that the rationale of classification has
become non-existent."
[emphasis supplied]
1415. The provision of the notice of intended marriage can be traced to the English laws dating back to 1753,
which was intended to prevent runaway marriages' without parental consent, in order to protect 'family reputation',
'class lineage' and 'wealth'. In fact, when SMA, 1872 was enacted, the residence requirement was only 14 days as well
as 14 days period for giving objection(s) before the Marriage Registrar. This extension from 14 days in SMA, 1872 and
then to 30 days in the SMA, 1954, both for domicile and for period within which objections could be given, makes it
clear that these provisions are intended to provide ample time to the families to track down their children, consenting
adults exercising their freedom to choose a partner, and to object to their marriages, which are no longer permissible.
1416. The Latin maxim cessant rationae legis, cessati ipsa lex, i.e., when the reason for a law ceases, the law itself
ceases is a well-recognised principle of law in the Indian jurisprudence. The rationale for notice-publication-objection
regime under SMA, 1954 is no longer valid and ought to be struck down [See : Navtej Johan at para 349]
XIII. Natal Family Violence and the Need for a Protocol
1417. This Hon'ble Court in several cases has noted the pervasive violence and harassment faced by inter-caste
and inter-faith couples who dare to exercise their freedom to choose their partner, often in the garb of protecting
'family honour', which has even resulted in gruesome killings of individuals. This Hon'ble Court in Shakti Vahini has
passed a number of directions providing for protection of young consenting adults from family violence, including
setting up safe houses for couples facing family/caste/community opposition, registration of FIRs against offending
family members and punitive action against police officials for dereliction of duty in failing to protect the adult
consenting couples.
1418. In a similar vein, when LGBTQIA+ persons leave abusive family situations and seek to live a life of freedom
and dignity, they too face sustained backlash from their natal families, supported by the local police authority, on
account of their sexuality or gender identity, as has happened with the Petitioners. Use of criminal law at the behest of
private actors, including the natal families, by filing of false missing complaints or false cases of kidnapping against
the partners of queer and transgender persons has a serious chilling effect on the exercise of freedoms. Many queer
and transgender persons, including transgender men and lesbian couples, have had to approach the High Courts time
and again either seeking police protection from natal family harassment or writ of habeas for release from illegal
confinement.
1419. The Hon'ble Madras High Court has also taken note of the scale of the problem that queer and trans
individuals who leave their home face in S. Sushma V. Commr. of Police, W.P. No. 7284 of 2021, order dated
07.06.2021 directing that:
"the police, on receipt of any complaint regarding girl/woman/man missing cases which upon
enquiry/investigation is found to involve consenting adults belonging to the LGBTQIA+ community, shall upon
receipt of their statements, close the complaint without subjecting them to any harassment."
1420. It is evident that the queen and transgender individuals and couples are being harassed in numerous ways
by their natal families, including on the purported basis that they are missing on have been kidnapped. A seemingly
straightforward procedure of recording an individual's statement to determine whether they are acting in accordance
with their own wishes as an adult is being used to defeat their constitutional right to life with dignity and autonomy,
and their ability to move to any part of the country and live with safety and peace. It is incumbent upon the police,
whether out of State or not, to make all efforts to record the person's statement at the place where they are residing,
and not insist on the person's presence at the police station where the missing person complaint is registered.
1421. This Hon'ble Court in several cases have stepped in, when there is a legislative or executive vacuum, to
protect and advance the fundamental rights of citizens of this country. It is imperative that detailed guidelines are
framed by this Hon'ble Court, in line with Shakti Vahini, concerning the police action in dealing with cases of adult
and consenting queer and transgender persons, who are either wrongly named in missing complaints or falsely framed
in cases of kidnapping/abduction by the natal families.
XIV. Power of Judicial Review
1422. Article 13(2) of the Constitution provides that any law, which takes away or abridges fundamental rights is
void, to the extent of the contravention. In the State of West Bengal V. Committee for the Protection of Democratic
"51. The Constitution of India expressly confers the power of judicial review on this Court and the High Courts
under Article 32 and 226 respectively. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar described Article 32 as the very soul of the Constitution-
the very heart of it the most important Article. Moreover, Article 13 of the Constitution not only declares the pre-
constitution laws as void to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the fundamental rights, it also prohibits
the State from making a law which either takes away totally or abrogates in part a fundamental right".
[emphasis supplied]
1423. The contention that the issue of legal recognition of LGBTQIA+ relationships is a matter for the legislature,
and cannot be subject to judicial review, is unacceptable and untenable, as held by this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johar:
"352. The very purpose of the fundamental rights chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdraw the
subject of liberty and dignity of the individual and place such subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments
so that constitutional morality can be applied by this Court to give effect to the rights, among others, of 'discrete
and insular' minorities One such minority has knocked on the doors of this Court as this Court is the custodian of
the fundamental rights of citizens. The fundamental rights chapter is like the north star in the universe of
constitutionalism in India. Constitutional morality always trumps any imposition of a particular view of social
morality by shifting and different majoritarian regimes."
[emphasis supplied]
1424. This Hon'ble Court has time and again emphasised the importance of the Constitution as a living document
alive to the changing times and social realities, which envisages a society where the ideals of equality, dignity and
Hon'ble Court held:
"16. The law regulates relationships between people. It prescribes patterns of behaviour. It reflects the values of
society. The role of the court is to understand the purpose of law in society and to help the law achieve its purpose.
Indeed, when social reality changes, the law must change too. Just as change in social reality is the law of life,
responsiveness to change in social reality is the life of law. It can be said that the history of law is the history of
adapting the law to society's changing needs."
[emphasis supplied]
1425. Neither the exclusion of the Petitioners from SMA, 1954 nor the procedural requirements of notice-
publication-inviting objections under the Act meet the test of non-arbitrariness and reasonableness that animates our
constitutional edifice. No amount of fallacious arguments can take away from the profound truth that lack of legal
recognition of the Petitioners' relationships is an affront to their dignity, identity, and personhood, which cannot be
allowed in a constitutional democracy like ours.
1426. It is thus crystal clear that Section 4(c), along with other corresponding provisions of SMA, 1954, to the
extent they exclude LGBTQIA+ couples, including the Petitioners, from entering the institution of civil marriage under
SMA, 1954, are violative of the fundamental rights of the Petitioners guaranteed under Articles 14, 15(1) & (2), 19(1)
(a), 21 and 25 of the Constitution, and thus ought to be declared as void. In the same vein, Sections 5-8, of SMA,
1954, to the extent that they impose arbitrary and unreasonable restrictions on the exercise of the fundamental right
to marry under the law, are unconstitutional, and ought to be struck down by this Hon'ble Court.
1427. The Petitioners seek that this Hon'ble Court uphold their right to marry and to be able to live with freedom
and dignity. As one of them says, "I will feel safer and SO much more secure. My family won't be able to say that you
two are living in sin."
01.03.2023
New Delhi
Drawn By:
Amritananda Chakravorty, Advocate
Mihir Samson, Advocate
Shreya Munoth, Advocate
Aswathi Menon, Advocate
Sitamsini Cherukumalli, Advocate
Settled By:
Mr. Raju Ramachandran, Senior Advocate
Filed Through:
Dr. Anindita Pujari, Advocate on Record
IN THE HON'BLE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 129 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Amburi Roy & Ann
Petitioners
V.
Union of India & Ors Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MS. ANITHA SHENOY, SENIOR ADVOCATE
INDEX
S. No.
Heading
1.
Introduction and Relief sought by the Petitioners
11.
Brief Propositions advanced by the Petitioners
111.
Background of the Petitioners' Relationship
IV.
Impugned Provisions
V.
The Petitioners are entitled to the fundamental right to marry
VI.
Denial of recognition of the Petitioners' marriage defeats the object of Foreign Marriage Act, 1969
VII.
Exclusion of the Petitioners' marriage from Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 is unconstitutional
VIII.
Notice-Publication-Objection regime under Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 is violative of fundamental rights
IX.
Impugned Regulations are beyond the remit of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015
X.
Impugned Regulations by excluding the Petitioners from joint adoption are void
XI.
Impugned Regulations violate the principles of Best Interest of Child
I. Introduction and Relief Sought by the Petitioners
1428. The present petition raises critical issues of constitutional significance, with widespread implications on
private international law, relating to the invalidity of marriages in India validly solemnised by Indian citizens in a
foreign country, merely on account of the parties' sexual orientation. It further raises key concerns around family and
motherhood in India and whether joint adoption in India could be denied to same-sex couples, solely owing to their
sexual identity. The Petitioners approach this Hon'ble Court for the following reliefs:
a. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that Section 17(2) and Section 4(c) of the Foreign Marriage
Act, 1969 ('FMA'), to the extent they exclude the registration of marriages duly solemnized by LGBTQIA+
couples in foreign countries, are unconstitutional;
b. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that the words "bride" and "bridegroom" in the Foreign
Marriage Act, 1969, would be substituted by the word "party", to the extent of its application to marriages that
are solemnized where at least one of the parties to the marriage is an LGBTQIA+ person;
C. Issue an appropriate writ, orden or direction declaring that Sections 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10 of the Foreign Marriage Act,
1969 are unconstitutional;
d. Issue an appropriate writ, orden or direction declaring that all rights, entitlements and benefits associated with
the solemnisation and registration of marriage under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 would be applicable to
LGBTQIA+ persons;
e. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that Regulations 5(2) and 5(3) read with Schedules 11,
111, VI, and VII of the Adoption Regulations, 2022, ('impugned Regulations') to the extent they exclude
LGBTQIA+ couples from joint adoption, are unconstitutional and ultra vires the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 J Act');
f.
Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that the words "married couple" and "marital relationship"
used in Regulations 5(2)(a and (3) in the Adoption Regulations, 2022 encompass LGBTQIA+ couples duly
married under any foreign law; g. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring that the words 'male
applicant' and female applicant' would be substituted by the word 'Prospective Adoptive Parent 1' and
'Prospective Adoptive Parent 2' (in case of applicant couples) in Schedules 11, 111, VI and VII of the Adoption
Regulations, 2022.
11. Brief Propositions Advanced by the Petitioners
a.
The Petitioners have a fundamental right to marry a person of one's own choice under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21
of the Constitution, and any exclusion or discrimination from solemnization or registration, as incorporated in
Section 4(c) and 17(2) and other provisions of the FMA is ultra-vires the Constitution.
b. The denial of recognition of the Petitioners' marriage is inconsistent with the very object of the FMA not to
invalidate marriages duly solemnized under foreign law by Indian citizens.
C. The exclusion of the Petitioners' marriage from the FMA violates their right to equality and equal opportunity
before law, right to non-discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation, the right to choose one's sexual
partner, the right to privacy, intimacy and dignity and the right to found a family as well as the right to
'conscience' guaranteed under Articles 14, 15(1) & (2), 19(1)(a), 21 and 25 of the Constitution.
d. The exclusion of the Petitioners' marriage from legal recognition under the FMA denies them a plethora of socio-
economic rights and entitlements that the State provides to the heterosexual married couples.
e.
There exists no compelling State interest to exclude the Petitioners from the institution of marriage, and the
State cannot resort to archaic ideas of procreation and gender-stereotypes as well as religious considerations to
deny the fundamental right of marriage to LGBTQIA+ couples.
f. The procedural requirements of notice, publication of notice, inviting objections from public at large to the
proposed marriage and the powers of the Marriage Officer to conduct an inquiry into such objections under
Section 5, 7, 8, and 10, FMA constitute serious impediments on the right of the individuals to exercise their
choice of partner, and to solemnise marriage under FMA. These restrictions have a disproportionate impact on the
LGBTQIA+ couples like the Petitioners who are already battling years of natal family disapproval.
g. The requirement of proof of a 'marital relationship' by a 'married couple' for the purpose of joint adoption under
Regulations 5(2)(a) and 5(3) is beyond the remit of Section 57 of the JJ Act that extends joint adoption to
relationships that are 'marriage like' including marriages between same-sex couples solemnized overseas.
h. The impugned Regulations 5(2)(a) and 5(3) violate the principle of equality and (non-discrimination on the basis
of sexual orientation under Articles 14 and 15 for excluding married same-sex couples from the purview of joint
adoption.
i. The exclusion of married same-sex couples from applying for joint adoption by the impugned Regulations 5(2)(a)
and 5(3) violates their right to adoption and motherhood protected under Article 21.
j. The impugned Regulations (2)(a) and 5(3) violate the right of a child to be adopted recognised under the Hague
Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of Inter-country Adoption, 1980 and the
Convention on the Rights of Children, 1989.
k. The impugned Regulations 5(2)(a) and 5(3) deprive the adopted child of a same-sex couple of a legal
relationship with the de facto parent, which is contrary to the protection of the best interest of the child that is a
guiding principle of the JJ Act.
III. Background of the Petitioners' Relationship
1429. The Petitioners are two adult women from West Bengal who have been in a relationship since 2007, and
solemnised their marriage in Denmark on 16.08.2022. The Petitioners were constrained to leave India in October,
2021 as the legal environment for them to live a life of dignity and freedom was absent, with no recognition of their
relationship. They have managed to build a life together in Berlin, Germany, but wish to come back to India without
losing their joint life. However, the Petitioners are unable to register their marriage in India due to the exclusionary,
discriminatory and unconstitutional requirements of Section 17(2) read with Section 4(c) FMA, which only registers
marriages between a man and a woman that have been solemnised in a foreign territory. The Petitioners further
deeply desire to adopt a child and lead a regular family life in India.
1430. The Petitioners, both natives of West Bengal, met at the Siliguri Institute of Technology, Siliguri, West
Bengal, where they were enrolled in the Bachelor of Technology (Computer Science & Engineering) program. They
arew close during the course of their education and began livina together as a couple in 2007. In January 2009. the
Petitioner No. 2 moved in with the Petitioner No. 1 at Kolkata, who had moved there for work a few months earlier. The
Petitioners lived together, divided domestic responsibilities, and financially supported each other. They shared a desire
to raise children together and lead a regular family life in India. However, legal recognition of their relationship was an
impossibility under Indian law and neither had come out about their sexual orientation to their families and friends,
out of concern for their safety and well-being. Consequently, they relocated to Bangalore in September, 2015 and lived
together as a couple.
1431. In September, 2018, after this Hon'ble Court's landmark decision in Navtej Johar V. Union of India [(2018)
colleagues and family. Soon they realised that despite decriminalisation, their relationship had no legal or social
sanction in India, and they did not want to spend their best years in the closet pretending to be someone else.
Consequently, they decided to move abroad, where they could build a joint life with dignity and freedom. In October,
2021, the Petitioners moved to Berlin, Germany and began living together as a couple. Both the Petitioners' families
staunchly disapprove of their relationship, and do not wish to maintain close ties with them, which has caused huge
distress to the Petitioners. In August, 2022, the Petitioners finally tied the knot in Copenhagen, Denmark in an
intimate ceremony, and were ecstatic that their longstanding relationship was now legal and visible to all, instead of
being cloaked in invisibility and secrecy. The Petitioners have a deep desire to move back to India and settle down,
while retaining their marital status and joint life as well as to adopt a child as soon as possible.
IV. Impugned Provisions
1432. The Petitioners have challenged the validity of Sections 4(c), 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 17(2) of the FMA and
Regulations 5(2)(a) and 5(3) read with Schedules 11, 111, VI and VII of the Adoption Regulations, 2022 that
collectively exclude the Petitioners' marriage from legal recognition and prevent them from applying for joint adoption
under the JJ Act.
Legislative History of FMA and exclusion of LGBTQIA+ couples
1433. The legislative history of the FMA enacted in 1969 can be traced back to the English law, the Foreign
Marriage Act, 1892 ('1892 Act') that was enacted by the British Parliament to consolidate the laws relating to the
marriage of British subjects outside the United Kingdom. Marriages solemnized in a foreign territory in accordance with
the 1892 Act would be as valid as a marriage solemnised in the United Kingdom. Consequently, the 1892 Act was then
introduced into India, vide the Act No. XIV of 1903, wherein the 1892 Act was made applicable to all British subjects
in the territory of British India.
1434. After independence in 1947 in India, the Parliament deliberated whether the Special Marriage Act, 1954
('SMA, 1954') would also cover those marriages involving at least one Indian citizen that were solemnised in foreign
territories, but it was felt that a separate legislation was necessary. The FMA was enacted in India in 1969, pursuant to
the recommendations of the 23rd Report of the Law Commission of India (Law Commission Report') in August,
1962 to enact a new legislation i) to provide for solemnisation of marriages outside India where at least one of the
parties thereto is an Indian citizen; ii) to enable them to seek matrimonial relief in Indian courts; and iii) to ensure the
validity of such marriages, so far as India is concerned.
1435. While Section 4 sets out the essential conditions of marriage under FMA, Section 4(c), by using the terms
'bride' and 'bridegroom' to prescribe the minimum age of the parties, presumes a heterosexual marriage. Section 17
(2) further provides for registration of foreign marriages not solemnized under the FMA, but in order to qualify for
registration under the FMA, the parties must meet the essential conditions under Section 4, thereby excluding same-
sex marriages.
1436. Pertinently, there were no discussions on the possibility of marriage amongst LGBTQIA+ persons, either
during the debates on the SMA, 1954 or during the legislative deliberations on the FMA, as the essential conditions of
marriage under Section 4, FMA are similar to the ones under Section 4, SMA, 1954. Neither the legislators nor religious
and/or civil society groups sought explicit prohibition on same-sex marriage or marriage involving LGBTQIA+ persons.
Section 4(c) and Section 17(2) of the FMA, which do not recognize marriage between the Petitioners, are thus
unconstitutional and discriminatory, in that they deprive the marriage of LGBTQIA+ couples the validity and
recognition under Indian law that is accorded to heterosexual marriages in terms of Sections 15 and 7(6) of the FMA.
1437. The Petitioners have also challenged the process of solemnization under the FMA that requires a satisfaction
of the domicile and notice requirement under Section 5, publication of the notice of intended marriage under Section
7, an objection period of 30 days under Section 8, and the procedure on receipt of objections under Section 10. This
process provides ample opportunity to third parties, including hostile family members, to interfere with the decisions
of LGBTQIA+ couples to marry a person of their choice.
Adoption Regulations
1438. The Petitioners are further challenging the impugned Regulations framed by the Respondent Nos. 3-4 that
exclude same-sex couples from joint adoption under the JJ Act by requiring the applicant couples to be in a
heterosexual marriage for two years. The impugned Regulations are not just discriminatory, but also go beyond the
remit of the parent Act, i.e., the JJ Act that does not prohibit LGBTQIA+ persons to adopt nor restricts joint adoption
only to heterosexual married couples. Under the JJ Act, adoption is contemplated as a mechanism to rehabilitate and
reintegrate a particular class of children who have been surrendered, abandoned or orphaned. It is a secular law that
permits adoption irrespective of religion, and its overarching concern is to promote the "best interest of the child".
1439. However, the impugned Regulations have been framed in the teeth of the JJ Act. While Regulation 5(2)(a)
provides that "the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be required, in case of a married couple",
Regulation 5(3) mandates that "no child shall be given in adoption to a couple unless they have at least two years of
stable marital relationship except in the cases of relative or step-parent adoption" This assumption of heterosexuality
of the applicant couples in the impugned Regulations is inconsistent with the express provisions of the parent JJ Act,
since the sexual orientation of an applicant couple is not mentioned in the eligibility criteria under the JJ Act.
V. The Petitioners are Entitled to the Fundamental Right to Marry
1440. This Hon'ble Court in several landmark decisions have upheld the right of adult individuals to choose their
deprecating the practice of honour killing' and violence by families in case of inter-caste marriages, held that:
"17. This is a free and democratic country, and once a person becomes a major he or she can marry whosoever
he/she likes. If the parents of the boy or girl do not approve of such inter-caste or inter-religious marriage the
maximum they can do is that they can cut-off social relations with the son or daughter, but they cannot give
threats or commit or instigate acts of violence and cannot harass the persons who undergoes such inter-caste or
inter-religious marriage."
[emphasis supplied]
1441. This Hon'ble Court has reiterated Lata Singh on numerous occasions, including in Arumugam Servai V. State
-judge bench decision, while emphatically upholding the fundamental right to privacy, noted that:
"298. The autonomy of the individual is the ability to make decisions on vital matters of concern to life... The
guarantee of equality is a guarantee against arbitrary State action. It prevents the State from discriminating
between individuals The intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom
of thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination The marriage,
procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual."
[emphasis supplied]
upheld the right to choose a life partner as part of the fundamental rights protected under Articles 19 and 21 of the
Constitution, and issued preventive, remedial and punitive measures to be followed by the State authorities to
facilitate the exercise of the said right by the adult couples. This Hon'ble Court noted in categorical terms:
"43. when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a manifestation of their choice which
is 10ecognized under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has the sanction of the constitutional law
and once that is 10ecognized, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot succumb to the conception of class
honor or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely does not have any legitimacy."
[emphasis supplied]
wherein it was held:
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. This right cannot be taken away except through a law which is substantively and
procedurally fair, just and reasonable. Intrinsic to the liberty which the Constitution guarantees as a fundamental
right is the ability of each individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness. Matters of
dress and of food, of ideas and ideologies, of love and partnership are within the central aspects of identity."
[emphasis supplied]
1445. The Hon'ble Madras High Court in Arun Kumar V. Inspector General of Registration, Chennai (AIR 2019 Mad
265) has upheld the right of transgender persons to marriage by holding that the term 'bride' in Section 5, HMA
includes transgender women. Similarly, the word 'wife' as well as the word 'bride' in the Third Schedule under Section
11 in SMA, 1954 should include both cis women and transgender women.
1446. The Petitioners thus have a fundamental right to marriage, and any exclusion or discrimination, as
incorporated in Sections 4(c) and 17(2) of FMA is ultra-vires the Constitution.
VI. Denial of Recognition of the Petitioners' Marriage Defeats the Object of FMA
1447. Section 17(2) read with Section 4(c) are inconsistent with a clear legislative intention of the FMA not to
invalidate marriages duly solemnised under foreign law by the Indian citizens.
1448. The Law Commission Report made the following observation in respect of the validity of foreign marriages:
"3... The legislation will thus provide a form of marriage which can be availed of by an Indian citizen who wishes
to marry abroad, and which will ensure beyond doubt the validity of the marriage SO far as India is concerned, and
in respect of which it will be possible to obtain appropriate reliefs in Indian courts. While this legislation aims at
providing a form of marriage whose validity cannot be questioned in Indian courts, care has been taken to secure
conformity with rules of private international law on this subject SO as to ensure, as far as possible, that the validity
of the marriage must be recognized in other countries besides India."
1449. It is in aid of this tightrope act that Explanation (ii) in Section 18(1) exempts foreign marriages not
solemnized under the FMA and those deemed to be solemnised under Section 17 from being considered void under
Section 24, SMA, 1954. The anxiety to avoid invalidating foreign marriages not solemnized under the FMA is
reaffirmed in Section 27, which states that the FMA does not in any way affect the validity of a marriage solemnized in
a foreign country otherwise than under the Act. The corresponding Explanatory Note in the Law Commission Report
stated that:
"This clause, saving marriages solemnized under other laws, has been inserted by way of abundant caution".
1450. Chapter VI, FMA contains a third mode for recognition of foreign marriages in India. Section 23 provides that
the Central Government may notify such marriages solemnized under the law of a foreign country, whose provisions
that are similar to those in the FMA, to be recognised by courts in India as valid.
1451. The scheme of the FMA thus firmly indicates an overarching concern to ensure the validity of marriages duly
solemnized outside India. This is consistent with a well-established legal principle that if a marriage is good by the law
of the country where it is solemnised and it does not violate the conditions of capacity and essential validity, then it is
good all over the world. In Eugene Berthiaume V. Dame Anne-Marie Yvonne Dastous [(1930) TLW XXXI 106], the Privy
Council held:
"If there is one question better settled than any other in international law, it is that as regards marriage-putting
aside the question of capacity-locus regit actum; if a marriage is good by the laws of the country where it is
effected, it is good all the world over, no matter whether the proceeding or ceremony which constituted marriage
according to the law of the place would not constitute marriage in country of the domicile of one or other of the
spouses. If the SO called marriage is no marriage in the place where it is celebrated, there is no marriage anywhere,
although the ceremony or proceeding if conducted in the place of parties' domicile would be considered a good
marriage." (page 108)
[emphasis supplied]
1452. It is humbly submitted that the aforesaid principle is applicable to the marriage of the Petitioners. The
conditions of capacity and essential validity under Section 4 of the FMA are that the parties must be unmarried, of
sound mind, beyond the degrees of prohibited relationship and of the minimum age required to marry. Sexual
orientation is not an essential condition of validity under Section 4. As the Petitioners' marriage satisfies the said
conditions, they are entitled to have their marriage registered under Section 17 FMA and cannot be refused
registration solely on account of their sexual orientation.
1453. The Petitioners are validly married under Danish law, and their marital status is an integral part of their
relationship that cannot be shed or altered based on their location in the world. It is an expression of their sexual
orientation, which is integral to their personality and is one of the most basic aspects of self-determination dignity
and freedom. They should not suffer the indignity of having their marital status invalidated and being treated as
unmarried, devoid of the concomitant rights and privileges in law, thereby being rendered second class citizens in
their own country. Without registration under the FMA, their marriage will not be valid and will inevitably inhabit a
proverbial no-man's land, not being void by reason of Sections 18(1), Explanation (ii) (a) and 27, yet being a dead
letter for any purpose in India, including in accessing matrimonial reliefs under a secular law.
1454. Thus, Section 4(c) read with Section 17(2) of FMA to the extent they exclude LGBTQIA+ persons from
marriage, are inconsistent with the objects of FMA.
VII. Exclusion of the Petitioners' Marriage from The FMA is Unconstitutional Right to equality and non-
discrimination under Articles 14 and 15
1455. The Petitioners are excluded from FMA solely owing to their sexual orientation, which is discrimination
simplicitor, and is impermissible. The Petitioners are entitled to legal protection of laws in all spheres of State activity,
including employment, healthcare, education as well as equal civil and citizenship rights, as enjoyed by any
heterosexual couple in India.
1456. This Hon'ble Court in NALSA held that:
"62. Discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation or gender identity, therefore impacts equality before law
and equal protection of law and violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
83. We, therefore, conclude that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity includes any
discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference, which has the effect of nullifying or transposing equality by the
law or the equal protection of laws guaranteed under our Constitution."
1457. This Hon'ble Court in Puttaswamy further held:
"144. Sexual orientation is an essential attribute of privacy. Discrimination against an individual on the basis of
sexual orientation is deeply offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual. Equality demands that the
sexual orientation of each individual in society must be protected on an even platform. The right to privacy and the
protection of sexual orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the
Constitution."
[emphasis supplied]
1458. It is well-settled that Article 14 envisages substantive equality, and not just formal equality. In Joseph Shine
"171. In consonance with constitutional morality, substantive equality is directed at eliminating individual,
institutional and systemic discrimination against disadvantaged groups which effectively undermines their full and
equal social, economic, political and cultural participation in society.
172. The primary enquiry to be undertaken by the Court towards the realization of substantive equality is to
determine whether the provision contributes to the subordination of a disadvantaged group of individuals. The
focus of such an approach is not simply on equal treatment under the law, but rather on the real impact of the
legislation."
[emphasis supplied]
1459. The exclusion of the Petitioners' duly solemnised marriage in Denmark from registration under Section 17(2),
FMA on the ground of sexual orientation is manifestly arbitrary, irrational and disproportionate, and thus violates
Article 14. This Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johar had held:
"417. Section 377 is based on a moral notion that intercourse which is lustful is to be frowned upon. It finds
the sole purpose of intercourse in procreation. In doing so, it imposes criminal sanctions upon basic human urges,
by targeting some of them as against the order of nature. It does so, on the basis of a social hypocrisy which the
law embraces as its own. It would ask of a section of our citizens that while love, they may, the physical
manifestation of their love is criminal. This is manifest arbitrariness writ large."
[emphasis supplied]
1460. Thus, the denial of registration of the Petitioners' marriage under Section 17(2) read with Section 4(c), FMA
is violative of the constitutional guarantee of equality and equal protection of laws under Article 14.
1461. It is well-settled that the term 'sex' in Articles 15(1) and 15(2) of the Constitution has been interpreted to
include 'sexual orientation' and 'gender identity'. In NALSA, this Hon'ble Court noted that:
" Articles 15 and 16 prohibit discrimination against any citizen on certain enumerated grounds, including the
ground of 'sex'. In fact, both the Articles prohibit all forms of gender bias and gender-based discrimination.
1462. This Hon'ble Court in multiple cases has struck down sex and gender stereotypes that animate many of the
laws existing in the country today, In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court held that:
"438. A discriminatory act will be tested against constitutional values. A discrimination will not survive
constitutional scrutiny when it is grounded in and perpetuates stereotypes about a class constituted by the grounds
prohibited in Article 15(1). If any ground of discrimination, whether direct or indirect is founded on a stereotypical
understanding of the role of the sex, it would not be distinguishable from the discrimination which is prohibited by
Article 15 on the grounds only of sex. This infuses Article 15 with true rigour to give it a complete constitutional
dimension in prohibiting discrimination. "[emphasis supplied]
14 The exclusion of the Petitioners from FMA turns solely on their sexual orientation, as the Petitioners' marriage
meets all other conditions for registration of their marriage. Underlying this exclusion is a sex stereotype that marriage
is essentially a union between a cis man and a cis woman. It is thus submitted that Section 4(c), FMA read with
Section 17(2) discriminates against LGBTQIA+ persons, including the Petitioners, by limiting the institution of civil
marriage only to heterosexual couples.
Freedom of Sexual Expression protected under Article 19(1)(a)
1464. It is well-settled that the freedom of expression under Article 19(1)(a) includes the right to express one's
sexual identity and to choose a sexual partner. In Navtej Johar, while striking down Section 377, IPC, this Hon'ble
Court held:
"268.16. An examination of Section 377 IPC on the anvil of Article 19(1)(a) reveals that it amounts to an
unreasonable restriction, for public decency and morality cannot be amplified beyond a rational or logical limit and
cannot be accepted as reasonable grounds for curbing the fundamental rights of freedom of expression and choice
of the LGBT community. Consensual carnal intercourse among adults, be it homosexual or heterosexual, in private
space, does not in any way harm the public decency or morality. Therefore, Section 377 IPC in its present form
violates Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution."
1465. The exclusion of the Petitioners from FMA constitutes a grave violation of their fundamental right to speech
and expression, which includes the right to express one's self-identified sexuality and to choose a partner. Despite the
Petitioners being duly married abroad, the denial of recognition to their marriage in India solely on account of their
sexual orientation goes against the teeth of the constitutional rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a).
Right to privacy, intimacy and dignity under Article 21
1466. It is well-settled that the fundamental right to privacy under Article 21 creates a protected space against
State interference. In Puttaswamy, this Hon'ble Court held:
"323. Privacy includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of family life, marriage,
procreation, the home and sexual orientation. Privacy also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards
individual autonomy and recognises the ability of the individual to control vital aspects of his or her life. Personal
choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to privacy."
1467. In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court formulated the idea of 'sexual privacy' as part of the right to privacy
under Article 21, wherein it held:
"468. it is imperative to widen the scope of the right to privacy to incorporate a right to "sexual privacy" to
protect the rights of sexual minorities. Emanating from the inalienable right to privacy, the right to sexual privacy
must be granted the sanctity of a natural right."
1468. In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court further emphasized the notion of the "right to intimacy", which is an
integral part of the individual's sexual agency, as follows:
1469. "479. By criminalising consensual acts between individuals who wish to exercise their constitutionally-
protected right to sexual orientation, the State denying its citizens the right to intimacy. The right to intimacy
emanates from an individual's prerogative to engage in sexual relations on their own terms. It is an exercise of the
individual's sexual agency, and includes the individual's right to the choice of partner as well as the freedom to decide
on the nature of the relationship that the individual wishes to pursue."
[emphasis supplied]
1470. The Petitioners cannot be denied the legal recognition of their duly solemnised marriage, and cannot be
forced back into the 'closet', by making their relationship invisible in law, and being condemned to a life of perennial
instability. This blanket exclusion sends a clear message that queer couples and their relationships do not have the
inherent dignity and are not worthy of the respect and recognition accorded to heterosexual relationships.
1471. The lack of legal recognition of their relationship subjects the Petitioners to deep indignity and humiliation
every day of their lives, when they have to disguise their relationships as 'friends' or 'cousins' It impairs the intrinsic
dignity and personhood of the Petitioners who have to hide the true nature of their relationship from the world at
large, and still invite constant scrutiny from the State and the people.
1472. Marriage is one of the central institutions around which the social order is organized. The symbolic value of
marriage, especially for individuals from marginalized backgrounds, which have hitherto been criminalized for
centuries, cannot be underestimated. In Halpern V. Canada (AG) [65 O.R. (3d) 161 (2003), Court of Appeal for
Ontario], the Court of Appeal rightly noted:
"5. Marriage is, without dispute, one of the most significant forms of personal relationships. For centuries,
marriage has been a basic element of social organization in societies around the world. Through the institution of
marriage, individuals can publicly express their love and commitment to each other. This public recognition
and
sanction of marital relationships reflect society's approbation of the personal hopes, desires and aspirations that
underlie loving, committed conjugal relationships. [emphasis supplied]
1473. Though the Petitioners are no longer 'outlaws', following the decision of this Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johar,
the Petitioners are still considered as 'outcasts' in State and public sphere, with no aspect of their relationship having
legal recognition or acceptance. They are 'strangers' to each other in law, and are living in a legal void, which is a clear
anathema to their fundamental rights.
1474. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie [(2006) 1 SA 524 (CC)
('Fourie')] observed:
"[72] the intangible damage to same-sex couples is as severe as the material deprivation. To begin with, they
are
not entitled to celebrate their commitment to each other in a joyous public event recognised by the law. They
are
obliged to live in a state of legal blankness in which their unions remain unmarked by the showering of presents
and the commemoration of anniversaries SO celebrated in our culture. It follows that, given the
centrality
attributed to marriage and its consequences in our culture, to deny same-sex couples a choice in this respect is to
negate their right to self-definition in a most profound way."
[emphasis supplied]
1475. Similarly, in Obergefell V. Hodges [576 US 644 (2015) ('Obergefell')], the United States Supreme Court
noted:
"As the State itself makes marriage all the more precious by the significance it attaches to it. exclusion from the
status has the effect of teaching that gays and lesbians are unequal in important respects. Same-sex couples, too,
may aspire to the transcendent purposes of marriage and seek fulfillment in its highest meaning."
[emphasis supplied]
1476. The Petitioners are thus being denied this crucial opportunity to celebrate and publicly declare their love and
commitment to each other in India by the Respondents, solely on the ground of sexual identity, which is
impermissible.
Right to found a family under Article 21
1477. It is submitted that the fact that same-sex marriages and parenthood do not fit the prevalent notion of the
traditional family unit is not a ground to exclude same-sex couples from marriage or adoption. The Constitution
protects diverse forms of families, based on the inherent claims of dignity and autonomy of individuals. This Hon'ble
emphatically noted:
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the form of
domestic, unmarried partnerships or queen relationships Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally
deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The
black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional ones".
[emphasis supplied]
1478. Reiterating Deepika Singh, this Hon'ble Court in X V. Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare
"45. Societal reality, as observed by this Court in Deepika Singh (supra), indicates the need to legally recognise
non-traditional relationships. Such legal recognition is necessary to enable individuals in non-traditional family
structures to avail of the benefits under beneficial legislation, including the MTP Act."
[emphasis supplied]
1479. Thus, the right to found a family goes hand in hand with the right to a meaningful family life. This includes
those aspects that make an individual's life meaningful, complete and worth living.
1480. While considering the infringement of the right to life by the denial of inter-cadre transfer in Lakshmi Bhavya
"48.. We have no doubt that the right to meaningful family, which allows a person to live a fulfilling life and
helps in retaining her/his physical, psychological and emotion integrity would find a place in the four corners of
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.'
1481. Principle 24 of the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity ('Yogyakarta Principles') explicitly refers to the right to found a family,
irrespective of sexual orientation or gender identity, and calls upon the States to:
a. "take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure the right to found a family, including
through access to adoption or assisted procreation (including donor insemination). without discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation or gender identity",
b. "ensure that laws and policies recognize the diversity of family forms, including those not defined by descent or
marriage, and take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that no family may be
subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or gender identity of any of its members,
including with regard to family-related social welfare and other public benefits, employment, and immigration";
e. "take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that in States that recognise same-
sex marriages or registered partnerships, any entitlement, privilege, obligation or benefit available to different-
sex married or registered partners is equally available to same-sex married or registered partners";
f.
"take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that any obligation, entitlement,
privilege, obligation or benefit available to different-sex unmarried partners is equally available to same-sex
unmarried partners".
[emphasis supplied]
1482. The Yogyakarta Principles have been endorsed by this Hon'ble Court in many cases, including in NALSA and
in Navtej Johar.
1483. Despite being married, the Petitioners are prevented from constituting a family, establishing, enjoying and
benefiting from family life, and from maintaining a legally protected relationship, while having domicile and citizenship
of India, which is an affront to the right to life under Article 21.
Right to freedom of conscience under Article 25
1484. Article 25 of the Constitution guarantees the freedom of conscience to all persons, which extends to the
entire consciousness of a human, including beliefs of her sexual identity, which, in fact, go to the core of each
individual's sense of self, as well the intensely personal nature of her own sexual orientation. This Hon'ble Court in
Puttaswamy has referred to J.S. Mill's essay 'On Liberty' (1959), which stated:
"This, then is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises, first, the inward domain of consciousness;
demanding liberty of conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute
freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative, scientific, moral or theological" (paras
408 and 523)
[emphasis supplied]
1485. Accordingly, the exclusion of the Petitioners from the secular institution of civil marriage under FMA grossly
impairs their freedom of conscience that inheres in each individual, and the ability to take decisions on matters that
are central to the pursuit of happiness.
Material Benefits of Marriage
1486. It is well-settled that marriage is not just a piece of paper, but a status in rem vis--vis society at large as
well as a bundle of rights and entitlements that affect the individuals from "cradle to grave", and even after death. In
Fourie, it was held:
"[70] the rights and obligations associated with marriage are vast. Besides other important purposes served by
marriage, as an institution it was the only source of socio-economic benefits such as the right to inheritance,
medical insurance coverage, adoption, access to wrongful death claims, spousal benefits. bereavement leave. tax
advantages and post-divorce rights."
[emphasis supplied]
of loss of spousal consortium in motor accidents' cases, and held that:
"46 In legal parlance, "consortium" is the right of the spouse to the company, care, help, comfort, guidance,
society, solace, affection and sexual relations with his or her mate. That non-pecuniary head of damages has not
been properly understood by our courts. The loss of companionship, love, care and protection, etc., the spouse is
entitled to get, has to be compensated appropriately.. By loss of consortium, the courts have made an attempt to
compensate the loss of spouse's affection, comfort, solace, companionship. society, assistance, protection, care and
sexual relations during the future years."
[emphasis supplied]
1488. In India too, the entire legal framework for partner benefits revolves around the institution of marriage,
which privileges only heterosexual marital relations, to the exclusion of all others. The exclusion of the Petitioners from
FMA thus not just interferes with their fundamental right to marry, but also denies them the plethora of rights and
entitlements that the State provides to heterosexual married couples. For most LGBTQIA+ persons, including the
Petitioners, who have no access to state, social or family support, marriage is the only avenue to access rights and
gain societal acceptance, otherwise they would spend their whole lives at the margins, bereft of any right or
entitlements, and battling for bare survival.
No Compelling State Interest
1489. There exists no legitimate State interest, much less a compelling one, in limiting the right to marry only to
heterosexual couples, to the exclusion of LGBTQIA+ couples like the Petitioners. The Petitioners cannot be kept out of
an important societal and legal institution, owing to archaic ideas of procreation and sex-stereotypes as an entitlement
to marriage. This Hon'ble Court in Navtej Johar had emphatically noted:
"478. Sexuality cannot be construed as something that the State has the prerogative to legitimize only in the
form of rigid, marital procreational sex. Sexuality must be construed as a fundamental experience through which
individuals define the meaning of their lives. Human sexuality cannot be reduced to a binary formulation. Nor can it
be defined narrowly in terms of its function as a means to procreation." [emphasis supplied]
1490. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Fourie, while rejecting the State's contention of lack of
procreative potential in same-sex couples, held that:
"[86] however persuasive procreative potential might be in the context of a particular religious world-view, from
a legal and constitutional point of view, it is not a defining characteristic of conjugal relationships.
[87] It is clear, then, that the procreation argument cannot defeat the claim of same-sex couples to be accorded
the same degree of dignity, concern and respect that is shown to heterosexual couples." [emphasis supplied]
1491. Thus, from a constitutional standpoint, procreation is not a valid basis for differential treatment, as is evident
from the recognition, and the concomitant entitlements, accorded to heterosexual married couples who cannot or do
not want to procreate or want to adopt. In any case, LGBTQIA+ couples like the Petitioners can choose to have
children through other means, including adoption, surrogacy and donor insemination.
1492. Similarly, the Petitioners' right to marry and to enjoy the same status, entitlements and responsibilities as
heterosexual married couples under FMA cannot be defeated on the ostensible basis of religious freedom. The fact that
the FMA was enacted by the Parliament to validate marriages duly solemnised abroad makes it foremost a secular law
on marriage and divorce, which cannot discriminate against individuals based on their sexual orientation. A secular
State cannot treat its citizens unfairly and unequally in the garb of protection of religious personal laws.
VIII. Notice-Publication-Objection Regime under FMA is Violative of Fundamental Rights
1493. The procedural requirements of notice of intended marriage, publication of notice and invitation of objections
under Sections 5, 7, 8 and 10, FMA place an unreasonable restriction on individuals, particularly those that do not
conform to social mores, to access the institution of civil marriage. The imposition of a notice period of 30 days prior to
the marriage under Section 5, FMA is entirely discriminatory and, having been derived from a specific religious
personal law, i.e., from the Christian law, is entirely inappropriate in a law that is modeled on the secular SMA, 1954.
1494. The 1892 Act from England too contained a notice period of 7 days in the district of residence, and another
period of 14 days for publication of notice before the marriage could be solemnised, which was intended to prevent
'undesirable' marriages. The notice period under the FMA is analogous to Section 5 of the SMA, 1954, which the Law
Commission in its 242nd Report and its Consultation Paper published in 2018, deemed as a major impediment to the
freedom of autonomy exercised by couples and an enabler of violence.
1495. In the context of SMA, 1954, both the High Courts and the Law Commission of India have noted the
deleterious effects of the notice-publication-objection regime under SMA, 1954 on the right of inter-faith couples to
marry as per their choice, as it exposes them to the wrath of the community, thereby facing grave threats to their
Sultana V. State of Uttar Pradesh AIR 2021 All 56, para 45-46].
1496. Similarly, the Law Commission of India in 2012, while noting the tremendous difficulties faced by inter-faith
couples, stated that:
"9.1. it is desirable that the procedure under the Special Marriage Act is simplified. The time gap between the
date of giving notice of marriage and the registration should be removed and the entire process of registration of
marriage should be expedited. The domicile restriction should also be removed. [See : LCI's 242nd Report titled
Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances (in the name of Honour and
Tradition) : A suggested Legal Framework (August, 2012)].
1497. The requirement of the notice prior to the marriage is particularly perilous to LGBTQIA+ individuals who very
often face violence and disapproval from their family members. It is the common experience for LGBTQIA+ individuals,
especially lesbian, bisexual and transgender persons that they have to leave their homes suddenly to avoid being
coerced into a marriage by their families. Where a couple runs away together to a foreign country and wishes to get
married, under the FMA, they would have to reside in the new city for 30 days and then provide notice of intended
marriage for another 30 days in India, leaving them vulnerable to being separated and harassed in the meantime. If
the Petitioners had not married under the Danish law, but sought to solemnise their marriage under the FMA, then
besides Section 4(c), the Petitioners could not have followed the procedure laid down in Sections 5-10, FMA, owing to
fear of family interference.
IX. I Impugned Regulations are Beyond the Remit of the JJ Act
1498. It is well-settled that a subordinate legislation should be consistent with the enabling Act, and should not
travel beyond the remit of the parent Act, or be inconsistent with the parent statute. This Hon'ble Court in X V.
Principal Secretary (supra) has noted that:
"33. The interpretation of a subordinate legislation should be consistent with the enabling Act. A subordinate
legislation must be reasonable and in consonance with the legislative policy."
1499. Section 57 of the JJ Act sets out the eligibility of prospective adoptive parents. There is no specific bar on
LGBTQIA+ persons to adopt, as single persons too are eligible to apply for adoption. Section 57(2) deals with the
specific circumstance of adoption by a 'couple' stipulating that 'in case of a couple, the consent of both spouses for the
adoption shall be required. Section 57(2), JJ Act thus uses the word 'spouse' in the context of 'couple' as opposed to
'husband' and 'wife'. In view of the secular character and object of the JJ Act, the use of a broad term like 'spouse' and
'couple' without referring to marriage is deliberate and broad enough to include relationships that are 'marriage like'
including marriages between same-sex couples solemnized overseas. There is no specific requirement of the adoptive
couple to be married.
1500. The JJ Act replaced the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, ('JJ Act, 2000'), which
was enacted to fulfill the Directive Principles of State Policy under Articles 39(e) and (f), 45, and 47 of the Constitution
to ensure that all needs of children are met and their basic human rights are protected and in discharge of India's
obligations under international instruments, specifically the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children, 1989
('CRC'). It ushered in landmark changes to the law relating to adoption, as before 2000, Hindus could only adopt
under the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 ('HAMA'), whereas Christians and Muslims could only be
appointed as 'guardians' by courts under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890. It set in place a secular system of
adoption that is distinct from customary adoption regulated by HAMA.
1501. The JJ Act is a secular law that primarily aims to ensure the best interest and welfare of children who are in
institutional care (Section 3) by placing them with thoroughly vetted and highly motivated parents who are able to
provide a culturally familiar environment, amongst other things (Sections 58 and 59).
1502. The JJ Act, itself, makes no reference to the sexual orientation of prospective adoptive parents. A bare
perusal of Chapter VIII of the JJ Act makes it clear that the Act recognises non-traditional families, including a single
lesbian parent, and grants them the same rights and protections as granted to the traditional families of husband, wife
and child. An unmarried individual is entitled to seek adoption without any impediment, except the best interest of the
child. This is in consonance with this Hon'ble Court's observations in Deepika Singh, with reference to 'atypical
families' including domestic unmarried partnerships or queen relationships.
1503. The marital status of the prospective adoptive parent is not a central concern of facilitating adoption under
the JJ Act. The Hon'ble Bombay High Court has noted in In the matter of adoption of Payal @Sharinee V. Indian
"21. While enacting the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 the legislature has taken care to ensure that its provisions are
secular in character and that the benefit of adoption is not restricted to any religious or social group. The focus of
the legislation is on the condition of the child taken in adoption. If the child is orphaned, abandoned or surrendered,
that condition is what triggers the beneficial provisions for adoption The object of rehabilitation and providing
for
social reintegration to orphaned, abandoned or surrendered children is a matter of high legislative policy. It is in
effectuation of that policy that the legislature has stipulated that adoption of such a child must proceed irrespective
of the marital status of a person taking in adoption and irrespective of the number of living biological children of the
parents seeking adoption. Consequently, where the child which is sought to be adopted falls within the description
of an orphaned, abandoned or surrendered child within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 41 or a child in
need of care and protection under Clause (d) of section 2, the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2000 must prevail.
[emphasis supplied]
1504. The broader terms 'couple' and 'spouse' thus serve the practical purpose of accommodating marriages
solemnized in other jurisdictions for inter-country adoption under the JJ Act (Section 59). In K. and B. (Re) [(1995)
CanLII 7396], the Ontario Supreme Court, while interpreting the definition of 'spouse' in the Child and Family Service
Act, held that:
"[86] What may be questioned at this point is the nature of the "family" contemplated by the provisions and
philosophy of the Act. Although there has been no clear judicial pronouncement on this topic, it is obvious that the
Act recognises the fact of non-traditional families and affords them the same rights and protections as the more
traditional form. By removing the requirement of marriage in the definition of "spouse", unmarried or "common law"
partners are given the right to apply for adoption, and by analogy, are given financial, custodial and property rights
in
other statutes. As well, the concept of "parent" is no longer restricted to the biological parent but includes any
person, married or unmarried, an obvious reflection in the Act of the fact that non-traditional families are a fact of
life in our society."
[emphasis supplied]
1505. On the other hand, the impugned Regulations restrict consideration for joint adoption only to heterosexual
married couples by requiring couples to prove a 'marital relationship' and qualifying the term 'couple' with the term
'married'. This is beyond the pale of the parent Act. When the JJ Act does not mention any disqualification based on
sexual orientation of prospective adoptive parents, whether as adoptive couples, or as a single parent, such a patently
discriminatory condition cannot be introduced in the impugned Regulations by the Respondent Nos. 3-4. The exclusion
also breaches the mandatory principle of the best interest of the child contained in the JJ Act and reiterated in
Regulation 3(a) inasmuch as it would deprive the adopted child of a same-sex couple of having a legal relationship
with the de facto parent under Section 63 of the JJ Act solely because the parents' same-sex marriage is not valid
under Indian law.
X. Impugned Regulations inasmuch as they Preclude The Petitioners from Jointly Adopting a Child are Void
1506. But for their sexual orientation, the Petitioners would be eligible for joint adoption under the impugned
Regulations, which is arbitrary and discriminatory simpliciter.
1507. Noting the consensus towards sexual orientation equality evident from comparative jurisprudence, this
Hon'ble Court has noted in Navtej Johar that:
"5 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to another and that we must
therefore look at comparative law-making allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight of international
opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental rights for same sex couples reflect a
growing consensus towards sexual orientation equality. We feel inclined to concur with the accumulated wisdom
reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees contained within the Indian
Constitution, but to provide a sound and appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about those guarantees."
[emphasis supplied]
1508. It is evident from the following foreign jurisprudence that the exclusion of same-sex couples from adoption is
discriminatory and violative of the right to equality:
i. In XV. Austria (Application No. 19010/2007, Judgment dated 19.02.2013 at paras 142-146), the European Court
of Human Rights ('ECtHR') held that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the right of second parent
adoption, i.e., adoption of one's partner's biological child by the other partner, under Article 182(2) of the Civil
Code of Austria, was not proportionate and violated the prohibition on discrimination under Article 14 in
conjunction with right to respect for private and family life under Article 8. The ECtHR noted:
"146. All the above considerations - the existence of de facto family life between the applicants, the
importance of having the possibility of obtaining legal recognition thereof, the lack of evidence adduced by the
Government in order to show that it would be detrimental to the child to be brought up by a same-sex couple or
to have two mothers and two fathers for legal purposes, and especially their admission that same-sex couples
may be as suited for second-parent adoption as different-sex couples - cast considerable doubt on the
proportionality of the absolute prohibition on second-parent adoption in same-sex couples arising out of Article
182  2 of the Civil Code. This would also appear to be more in keeping with the best interests of the child,
which is a key notion in the relevant international instruments.
ii. The Austrian Constitutional Court in G 119-120/2014-12 struck down provisions of the Civil Code and the
Federal Act on Registered Partnership that prevented registered same-sex partners from joint adoption and
successive adoption (second adoption of the adopted child of one spouse) as violating Articles 8 and 14 of the
European Convention on Human Rights and the principle of equality. The child's best interest did not justify the
unequal treatment of heterosexual couples and same-sex couples in matters of joint adoption given that step
child adoption was already available to same-sex parents [Official translation in excerpts of judgment dated 11th
December, 2014 at para 6].
iii. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Du Toit V. The Minister For Welfare & Population Development [(CCT
40/01), date of decision : 10.09.2002 ('Du Toit')], while considering the validity of provisions of the Child Care
Act, 1983 and the Guardianship Act, 1993 that provided for joint adoption and guardianship of children by
married persons only, held that:
"[26] The unfair effect of the discrimination is squarely founded on an intersection of the grounds upon which
the applicants' complaint is based : the applicants' status as unmarried persons which currently precludes them
from joint adoption of the siblings is inextricably linked to their sexual orientation. But for their sexual orientation
which precludes them from entering into a marriage, they fulfil the criteria that would otherwise make them
eligible jointly to adopt children in terms of the impugned legislation. In this respect, then, the provisions of
section 17(a) and (c) are in conflict with section 9(3) of the Constitution."
[emphasis supplied]
iv. Similarly, in J V. Director General, Department of Home Affairs [(2003) ZACC 3 at para 13 and 28], the
Constitutional Court recognized both partners in a permanent same-sex couple as parents to a child conceived by
one of the partners through artificial insemination. Confirming the High Court's order, the South African
Constitutional Court held that Section 5 of the Children's Status Act, 1987 unfairly discriminated between
married persons and permanent same-sex life partners in a manner that was inconsistent with the constitutional
prohibition on discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
V. In Accion De Inconstitucionalidad 8/2014, the Supreme Court of Mexico held that the prohibition on joint
adoption by domestic partners stipulated under Article 19 of the Regulatory Law on Civil Domestic Partnerships
of
the State of Campeche violated the principle of equality and non-discrimination by making an unconstitutional
distinction on the basis of sexual orientation between same sex couples and heterosexual couples in domestic
partnerships. It also discriminated against such same-sex couples by not protecting their family in the same
manner as heterosexual couples [Chapter 11, Constitutional Precedent in the Mexican Supreme Court, pp. 171-
182, summary of p. 32-33, p. 40-41, 45 of the judgment at pp. 178-181].
1509. Therefore, the exclusion of LGBTQIA+ couples from joint adoption and not of heterosexual couples under the
impugned Regulations is discriminatory and violates the principle of equality under Article 14.
1510. It is well settled that the test of manifest arbitrariness applies to invalidate subordinate legislation under
"101 The test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, as laid down in the aforesaid judgments would apply to
invalidate legislation as well as subordinate legislation under Article 16. Manifest arbitrariness, therefore, must be
something done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally and/or without adequate determining principle. Also
when something is done which is excessive and disproportionate, such legislation would be manifestly arbitrary."
[emphasis supplied]
1511. As the impugned Regulations only recognise heterosexual marital relations for joint adoption, they effectively
alter the Petitioners' marital status by not recognizing it. Married heterosexual couples and single LGBTQIA+ persons
are not subject to a similar process. The non-recognition of the marital status of same-sex couples flows solely from
sexual orientation, which cannot be allowed. Pertinently, the impugned Regulations do not discriminate between
unmarried lesbian or gay applicants and unmarried straight applicants. However, sexual orientation is selectively
invoked only in the case of married same-sex couples.
1512. It is trite that the JJ Act, being a secular law, endeavours to permit adoption of surrendered, orphaned or
abandoned children and not to uphold particular notions of marriage. By making adoption accessible to both single
persons as well as couples, the JJ Act contemplates more than one notion of family life. To exclude an entire class of
parents from the pool of adoptive parents, solely on the basis of their sexual orientation, without any regard to the
best interest of the child, which should be the guiding principle behind the impugned Regulations, is irrational,
unreasonable and manifestly arbitrary, and thus violative of Article 14.
1513. Additionally, the impugned Regulations treat unequals equally by placing single LGBTQIA+ persons and
married same-sex couples on equal footing, even though adoption by a single person does not have an identical legal
consequence as adoption by a married heterosexual couple, thereby violating Article 14. Whereas adoption by a single
parent would create a legal relationship between the child and that parent, an adopted child of a married heterosexual
couple would have a legal relationship with both parents. In the case of LGBTQIA+ parents, however, the impugned
Regulations obviate joint adoption by married same-sex couples by requiring proof of a 'marital relationship'
Consequently, same-sex couples must resign themselves to single parent adoption even as the de facto family unit
consists of two parents.
1514. It is well-settled that the term 'sex' in Articles 15(1) and 15(2) has been interpreted to include 'sexual
orientation' and 'gender identity'. Accordingly, the State cannot discriminate against the Petitioners or any other
LGBTQIA+ person on the ground of sexual orientation in relation to rights available to heterosexual married couples,
including the right to apply for adoption under the JJ Act.
1515. It is submitted that even if the Petitioners' prayers for legal recognition of their marriage under FMA is
granted by this Hon'ble Court, the impugned Regulations, along with the impugned Schedules, would still come in the
way of the Petitioners in their endevour for joint adoption. It is thus imperative that the impugned Regulations are
struck down independently by this Hon'ble Court as being discriminatory and violative of equality.
Right to Adoption and Motherhood is a facet of Article 21
1516. Adoption is a means to a meaningful life from the perspective of aspiring adoptive parents who cannot or do
not want to procreate. While harmonizing the right to adopt under the JJ Act, 2000 and personal law in In the matter
of adoption of Payal @ Sharinee V. Indian Adoption, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held that:
"20. Adoption is a facet of the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution. The right to live that is asserted
is. on the one hand, the right of parents and of individuals women and men who seek to adopt a child to give
meaning and content to their lives. Equally significant, in the context of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000, the right to
life that is specially protected is the right of children who are in need of special care and protection. The legislature
has recognized their need for rehabilitation and social integration to obviate the disruptive social consequences of
destitution, abandonment and surrender. There is legislative recognition of adoption as a means to subserve the
welfare of orphaned, abandoned and surrendered children."
[emphasis supplied]
1517. The right to life includes the right to parenthood, without parenthood taking one specific form. While
discussing parity in maternity leave in situations of surrogacy and adoption in Hema Vijay Menon V. State of
"8.. In our view, there cannot be any distinction whatsoever between an adoptive mother that adopts a child and
a
mother that begets a child through a surrogate mother, after implanting an embryo in the womb of the surrogate
mother Right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India includes the right to motherhood and also the
right of every child to full development. "[emphasis supplied]
1518. Similarly, as noted before, Principle 24 of the Yogyakarta Principles mandates the States to take measures to
ensure the right to found a family on a non-discriminatory basis through access to adoption and assisted procreation.
In its landmark advisory opinion (OC-24/17) the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ('IACtHR') held the concept
of
family in American Convention of Human Rights ('ACHR') to encompass the familial bonds formed by same-sex
couple. The State was obligated to recognize these bonds and rights derived therefrom, and to ensure full access to all
mechanisms under domestic law that are available to families formed from heterosexual couples [Advisory Opinion OC
-24/17, at p. 83].
1519. The US Supreme Court's decision in Obergefell has drastically reduced the scope for State interference in the
marital and familial rights and responsibilities that would accrue to a married same-sex couple. In Campaign for
Southern Equality V. Mississippi Department of Human Services [175 F. Supp, 3d 691 (2016) at p. 710] a US District
Court judge granted a preliminary injunction against Mississippi's ban on adoption by married same-sex couples by
holding that the majority opinion in Obergefell, foreclosed litigation over laws interfering with the right to marry and
rights and responsibilities intertwined with marriage, including the right to adopt.
1520. In addition to judicial interventions, laws have been passed in several jurisdictions to facilitate adoption by
same-sex couples in aid of their right to found a family. Full joint adoption by same-sex couples is legal in 13
European Union countries : the Netherlands (since 2001), Sweden (2003), Spain (2005), Belgium (2006), Denmark
(2010), France (2013), Malta (2014), Luxembourg (2015), Austria (2016), Ireland (2016), Portugal (2016), Finland
(2017) and Germany (2017). Estonia (2016) permits step-child adoption, where the partner in a registered same-sex
partnership can adopt his or her partner's biological, and in some cases, adopted child. In Italy, decisions are made on
a case-by-case basis by the courts. Croatia allows registered and unregistered life partners to become partner-
guardians of their partner's child (2014) [See : European Parliament, The rights of LGBTI people in the
European Union, 2022 at p. 7].
1521. The impugned Regulations thus are a gross infringement on the right of married same-sex couples to have
access to joint adoption, in order to found a family. In fact, in order to have any chance of adoption, the Petitioners
must pick one amongst themselves to be the legal parent of the adopted child, which is an affront to the right to life
under Article 21.
XI. Impugned Regulations Violate the Principle of Best Interest of the Child Right of a child to be adopted
recognised the right of a child to be adopted, derived from the broader right of a child to grow up in the loving
environment of a family:
Every child has a right to love and be loved and to grow up in an atmosphere of love and affection and of
moral and material security and this is possible only if the child is brought up in a family. The most congenial
environment would, of course, be that of the family of his biological parents. But if for any reason it is not possible
for the biological parents or other near relative to look after the child or the child is abandoned and it is either not
possible to trace the parents or the parents are not willing to take care of the child, the next best alternative would
be to find adoptive parents for the child SO that the child can grow up under the loving care and attention of the
adoptive parents. The adoptive parents would be the next best substitute for the biological parents."
1523. Access to alternative care in a family-like environment through the adoption is recognised as a right of the
child under the CRC and the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of Inter-country
Adoption, 1980 ('Hague Convention') that have been ratified by India.
1524. Article 20 of the CRC provides the right of the child who is deprived of a family environment to special
protection and assistance by the State including provision of adoption as a form of alternative care.
1525. As per its preamble, the Hague Convention is premised on the understanding that:
"the child, for the full and harmonious development of his or her personality, should grow up in a family
environment, in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding [and] intercountry adoption may offer the
advantage of a permanent family to a child for whom a suitable family cannot be found in his or her State of origin".
1526. Thus, there is an implied recognition of the right of the child to be adopted derived from the express
recognition of the right of the child to family life. Yet, a large number of children who are fit for adoption remain in
institutional care for extended periods of time. As per government data, there were a total of 52, 793 adoptable male,
female, and transgender children in Childcare Institutions/Homes of whom only a small fraction is placed in adoption
[See : Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government India, The Report of the Committee for
Analysis Date of Mapping and Review Exercise of Child Care Institutions under the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and other Homes, Vol I, September 2018 at pp. 220-221]. The data
betrays a clear preference for children under 6 years who accounted for 10.6% of the total adoptable children. In other
words, a majority of the children in institutional care face the possibility of spending their entire youth in institutional
care than with an adoptive family as intended by the JJ Act.
Protection of the best interest of the child
1527. The best interest of the child is an essential guiding principle of adoption under the JJ Act. Section 2(9) of
the JJ Act defines the "best interest of child" as
"the basis of any decision taken regarding the child, to ensure fulfilment of his basic rights and needs, identity,
social well-being and physical, emotional and intellectual development".
1528. All decisions about the child ought to be based on the principle of:
i.
the best interest of the child that they are in the best interest of the child and to help the child to develop full
potential [Section 3(iv)];
ii. family responsibility that the primary responsibility of care, nurture and protection of the child shall be with the
adoptive parents [Section 3(v)]
iii. of positive measures to mobilize all resources including those of family and community, for promoting the well-
being, facilitating the development of identity and providing an inclusive and enabling environment, to reduce
vulnerabilities of children and the need for intervention under the Act [Section 3(vii)]; and
iv. of institutionalization as a measure of last resort [Section 3(xii)].
1529. The mandatory principle of the best interest of the child is further reiterated in Regulation 3(a). The
Petitioners' exclusion from joint adoption breaches the mandatory principle of the best interest of the child contained
in the JJ Act by depriving the adopted child of a same-sex couple of a legal relationship with the de facto parent under
Section 63 of the JJ Act solely because the parents' same-sex marriage is not valid under Indian law.
1530. The right of adoption by same-sex couples has been held to serve the best interest of the child under
international human rights law and foreign jurisprudence. Way back in 1993, the Vermont Supreme Court observed
that to deny the children of same-sex partners, as a class, the security of a legally recognized relationship with their
second parent served no legitimate state interest and was inconsistent with the child's best interests and therefore the
public policy of the state [See In re Adoptions of B.L.V.B. & E.L.V.B., 628 A. 2d 1271 (1993 Vt) at p. 372 and 376)].
1531. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Du Toit, while considering the issue of best interest of the child
with regard to adoption by same-sex couples, held that:
[21] In their current form the impugned provisions exclude from their ambit potential joint adoptive parents who
are unmarried, but who are partners in permanent same-sex life partnerships and who would otherwise meet the
criteria set out in section 18 of the Child Care Act. Their exclusion surely defeats the very essence and social
purpose of adoption which is to provide the stability, commitment, affection and support important to a child's
development. which can be offered by suitably qualified persons.
[22] Excluding partners in same sex life partnerships from adopting children jointly where they would otherwise
be
suitable to do SO is in conflict with the principle enshrined in section 28(2) of the Constitution. It is clear from
the evidence in this case that even though persons such as the applicants are suitable to adopt children jointly and
provide them with family care, they cannot do SO. The impugned provisions of the Child Care Act thus deprive
children of the possibility of a loving and stable family life as required by section 28(1)(b) of the Constitution. This
is
a matter of particular concern given the social reality of the vast number of parentless children in our country.
The provisions of the Child Care Act thus fail to accord paramountcy to the best interests of the children and /
conclude that, in this regard, sections 17(a) and (c) of the Act are in conflict with section 28(2) of the Constitution.
[emphasis supplied]
1532. In its Concluding Observations on the combined Fifth and Sixth Periodic Reports of Poland
(CCPR/C/POL/CO/5-6, date : 06.12.2021), the Committee on the Rights of the Child has recently recommended the
State Parties to:
"20(a) integrate and consistently interpret and apply the right of children, including children born to same sex
partners, to have their best interests taken as a primary consideration in all legislative, administrative and judicial
proceedings."
1533. Thus, the blanket exclusion of the Petitioners from joint adoption, owing to the impugned Regulations
squarely goes against the best interest of the adopted children.
1534. There is no legitimate State interest, much less a compelling one, in limiting the right to found a family only
to heterosexual couples, to the exclusion of LGBTQIA+ couples like the Petitioners. A parent's sexual orientation has no
bearing on the development of the child and same-sex couples make as competent parents as any heterosexual
couple. The only criterion is whether the adoptive parent is providing an adequate level of care for the child or not. As
long as the parents are providing such care, the State should not intervene in the parent-child relationship that should
remain inviolable.
1535. The impugned Regulations are further inconsistent with the Directive Principles of State Policy in respect of
children bound to be followed under Article 39(f) of the Constitution, and ought to be read in conjunction with Article
21. Article 39(f) requires the State to take measures to ensure that children are given opportunities and facilities to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected
against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment. The impugned Regulations betray a complete
disregard of the constitutional duty under Article 39(f) cast upon the Respondents, as they deprive the adopted child
of a same-sex couple of a legal relationship with both parents.
1536. Once the Petitioners are validly married under foreign law, they cannot be stripped of their marital status in
India, owing to non-recognition of their marriage under the FMA. The Petitioners cannot be treated as strangers to
each other in law, with no aspect of their relationship having legal recognition or acceptance. The Courts lean towards
validity of marriages, rather than invalidity. It is not enough to be able to live together or love each other without the
fear of law or the knock of the police on their door. The Petitioners should have the right to celebrate their relationship,
and their commitment to each other in public as recognised by Indian law. They should not have to choose between
their home country and their fundamental rights to marriage, family and motherhood.
01.03.2023
New Delhi
Drawn By:
Asawari Sodhi, Advocate
Amritananda Chakravorty, Advocate
Mihir Samson, Advocate
Shreya Munoth, Advocate
Settled By:
Ms. Anitha Shenoy, Senior Advocate
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 159 of 2023
In the Matter of:
Dr. Akkai Padmashali and Ors Petitioners
V.
Union of India
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.
The impugned sections 4, 22, 23, 27, and 44 of the Special Marriage Act 1954 ("SMA") require to be
read to include the word 'spouse' and 'person' to include transgender persons within its ambit
2.
Not giving a broader reading to the SMA to include 'persons' or 'spouse' in the impugned sections,
amounts to a violation of the Right to Equality and the right to equal protection of the laws to
transgender persons under Article 14 of the constitution.
3.
The restrictions under the SMA to marriage only between a 'man' and a 'woman', amounts to
discrimination on the basis of 'sex' under Article 15 (1) which includes discrimination on the basis of
gender identity and sexual orientation
4.
The right to personal autonomy and liberty under Article 21 guarantees the right to marry to all persons
and cannot be denied on the basis of gender identity and sexual orientation
5.
The Denial of the Right to Marry to persons based on their gender identity, amounts to a violation of their
Right to Dignity
6.
Article 21 of the constitution includes the Right to Family Life and the SMA amounts to a violation of the
rights of transgender persons to have a family
DATED : 10.04.2023
FILED BY:
1. Jayna Kothari, Sr. Adv.
2. Rohit Sharma, Adv.
3. Aparna Mehrotra, Adv.
4. Raghav Gupta, Adv.
5. Nikhil Purohit, Adv.
6. Ashok Kumar, Adv.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 159 of 2023
In the Matter of:
Dr. Akkai Padmashali and Ors
Petitioners
V.
Union
of
India
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS - BY JAYNA KOTHARI
SENIOR ADVOCATE
I. The impugned sections 4. 22, 23, 27. and 44 of the Special Marriage Act 1954 ("SMA") require to be read to include
the word 'spouse' and 'person' to include transgender persons within its ambit:
(i) It is a well-recognized principle that has been upheld by this Hon'ble Court that the concept of constitutional
morality is the embracing of constitutional values is imperative for the ushering of a pluralistic and inclusive
morality means that the values of constitutionalism must trickle down and percolate through the apparatus of
the State for the betterment of each and every individual citizen of the State. This would include the
embodiment of these principles in legislation and legislations must be guided by, and reflect, constitutional
morality.
(ii) The SMA, when enacted, reflected the constitutional morality of the time when it gave legal recognition to inter
faith and inter caste marriages. It is submitted that historically under the existing personal laws governing
marriage and family life in India, marriages outside of caste and religion were not permitted. Due to this, the
SMA, when it was enacted, reflected the evolving and changing conception of marriage as reflected legislatively
in India. The Parliamentary debates at the time of the introduction of the Special Marriage Bill in the Indian
Parliament noted that one of the main objects of this Act was to "make it more progressive and to encourage
marriages. It does not take religion into account and permits marriages between different castes and creeds." It
embodied a certain progressive idea of marriage and the SMA provided a route to realizing an expansive notion of
marriage.
(iii) Just as the SMA opened up the doors to inter-faith and inter-caste marriage in the nineteen-fifties, with time,
even other pre-conceived notions of marriage have changed and our courts have led such changes. In Joseph
the "sanctity of marriage" noting that adultery laws were typically rooted in historical inequality of the sexes and
held that:
...A woman's 'purity' and a man's marital 'entitlement' to her exclusive sexual possession may be reflective of
the antiquated social and sexual mores of the nineteenth century, but they cannot be recognized as being so
today. It is not the "common morality" of the State at any time in history, but rather constitutional morality,
which must guide the law. In any democracy, constitutional morality requires the assurance of certain rights that
are indispensable for the free, equal, and dignified existence of all members of society. A commitment to
constitutional morality requires us to enforce the constitutional guarantees of equality before law, non-
discrimination on account of sex, and dignity, all of which are affected by the operation of Section 497." [para
143]
within marriage, the tradition of child marriage and child marital rape was held to be against the constitutionally
recognized rights of women. This Hon'ble Court held:
It must be remembered that those days are long gone when a married woman or a married girl child could
be treated as subordinate to her husband or at his beck and call or as his property. Constitutionally a female has
equal rights as a male and no statute should be interpreted or understood to derogate from this position. If there
is some theory that propounds such an unconstitutional myth, then that theory deserves to be completely
demolished.
83. Merely because child marriages have been performed in different parts of the country as a part of a
tradition or custom does not necessarily mean that the tradition is an acceptable one non should it be sanctified
as
such. Times change and what was acceptable the few decades ago may not necessarily be acceptable today.
86. There is therefore no doubt that the impact and effect of Exception 2 to Section 375 of the IPC has to be
considered not with the blinkered vision of the days gone by but with the social realities of today. Traditions that
might have been acceptable at some historical point of time are not cast in stone. If times and situations change,
so must views, traditions and conventions."
(v) At present, the Constitution recognises equal rights and dignity for members of LGBTQ community. The Right to
Marry is an important facet of an individual's social existence, and their right to lead a dignified life with their
partner and the denial of this right to LGBTQ persons is violation of their right to equal treatment under the law.
The SMA must be interpreted in light of the prevailing constitutional morality, to realize the true purport and
meaning of fundamental rights under the constitution.
(vi) Constitutional challenges to marriage laws in other jurisdictions have been upheld to keep up with changing
times and recognition of rights. In the United States there were prohibitions on mixed race marriages by anti-
miscegenation laws. This was set aside by the US Supreme Court in Loving V. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 12, which
invalidated bans on interracial marriages.
(vii) In Kirchberg V. Feenstra, 450 U.S. 455, the US Supreme Court struck down legislation that required the
husband to be the head of the marital community and gave him sole authority to manage and dispose of
community property. The Court held that the law was unconstitutional as it violated the equal protection clause
of the fourteenth amendment which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex and held that it was based on
outdated gender stereotypes and perpetuated the notion that women were inferior and subservient to men in
marriage.
of a proposed legislation for civil marriage, that defined marriage as a "lawful union of two persons to the
exclusion of all others". The Canadian Supreme Court responding to the argument that there is a fixed concept of
marriage as being between a man and a woman, held that:
"Canada is a pluralistic society. Marriage, from the perspective of the state, is a civil institution. The "frozen
concepts" reasoning runs contrary to one of the most fundamental principles of Canadian constitutional
interpretation that our Constitution is a living tree which, by way of progressive interpretation, accommodates
and addresses the realities of modern life.
(ix) Marriage provisions, thus, under the SMA which is a civil law for marriage in India, should therefore be read to
recognize the inclusion of persons of all gender identities, and not just between a 'male' and 'female'. The
eligibility should be to "two persons", regardless of gender, who should be legally capable of being married and
should determine the capacity for marriage.
(x) In order to bring legislation within the framework of the constitution, courts have read down/read up laws so
that they do not violate the constitution. In Independent Thought, this Hon'ble Court held:
"59. Therefore, the principle is that normally the Courts should raise a presumption in favour of the impugned
law; however, if the law under challenge violates the fundamental rights of the citizens, the law is arbitrary, or is
discriminatory, the Courts can either hold the law to be totally unconstitutional and strike down the law or the
Court may read down the law in such a manner that the law when read down does not violate the Constitution.
While the Courts must show restraint while dealing with such issues, the Court cannot shut its eyes to the
violations of the fundamental rights of the citizens. Therefore, if the legislature enacts a law which is violative of
the fundamental rights of the citizens, is arbitrary and discriminatory, then the Court would be failing in its duty
if it does not either strike down the law or read down the law in such a manner that it falls within the four
corners of the Constitution."
(xi) In keeping with a similar approach, the South African Constitutional Court in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie,
CCT 60/04 directed that if Parliament failed to cure the defect within twelve months, the words "or spouse" will
automatically be read into section 30(1) of the Marriage Act to enable same-sex couples to achieve the status
and benefits coupled with responsibilities which it presently makes available to heterosexual couples.
(xii) Therefore, it is submitted that the SMA, should be read so as to declare that all references to "husband"
and "wife" and 'male' and 'female' in Sections 4, 22, 23, 27 and 44 of the Special Marriage Act 1954 be read so
as to include the word 'or spouse' after the said words in order to make them apply to all persons, irrespective of
their gender identity and sexual orientation.
11. Not giving a broader reading to the SMA to include 'persons' or 'spouse' in the impugned sections,
amounts to a violation of the Right to Equality and Equal Protection of the Laws to transgender persons
under Article 14 of the constitution:
(i) By not including the words 'spouse'' or 'person' in sections 4, 22, 23, 27, and 44 of the SMA, transgender
persons are excluded for the coverage and equal protection of all laws, being the SMA in the present case, solely
due to their gender identity.
(ii) Rights implicit in liberty and rights secured by equal protection may rest on different precepts and are not
always coextensive, yet each may be instructive as to the meaning and reach of the other.
"Gender identity is one of the most-fundamental aspects of life which refers to a person's intrinsic sense of
being male, female or transgender or transsexual person.
Gender identity refers to each person's deeply felt
internal and individual experience of gender, which may or may not correspond with the sex assigned at birth,
including the personal sense of the body which may involve a freely chosen, modification of bodily appearance or
functions by medical, surgical or other means and other expressions of gender, including dress, speech and
mannerisms. Gender identity, therefore, refers to an individual's self-identification as a man, woman,
transgender or other identified category."
It further held that:
"Binary notion of gender reflects in the Indian Penal Code, for example, Section 8, 10, etc. and also in the laws
related to marriage, adoption, divorce, inheritance, succession and other welfare legislations like NREGA, 2005,
etc. Non-recognition of the identity of Hijras/Transgenders in the various legislations denies them equal
protection of law and they face wide-spread discrimination."
(iv)
Thus, when gender affirmative treatment is not a requirement for the legal requirement of their gender identity,
it cannot be a barrier in getting married, which is permitted under law only to persons of the opposite sex and
not to persons whose self-determined gender identity is either not changed in their legal documents, or those
whose self-determined gender identity is 'transgender'. Hence the provisions of the SMA ought to be read down
to include the words "or spouse" in all provisions so that all persons are able to get married, irrespective of their
gender identity.
(v) Unless such a purposive reading is given to the impugned sections of SMA, they would violate the core precepts
of equality. The SMA is in essence unequal and transgender persons and couples are denied benefits that are
afforded to cis-gender persons and opposite-sex couples as they are barred from exercising their fundamental
right to marry and equal protection of the SMA. This denial is a grave and continuing harm. It disrespects and
subordinates transgender and intersex persons as it does not cover them under the SMA solely based on their
gender identity.
(vi) The right to marry is a fundamental right inherent in the liberty of the person under Article 21 of the
constitution and under Article 14, transgender persons may not be deprived of that right and that liberty. Yet by
virtue of their exclusion from the SMA, transgender persons are denied the benefits that the State has linked to
marriage. Exclusion from being able to have the legal status of marriage gives the message that transgender
persons, gays, and lesbians are unequal and subordinate and imposes stigma and injury which is wholly based
on their gender identity. This amounts to the violation of the guarantee of equal protection under Article 14 of
the constitution.
(vii) If the SMA is not interpreted to include the word 'spouse' or 'person' to include all persons to have the right to
marry, it will amount to identifying a subset of relationships as unequal. It would force transgender persons and
couples or same-sex couples to live as unmarried for the purpose of law, and undermines both the public and
private significance of state-sanctioned marriages; for it tells those couples, and all the world, that their
relationships are unworthy of legal recognition. This differentiation demeans the couple, whose moral and sexual
choices the Constitution protects under the Puttuswamy judgement and in Navtej Johar.
(viii) In Arunkumar V. Inspector General of Registration, (2019) 4 Mad LJ 503, the Madras High Court declared that
transgender persons who are neither male/female fall within the expression "person" and hence entitled to legal
protection of laws in all spheres of State activity as enjoyed by any other citizen of this country. Discrimination
on the ground of sexual orientation or gender identity, therefore, impairs equality before law and equal protection
of law and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The Madras High Court held the expression "bride" in
Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 to mean and include a transwoman identifying as a woman, thereby
interpreting the law to allow solemnization of marriages involving trans persons.
(ix) In the United States, courts have invoked equal protection principles to invalidate laws relating to marriage. In
Loving V. Virginia, the US Supreme Court held that inter-racial bans on marriage were a violation of the equal
protection clause and held:
"There can be no doubt that restricting the freedom to marry solely because of racial classifications violates
the central meaning of the Equal Protection Clause."
It further held that:
"To deny this fundamental freedom on SO unsupportable a basis as the racial classifications embodied in these
statutes, classifications SO directly subversive of the principle of equality at the heart of the Fourteenth
Amendment, is surely to deprive all the State's citizens of liberty without due process of law."
(x) Hence, to deny persons the freedom and right to marry solely on the basis of their gender identity, is manifestly
arbitrary, and is a classification that has no nexus to the purpose of the legislation which is to recognize marital
relationships and therefore denying transgender persons equality under the law and equal protection of the laws
and a violation of Article 14 of the constitution.
111. The restrictions under the SMA to marriage only between a 'man' and a 'woman', amount to
discrimination on the basis of 'sex' under Article 15 (1) which includes discrimination on the basis of
gender identity and sexual orientation:
(i) The protection extended under Article 15 (1) of the Constitution against discrimination on the basis of sex has
seen a dynamic and expansive interpretation by the courts. In NALSA V. Union of India, this Hon'ble Court has
held that the discrimination on the ground of 'sex' under Articles 15 and 16, includes discrimination on the
ground of gender identity.
stereotypes was established in recognition of the fact that the protection against discrimination extended under
Article 15 needs to move in tandem with changing social mores. The Court held that the anti-stereotyping
principle is firmly rooted in the prohibition of discrimination under Article 15 of the Constitution. It also held that
legislations encapsulating majoritarian impulses rooted in biological, social and cultural determinants and
moralistic traditions, which impinge upon individual autonomy deserve deeper and heightened judicial scrutiny.
(para 46)
(iii) Once the court has established the right to self-determination of gender identity, the means to such realization
must also be recognised. It would, therefore, require that transgender persons or couple or same-sex couples
cannot be denied the legal right to marry under the SMA based on their gender identity. Which is afforded to
heterosexual opposite sex couples. In NALSA, this Hon'ble Court held:
The Constitution makers included a guarantee against discrimination on grounds of sex to prevent direct or
indirect discrimination on the basis of failure to conform with stereotypical notions of gender. Therefore, Article
15 and 16 prohibit discrimination on the basis of genden identity. (Paras 63 and 66)
Non-recognition of the gender identity of transgender persons in legislations which are coded in the binary of
male/female gender denies them equal protection of law. (Para 81)
Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity includes any discrimination, exclusion,
restriction or preference, which has the effect of nullifying equality before law (Para 83)
includes sex stereotypes, gender identity and sexual orientation and held that:
Under Article 15, that a ground of discrimination is rooted in sex and in other considerations (sex plus)
can
no longer be accepted by the intersectional understanding of how discrimination operates, which does not
operate in isolation with other identities, especially from the socio-political and economic contexts. (Paras 389,
394)
A provision challenged as being ultra vires the prohibition of discrimination on the grounds of sex under
Article 15(1), is to be assessed not by the objects of the State in enacting it, but by the effect the provision has
on affected individuals and their fundamental rights. (para 394)
(v) The discrimination faced by transgender persons who despite having the right to self-determination of gender
identity are not only denied legal recognition of their gender identity by the State, but also denied the right to
marry and to have a family by virtue of the SMA which provides for only a binary recognition of gender of male
and female for the purpose of marriage.
(vi) In Christine Goodwin V. United Kingdom, Application no. 28957/95, the European Court of Human Rights
recognized that there was no basis for denying transgender persons the right to marry, and held:
"The Court finds no justification for barring the transsexual from enjoying the right to marry under any
circumstances. 104. The Court concludes that there has been a breach of Article 12 of the Convention in the
present case. Article 12 of the Convention, which provides as follows: "Men and women of marriageable age have
the right to marry and to found a family, according to the national laws governing the exercise of this right."
(vii) This Hon'ble Court has held that the Article 15 (1) guarantee on freedom from discrimination on the ground of
sex would include gender-identity based discrimination. The exclusion of transgender and intersex persons from
the institution of marriage is discrimination based on their gender identity. Gender identity is a prohibited
ground of discrimination under Article 15, and in accordance with the equal constitutional claims of transgender
persons, the State cannot exclude them from the institution of marriage. Therefore, the exclusion of transgender
persons from the family law institution of marriage is discrimination based on gender identity and is likely to
violate Article 15 (1) of the Constitution.
IV.
The right to personal autonomy and liberty under Article 21 guarantees the right to marry to all persons
and cannot be denied on the basis of gender identity and sexual orientation:
(i) Under Article 21, no person shall be deprived of their life or personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law. Personal liberty under the right to life has been held to extend to certain personal choices
central to individual dignity and autonomy, including intimate choices that define personal identity and beliefs.
(ii) The right to marry has been held to be a fundamental right under Article 21. Decisions about marriage are
among the most intimate that an individual can make. This is true for all persons, whatever their gender identity
or sexual orientation.
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. This right cannot be taken away except through a law which is substantively and
procedurally fair, just and reasonable. Intrinsic to the liberty which the Constitution guarantees as a fundamental
right is the ability of each individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness. Matters of
belief and faith, including whether to believe are at the core of constitutional liberty. The Constitution exists for
believers as well as for agnostics. The Constitution protects the ability of each individual to pursue a way of life or
faith to which she or he seeks to adhere. Matters of dress and of food, of ideas and ideologies, of love and
partnership are within the central aspects of identity. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional
compliance) the conditions of a valid marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be
ended or annulled. These remedies are available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on
whether they should accept each other into a marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to
play in determining our choice of partners.
(iv) The right to intimate association has been protected in Griswold V. Connecticut. Trans couples have the same
right as opposite-sex couples to enjoy intimate association, a right extending beyond mere freedom from laws
making same-sex intimacy a criminal offense.
(v) The nature of marriage is that, through its enduring bond, two persons together can find other freedoms, such
as expression, intimacy, and spirituality. This is true for all persons, whatever their gender or sexual orientation.
There is dignity in the bond between two persons who seek to marry and in their autonomy to make such
profound choices. Under Article 21 of the Constitution, transgender persons seek in marriage the same legal
treatment as heterosexual persons, and it would disparage their choices and diminish their personhood to deny
them this right. (vi) Further, the provisions of Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 46 of the SMA imposing a 30-day
public notice obligation amounts an infringement of the constitutional rights of adult persons who seek to get
married under the SMA.
V. The Denial of the Right to Marry to Persons based on their Gender Identity, amounts to a Violation of
their Right to Dignity:
(i) The requirement under the SMA that marriage is permitted only between a 'male' and a 'female' is in complete
violation of Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the constitution and is a violation of the right to dignity of transgender
persons.
(ii) Denying people with different gender identities the option of marriage under the SMA, when it is a course of
action available to all other individuals, impairs the right to dignity inherent in the Article 21 guarantee of the
Constitution. Both Article 14 guaranteeing equality and Article 21 guaranteeing the right to life protect personal
liberty because it stems from the inherent worth and dignity of each person. The ability independently to define
one's identity, is central to any concept of liberty. Protecting dignity rights involves more than just non-
interference with one's private, intimate choices.
(iii) As argued by Danieli Evans, in her article, "Imagining a Same-Sex Marriage Decision Based on Dignity
:
Considering Human Experience in Constitutional Law", 37 N.Y.U. Rev. of L. & Soc. Change 251 (2013), the
freedom to define oneself is incomplete if the State does not respect, validate, and embrace
public
manifestations of these choices. She thus argues that there are two distinct components of human dignity
:
intrinsic dignity, or the inherent, inalienable worth that stems from human ability to self-consciously create an
individual identity, and extrinsic dignity, the worth that an individual imputes to themselves, based on the
extent that their attributes are recognized and validated by society. Intrinsic worth and extrinsic or imputed
worth demands both personal autonomy and societal acceptance of personal attributes that gives rise to an
individual's sense of how she is valued in relation to other members of society. To fully execute the Constitution's
promise of respect for individual self-definition, worth, and freedom, the state must also respect and validate
public manifestations of personal identity.
(iv) Dignity is tied to how society respects particular choices that determine fundamental aspects of one's being
which includes personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child
rearing, and education. A person's marital status does not simply denote the legal recognition of a relationship
but it also regulates access to a range of other rights and protections including healthcare benefits, social
security, property rights, guardianship and adoption, spousal benefits under labour laws. Marital status includes
inheritance and property rights; rules of intestate succession; hospital access, medical decision-making
authority; adoption rights; the rights and benefits of survivors; birth and death certificates, workers'
compensation benefits; health insurance; and child custody, support, and visitation rules. Valid marriage under
central and state laws is a requirement for several legal benefits.
(v) It also safeguards children and families. Without the recognition, stability, and predictability marriage offers,
children suffer the stigma of knowing their families are somehow lesser.
(vi) Denying persons who are transgender the access to the recognition of the status of marriage results in stigma
and stereotypes against the trans community. It is difficult for an individual to feel a positive sense of self-worth
if she is not able to fulfill the values society deems most important. It also harms and humiliates the children of
trans or same-sex couples as they will be seen as less worthy, coming from families where their parents are not
legally married.
(vii) It is submitted that stereotypes about individuals or groups based on their different characteristics, be it their
gender, disability or caste or any other characteristics, have the effect of perpetuating or promoting the view that
the individual is less capable or worthy of recognition or value as a human being. Stereotypes are directly linked
to the pre-existing disadvantage, vulnerability, or prejudice experienced by the individual or groups.
(viii) Courts have recognized that subordination which is done by stereotyping, has the result of denying equal
dignity and worth of all persons. In the case of same sex marriage, the Constitutional Court of South Africa
declared that the failure of the common law and Marriage Act to provide for same-sex marriage violated the
express constitutional guarantee of dignity in Minister of Home Affairs V. Marie Adriaana Fourie. Noting the close
relationship between dignity and equality, the South African Constitutional Court held that the exclusion to which
same-sex couples are subjected, manifestly affects their dignity as members of society and held that:
"The crucial determinant will always be whether human dignity is enhanced or diminished and the
achievement of equality is promoted or undermined by the measure concerned. Differential treatment in itself
does not necessarily violate the dignity of those affected. It is when separation implies repudiation, connotes
,230
distaste or inferiority and perpetuates a caste-like status that it becomes constitutionally invidious.
(ix) In Egan V. Canada, which was a case about a homosexual couple where one of the partners was refused spousal
allowance, L'Heureux-Dube, J of the Canadian Supreme Court held that:
"Equality
means nothing if it does not represent regardless of individual differences. Equality means that
our society cannot tolerate legislative distinctions that treat certain people as second-class citizens, that demean
them, that treat them as less capable for no good reason, or that otherwise offend fundamental human
,231
dignity.
(x) In Obergefell V. Hodges, the US Supreme Court held that discriminatory sex-based classifications in marriage
treating women as unequal to men in marriage denied the equal dignity of men and women. It went on to hold
that when same sex couples seek the right to marry, they seek equal dignity and upheld their right to marry.
Justice Kennedy poignantly states at the end of his opinion, "They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the law.
The Constitution grants them that right.
(xi) In Goodridge V. Dept. of Public Health, 798 N.E.2d 941 (Mass. 2003), the Court interpreted the state
constitution as affirming "the dignity and equality of all individuals," and it further held that "it forbids
the
creation of second-class citizens." It held that that "the core concept of common human dignity protected by the
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" precludes the intrusion of the government "into the
deeply personal realms of consensual adult expressions of intimacy and one's choice of an intimate partner."
(xii) In United States V. Windsor, the US Supreme Court held that:
"For same-sex couples who wished to be married, the State acted to give their lawful conduct a lawful status.
This status is a far-reaching legal acknowledgment of the intimate relationship between two people, a
relationship deemed by the State worthy of dignity in the community equal with all other marriages. It reflects
both the community's considered perspective on the historical roots of the institution of marriage and its
evolving understanding of the meaning of equality."
(xiii) In Navtej Johar, this Hon'ble Court held, the discrimination faced by the LGBTQI community "is deeply
offensive to the dignity and self-worth of the individual" and that equality demands that the sexual orientation of
each individual in the society must be protected on an even platform, for the right to privacy and the protection
of sexual orientation lie at the core of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the
Constitution.
(xiv) Hence, the non-inclusion of transgender persons under the SMA, based solely on their gender identity,
amounts to stereotyping and subordination and to a violation of their right to dignity and deserves to be given an
interpretation that allows for marriage, irrespective of one's gender identity or sexual orientation.
VI. Article 21 of the constitution includes the Right to Family Life and the SMA amounts to a violation of
the rights of transgender persons to have a family:
(i) While it has been held that Article 21 includes the right to marry, it is submitted that it would also include the
right to have a family and the right to family life.
(ii) Under many international treaties, there are provisions which guarantee the right to family life.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Article 16 states that "Men and women of full age, without any
limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to
equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution."
Under Article 9 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, all persons have the right to
marry and the right to found a family.
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights guarantees the right to privacy and states that
"Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence"
The Yogyakarta Principles which have been followed by this Hon'ble Court, in Principle 24 clearly recognizes
that everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Principle 24
states follows : Principle 24 : Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender
identity. Families exist in diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual
orientation or gender identity of any of its members.
(iii) In Oliari V. Italy, Applications nos. 18766/11 and 36030/11, the European Court of Human Rights held that the
absence of a legal framework allowing for recognition and protection of same-sex relationships violates the rights
under Article 8 of the Convention and that measures needed to be taken by the State to fulfil its obligations to
secure the right of the applicants and other persons in their position to respect for their private and family life.
(iv) In India, for the first time, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Lakshmi Bhavya Tanneeru V. Union of India, 2021
psychological, and emotional integrity, would find a place in the four corners of Article 21 of the Constitution.
(v) It is therefore submitted that the right to life under Article 21, while it includes the right to marry, also includes
the right to all persons to be able to have a family and the right to family life. The right to family life would
include the right to be able to have one's relationships legally recognized by the State under the applicable
marriage laws, in this case the SMA. This right to family life would also include the right to have all other benefits
related to the recognition of marriage, including having children, spousal recognition under the law and all that
which comes within the framework of a family, as recognized under the law.
(vi) The right to life, personal autonomy and privacy is infringed by the SMA as it interferes with the private life of
adult transgender persons by depriving them of their right to marriage and the right to family life, thereby
violating Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Filed By:
1. Jayna Kothari, Sr. Adv.
2. Rohit Sharma, Adv.
3. Aparna Mehrotra, Adv.
4. Raghav Gupta, Adv.
5. Nikhil Purohit, Adv.
Place Delhi
4. Ashok Kumar, Adv.
Date 10.04.2023
Advocates for the Petitioners
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 260 OF 2023
(UNDER ARTICLE 32 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA)
In the Matter of:
Rituparna Borah & Ors
Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS BY MS.
VRINDA GROVER, ADVOCATE
INDEX
1. DENIAL OF CHOICE, VIOLENCE AND CONFLICT WITH NATAL FAMILY:
i. Petitioner Nos. 1-4
ii. National Network of LBI Women and Trans Persons
iii. Petitioner Nos. 5-10
iv. Panel hearing on Familial Violence
11.
11. Interference, opposition and violence from natal families, irrespective of marital status, violates
the fundamental Right to Life and Personal Liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution:
i. Conflict with Law : Prosecution and Persecution
ii. International and Comparative Law on Gender Based Violence Against Queer and Trans Persons:
III. Non-recognition of 'atypical families' or 'chosen families' beyond constraints of marriage, blood or
adoption violates Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21:
i. Revisiting the Paradigm of Care in Context of Conflict inflicted by Natal Families
ii. Comparative Law on Recognition of Chosen Families - Care-giving, Economic Inter-dependence and Domestic
Responsibilities:
IV. The "notice, domicile and objection" framework under Sections 5-9 of SMA violates Articles 14, 15,
19 and 21
i. SMA and Intersectionality of Caste, Religion, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
ii. The Notice, Domicile and Objection Framework Violates the Guarantee of Due Process:
V. Non-recognition of marriage between two consenting adults on basis of gender identity or sexual
orientation under the scheme of solemnization and registration of marriages in Special Marriage Act, 1954
(SMA) violates Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21:
i. Legislative Intent in Recognizing Inter-Religious Marriages Must Guide the Recognition of Queer and Trans
Marriages:
ii. Interpretation of Statutes Must Bridge the Gap between Law and Society
iii. Systemic Discrimination to Full Citizenship - Trans Persons and Right to Marry and Found a Family:
iv. Denial of the Right to Marry and Found a Family for Queen and Trans Persons Violates Part 111 of the
Constitution:
V. A Commitment to Rights of Queen and Trans Persons under Constitutional Morality:
vi. Saving of Validity of pre-existing Marriages where one party has Transitioned to Affirm their Self-Determined
Gender Identity in order to Protect Rights accrued under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution:
1. DENIAL OF CHOICE VIOLENCE AND CONFLICT WITH NATAL FAMILY
Petitioner Nos. 1-4:
1537. The Petitioner Nos. 1-4 are before this Hon'ble Court to secure legal and constitutional protections which can
enable and assist persons such as the Petitioners herein to live their lives of choice, with dignity, autonomy and
independence. The Petitioner Nos. 1-4 have witnessed and continue to see many queer and trans persons struggle
with the violence that they face from their natal families, including providing adequate social and legal support to
Petitioner Nos. 5-10 herein. Their queer feminist activism of 4 decades informs them that these difficult individual
struggles, which are often fought alone without social support or official assistance, can be aided by assembling an
appropriate legal scaffolding, and the dynamism of the forever transformative Constitution of India provides the legal
tools to build the same.
1538. The Petitioner No. 1, Rituparna Borah, identifies as a lesbian woman and is a queer feminist activist with over
15 years of experience of working on issues of gender and sexuality. She is currently a board member at Nazariya,
which is a Queer feminist resource group that focuses, inter alia, on awareness and accessibility of the rights of
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender ("queen and trans") persons by conducting training sessions, engaging in
advocacy and running a dedicated help line. The Petitioner no. 1 has handled various cases of natal family and marital
family violence against queen and trans persons. Further, the Petitioner has also supported queer and trans couples
who have faced "corrective rape" and conversion therapy at the hands of their natal families. The Petitioner no. 1 is
also a trained peer counselor and has successfully run the helpline of Nazariya.
1539. The Petitioner no. 1 has lost both her parents, her father only very recently. While her father was an ally and
was supportive and understanding of her sexual orientation and lifestyle choices, her surviving familial relatives are
not. She suffers from Fibromyalgia and Chronic Fatigue, which has been recognised in the UK as a potentially disabling
condition. Her diagnosis requires those close to her to provide regular care and support and also to take medical
decisions on her behalf and in her best interest. Such crucial medical decisions that determine her quality of life
cannot be left to her surviving natal family members who do not support, respect or understand her and her lifestyle
decisions. Currently, with no existing allies in her natal family, the Petitioner no. 1 also doesn't wish to nominate any
surviving members of her natal family as beneficiaries to her estate or her belongings, or desire that any legal rights or
claims in her name accrue to them. Rather, she wants to assign such benefits, rights and claims to the people who
might not be her de jure family but are her de facto support system and will take decisions in her best interest.
1540. The Petitioner No. 2 Chayanika Shah is a queer woman - a teacher, researcher and activist based in Mumbai.
She has a doctorate degree and was a Physics lecturer in a Mumbai based college, from which she took voluntary
retirement in 2008. Since her retirement she has been actively teaching and conducting seminars on themes such as
Gender Studies, Queen Studies and Science Education.
1541. In the last 14 years, Petitioner No. 2 has collaborated on three studies related to queen and trans lives. The
first was a research study titled, "Breaking the Binary : Understanding concerns and realities of queen persons
assigned gender female at birth across a spectrum of lived gender identities", which was based on qualitative
interviews with 50 such individuals across the country. This study was conducted from 2009 to 2013 and later
published as a book titled "No Outlaws in the Gender Galaxy" co-authored by her and published by Zubaan Press in
2015. The second was a short study in 2013 with TISS, Mumbai titled, "Making sense : Familial journeys towards
acceptance of gay and lesbian family members". More recently from 2017 to 2019 she has been part of a multi-city
study housed in TISS, Mumbai titled "An exploratory study of discrimination based on marginalized genders and
sexualities". 6. As a member of voluntary collectives like Forum Against Oppression of Women (FAOW) for the last 4
decades and more recently of the People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL), Petitioner No. 2 has been actively working
on issues related to human rights from a queen feminist lens. She has been part of a voluntary group based in
Mumbai, LABIA-A Queen Feminist LBT Collective from 1995 to 2021. As part of LABIA, she has worked towards
creating space and support for many queer and trans people from Mumbai. They have worked with other feminist
queen and trans groups and women's groups to provide safe shelter and security to many people from across the
country as well. Over the years, as more and more people reached out, LABIA along with the other organizations and
individuals worked within a loose network of queen and trans groups and individuals across the country, of which she
remains an active member.
1542. The Petitioner No. 3, Minakshi Sanyal is a queer feminist activist and Indian citizen based in Kolkata. She has
been engaged in the LGBTQIA+ rights movements and feminist movements in India for more than two decades. She
is co-founder of Sappho (formed in 1999) and Sappho for Equality (formed in 2003), Kolkata, which is the first queen
and trans rights collective and organization in eastern India. She served as the Managing Trustee for Sappho for
Equality during 2003 - 2020 and continues to play an active role in mobilizing queen and trans communities in West
Bengal. The Petitioner No. 3's life's journey depended on nothing but self-reliance, which is why she took voluntary
retirement at the age of 53 from a public sector company and devoted herself completely to the feminist movement
and the movement for the rights of marginalized sexualities. For the last 7 years, she has been actively engaged in
conducting sessions on gender and sexuality at various higher educational institutions.
1543. In 2014-1015 the Petitioner No. 3 was engaged in a research study, titled, 'Politics of Living In search of
a
roadmap for LBT(F to M)Q activism'. Her jointly edited book titled 'Monologue Dui Banglar Lesbian Kathan/Lesbian
Narratives of Bangladesh and West Bengal was published in 2021 in both Bengali and English languages.
1544. The Petitioner No. 4, Maya Sharma, who identifies as a lesbian woman, is a queen activist and writer, and is
a
part of the National Network of Lesbian, Bisexual and Intersex (LBI) Women and Transgender Persons. She is an
Indian citizen and is based in Vadodara. In the late 1980s, the Petitioner No. 4 worked on the issues of single women
in Delhi resettlement colonies. While working there she realized that the diversity amongst the single women
concealed 'women who loved women'. These patterns also emerged in her work with trade unions.
1545. The Petitioner No. 4 has a prolific writing career which began with her co-authoring a book on single women
in Hindi, Kinaro Pey Ugti Pechaan,' She has also written a book titled, 'Loving Women Being Lesbian in Unprivileged
India, published in 2006 by Zubaan Books, which is based on her experience of living in Gujarat in the late 1990's
when the queen voices of the marginalized community were barely audible. Her most recent publication, 'Footprints of
a Queen History : Life Stories from Gujarat', published in 2022 by Yoda Press, is the result of her years of involvement
with queen issues : supporting queen couples in crisis, interacting with families of queen children and of bringing home
the fragile entitlements available to trans persons under the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. The
stories narrated in Petitioner No. 4's books tell a tale of her personal struggle, in overcoming natal family violence,
socio-legal struggles and finding friendships and love. Her life's work has meticulously cataloged the pain, stigma and
silence which is woven into the everyday existence of the queer community.
The National Network for LBI Women and Trans Persons
1546. Petitioner Nos. 1-4 are part of an informal network called National Network of LBI Women and Trans Persons.
This network's members include queer, intersex and trans individuals from Mumbai, Kolkata, Vadodara, Thrissur,
Delhi, Chennai, Hyderabad and other cities. The members of the Network have been active in other collectives and
organizations working with and for queen and trans persons over several decades, whereby they have created spaces
for these communities to reach out for connection and in case of any urgent crisis in their lives;
1547. This network was created during a conference held in Bangalore in June 2008, when Petitioner Nos. 1-4 came
together with others as an informal network of individuals and organizations. The network has evolved as new groups
were formed and new people joined from different cities. They stayed in touch through joint campaigns and
conferences from time to time but most importantly as a network collaborating with each other as they responded to
pleas for help from queen and trans persons from across the country;
1548. Over the years Petitioner Nos. 1-4 and other members of the network have been contacted directly by a large
number of queer and trans individuals, including Petitioner Nos. 5-10 herein. The presence of this network in different
states has made a significant difference because distress migration from home towns and states has been a feature of
the lives of queen and trans persons, due to violent opposition, hostility and discrimination from natal families and
local communities. They are forced to leave their homes and take refuge and shelter in anonymity in other states as far
away as possible from their natal families because they fear being apprehended and separated. The Petitioners No. 1-4
often work in coordination since many a times the person(s) may need help in multiple locations.
1549. Runaway queen and trans persons, often wish to marry each other and are seeking to secure some legal and
social sanction for their relationship, particularly given the hostility, threat and violence that is inflicted on them not
only by society at large but specifically from family members, opposed to their choice and decision. They have tried
different ways of solemnising their relationship, through ceremony in temples or approaching state authorities to help
them get married. They often approach queen and trans activists, including Petitioner Nos. 1-4 when they desire to live
as a married couple, so that their relationship is recognised with respect and dignity, and the ire of family and
discrimination by society is blunted on account of the social and cultural privileges attached to 'marriage' and the
recognition of their 'spouse' by family and the world at large. Petitioner Nos. 1-4 have assisted a significant number of
such couples hailing from all parts of the country, from the remotest of villages to the biggest of metropolis; from all
religions, castes and also from adivasi communities. The common thread running through the lives of all queer and
trans couples is the myriad forms of violence that they suffer from their natal families and local communities. More
often than not the natal family is hostile to the relationship and opposed to the choice of partner, and far from being a
source and space of love and protection, becomes a source and site of conflict from which such persons need
protection, including seeking legal and constitutional protection through marriage.
1550. While intervening in such situations across the country, Petitioner Nos. 1-4 have used all available statutory
and constitutional mechanisms, including the provisions for addressing violence against women, habeas corpus
petitions and appeals to higher officials in the police hierarchy, in order to safeguard the right to life and personal
liberty of queer and trans persons. In some cases, they have been able to help the people get the required support
and security to lead their chosen lives. In some, they have not been able to help because families employed physical
violence and force to separate the partners. In some others, it was too late to intervene, where one or both of them
ended their lives, as they could no longer endure the relentless coercion, violence and pressure from their families to
end the relationship. Petitioner No. 1-4 have also witnessed situations where natal families have reconciled and
accepted the choices made by their children, however, the proportion of instances where the family remains in conflict
with queen and trans persons far outnumber these happy endings.
1551. The Petitioner Nos. 1-4 also find in the course of their work and their own lives that family violence is also
continuously directed towards queer and trans persons who may not be in relationships because their families
disapprove of their self-determination of their genden and/or sexuality. This violence includes attempts at conversion
therapy, depriving them access to education, forced marriages, disallowing them to be mobile and communicate with
others like them, and even threats or actual disinheritance.
PETITIONERS 5-10
1552. The Petitioner Nos. 5-10 are before this Hon'ble Court for the legal recognition of their right to solemnize a
marriage with a partner of their choice, irrespective of sexual orientation or gender identity. The Petitioners No. 5-10
have all suffered physical, verbal and psychological abuse from their natal families and subjected to bias,
discrimination and prejudice from the State machinery because of their self-determined gender identity, sexual
orientation and choice in life partner. The current legal regime's non-recognition of the right of queer and trans
persons to solemnize a marriage has exacerbated the prejudice and abuse faced by them leaving them vulnerable and
veritable strangers in law.
1553. The Petitioner No. 5 aged about 23 years old, identifies as a trans-masculine person and Petitioner No. 6
about 22 years old is a cis-gender woman and they are in a romantic relationship. Petitioner No. 5 has completed his
education up to Class XI and Petitioner No. 6 has completed her education up to Class VI. They are both Indian
citizens and hail from socially and economically marginalized communities in Howrah, West Bengal.
1554. When Petitioners 5-6 shared the news of their relationship with their families in 2019, Petitioner No. 5's
family brutally assaulted him which almost left him for the dead. His father threatened him that he must forget
Petitioner No. 6and get married. Petitioner No. 6also met with violence at the hands of her brother.
1555. Petitioner Nos. 5and6 have made several attempts to elope due to the grave resistance from the former's
natal family, but were unsuccessful as his family members traced their location, separated them and dragged him
home against his wishes. In early 2020, when they both escaped to Barasat, Petitioner No. 5's family eventually found
them after 3 months and manipulated them into returning home on the false assurance that they had accepted the
relationship. However, on arriving home, Petitioner No. 6 was immediately sent to her residence and Petitioner No. 5's
family again physically abused him. He was so distraught after repeatedly suffering physical violence and verbal abuse
at the hands of his own family, he began contemplating self-harm as a way to escape his abusive circumstances.
1556. During her stay at her natal family home, Petitioner No. 6 reached out to Sappho for Equality (SFE) - a
Kolkata-based organization which works for the rights of LBI women and trans persons, for assistance as she was
facing pressure from her brother to get married. The familial rejection of her relationship with Petitioner No. 5and the
constant threat of a forced marriage also pushed the Petitioner no. 6 to contemplate self-harm as a means to escape
her abusive circumstances. As both the Petitioners were confined to their homes against their will due to Covid
lockdown measures, they experienced constant and heightened insecurity to their physical and mental health within
their homes. 22. On their final attempt at elopement on 05.02.2021, Petitioner Nos. 5 and 6 visited the Dunlop Police
Station, Kolkata, for help. Subsequently, they called SFE's helpline and sought assistance as Petitioner No. 5 was
apprehensive of his family's intervention to forcefully separate them again. SFE sought the intervention of the West
Bengal State Women's Commission, who instructed the Dunlop Police Station to keep Petitioner Nos. 5and 6 safely in
police custody for the night. The Petitioner Nos. 5 and 6 spent the night at the police station as they feared violence
from their natal families. However, instead of assuring the Petitioners of their safety and security, the police subjected
them to verbal abuse, issued threats of violence and shamed them for leaving their natal families in order to pursue
their relationship. The police even contacted Petitioner No. 6's father and told him to "discipline" her through physical
violence.
1557. The police's hostile treatment of the Petitioner Nos. 5& 6 is illustrative of the general attitude of law
enforcement towards queen and trans couples who runaway from natal families due to the real threat of violence,
wherein the legacy of criminalization and the vagueness of the legal status of such relationships translates into a
climate of social disapproval by families and the police alike.
1558. Due to their inability to complete their education, both Petitioner Nos. 5 and 6 have faced significant
challenges in securing formal employment. At present, Petitioner No. 5 works at a cafe and Petitioner No. 6 works in a
boutique and they both struggle for sustenance on a daily basis. After leaving SFE's temporary safe residence, both
Petitioners continue to face challenges in securing rental housing due to intersectional vulnerabilities on account of
their gender identity, sexual orientation, religion and class, apart from their inability to cohabit as a married couple in
the eyes of law.
1559. Petitioner No. 7, 23 years old, identifies as a trans-masculine person and Petitioner No. 8 (21 years) is a cis-
gender woman and they are in a romantic relationship. They are both Indian citizens.
1560. Petitioner No. 7used to regularly visit Petitioner No. 8 at her residence, in Baranagar, North 24 Parganas,
West Bengal, as they both lived there with their natal families. However, when Petitioner No. 8's parents learnt about
their intimacy, they started harassing and physically abusing her to discourage her from continuing the relationship
with Petitioner No. 7. Unable to face the violent abuse at home, Petitioner No. 8 decided to leave her natal home of her
own volition.
1561. Since June 2020, Petitioner Nos. 7 and 8 have been living together in a rented house at Salt Lake, Kolkata.
After Petitioner No. 8's father learnt of her relationship with Petitioner No. 7, he canceled her enrollment at the Techno
India College, where she was pursuing a Bachelor in Business Administration, and started pressuring her to get
married. In order to separate them against their wishes, Petitioner no. 8's mother even lodged a criminal complaint
against Petitioner No. 7 in September 2022, falsely alleging that he had abducted her daughter and stolen valuable
items from their residence. Her family went to the extent of displaying "missing persons" posters in public spaces and
employed local goons to trace their location. These acts by Petitioner No. 8's natal family heightened the risk to their
safety and security.
1562. Due to the false FIR lodged by the natal family of Petitioner no. 8, Petitioner No. 7 was arrested and he was
only released on bail after unjustly suffering 3 months of detention due to an egregious abuse of the process of law.
Petitioner No. 8's family was present at the court for the hearings and they attempted to forcefully bring her home.
However, the family members ceased their attempts as soon as they realized they could not risk drawing attention to
the dispute in the court premises.
15 Petitioner No. 8's parents persisted in their attempts to bring her back to the natal home by any means
whatsoever. Her mother made pleas of her father being missing or her being subjected to domestic violence, in order
to compel her to come home. Petitioner No. 7 and 8 decided to return to their natal home temporarily until such
circumstances settled down. When they returned home, they were forcibly trapped and they learnt that the Petitioner
No. 8's mother had employed false pretexts in order to bring her home and restrict her liberty. They both were not
allowed to go outdoors and were under strict surveillance within the home. Both their phones were confiscated to cut
them off from any support from the outside world. Her family manipulated her by imputing false and malicious
allegations of "human traffickina" on Petitioner No. 7. Thev involved their relatives and neiahbors in the matter to
"counsel" Petitioner No. 8 to break the relationship and when the "counseling" wouldn't suffice, everyone verbally
abused and issued threats of physical violence against Petitioner No. 7 and 8 to forcibly separate them. The Petitioner
No. 8's father even threatened to sexually assault Petitioner No. 7.
1564. When Petitioner No. 7 and 8 discretely attempted to contact the local police for help, they were of no
assistance whatsoever as they only spoke to Petitioner No. 8's natal family to verify their safety and well-being, who
falsely assured the police of the same and silenced the matter. At this stage, in September 2022, Petitioner No. 7
contacted SFE and desperately requested for urgent help to protect Petitioner No. 8. When the SFE team reached
Petitioner No. 8's residence, they were intimidated by 3 men who were business associates and family friends of
Petitioner No. 8's father. The men threatened the SFE teamand said that they considered homosexuality to be a
"perversion" and claimed that Petitioner No. 7 is a "bad influence" on Petitioner No. 8. In front of Petitioner no. 8's
natal family, SFE members asked her whether she wants to stay with her parents or live with Petitioner No. 7. When
Petitioner No. 8 asserted that she wants to live with Petitioner No. 7, the SFE team helped her pack her belongings
and requested her parents to handover her certificates and essential official documents.
1565. Petitioner No. 8's parents initially resisted but eventually handed over the documents. The SFE team also
contacted the Belgachia Police Station for help, who instructed all parties to appear before them to resolve the matter.
At the police station, the police officers initially supported the family and insisted that Petitioner No. 8 should return to
her natal home. However, with SFE's intervention and explanation of the rights of all consenting adults to choose a
partner and live together irrespective of gender identity and sexual orientation, the police changed their attitude. The
Police officers counseled Petitioner No. 8's mother that the family cannot interfere in her private decisions. Even when
Petitioner Nos. 7 and 8 were leaving the police station along with the SFE team, they were chased by Petitioner No. 8's
mother who was verbally abusing them.
1566. At present, Petitioner Nos. 7 and 8are living together in a rented house in Kolkata. However, the criminal
proceedings falsely initiated by the family of Petitioner No. 8against Petitioner No. 7are currently pending and have
detrimentally affected his employment opportunities. Petitioner No. 8 is currently the sole earning member and
supports the family. Petitioner No. 8's family continues to keep a watch on her whereabouts and contact her from time
to time in order to manipulate her into breaking the relationship and returning to her natal home.
1567. Petitioner No. 9 is a 21 year old, cis-gender woman and Petitioner No. 10 is a 22 year old transgender man
and they are both in a romantic relationship. They met when they were studying in Class VI in a government school in
Darbhanga, Bihar. They fell in love during their formative schooling years. They are both Indian citizens.
1568. In November 2019, when they were in Class XI, Petitioner No. 10's parents started pressuring him to marry.
On 26.11.2020, when he refused to get married, his family sent him to his elder sister's house in Muzaffarpur and
started looking for a man to marry him in the meantime. At his sister's home, he confided in her about his gender
identity and his relationship with Petitioner No. 9. His sister understood and accepted his identity and decided to not
let him go back to the natal home because their parents threatened to kill him if he did not marry.
1569. In January 2020, Petitioner No. 10's parents started issuing death threats to his elder sister and her husband
for supporting his decisions. His sister sent him to their maternal grandmother's home in Samastipur, where he lived
up to October 2020. During this time, Petitioner No. 10's maternal uncle requested his family to allow him to finish his
education up to Class XII.
1570. In December 2021, Petitioner No. 10's family arranged his marriage with a man in Patna. Petitioner No. 10
informed the man about his relationship with Petitioner No. 9 and requested him to refuse the marriage proposal
before their respective families, however, the man expressed his wish to solemnize the marriage notwithstanding
Petitioner No. 10's explicit wishes. On 13.12.2021, the marriage ceremony was performed.
1571. In March 2022, Petitioner No. 10 convinced his 'spouse' to send him to study in Darbhanga to prepare for an
ITI diploma course. Petitioner No. 9also came to Darbhanga to prepare for the CTET exam. Here, Petitioner Nos. 9 and
10 started living together in a rented house. On 27.03.2022, Petitioner No. 10's 'spouse' came to meet him for Holi
celebrations where he demanded Petitioner No. 9 to have sex with him and threatened to tell their families about their
relationship if she refused. When Petitioner No. 9 refused, Petitioner No. 10's 'spouse' physically assaulted them both
and informed their families of their relationship. Apprehensive about their safety and security, Petitioner Nos. 9 and 10
decided to run away. They went to the nearest railway station and arrived at the Sitamarhi railway station. On
28.03.2022 at 3 oo AM, their families found them both at the Sitamarhi railway station and took them both by force
to Petitioner No. 10's paternal aunt's home in Baheri, where they committed physical assault on both of them in
separate rooms. Petitioner No. 10's father demanded Rs. 15000/- from the mother of Petitioner no. 9 as a pre-
condition for her release.
1572. Petitioner No. 10's family coerced him to write a 'suicide letter' where he was ordered to assign the reason
for his 'death' to Petitioner no. 9. He wrote the letter under fear for his safety, but when he didn't mention Petitioner
No. 9's name in it, his father cut his wrist. His father again demanded that he write the letter and mention that he is
not 'mentally stable'. After Petitioner No. 10 wrote the letter under fear for his safety, his father submitted copies of
the 'suicide letter' to the nearest police station and the local sarpanch.
1573. In April 2022, Petitioner No. 9 contacted Nazariya a Delhi-based queen feminist resource group - for help,
who connected them with Women Special Cell in Darbhanga. Petitioner Nos. 9 and 10 decided to flee from their natal
family homes on 29.04.2022 and meet at the Baheri police station. However, on 28.04.2022, Petitioner No. 10's family
confiscated his phone and his 'spouse' physically assaulted him. On 29.04.2022, Petitioner No 9 and 10met at the
Baheri Police Station, after leaving home under false pretexts to evade surveillance from the families. At the Baheri
Police Station, they were redirected to the Laheriya Saray Police Station which is designated as the Mahila Police
station, where the officers noted the couple's written statements. The police officers assisted Petitioner No. 10and his
'spouse' in preparing their petition for divorce, which was signed by both parties. On the night of 29.04.2022,
Petitioner Nos. 9 and 10 arrived at Patna to stay in Garima Greh shelter homes for transgender persons, which
operates under the aegis of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MOSJE).
1574. Since June 2022, Petitioner Nos. 9 and 10 have been living at a rented house in New Delhi since they
couldn't live together at the Garima Greh in Patna for a long duration, as cis-gender women are not permitted to stay
at these shelter homes.
Panel Hearing on Familial Violence against Queen and Trans persons:
1575. At a panel hearing on familial violence on queen and trans persons and their implications for "marriage
equality" organized by the National Network of LBI Women and Tran Persons and PUCL on 01.04.2023, several queen
and trans persons shared testimonies of the conflict with natal families.
1576. These testimonies were heard by an eminent panel chaired by a retired high court judge, and included civil
society organizations which provide social and legal support to runaway couples, experts on women and child welfare,
queen feminist activists, anti-caste activists, human rights advocates and feminist academics. The expert panel heard
testimonies from 32 queen and trans persons from across the country and from diverse locations with respect to age,
gender, class, caste, religion and ability. The panel held a press conference on the 03.04.2023 at Press Club, Delhi
where they stated that the extent of familial violence inflicted on queen and trans persons makes a compelling case for
the state to adopt measures to safeguard their fundamental right to personal liberty and to lead a life of dignity.
1577. Natal family violence in the form of physical, verbal, emotional and economic abuse often begins in
childhood. This manifests as restrictions on the freedom of queer, trans and gender-non conforming persons to gender
expression in the manner they choose to wear the clothes and hair, their mobility, communication with friends and
peers; often it includes families putting a stop to their childrens' education.
1578. Several cis women and trans masculine persons narrated their traumatic and humiliating experiences of
being forced into marriages at ages as young as 14 years old. The multiple deprivations they face as a consequence of
refusal to engage in sexual relations without consent, such as starvation, domestic violence and rape within their
marital homes occurred with the explicit or tacit approval of their natal families. Some were even forced to have
children.
1579. When queen and trans people escaped these violent situations in their natal or marital homes, alone or with
chosen partners, the families would collude to forcibly bring them or their partners back to their respective "homes"
where they were placed under house arrest for months. Some were sent to "rehab" centres or psychiatric facilities and
subjected to physical restraint, heavy sedation and/or "conversion therapies" in contravention of professional ethics
guidelines. When the queer trans persons defied the boundaries of caste and religion, the violence that they faced was
even more severe.
1580. The families frequently employed physical violence, threats, and emotional manipulation. Several women,
when they were outed as lesbian or bisexual, were subjected to threats of "corrective" rape or to actual rape by close
family members, including fathers and brothers. In many cases, the police actively colluded with natal families in
tracking down queen and trans persons who had run away from violent homes. Further misuse of police mechanisms in
the form of false missing persons report abduction and even trafficking complaints are found to be rampantly filed
against queen and trans couples who runaway from homes to flee violence from natal families.
1581. Queen feminist activists observed how hetero-patriarchal norms have virtually turned every state and non-
state actor which is meant to support and protect, into sites of abandonment and violence for them, be it the family,
landlords, employees, police, judiciary, mental institutions, rehabilitation centres, psychiatrists and doctors, among
others. Queen and trans persons who are living with HIV and/or seeking trans-affirmative healthcare services do not
share this aspect of their lives with natal families, for the fear of further alienation and aggravated violence due to the
stigma attached to their health concerns. In such context, queen and trans persons often rely on their kinship networks
of queer and trans friends, community groups and/or partners to help them navigate the healthcare decision-making
processes, who serve as an indispensable support system and perform their roles as 'chosen families'. However, such
persons are not recognized and granted decision-making authority, by healthcare establishments or facilities, for queen
and trans persons since they do not qualify as 'family' or 'next of kin' as per law (Marriage equality alone will not free
queen persons from violent families, The News Minute, April 3 2023; Why India should recognize same-sex marriages
Testimonies by queer, trans persons, Indian Express, April 4, 2023).
1582. The myriad experiences of the queer and trans persons show that despite decriminalization of adult
consensual relationships, queen and trans persons remain stigmatized, and are neither free to choose their partners
nor to make families and living arrangements of their choice. Their lives continue to be dominated by the diktats of
and violence from natal families. These testimonies emphasize the urgent need for the state to adopt all measures to
protect the right to life with human dignity and personal liberty of queen and trans persons, which is fundamental to
create an enabling environment for them to be let alone to decide matters relating to marriage and other modes of
organizing chosen families.
1583. These lived realities of queen and trans persons across the nation raise the following important questions of
law for the consideration of this Hon'ble Court:
i. Whether issuance of directions on protection from violence by natal families and other non-state actors is
imperative for protecting the fundamental right to life and personal liberty and the right to found a family under
Article 21 of the Constitution?
ii. Whether this Hon'ble Court's declarations on transcending the institution of marriage as a source of rights and
recognizing 'atypical families' or 'chosen families' merits grant of relief to individuals irrespective of gender
identity, sexual orientation and marital status to nominate 'any person' as 'next of kin' in order to protect against
undue interference by 'guardians, close relatives and family members'?
iii. Whether SMA needs to be interpreted to recognize queer and trans marriages to save it from constitutional
invalidity on grounds of Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution?
iv. Whether the "notice, domicile and objection" framework under Sections 5-9 of SMA is unconstitutional, illegal
and ultra vires?
V. Whether this Hon'ble Court must intervene to save the validity of pre-existing marriages where one party has
transitioned to their self-determined genden identity?
11. Interference. opposition and violence from natal families, irrespective of marital status. violates the
fundamental Right to Life and Personal Liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution:
1584. Whether or not queer and trans persons are in intimate relationships, they are often faced with conflict from
the natal family by virtue of the opposition to the self-determination of gender identity and sexual orientation;
1585. Despite solemnization and registration of marriages, queen and trans couples will remain vulnerable to
unabated cycles of opposition, interference and violence from natal families, undermining the fundamental right to
marry and found a family, therefore, it is incumbent to protect the life and liberty under Article 21 irrespective of
relationship/marital status;
1586. International human rights bodies recognize that the predominant social and cultural justification for natal
family violence suffered by queer and trans individuals in Asia is embedded in notions of "family honour" the same
oppressive norm which fuels opposition, interference and violence against inter-caste and inter-faith couples (Report of
the United Nations Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation
and gender identity : Practices of so-called "conversion therapy", A/HRC/44/53, 1 May 2020);
1587. Queen and trans persons run away from natal families and homes often due to real and imminent threats of
forced marriage and corrective rape, or when the family finds out about their identity. The families typically respond by
detaining them against their will under 'house arrest' and without communication with any of their friends. Often their
education is stopped and their jobs, if any, discontinued (This Is Why We Became Activists : Violence Against Lesbian,
Bisexual and Queer Women and Non-Binary People, Human Rights Watch (2023) at pages 58-76);
1588. In case of queen and trans couples, natal families often file false missing person complaints when their adult
'daughters' voluntarily leave homes and use the police to track them across states. They often also file false charges of
abduction and theft against the partners as well as their own adult children, as acts of retaliation and insidious means
to seek their 'custody' and compel them into heterosexual expectations of society (The Unspoken : A Qualitative
Research on Natal Family Violence, Shakti Shalini (2023), at pages 23-25);
1589. Heteronormativity leaves no choice for queen and trans people to realize their pleasure either in terms of
having a partner of their same gender or in terms of wanting to identify with a different gender than the one they were
ascribed at birth, or even expressing non-stereotypical gender behaviour like cutting their hair. Indeed, one of the
main attacks for both trans feminine people and trans masculine people is on the basis of hair, which is very linked to
gender expression for transgender people. For trans feminine people, cutting off the hair by force is common and
sometimes it has led to even murder of the person by their family. Similarly cutting of long hair by trans masculine
people is also punished, in fact many cannot even cut their hair till they come out of their family. Expression of any
self-pleasure, let alone homosexuality, has no legitimate space (Towards Gender Inclusivity : A Study on
Contemporary Concerns Around Gender, Alternative Law Forum and LesBIT, 2013, at page 37);
Conflict with Law : Prosecution and Persecution
1590. District courts have directed that in cases of missing persons cases, once the police have obtained
statements from the runaway queen and trans couples that they are adults and have left their natal homes of their free
will and volition, the case must be closed forthwith and the police must ensure there is no further interference in the
relationship (S. Sushma V. Commissioner of Police, WP No. 7284/2021, order dated 07.06.2021);
1591. The gravity of the impunity in law with which natal families commit violations against their adult queer and
trans children is occasionally mirrored by orders of constitutional courts, wherein, instead of directly seeking
production of the detenu before court in a habeas corpus petition filed by the same sex partner, the court directed the
detenu's statement to be recorded at her residence and to undergo "counseling sessions" for 4-5 days. This undue
deference to the natal family by a constitutional court completely ignores the coercion and violence that queen and
trans persons are vulnerable to within their homes, many of whom do not have access to social and legal support to
exit abusive homes (Order dt. 06.02.2023 in Devu G. V. State of Kerala, SLP (Criminal) No. 5027/2023);
1592. In yet another case of constitutional courts mirroring heterosexist violence against queer and trans persons,
the State of Kerala is directed 'regulate' provision of conversion therapy, rather than impose an outright prohibition on
the same. A complex web of social, cultural and religious conditioning leads to systemic dehumanization of queer and
trans persons in our society. In such context, a vast majority of queer and trans individuals are violently coerced by
natal families to submit to medically abusive practices in order to purportedly "cure" their self-determined gender
identity or sexual orientation, while a minority of this group "chooses" to submit only in expectation of cessation of
natal family violence. The court's inability to take cognizance of this lived reality will have disastrous consequences for
the physical and mental health for queen and trans persons in society, as the proposed guidelines will promote
unscientific medical procedures and embolden natal families to perpetuate this cycle of violence under the illusion of
"informed consent" (Order dt. 10.12.2021 in Queerala V. State of Kerala, WP (C) No. 21202/2020);
1593. This Hon'ble Court has declared that any kind of torture or torment or ill-treatment in the name of "honour"
that violates the right to choose a partner in a relationship or marriage by any group of persons is illegal and has
issued directions to state governments for adopting preventive, remedial and punitive measures, including
establishment of safe houses to respect, protect and fulfill the fundamental right to marry and found a family for inter-
1594. This Hon'ble Court has applied the same apparatus of preventive, remedial and punitive measures to restrain
cases of mob lynching and destruction of property by "self-appointed keepers of public morality" (Tehseen S.
713 at paras. 18-20);
1595. This Hon'ble Court's directions to state governments for adopting preventive, remedial and punitive
measures are extended to runaway queer and trans couples by High Courts, who face similar vulnerability to "honour"
based natal family violence. However, this apparatus is not available on a national level for queer and trans persons
(Dhanak of Humanity V. State of NCT WP )1321/2021, final order dated 23.07.2021);
1596. High courts have directed the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MOSJE) in a series of orders to
enlist nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in order to make shelter homes available for all members of the queen
and trans community in a manner similar to the Garima Greh welfare scheme, which provides shelter homes run by
members of the trans community for at-risk members of their community (S. Sushma V. Commissioner of Police, WP
No. 7284/2021, orders dated 23.12.2021, 08.04.2022, 08.07.2022, 22.08.2022, 09.12.2022);
1597. High Courts are in early stages of recognizing transgender women's access to justice as 'aggrieved women'
under the DV Act, however, the right is made conditional on compulsory sex re-assignment surgery in complete
violation of NALSA's declaration of self-determination of gender identity. This practice will further condemn
transgender persons to lack of redress with respect to domestic violence and create barriers to access the architecture
of support services under the law, as it will exclude a vast majority of the community who are unable to afford trans-
affirmative healthcare services (Order dt. 16.03.2023 in Vithal Manik Khatri V. Sagar Sanjay Kamble @ Sakshi Vithal
Khatri, WP (C) No. 4037/2021);
1598. This Hon'ble Court has recognized the epidemic of police abuse of the power of arrest in course of criminal
justice administration as a tool of harassment and corruption, and directed all state governments to issue instructions
to
police officers to compulsorily follow the mandate of Sections 41 (When police may arrest without warrant) and 41-
A (Notice of appearance before police officer) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 ("CrPC") in order to prevent
unlawful arrest, in cases where the offence is punishable with less than or up to 7 years. In fact, this Hon'ble Court has
revitalized this mandate by routinely passing strictures against state governments and the defaulting police officers in
order to protect the fundamental right to personal liberty of persons under Article 21. As queen and trans persons
voluntarily runaway from abusive homes and are regularly harassed by natal families and the police under pretext of
commission of offences relating to abduction (Section 363, IPC - punishable up to 7 years) of the partner and/or theft
(Section 379 - punishable up to 3 years), this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue directions to all state
governments to instruct the police officers to compulsorily follow the mandate of Sections 41 and 41-A, CrPC when
responding to complaints involving queen and trans adults who voluntarily leave natal homes (Arnesh Kumar V. State
International and Comparative Law on Gender Based Violence Against Queen and Trans Persons:
1599. The Yogyakarta Principles reflect the application of international human rights law to the lives and
experiences of persons of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities, including but not limited to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 ('UDHR'); International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 ('ICCPR'),
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966 ('ICESCR'), Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1965 ('CERD'); Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women, 1979 ('CEDAW'); Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989 ('CRC') and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, 2006 ('CRPD') (Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in
Relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (2007));
1600. This Hon'ble Court must mould appropriate relief by taking into account Principle 7 (Right to Freedom from
Arbitrary Deprivation of Liberty) of the Yogyakarta Principles, which enjoins states to adopt all measures to ensure that
sexual orientation or gender identity may under no circumstances, de jure or de facto, be the basis for arrest or
detention as well as undertake training programmes to educate police and other law enforcement agencies regarding
the prohibition of arbitrary arrest or detention on such basis;
1601. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women has stated unequivocally that member
states must all take measures to respond to genden based violence, forced marriages, non-consensual medical
procedures and other status-based discrimination against queen and trans women (General Recommendation No. 35
on gender-based violence against women, updating general recommendation No. 19, CEDAW/C/GC/35);
1602. A study of violence against women (VAW) laws in five Asian countries (Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Malaysia,
Philippines and Japan) revealed they were directly or indirectly discriminatory and did not extend adequate protections
- or in some cases any protections - to queen and trans people. In many respects, it was reported that the states not
only failed to prevent but also condoned violence against female bodied and transgender people. The family was
reported as the primary perpetrator of violence. Family members carried out emotional, verbal, physical and sexual
violence against queer and trans people. This violence occurred regularly and had greater and longer lasting impact
than violence perpetrated by non-family members. State institutions, including medical, mental health and women's
shelter networks across the Asian region were insensitive and not trained to assist queen and trans victims of violence.
In general, service providing agencies responded poorly to queen and trans individuals who face violence. Women's
shelter programs set up specifically to assist women fleeing violence turned away lesbians in need of emergency
shelters for violence. The authors recommend that respective states must review existing VAW legislation to cover
queen and trans people, ministries must direct state-funded victim assistance programs to expand services to queer
and trans people and ensure that NGOs receive training and implement good practices on safe, inclusive, sensitive
services for queen and trans people in need of assistance for violence, foreg., legal redress, healthcare, social welfare,
etc. (VIOLENCE Through the Lens of Lesbians, Bisexual Women and Trans People in Asia, The International Gay and
Lesbian Human Rights Commission (2014));
1603. The Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act, 2012 of Queensland (Australia) requires courts to take into
account lesbian, bisexual, transgender and intersex people's heightened vulnerability to domestic violence in moulding
appropriate relief to survivors (Section 4 Principles for administering Act) and directing access to services relating to
counseling, disability, health, education, housing or homelessness and legal aid (Section 169C(1)(a) and (h)
Definitions for part);
1604. The Istanbul Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence
(2011) requires member states of the European Union (EU) to adopt all preventive, remedial and punitive measures in
order to respond to gender based violence against women. The treaty enjoins member states that Parties are
encouraged to apply this Convention to all victims of domestic violence. Parties shall pay particular attention to women
victims of gender-based violence in implementing the provisions of this Convention" (Article 2 - Scope of the
Convention). Member states are further mandated to ensure that implementation of the treaty shall be secured
without discrimination on basis of sexual orientation or gender identity (Article 4 - Fundamental rights, equality and
non-discrimination). The convention requires member states to recognize, encourage and support, at all levels, the
work of relevant non-governmental organizations and of civil society active in combating violence against women and
establish effective cooperation with these organizations (Article 9 Non-governmental organizations and civil society)
in facilitating access to services such as legal and psychological counselling, financial assistance, housing, education,
training, assistance in finding employment and shelters (Article 20 - General support services) (Council of Europe
Treaty Series 210 - Violence against women and domestic violence, 11.V.2011);
1605. This Hon'ble Court must mould appropriate relief by taking into account Principle 5 (Right to Security of the
Person) of the Yogyakarta Principles, which enjoin states to adopt all measures in order to respect, protect and fulfill
the right to protection by the state against violence or bodily harm on basis of sexual orientation or gender identity,
whether inflicted by state or non-state actors;
1606. This Hon'ble Court must also take into account Principle 30 (Right to State Protection) of the Yogyakarta
Principles Plus 10, which enjoins states to take all measures to prevent, punish and provide remedies for
discrimination, violence and other harm on basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression or sex
characteristics, whether by state or non-state actors. States are further mandated to establish support services for
survivors of sexual assault, harassment, violence and other harm on such grounds (Additional Principles and State
Obligations on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity,
Gender Expression and Sex Characteristics to Complement the Yogyakarta Principles, as adopted on 10 November
2017, Geneva);
1607. Queen and trans people, whose identity intersects with their belonging to religious minorities or oppressed
caste, need relief in terms of recognition and redistribution. Recognition seeks removal of sexual orientation and
gender identity based restrictions under SMA. However, redistribution can offer medico-legal care for survivors of
gender based violence, affordable housing and employment opportunities to most-at risk queen and trans people from
religion and caste minorities, who are fleeing from natal family violence (Social Justice in the Age of Identity Politics :
Redistribution, Recognition, and Participation, Nancy Fraser, The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, Delivered at
Stanford University April 30-May 2, 1996);
1608. This Hon'ble Court's determination of legal recognition of queer and trans marriages must proceed through
the lens of transformative constitutionalism, which mandates moulding of relief under a 'social science' approach and
not based on 'traditional legalism'. In the context of conflict with natal families and gross disparities in material
wellbeing of a vast majority of the queer and trans community, marriage alone cannot remedy historical injustices. The
Constitution recognizes that our society has deeply entrenched inequalities, thus, merely recognizing queen and trans
marriages will not remedy existing inequalities, unless positive action is taken to mitigate the same. Therefore, access
to a national-level state apparatus to prevent, remedy and punish all forms of violence against queer and trans
persons, with support services, can lay the groundwork for them to exercise the right to found a family without fear of
111. Non-recognition of 'atypical families' or 'chosen families' beyond constraints of marriage, blood or
adoption violates Articles 14, 15. and 21:
Revisiting the Paradigm of Care in Context of Conflict inflicted by Natal Families:
1609. For those who 'come out' as queen or trans to their families or are inadvertently found out to be queer or
trans, the conflict from the family does not start and end with relationships. Irrespective of relationship status, queen
or trans individuals are seen as "ill and abnormal". Families resort to all desperate attempts to "reform" their children
through coercive and violent means, which involve illegal and medically harmful methods like "conversion therapies"
or traditional methods through faith-healers or even forced heterosexual marriage, which is seen as a "cure" for all
assertions of individual choice;
1610. Queer and trans individuals face opposition, denial of identity, restriction of liberty, surveillance, forced
marriages and violence from "guardians, close relatives and family members" when they 'come out' and present their
authentic selves before their families and society. The limitations of law's recognition of only a typical family unit is
grossly inadequate as it strips queen and trans individuals the autonomy to choose 'any person' in order to secure their
best interests and ensure security of person, especially where the natal family is predisposed to reject and harm the
queen and trans person. Queen and trans people form different kinds of families for taking care and responsibility for
and of each other, and pooling of financial and immoveable assets, which are not protected by the law's notion of a
'family';
1611. Queen and trans individuals face invidious interference and opposition from natal families on account of any
choice (whether personal, professional, economic and others) that affirms the centrality of their gender identity and
sexual orientation to their lives, irrespective of whether or not they are in relationships and/or cohabit with a partner.
Hence, the recognition of an individuals' ability to nominate 'any person', not conventionally related, yet being most
intimate, available and reliable, to secure their best interests in circumstances of vulnerability, incapacity or when the
individual is unable to make a decision for any other reasons assumes greater significance for unmarried queer and
trans individuals who, out of abundant caution, need to clearly define and limit the role of their natal families in their
private lives to every possible extent, including exclusion in the most dire events. The primary objective being to
ensure one's best interests, a large number of queer and trans persons, informed by their lived experiences of natal
family rejection, hostility and violence, need the legal right to substitute natal family relatives with their chosen family
or 'nominee' for medico-legal as well as social purposes. In the absence of such legal recognition, the law perpetuates
natal family violence on queen and trans persons even decades after they may have succeeded in escaping violent and
abusive families. Perpetuation of such violence, even though seemingly as per law, is impermissible under the
constitutional scheme which does not permit the perpetuation of historic injustices, biases and prejudices through
promulgation or continuance of laws;
1612. While some queen and trans persons wish to make the choice to get married, there are also many others who
do not share such aspirations, and the law cannot ignore or have a blind spot towards the rights of such queen and
trans persons. In this context, apart from ensuring that the bouquet of rights ensuing from marriage is made
accessible to queen and trans persons, there is an imminent need for recognition of the right of queer and trans
persons to a chosen family and for legal recognition of such atypical families. The recognition in law of the right to
choose a family "disrupts assumptions around the primacy of marriage as the principal marker of adult
commitment" (Chosen Family, Care, and the Workplace, Deborah A. Widiss, 05.11.2021, Yale Law Journal);
1613. A critical mass of the queen and trans community may not choose marriage as an institution to define the
meaning of their intimate relationships and lives; whereas on the contrary, they seek and choose to assign rights and
obligations with respect to the most intimate aspects of their private lives in relation to housing, custody of minor
children, end of life care decisions, among others, to individuals like friends, live-in partners and any other persons of
vital importance in their lives. These lived experiences with chosen families occur against a backdrop of restrictions
and interference by natal families who deny dignity and autonomy in life and death. It is pertinent to note that while
the notion of a chosen family may be borne out of the conflict inflicted by the natal family, it is not an idea that
challenges natal family bonds, but merely allows for a more inclusive understanding of adult intimacies and
commitments, leading to conceptualizing of families that are more capacious, inclusive and available to queen and
trans persons, especially when in need of care (Humjinsi A Resource Book on Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Rights in
India', Edited and Compiled by Bina Fernandez, India Centre for Human Rights and Law (1999), pgs. 83-88, marked
as Annexure-P8 at Page 240-245A);
1614. The latest data shows that single person households constitute 12.5% of all households in India. Moreover,
7.5% of all households are single parent families, a majority of which households (approximately 13 million) are
headed by women. Recent academic work on motherhood in India explores non-normative families, primarily by
women identifying as queer or lesbian, unwed biological mothers and unmarried friends raising adopted children
together. These emerging narratives which are not based on conjugal or romantic bonds further demonstrate the need
for re-defining laws governing families and dependency (Nandy, Amrita (2017) : Motherhood and Choice Uncommon
Mothers. Childfree Women. New Delhi. Zubaan):
1615. Kinship between unrelated persons could be experienced as equivalent of biological or legal ties, and within
queen and trans communities, individuals are more likely to form families of friends. There is no compelling reason for
the state to withhold associated rights from non-conjugal households and relationships premised on care-giving and
economic interdependence, and this Hon'ble Court must mould appropriate relief by taking into account caring
arrangements, consent to healthcare decisions, sharing property, among others (Beyond Conjugality Recognizing and
Supporting Close Personal Adult Relationships, Law Commission of Canada (2001));
1616. Older queen and trans persons are more likely to live alone and experience social isolation and report poorer
health outcomes. Family rejection and limitations in the recognition of certain forms of families mean that often older
queen and trans persons are more likely to rely on chosen family for caregiving support(Report of the United Nations
Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, A/75/258, 28 July 2020);
1617. The need for recognition of chosen families was manifestly evident during the Covid-19 pandemic. After the
lockdowns, many transgender people had no option but to return to their parental or family homes, which they had left
or were disowned due to their choice of gender non-conforming identity, as they could not sustain themselves when
their means of earning were lost. Due to stay-at-home restrictions, many queen and trans youth were confined in
hostile environments with unsupportive family members. This increased their exposure to violence, as well as their
anxiety and depression. The suicides of transgender persons during the lockdowns are the evidence of both the
material and psychic abandonment that trans and queen persons were struggling against, with natal families forcing
outlawed conversion therapy on the one hand and isolating any networks for support, on the other. With no access to
friends, partners and community, many trans persons found themselves particularly lonely. These experiences reveal
that desperate circumstances for queer and trans individuals can be exacerbated if the only available support system
is the natal family. Trans communities have thus articulated the demand for recognition of their 'non-traditional family
structures' (Report of the Study of Impact of the Covid-19 and Lockdowns on the Transgender Community in
Karnataka, Gamana Mahila Samuha (2020), pages 10, 20; Vikramaditya Sahai, Aj Agrawal and Almas Shaikh,
'Exclusion Amplified COVID-19 and the Transgender Community (CLPR, Bangalore, 2020) at page 13);
1618. It is most difficult to overcome violence and discrimination faced from parents, siblings, relatives because
queen and trans adolescents and adults alike are conditioned to not recognize such harmful acts as 'violence' at the
behest of the 'family unit'. Worse even, the violence normalized and considered to be means of discipline. On the other
hand, the compulsoriness of marriage in order to redraw boundaries with the natal family undermines every other way
of living and making families. When marriage is recognized as the only means of claiming rights as a family unit in law
and society, it undermines other ways of living and loving. Queen and trans communities' experiences say that they
find support and care primarily in queer friendships, kinships and intimacies. They depend on these affective
relationships for survival-from health emergencies, illness, financial crisis, emotional break-down, decisions about life
and care (Queer-Trans* Intimacies and Communities - Envisioning Rights and the Way Forward, National Queer-
Trans* People Meet Report, 25-26 June 2022, Kolkata);
1619. In NALSA, this Hon'ble Court did not limit its writ jurisdiction to issue a positive declaration to the concern
on self-determination of gender identity. Rather, in order to do complete justice to a historically marginalized
community, this Hon'ble Court issued expansive directions to central and state governments to ensure access to
healthcare, framing of social welfare policies and grant of reservation in educational institutions and public
appointments, among others, under Article 32. Likewise, it is essential that this Hon'ble Court traverses beyond the
recognition of queen and trans marriages under SMA and protect rights of queen and trans individuals whose lived
experiences demand the moulding of relief to recognize the autonomy and authority to assign rights and
responsibilities to members of a chosen family (National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) V. Union of India, (2014) 5
1620. It is respectfully submitted that but for the condition of conjugality and marital status between legally
wedded parties, chosen families perform the same roles of care-giving, financial inter-dependence and sharing of
domestic responsibilities. The denial of recognition of rights and responsibilities of members of chosen families, but
rewarding married parties with robust protections in law, proceeds on basis of conjugality and marital status of parties
to the relationship. The impairment of the autonomy of persons to organize their chose families and the violations
arising from non-recognition interfere with Article 15's proscription of discrimination on basis of sex and the analogous
ground of marital status. Therefore, denial of recognition to chosen families must be assessed on the test of strict
scrutiny by evaluating the impact of exclusion from the material benefits as well as the expressive norm of dignity
(Reading Swaraj into Article 15 A New Deal for All Minorities, Tarunabh Khaitan, NUJS Law Review, 2 NUJS L. Rev.
419 (2009), pages 424-425);
1621. The principle of substantive equality mandates that the State must not exact conformity as a price for
equality. Instead, it should accommodate difference and aim to achieve structural change. Queer and trans
individuals, who do not choose marriage, deserve the recognition and protection of law when they seek to nominate
'any person' beyond the constraints of 'guardians, close relatives or family members' as they seek to lead autonomous
lives independent of any restrictions imposed by natal families, by virtue of their inherent dignity. (Francis Coralie
1622. The inviolable nature of the human personality is manifested in the ability of an individual to make intimate
choices. The recognition that the fundamental right to privacy is an intrinsic recognition of heterogeneity and the right
of the individual to stand against the tide of conformity must lead towards the inescapable conclusion of recognition of
the authority of the individual in nominating 'any person' in order to secure their best interests in matters relating to
1 at para. 323);
1623. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother, a father and their children. This assumption ignores both, the many
circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the fact that many families do not conform
to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or
queen relationships. A household may be a single parent household for any number of reasons, including the death of a
spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the guardians and caretakers of children may change with remarriage,
adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be typical but they are as real as their
traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally, if not more deserving, not only of
protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation and policies. The black letter of
the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from traditional ones. (Deepika Singh V.
1624. While much of law's benefits are rooted in the institution of marriage, the law in modern times is shedding
the notion that marriage is a precondition to the rights of individuals (alone or in relation to one another). Changing
social mores must be borne in mind when interpreting the provisions of an enactment to further its object and
purpose. Statutes are considered to be "always speaking". Societal reality indicates the need to legally recognize non-
traditional manifestations of familial relationships. Such legal recognition is necessary to enable individuals in non-
traditional family structures to avail of the benefits under beneficial legislation. Both married and unmarried persons
have equal decisional autonomy to make significant choices regarding their own welfare (X V. Principal Secretary,
1625. Adults with capacity to consent have the fundamental right to self-determination and autonomy to refuse
medical treatment. In this regard, Advance Directives by a terminally-ill person or a person in vegetative state, for
withdrawing medical treatment, is entitled to be followed by a treating physician under Article 21 of the Constitution.
This Hon'ble Court has laid down guidelines to facilitate the process of implementing Advance Directives, and outlined
the role of guardians, close relatives or family members of the executor in giving effect to the same (Common Cause V.
1626. Competentcourts routinely declare and appoint one spouse as the legal guardian of the medically
incapacitated spouse, for managing the estate as well as participating in healthcare decisions in the best interests of
1627. The ability to nominate a caregiver in such emergency healthcare situations is severely restricted for queen
and trans individuals who are facing conflict from their natal families. Often the 'guardians, close relatives or family
members' are at best unaware of the wishes of the person, or worse, actively dishonour the wishes of the person,
thereby, violating their rights and heaping indignity even in the midst of critical events;
1628. Likewise queer and trans individuals are stripped of autonomy with respect to nominating 'any person' due to
the non-recognition in law of 'atypical or chosen families' which are formed beyond the constraints of marriage, blood
or adoption, in matters ranging from estate planning, housing, transfer of property, employment-based partner
benefits, guardianship of children, access to assisted reproductive technologies and many other private aspects of
family life;
1629. Certain High Courts have expanded the scope of legal heirs for the hijra community by declaring that non-
conjugal kinship bonds of the guru-chela parampara are not opposed to public policy and recognized members of a
hijra gharana as lawful heirs with respect to devolution of property of a deceased member (IIIyas V. Badshah alias
Kamla, AIR 1990 MP 334; Sweety V. General Public, AIR 2016 HP 148);
1630. Section 14 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (MHCA) recognizes an individual's right to appoint any
person' as the nominated representative, in addition to 'relatives', for purposes of giving effect to their advance
directive on the course of mental healthcare treatment in the event of their incapacity. It is humbly submitted that the
law's recognition of 'any person' as capable of serving the best interests of individuals in a state of vulnerability or
incapacity ought to be reproduced in general contexts for queen and trans. individuals to assign a right, title, interest,
claim or benefit accrued as per law;
1631. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare tasked with examining the Mental
Healthcare Bill, 2013 received objections with respect to appointment of any person' as a nominated representative
and assigning broad ranging caretaking responsibilities for persons with mental illness by several members deposing
before the committee. The objections were based on grounds that codification of such practice in formal law is "alien to
Indian culture", will pose a "danger" to the patient's health, lead to "conflict" between natal family and the nominated
representative over the best interests of the person with mental illness and is liable to "misuse" by the nominated
representative in usurping the property and other social and economic rights that vest in the person with mental
illness. However, the Department of Health and Welfare issued a complete response to all concerns by stating that the
appointment of nominated representative is limited for purposes for mental healthcare decision-makina and the
principle complies with the rights based framework that seeks to protect the autonomy of persons with mental illness
against "perceived rights" of natal families and caregivers. It is respectfully submitted that the prayer of Petitioners
herein with respect to nomination of 'any person(s) to act as their nominee or next of kin is based on the same
rationale that informs Section 14 of MHCA, which is binding law (Report No. 74, Department-Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare at pages 8, 52);
Comparative Law on Recognition of Chosen Families - Care-giving, Economic Inter-dependence and
Domestic Responsibilities:
1632. The Hawaii Reciprocal Beneficiaries Act, 1997 in the United States of America (USA) recognizes relationships
of any two individuals who have significant personal, emotional and economic interdependence, and grants equal
rights and benefits as those available only to married couples (Section 572C-2 : Findings). The law includes friends
who do not share a romantic relationship and persons who may be related to one another, to register as reciprocal
beneficiaries;
1633. The Adult Interdependent Relationships Act, 2002 in the Canadian province of Alberta defines a 'relationship
of interdependence' as a relationship outside marriage in which any two persons (1) share one another's lives (2) are
emotionally committed to one another, and (3) function as an economic and domestic unit (Section 1(1)(f)). In
determining whether two persons function as an economic and domestic unit, it is immaterial whether the persons
have a conjugal relationship (Section 1(2));
1634. The Relationship Act, 2003 in Tasmania (Australia) allows persons to enter into registered partnerships as
either a 'significant relationship' (Section 4) or 'caring relationship' (Section 5), which are characterized by financial
dependency, care-giving and domestic support, wherein a conjugal relationship is immaterial;
1635. The Colorado Designated Beneficiary Act, 2009 recognizes the right of any two individuals who are (1) above
18 years of age, (2) competent to enter into contracts, (3) neither party is married to the other, (4) neither party is
another person's designated beneficiary and (5) both parties enter into the agreement without force, fraud or duress
or (15-22-104. Requirements for a valid designated beneficiary agreement) to enter into an agreement for purposes of
caregiving responsibilities in disability, incapacity or estate planning in order that people are not placed at the mercy
of existing laws that vest decision-making power in persons the parties wish to not authorize (15-22-102. Legislative
declaration);
1636. The Ordinance No. 2020-16, City of Somerville in Massachusetts (USA) passed an ordinance on 'domestic
partnerships', defined as an entity formed by people who (1) are 18 years or older and competent to contract, (2) are
in a relationship of mutual support, caring and commitment, and intend to remain in this relationship, (3) reside
together, (4) are not married, (5) are not related by blood, and (6) consider themselves to be a family (Section 2-502
(c));
1637. The Cuban Family Code (2022), popularly referred to as the 'Code of Affection', recognizes rights and
obligations of any persons who share an 'affective relationship' which is based on financial dependence, care-giving
and domestic support;
1638. This Hon'ble Court must mould appropriate relief by taking into consideration India's duty to follow Principle
24 (Right to Found a Family) of the Yogyakarta Principles, which mandates that all states must recognize the diversity
of family forms, including those not defined by marriage or descent, and take all measures to ensure that no family
may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or genden identity of any of its members,
including but not limited to family-related social welfare and other public benefits;
IV. The "notice, domicile and objection" framework under Sections 5-9 of SMA violates Articles 14, 15, 19
and 21
1639. On 08.09.1954, during Lok Sabha debates on passage of the Special Marriage Bill (1952), Shri.
Ventkatraman issued the following statement in justification of the requirement of notice, domicile and objection
framework under SMA (Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill dated 08.09.1954 at pages 1329-1330):
"The amendment which / place before this House is to increase the period of residence from 14 days to 30 days, since
we do not want to provide opportunities for some runaway people going to an out of the way place and getting
themselves registered without adequate notice to the parties who are really interested in the marriage.
The question may be asked, how does thirty days, in any way, prevent such a contingency occurring? It is likely that if
a
person resides for a period of thirty days in a place, he would come into contact with a number of people, his
presence there would also be noticed or felt by the persons whom he ought to inform. His relations would come to
know the whereabouts of the person and, therefore, there are less chances of some couples running away and getting
themselves married, if the period is thirty days than it is if it were only a period of fourteen days. / am not suggesting
that this is a fool-proof amendment. All that / am saying is that if the period is increased from fourteen to thirty days,
the chances of people coming to know of the residence of that person in that place would be more and the relatives
and friends interested in him would also come to know of it and if any objection has got to be raised they may be able
to raise it.
1640. As evident on the face of the record, it is respectfully submitted that the epidemic of abuse suffered by inter-
caste and inter-religious couples eloping to escape violent natal families in order to solemnize and register marriages
is the intended consequence of the provision on notice, domicile and objection ('How the Special Marriage Act is Killing
Love', Article 14, dated 19.10.2020 marked as Annexure-P10 at pages 252-265);
1641. Queen and trans persons who faced violent resistance to their relationships from natal families or third
parties approached High Courts for relief even before Naz Foundation V. Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 2009 (111) DRJ 1 (DB).
However, since at the time the law de facto criminalized LBTI relationships, the vast majority of legal records relating
to protection cases of queer and trans persons between the period 1947 to 2009 do not authentically represent the
gender identity or sexual orientation of parties before the courts, since openly identifying as queer or trand could invite
social hardships and legal penalties ('Queer Women and Habeas Corpus in India : The Love that Blinds the Court',
Ponni Arasu and Priya Thangarajah, 19(3) Indian Journal of Gender Studies 413, (2012), pgs. 4-6, 8-17, marked as
Annexure-P5 at Page 114-137);
1642. Despite landmark declarations of this Hon'ble Court with respect to self-determination of gender identity
(NALSA) and decriminalization of sex between consenting adults (Navtej Singh Johar), queer and trans persons are
routinely compelled to resort to High Courts for seeking remedies against arbitrary interference and violations by natal
Sinsinwar V. State, WP (Crl) No. 3005 of 2018 disposed of by final order dated 01.10.2018; SSG V. State of West
Bengal, Writ Petition No. 23120(W) of 2018, disposed of by final order dated 29.01.2019; Bhawna V. State, WP (Crl)
order dated 20.07.2020; Sultana Mirza V. State of Uttar Pradesh, Writ Petition (C) 17394/2020, disposed of by order
dated 02.11.2020; Raunak Roy V. State of Karnataka, WP (C) 85 of 2020, disposed of by final order dated14.12.2020;
Poonam Rani V. State of UP, Writ Petition (C) No. 1213 of 2021 disposed of by final order dated 20.01.2021; S.
Sushma V. Commissioner of Police, order dated 07.06.2021 in WP No. 7284/2021);
1643. An analysis of the aforesaid cases reveals that this process is fraught with real and imminent challenges for
queen and trans people, as they are compelled to negotiate exercising their right to choose a partner against threats to
personal safety and economic security by natal families. The recourse of approaching High Courts on an ad-hoc basis
often provides limited relief in terms of prevention of imminent threat to life. In this context, solemnization and
registration of marriages irrespective of gender identity and sexual orientation and striking down of the notice,
domicile and objection framework under SMA can ameliorate the impact of arbitrary interference and violence by natal
families and third parties (The L World : Legal Discourses on Queer Women', Surabhi Shukla, 13 NUJS L. Rev. 3
(2020), pgs. 14-22, marked as Annexure-P6 at Page 138-162); SMA and Intersectionality of Caste, Religion,
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 110. The struggle of individuals who seek registration of their marriages
under SMA irrespective of gender identity and sexual orientation is located within the larger history of struggles
against various forms of social subordination in India. The impugned provisions under SMA perpetuate the
unconstitutional legacy of 'the order of nature" formerly sanctioned under Section 377, Indian Penal Code, 1860, (IPC)
which was conceptually not limited to non-procreative sex, but applied to all forms of intimacy which the social order
finds 'disturbing'. This includes various forms of inter-caste and inter-religious relationships which are sought to be
curbed by society, including natal families. The re-imagination of the 'order of nature' as being not only about
prohibition of non-procreative sex but instead about limits imposed by structures such as gender, caste, class, religion
and community necessitates the protection of the right to marryand removal of impugned barriers under SMA, not just
1644. The principle that a facially neutral action of the state may disproportionately affect a protected class is
1645. A vast body of literature published by queer and trans persons provides evidence of the very real and
imminent risk to life and liberty of individuals in relationships irrespective of gender identity and sexual orientation,
who are very likely to face similar or worse consequences under the notice, domicile and objection framework of SMA.
The authorisation for 'any person' to object and cause interference in solemnization and registration of marriages on
the basis of gender identity and sexual orientation, directly infringes upon personal autonomy in organizing the most
intimate aspects of one's lives. A declaration by this Hon'ble Court to affirm the fundamental right to marry and found
a family, without dismantling the notice, domicile and objection framework under SMA, will perpetuate the cycle of
queer and trans persons facing conflict from the law and natal families, and compel them to 'abscond' from one state
to another in search of safe havens ('The nature of violence faced by lesbian women in India, A Study by Bina
Fernandes and Gomathy N.B.', Tata Institute of Social Sciences (2003), pgs. 40-46, 111-112, marked as Annexure-
P11 at Page 266-275; 'Documenting and Mapping Violence and Rights Violations Taking Place in Lives of Sexually
Marginalized Women to Chart Out Effective Advocacy Strategies', Sappho for Equality (2011), pgs. 30-42, marked as
Annexure-P12 at Page 276-289; 'Breaking the Binary : Understanding Concerns and Realities of Queer Persons
Assigned Gender Female at Birth Across a Spectrum of Lived Gender Identities, A Study by LABIA' -A Queer Feminist
LBT Collective (April 2013), pgs. 33-38, marked as Annexure-P13 at Page 290-296; 'Beyond the Roof An action-
research study on women survivors of violence and shelter homes in Delhi', Action India, Jagori and Nazariya (2019),
pgs. 16-19, marked as Annexure-P14 at Page 297-301; 'Progressive Realization of Rights A Co-Traveller's
Reflections on Crisis Intervention', Suchithra K K, Deeptha Rao VN & Sathyakala K K(2022), pgs. 5-15, marked as
Annexure-P15 at Page 302-313);
1646. Inter-caste and inter-religious couples have not only withstood pressure and violence from families and third
parties for marrying beyond their communities, but they have also had to contend with unsupportive marriage officers
who "counsel" women against entering such marriages under the pretext of enforcing the notice, domicile and
objection framework. On the other hand, the lived experiences of queen and trans individuals suggest that sanction to
their relationships in law will invite a social backlash in terms of heightened vulnerability on basis of caste, religion and
community norms, thereby indicating that implementation of the notice, domicile and objection framework to deny
inter-caste, inter-religious and queen and trans marriages will likely be aggravated in the event this Hon'ble Court
grants the prayers of Petitioners herein to recognize queen and trans marriages (Talking Marriage, Caste and
Community Voices from Within, SAHELI (2007) at pages 18, 65);
1647. Although the notice, domicile and objection framework is facially neutral, the adverse impact in
implementation falls disproportionately on inter-caste and inter-religious couples, and especially on further
marginalized couples, where one or both partners do not conform to the gender binary or have unconventional sexual
orientation(s). Individuals in relationships across gender identity and sexual orientation are very likely to face worse
consequences, on account of the ignominious history of violence and opposition from natal families, the police and
third parties. When viewed in the backdrop of institutional or societal context in which the impugned framework
operates, it is respectfully submitted this has effect of perpetuating systemic disadvantage in the shape of social,
economic and political exclusion, psychological and physical harm by exposing minority communities to conflict
inflicted by natal families. As per settled law, therefore, the impugned provisions of SMA are unconstitutional as they
amount to indirect discrimination under Article 15. Moreover, the impugned framework is not saved by any
justification, as the purported legitimate state interest discernible from the legislative debates is the prevention of
runaway marriages', which predominantly consist of inter-caste and inter-religious couples who flee due to natal
61, 64-97);
1648. This Hon'ble Court must bear in mind that the Petitioners herein fall within a protected class on basis of
sexual orientation and gender identity. Article 15 recognizes the principle that certain groups have been historically
disadvantaged and that post the enactment of the Constitution, actions of the State that discrimination against queen
and trans persons are constitutionally untenable. The notice, domicile and objection framework does not operate in a
vacuum; it's implementation must be examined in the social context it operates and the effects that it creates in the
real world. It is immaterial that the impugned framework does not intentionally inflict harm on inter-caste and inter-
religious couples; the ultimate effect of its implementation has a disparate impact on the aforesaid protected groups
by perpetuating the historic denial of agency that individuals have faced in India on the basis of caste, religion, sexual
orientation and gender identity, and nullifies the fundamental right to marry and found a family (Madhu V. Northern
1649. It is difficult to think about 'one' experience of queen and trans persons in regard to issues of violence and
pleasure because this community, as with all communities in India, is divided by caste and class. The intersections of
caste and class in the context of sexuality and gender are very complex. The structure of our social system is based on
violence if there is any sort of non-conformity with norms of caste, class, religion, and gender and sexuality. Moreover
cultures are different in various regions and this adds to complex structural violence especially against queer and trans
persons. When an individual is located in multiple marginalized positions, they experience even more violence in their
inability to question and pursue alternatives to the systems they have been forced into (Towards Gender Inclusivity A
Study on Contemporary Concerns Around Gender, Alternative Law Forum and LesBIT, 2013, at pages 38-40) 117. The
doctrine of intersectionality presents a framework of analysis to review the implementation of the "notice, domicile and
objection" framework under SMA, by focusing on the effects of natal family opposition to solemnization of marriages by
the intersection of caste, religion, poverty, gender identity and sexual orientation which shape individual and collective
experiences of inequality. A comprehensive appraisal of the distinct experience of powerlessness of queen and trans
individuals belonging to religious or caste minority groups must translate into moulding appropriate relief (M.
Sameeha Barvin V. Jt. Secy., Ministry of Youth and Sports Development, (2022) 1 Mad LJ 466 at paras. 14-20; Patan
Jamal Vali V. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 2021 SC 2190 at paras. 15-30);
1650. It is necessary to consider the impact of SMA's "notice, domicile and objection" framework on marginalized
groups, whose social and economic conditions heighten their vulnerability to discrimination, harassment and violence
by natal families and third parties. The implementation of laws must not mirror the systemic discrimination prevalent
in society but must be aimed at remedying this discrimination and ensuring substantive equality (Devika Biswas V.
The Notice, Domicile and Objection Framework Violates the Guarantee of Due Process:
1651. The "notice, domicile and objection" framework signals to natal families and local communities that third
parties have a legitimate and vested right to cause interference and disruption in the most intimate and private
aspects of lives of consenting adults, whether before or after marriage, resultantly depriving inter-caste, inter-faith
and queen and trans couples the freedom from insecurity, interference and violence by state and non-state actors
1652. The fundamental right to marry and found a family under Article 21 is rendered futile by the "notice,
domicile and objection" framework, as such provisions have the direct and inevitable effect of emboldening natal
1653. Article 21 guarantees both procedural as well as substantive due process. Therefore, the scheme of SMA
must be applied in a manner that is fair, just and reasonable in order to guarantee the fundamental right to marry and
found a family. The procedure with respect to inspection of the marriage notice book and opportunity for filina
objections with respect to a notice of intended marriage by "any person" violates both the guarantees (Mohd. Arif V.
1654. The "notice, domicile and objection" framework is rendered unconstitutional on the ground of vagueness, as
it lacks reasonable standards and clear guidance for citizens, authorities and courts, in so far as it allows "any person"
to inspect records and cause interference between an intending couple. When a law uses vague expressions capable of
misuse or abuse, it leaves affected parties in a boundless sea of uncertainty and has a chilling effect on the ability of
1
at paras. 56-71);
1655. The Law Commission of India has recommended the procedure with respect to notice, domicile and filing
objections under SMA to be completely deleted in order to redress the harassment from natal families and third parties
(Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances (in the name of Honour and Tradition) : A
Suggested Legal Framework. Report No. 242 (2012) at para. 9.1);
1656. While intra-community marriage laws (Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Parsi personal laws) do not provide for
"notice, domicile and objection" framework, the codification of the same under SMA is unconstitutional in so far as the
impugned provisions are (a) disproportionate to the object of prevention of violations of the law and (b) there exists
no legitimate state interest in regulating inter-religious marriages and inter-caste marriages when intra-community
para. 325).
1657. While intra-community marriage laws (Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Parsi personal laws) do not provide for the
"notice, domicile and objection" framework, the codification of the same under SMA is unconstitutional in so far as it
casts a presumption of criminality on any two consenting adults who choose to marry beyond constraints of caste,
religion, heteronormativity, gender identity and sexual orientation. The impugned framework treats all persons seeking
solemnization and registration of marriages under SMA as potential criminals without even requiring the state to draw
a reasonable belief that the individuals might be perpetrating a crime or violating conditions of a valid marriage under
the law, therefore, it is completely disproportionate to the objective sought to be achieved by the state (Justice K.S.
1658. The additional "notice and objection" framework under Sections 15-16 of SMA, meant for registration of
marriages formerly solemnized as per personal laws, suffers from the same defects and violations as the "notice,
domicile and objection" framework impugned herein, since it imposes an unconstitutional barrier in circumstances
where one party to a marriage has transitioned to affirm their self-determined gender identity and both parties have
mutually decided to continue the marriage and save it's validity under Sections 15-16 of SMA;
V. Non-recognition of marriage between two consenting adults on basis of gender identity on sexual
orientation under the scheme of solemnization and registration of marriages in Special Marriage Act. 1954
(SMA) violates Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21:
1659. Queen and trans individuals need the layers of social, economic and legal protections which accrue as a direct
incidence of marriage, in order to shield themselves from the opposition, interference, violence and violations by natal
families;
1660. As conflict with natal families is a recurring phenomenon in many queen and trans persons' lives, the right to
marry and found a family can substantially mitigate these circumstances by offering the immunity of state sanction to
queen and trans marriages, and hence shield them against the misuse and abuse of law by natal families;
1661. As conflict inflicted by natal families results in loss of social and economic rights accrued as members of such
families, the benefits accruing as the direct incidence of marriage will offer a source of support to queen and trans
couples in order to live with dignity;
1662. The lack of legal recognition to queen and trans persons' relationships is historically a contributing factor
emboldening natal families to force them to enter into 'heterosexual' marriages against their will ('Less Than Gay, A
Citizens Report on the Status of Homosexuality in India', AIDS Bhedbhav Virodhi Andolan (1991), pgs. 8-9, marked as
Annexure-P1 at Pages 83-85);
16 Forced marriages have compelled many queen and trans people to run away in attempts to 'marry' a partner
of
their choice or die by suicide ('Lesbian Suicides and the Kerala Women's Movement', Paper presented at Hyderabad
Young South Indian Feminists Conference, Deepa Vasudevan, Sahayatrika, (2001), pgs. 1-6, marked as Annexure-P2
at Page 86-98A and 'Law like Love : Queen perspective on34 83-85 86-98A Law', Yoda Press (2011), pgs. 325-337,
marked as Annexure-P3 at Pages 99-105B);
1664. Lesbian couples have frequently sought to formalize their relationships under the device of maitri karan
(friendship agreements), however, the legal ambiguity of such arrangements has increased their vulnerability to
interference by natal families and non-recognition in law. Such intimate relationships may not always be sexual or
romantic, but are borne out of mutual care and respect, and allow gender non conforming individuals to exercise their
right to choice of family ('Rights in Intimate Relationships : Towards an Inclusive and Just Framework of Women's
Rights and the Family', Partners for Law in Development (2010), pgs. 66-72, marked as Annexure-P4 at Pages 106-
113);
1665. Several rural and urban queen and trans persons have historically undergone religious ceremonies to 'marry'
in witness of their supporting families, local communities and officiated by priests, or died by suicide together, in
cases where families and communities have violently opposed such relationships, often abetted by the local police
force. Ironically, the earliest reported instance from 1987 concerned 2 police-women, Leela Namdeo and Urmila
Shrivastav, who married each other at a temple in Bhopal. The formal law may not recognize such 'marriages',
however, local customs keep evolving and sometimes gain social recognition after long duration of practice (Love's
Rite Same Sex Marriages in Modern India and the West, Ruth Vanita, Palgrave Macmillan (2005));
Legislative Intent in Recognizing Inter-Religious Marriages Must Guide the Recognition of Queer and Trans
Marriages:
1666. Queen and trans individuals' prayer for the right to marry and found a family under SMA must be adjudicated
keeping in view the interpretive changes to the statute by the passage of time. This Hon'ble Court must take into
consideration the progressive development of social and jurisprudential norms which have taken place since the
passage of SMA. Although constitutional in 1954, the SMA's validity must be interpreted as per queen and trans
33);
1667. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of SMA states that the Special Marriage Act, 1872 is being replaced in
order to ensure that any two persons can marry irrespective of religious status. A brief legislative history and concerns
to reform the 1872 law are presented in the statements of Shri. Biswas during parliamentary debates on the 1954 law
(Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill dated 19.05.1954 at pages 7797-7804);
1668. Members of Parliament were cognizant of the status of queer persons in Indian society in 1954. However,
homosexuality and women "catamites" only featured in context of grounds of divorce in debates on the Special
Marriage Bill (1952), on account of the pathological and criminological lens through which such lives were understood
at the time (Report of the Joint Committee of the Special Marriage Bill, 1952 (March 1954) at pages xvii, xxxvi):
1669. On 16.12.1953, Shrimati Renu Chakravarty's defense of legal recognition of inter-religious marriages as a
necessary product of the evolution of social and cultural context in Indian history reads as such (Lok Sabha Debates on
the Special Marriage Bill dated 16.12.1953 at pages 2317-2318):
"But / would like to answer one general argument which is always brought forward by people who always oppose
any new progressive laws, viz., that it goes against Hindu society, that it goes against Hindu religion. The face of
society changes. We regard society as dynamic, and we recognize that through the ages society has changed and
the super-structure of society, i.e., the customs have changed also When we come in later ages to feudal times,
we see that the means of production has gone into the hands of man, women automatically become subjected. We
begin to see them becoming more and more akin to a commodity: they can be exchanged for money. We see such
things as polygamy, dowry etc. These are things which emanated from the objective reality of society. Now a new
society has come into being when there is need for free labour power which reflects itself in the growth of ideas
about individual freedom, then certainly we must come to this question about free choice of marriage. It is no use
saying that it is immoral, it is not right. We believe and we stand by this fact that there should be free choice of
marriage, and therefore. this contractual marriage as enunciated in this Bill we support. We do not think that just
because a person marries out of his or her free choice, it becomes unholy that the bride and the bridegroom see
into the soul of eachother only if they are married according to religion, and otherwise not...
1670. On 17.12.1953, Shri. D.C. Sharma supported legal recognition of inter-religious marriages for everyone on
the basis of India's commitment to democracy, freedom and rule of law as such (Lok Sabha Debates on Special
Marriage Bill dated 17.12.1953 at pages 2370-2371):
"Democracy means freedom of choice. We can choose in marriage anybody we like. / think this Bill gives us that
freedom of choice. This is a freedom which cannot be denied to men and women. It cannot be denied to persons
when they receive high education, when they are brought up in a democratic atmosphere, and when they are
taught they should love freedom. If they can have political freedom and freedom in other spheres of life, / do not
see why they should not have freedom in the choice of their partners. / think this is only an extension of the liberty
which we have granted in SO many spheres of life.
1671. On 19.05.1954, Dr. Rama Rao highlighted flaws in contentions against recognition of inter-religious
marriages based on public morality as such (Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill dated 19.05.1954 at pages
7844-7845):
"At the beginning of the past century, when we were burning our widows on the pyre and Raja Ram Mohan Roy
and others started the movement against the Sati and William Bentinck helped them, our friends like N.L. Sharmas
and Chatterjees-all those people-shouted "religion in danger". Even in our wn life-time, the Sarda Act was brought
in
to prevent marriage of girls of ten, seven, five or even three years. Then also they said, "religion in danger".
There has been a cry by wrongly shouting, "religion in danger". It was a step taken by the conservative mind, by
the chains that they wanted to enforce, and not by the permissive and progressive step."
1672. On 08.09.1954, Acharya Kripalani opposed the requirement under the proposed bill for parties to produce
certificates of fitness in order to solemnize a marriage as it perpetuated a reductionist conception of marriage as a
marriage for procreation, sexual intimacy or companionship, such plural manifestations of the family unit are equally
deserving of protection. In the words of Acharya Kripalani (Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill dated
08.09. 1954 at pages 1298-1299):
"A person may be willing to take a companion who is diseased in order to nurse her or him because there
is
affection, because there is intellectual affinity, because there is emotional affinity-all these things. Therefore, / think
the Law Minister has committed a great blunder by producing before us this Bill without being scientific, without
defining marriage, without saying what are the objects of marriage at the present time. If this is done, / think much
of the confusion will disappear. / believe there are many people who marry simply tor companionship simply for
intellectual help to each other SO that they may combine their labour and produce some creative work.
1673. On 14.09.1954, Shri. K.K. Basu supported the legal recognition of inter-religious marriages by placing
reliance on Article 15's mandate of anti-discrimination as such (Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill dated
14.09.1954 at page 1849):
"This is 1954 and we are bound by the Constitution where we have accepted that certain rights should be
guaranteed to the citizens irrespect of sex, creed or religion. Therefore, we are here coming forward with legislations
dealing with a form of marriage which is deemed to be progressive in consonance with the present day theories of
the modern world...
1674. Thereafter, Prime Minister Shri. Jawaharlal Nehru made a plea with respect to forbidding the vagaries of
personal law to interfere with intimate aspects of individuals as such (Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill
dated 14.09.1954 at pages 1856-1857):
do submit that this extreme reverence shown to what is called personal law seems to me completely
misplaced, whether it is the Hindu personal law or the Muslim personal law or any other. if you admit that society
changes-and / do not see how anybody can deny that society changes or that a social organisation changes-to tend
to bind it down with a certain organisation which might have been exceedingly good at a certain time under certain
circumstances but which does not fit in with the later age, is itself not wise, or certainly it comes in the way of any
advance or progress. And ultimately you put this alternative before the people governed by that society, that if you
do not allow them to grow into something different, the only way out for them is to break away from it. It would be
wrong, of course, to compel it or to force it to develop in any other way. And my own reading of our history is that
in the past, there was that capacity for adaptation, for change..
"
1675. On 16.09.1954, Dr. N.B. Khare ironically suggested that marriages based on companionship can include
queen marriages as such (Lok Sabha Debates on Special Marriage Bill dated 16.09.1954 at page 2093):
"There is no doubt that some reference was made to atmic vivah yesterday. / do not understand what the
marriage for companionship means or atmic vivah means Sir, as regards atmic vivah or 'soul marriage' if it is only
a 'soul marriage', then why not males marry males and females marry females? Both have souls! This atmic vivah is
nonsense.
1676. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1963 states that the SMA
is being amended to provide legal recognition to marriages involving any two persons who are within the prohibited
degrees of relationship, provided such marriages are permitted by custom or usage of at least one party. The
Parliament added a proviso to Section 4(d) to this effect on 22.09.1963;
1677. On 26.08.1963, Shrimati Vimla Devi's support for the proposed amendment reads as such (Lok Sabha
Debates on Special Marriage (Amendment) Bill dated 26.08.1963 at pages 3230-3231, 3233):
"Scientifically it may be true, and it is true also, that marriages between closely-related persons have got evil
consequences. But in spite of science, in spite of scientific knowledge, without spreading the scientific idea to the
people, the people try to follow their customs, and without a scientific knowledge, the people practise these
things / support this amendment because such persons, not ruled by any Act or by any science, emotionally get
involved by choice or by custom and they cannot be barred under the Special Marriage Act. So, for this reason,
/
support the amendment.
Personally, / do not advocate such marriages. But there are customs and practices among the communities and
they cannot be ignored. You cannot prohibit such marriages without taking the practices into consideration. If you
prohibit, either by law or by new law, they will still lead a married life.'
1678. Subsequently, Shri. D.C. Sharma's defense of the proposed amendment reads as such (Lok Sabha Debates
on Special Marriage (Amendment) Bill dated 26.08.1963 at page 3248)
"Here custom has been given a rightful place in the marriage law of our country. It has been recognised in a very
comprehensive way. There are customs which prevail amongst some communities; there are customs which prevail
among some members of one community, but not amongst other members of the community. There are certain
social groups, ethnic groups, certain families of course, a family does not mean a family of 5: it may mean a very
large-size family - which have their own customs and think we are doing only something which is there, which is
preservative of their life, which does not dislocate the orderliness already existing. How can this Bill be disruptive of
our social organisation? How can it sabotage our social values? How can it destroy all the great values of the Hindus.
It certainly cannot. It is only trying to put the seal upon those things which already exist."
1679. The legislative debates on the 1954 law and the 1963 amendment are instructive of valuable lessons for the
purposes of this Hon'ble Court's determination of prayers of Petitioners herein:
a. It is not the legitimate interest of the state to dictate value judgments on whether marriage as an institution
must be entered into for procreation, sexual intimacy and/or companionship and disenfranchise persons for
making choices with respect to private and intimate aspects of family life;
b.
A purported naturalization of compulsory heterosexuality in the institution of marriage in order to deny legal
recognition to queer and trans marriages and their families is a fallacy, in so far as the submission is only
instructive of the "socially, culturally and legally ingrained concept of marriage" at a particular time of Indian
history. Marriage has time and again evolved as a dynamic institution to respond to people's aspirations
depending on the social, economic, cultural and political changes through time and has witnessed radical
transformations in terms of abolition of sati (Sati Regulation XVII A.D. 1829 of the Bengal Code), widow
remarriage (The Widow Remarriage Act, 1850), prohibition of caste (Hindu Marriage Disabilities Removal Act,
1946 and The Hindu Marriage Validity Act, 1949) and religion (SMA, 1954) as barriers to marriage, prevention of
child marriage (The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929), the introduction of monogamy (Hindu Marriage Act,
1955), introduction of divorce (Indian Divorce Act, 1869), introduction of adoption (Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956) and in many other aspects. The law has always intervened to rectify historical injustices
within the institution of marriage and adapt it as per the constitutional norms of a developing society; C. It is
clearly borne out that SMA, 1954 was passed in order to meet the rigours of Article 15's guarantee of freedom
from discrimination on basis of religion. It is respectfully submitted that, undoubtedly, SMA can be interpreted to
recognize marriages involving queer and trans individuals on the basis of this Hon'ble Court's landmark
declarations on anti-discrimination in context of sexual orientation and gender identity under Article 15;
d. It is apparent on the face of the record that SMA has evolved inspite of objections on basis of scientific
knowledge and/or public morality to recognize marriages involving persons who are within prohibited degrees of
relationship, given that custom or usage governing one party allows it, which were previously deemed unfit for
inclusion during passage of the statute in 1954;
e. SMA was passed explicitly to remove religious barriers and provide a civil law framework to solemnize and
register inter-religious marriages. This has effectively de-linked the institution of marriage from compulsory
religious affiliation. The recognition of queen and trans marriages, therefore, must only be determined within the
framework of constitutional law and any social, cultural or religious objections are effectively foreclosed;
f. The striking feature of parliamentarians' support of the 1963 amendment is the experience of life of the law on
the streets; that lived realities of people and communities with respect to intimate and private aspects of family
life often live on regardless of law's dictates, and therefore, it is prudent that the law must recognize such
marriages in order to protect rights of parties to the marriage and children;
g. There is no material on record to demonstrate that recognition of marriages among persons within prohibited
relations has harmed the social fabric. Likewise, the recognition of queer and trans marriages must not be
obstructed on grounds which are not supported by any evidence. The state's commitment to a plurality of lived
experiences, and therefore, the recognition of diverse forms of marriages and families is a moral imperative in a
democratic state;
h. The fundamental premise of the legislative debates which led to the passage of the 1963 amendment is a
compelling defense of the triumph of personal autonomy;
i. The rationale that weighed with the Parliament during passage of the SMA, 1954 in recognition of inter-religious
marriages is applicable mutatis mutandis to the pleas of Petitioners herein on recognition of queen and trans
marriages;
1680. The body of family law has been reviewed by the judiciary to ensure consistency with Part III of the
Constitution which has re-shaped the different ways in which communities choose to organize a 'family unit'. From
recognizing Scheduled Tribe women's right to intestate succession to agricultural land (Madhu Kishwar V. State of
Reserve Bank of India, AIR 1999 SC 1149), declaring triple talaaq unlawful (Shayara Bano V. Union of India, (2017) 9
rectify historical injustices of gender based inequality codified in law on the anvil of Article 15. Therefore, it is
untenable to allow SMA to deny legal recognition to queen and trans marriages in 2023 on the misguided pretext that
doing so would adversely impact the 'family unit';
Interpretation of Statutes Must Bridge the Gap between Law and Society:
1681. The rule of purposive interpretation of statutes dictates that while interpreting the law, the court has a
bounden duty to bridge the gap between law and society in order to advance the pursuit of social justice (Deepika
1682. As per settled law, the provisions of SMA must not be frozen in the year it was legislated on basis of a literal
interpretation, rather, the law must be treated as "always speaking" to respond to the claims of Petitioners herein as
per the extant law applicable today. Since 1954, Indian society has vastly transformed in recognizing rights of queen
and trans individuals, therefore, there can be no a priori assumption that SMA must not apply to such individuals
today because legislators were not deliberating the content of rights of the community in 1954. During the passage of
SMA in 1954, queen and trans communities were both pathologized and criminalized, therefore, it was inconceivable to
advocate for the fundamental right to marry and found a family in such a tyrannical context. Queen and trans
individuals were struggling to survive and grappling with de-pathologizing and de-criminalizing their identities and
lives as recently as the second decade of the 21st century when this Hon'ble Court recognized the fundamental rights
of queer and trans individuals under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21. As the language of SMA is wide enough to recognize
marriages involving queer and trans persons, there is no reason why the law must not be interpreted in such manner
Georgia, 590 U.S.
(2020));
1683. As per the doctrine of living constitutionalism, even written constitutions yield unwritten principles of law
with the march of time. The necessity of seriously probing the validity of SMA's denial of recognition of marriages on
basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in context of evolution of Part 111 of the Constitution cannot be ignored,
in light of this Hon'ble Court's unanimous recognition of the fundamental right to privacy in Part 111, despite the choice
of members of the Constituent Assembly to not codify the same expressly under the Constitution. This Hon'ble Court
has progressively adopted the living constitutionalism approach which allows the Constitution to endure and adapt to
paras. 251-262, 320-321, 344-351);
1684. On the basis of this Hon'ble Court's recognition of self-determination of gender identity, there is judicial
precedent under the HMA, MTP and IPC of expansive and inclusive interpretation of gendered categories, to include
transgender women and intersex persons identifying as women in laws regulating private aspects of family life and
impacting violation of sexual autonomy. Laws governing marriage and other aspects of family life too must keep pace
with this jurisprudential advancement, and specifically under the SMA, categories such as, 'woman/bride' and
'man/bridegroom' need to be interpreted as including transgender persons and intersex persons self identifying as
woman or man, and not be limited to cis women and men. The submission herein seeks that legal terms be read and
interpreted in an expansive and inclusive manner to ensure the right to marry and found a family and attendant and
consequential rights are available and accessible to persons of all sexual orientation and gender identity. This is
without prejudice to the Petitioner's prayer that the law be interpreted to recognize the right to marry and found a
family with any person of one's choice irrespective of sexual orientation or gender identity (Arunkumar and Sreeja V.
Inspector General of Registration, AIR 2019 Mad 265 at paras 4-15.; X V. Principal Secretary, Health and Family
(Crl) 2537/2018 before High Court of Delhi);
1685. The provisions of a statute must be applied in a manner consistent to settled constitutional principles in
order to ensure social, economic and political justice for all individuals. Constitutional Courts do not defer to the
Parliament to guarantee the constitutional right to seek abortion services for women, rather, they routinely and
positively intervene under plenary powers in Articles 226 and 32 by reading-in non-lethal risk to women's physical and
mental health within the statutory duty of registered medical practitioners to 'save the life of a woman' under the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 despite exceeding the statutory limits by interpreting it consistently with
the expansive meaning afforded to the 'right to life' with human dignity under Article 21. Likewise, it is humbly
submitted that sex-related terms like 'woman/bride' and "man/bridegroom' under SMA must be interpreted inclusively
and purposively to cover LGBTI individuals seeking to solemnize and register a marriage as the term 'sex' under Article
15 includes sexual orientation and gender identity (XYZ Union of India, (2019) 3 Bom CR 400; Meera Santosh Pal V.
Discrimination to Full Citizenship - Trans Persons and Right to Marry and Found a Family:
1686. This Hon'ble Court noticed that non-recognition of self-determined gender identity leads to denial of social,
economic, civil and political rights of transgender individuals, including unfair exclusion from marriage laws which are
at paras. 53, 81);
1687. The institution of marriage cannot be limited between biological men and women, as with the march of time,
the law recognizes that self-determined gender identity is the appropriate basis for recognizing rights of individuals,
1688. The provisions of Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 ("TG ct")codify the rule of law on
recognition of self-determination of gender identity and guarantee equality before law, and existing older laws must be
revisited to ensure these statutory protections see the light of day and are implemented on the ground;
1689. Section 3 of the TG Act provides that no person or establishment shall discriminate against transgender
persons in terms of unfair treatment in employment, healthcare, purchasing or renting property and access to
enjoyment of goods, services and facilities dedicated to the use of general public, among other areas. However, as
extant law does not recognize marriages involving transgender persons, they face rampant discrimination with respect
to nominating a representative for execution of advance directives during critical illness outside the parameters of
'guardian, close relative or family members', access to resources dedicated for survivors of gender based violence for
categorical exclusion from the scope of 'domestic relationship', at-risk of eviction from rented premises or disabled
from joint-ownership of residential property as the housing regulations only conceive of 'family' related by marriage,
birth or adoption and disentitled from receipt of death benefits of the partner by virtue of the restrictive manner in
which employment regulations are conceived, among others. It is humbly submitted that the TG Act mandates the
recognition of marriages involving transgender persons by virtue of the inextricable linkages marital status has to the
broader range of social and economic rights guaranteed as per law (Happy Together Law and Policy Concerns of
LGBTQI Persons and Relationships in India', Centre for Health Equity, Law and Policy, (2021), pgs. 47-52, 62-68,
marked as Annexure-10);
1690. Section 20 of the TG Act provides that provisions of this law are in addition to, not in derogation, of existing
laws in force. The sequitur follows that solemnization and registration of marriages under SMA must be performed in a
manner consistent with the anti-discrimination mandate of the TG Act. As per settled law, this Hon'ble Court must
recognize the fundamental right to marry and found a family for transgender persons by virtue of the anti-
discrimination provisions of TG Act, a special statute on rights of transgender persons, which overrule the heterosexist
underpinnings to the procedure of solemnization and registration of marriages under SMA, a general statute (Sharat
OnLine SC 1023);
1691. The denial of the right of transgender persons to marry and found a family under SMA bears striking
resemblance to the dark history of systemic marginalization of transgender persons under the Criminal Tribes Act,
1871 ("CTA"). The CTA set the shameful precedent for the transphobic rhetoric of casting transgender persons as
'harmful' to the best interests of a child, in so far as the law policed transgender persons on fictitious allegations of
kidnapping and castrating children (Section 26) and forbid transgender persons to act as guardians to any minor,
making a gift or will or adoption (Section 29). With the Parliament having repealed CTA in 1949, there is no bar under
any law on the right of transgender persons to found a family. However, it is impermissible for the state to resurrect
the legacy of criminalization through the backdoor by denying recognition of transgender persons' right to marry and
found a family, in light of this Hon'ble Courts landmark declarations on guaranteeing the fundamental rights of
paras. 18, 87);
1692. In order to remedy systemic discrimination, the responsibility of constitutional courts is not limited to the
negative duty of striking down discriminatory policy, criteria or practice (PCP) such as anti-sodomy laws and
compensating the aggrieved for the harm, but includes the positive duty to affirm the right to choose a partner for
marriage that can facilitate social redistribution by providing for entitlements that aim to negate the scope of future
1693. The recognition of the right to marry and found a family for queen and trans individuals under SMA would
guarantee substantive equality for the community by breaking a cycle of disadvantage associated with status, promote
dignity and thereby redress stigma, stereotyping, humiliation and violence because of membership of an identity
56); Denial of the Right to Marry and Found a Family for Queen and Trans Persons Violates Part 111 of the
Constitution:
excluding queen and trans persons from the scope of 'domestic relationship' under the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 ("DV Act") must be revisited in light of this Hon'ble Court's declarations on fundamental
rights of queen and trans persons as per Articles, 14, 15, 19 and 21 in NALSA, Puttaswamy, Shafin Jahan, and Navtej
Singh Johar;
1695. This Hon'ble Court is not precluded from determination of issues presented by the Petitioners herein, in so
far as the observation "When we say union, we do not mean marriage..." in para. 155 of Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of
orientation and gender identity under SMA and/or other personal laws did not arise for this Hon'ble Court's deliberation
in the matter;
1696. Marriage is an expressive choice, therefore, it implicates the freedom of expression and association under
Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. The ability to have public recognition of one's intimate partner as a lawfully
wedded partner without the fear of civil or criminal consequences by state or non-state actors is secured through
expression and plays a dominant role in developing well-being with respect to one's lived experiences and choices
1697. The purported justification of the "normative basis" in denying legal recognition of queen and trans marriages
is an unreliable yardstick under the framework of rule of law, since norms are not static and they constantly evolve as
informed by social, economic, cultural and political developments. The denial of recognition of marriages under SMA on
basis of gender identity or sexual orientation are not based on any adequate determining principle, therefore, the
impugned provisions are manifestly arbitrary. The thread of reasonableness runs through Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21
and thus the impugned provisions of SMA are interdicted by Part III of the Constitution for failure of the State to
present reasonable grounds as per the rule of law for denying recognition of marriages involving queer and trans
1698. The law can govern conditions of solemnizing a valid marriage and dissolution thereof, however, neither the
State nor the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on this aspect.
Social approval for intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognizing them. The Constitution guarantees the
right of every individual to take decisions on matters central to the pursuit of happiness (Shafin Jahan V. Asokan KM,
1699. The denial of recognition of marriages between two consenting adults, irrespective of gender identity or
sexual orientation, embodies a stereotype which violates the guarantee of non-discrimination based on 'sex' under
Article 15. The SMA is an instance of law where biological differences between sexes has devolved into oppressive
cultural norms and therefore merits strict scrutiny in so far as the impugned law suffers from incurable fixations of
41, 46, 50);
1700. The exclusion of queen and trans individuals from the institution of marriage under SMA perpetuates a
history of discrimination, prejudice and social exclusion against the group. Any form of stigmatization which leads to
social exclusion violates the anti-exclusion principle as codified in Article 17 (Indian Young Lawyers Association V.
1701. The determination of constitutional validity of limiting the solemnization of marriages under SMA exclusively
for heterosexual couples under the 'classification test' misses the true value of equality as a safeguard against
arbitrariness. The exclusion of queen and trans individuals from the institution of marriage must be decided on the
touchstone of the guarantee of substantive equality under Article 14, which in turn would inform and influence the
classification test. Moreover, the Respondent's basis of intelligible differentia ("normative basis") is wiped out by this
Hon'ble Court in barring such stereotypical views which have harmed queen and trans persons with the taint of
1702. While Article 14 permits classification on the basis of intelligible differentia having a rational nexus to the
legislative object, this Hon'ble Court has repeatedly held that the object of the legislation itself must be a legitimate
state object and not one that is designed merely to discriminate against minorities. It is apparent on the face of the
record, the Respondent's contention of "ensuring social stability via recognition of marriages", as the purported
legislative object, is designed merely to discriminate against minorities on basis of sexual orientation and gender
identity. It is not adequate for the Respondent to state the purported legislative object, but it is has the bounden duty
500);
1703. A formalistic interpretation of Article 15 would render the constitutional guarantee against discrimination
meaningless. The state is prohibited from rejecting a claim of discrimination on the basis that the impugned act or law
was based on sex plus grounds ("normative basis"), in order to bypass the proscription of Article 15. This fails to take
into account the intersectional nature of discrimination on account of sex, sexual orientation and gender identity of
Petitioners herein, whose communities are systemically marginalized by the "hetero-normative basis". Without
prejudice, it is respectfully submitted that denial of recognition of marriages involving queen and trans persons also
constitutes violation of the guarantee of non-discrimination only on the basis of sex in the formalistic view, in as much
as the Respondent's justification for the same is based solely on the sex of the choice of partner (Navtej Singh Johar V.
1704. The codification of the complete spectrum of marriage related laws on basis of the male/female binary in
matters relating to maintenance, child custody, divorce proceedings and other aspects does not detain this Hon'ble
Court from intervening on the limited aspect of solemnization of marriages by breaking the binary at this stage. SMA
excludes queen and trans individuals from the institution of marriage for failing to conform to heterosexual
expectations of society. In doing so, it perpetuates a symbiotic relationship between anti-queer and trans laws and
traditional gender roles. One cannot separate the discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and discrimination
on the basis of sex because the former inherently proceeds on stereotypical notions of sex and gender roles. By
attacking these genden roles, queen and trans individuals, in this move to build communities and relationships
premised on care and reciprocity, lay challenge to the idea that relationships, and by extension society, must be
paras. 397-406);
1705. It is humbly submitted that the legal recognition of the fundamental right to marry and found a family
irrespective of sexual orientation and gender identity of parties under SMA must not be detained by the concern on
implication on related statutory provisions, which are not agitated in the current batch of petitions. In NALSA, the
legal validity of Section 377, IPC and impact on other statutory laws coded in the binary of "male/female" gender
which implicated rights of transgender persons (foreg. service law, inheritance/succession law, criminal law, family
law and others) did not detain this Hon'ble Court from issuing positive declarations on self-determination of gender
identity, access to healthcare and grant of reservation in educational institutions and public appointments, among
others, under Article 32. In fact, this Hon'ble Court's wide-ranging positive directions have encouraged transgender
persons to undertake legislative advocacy and judicial intervention for recognition of rights in service law,
inheritance/succession law, criminal law, family law and other areas on a case by case basis (National Legal Services
1706. The denial of the right to marry and found a family for queen and trans individuals under SMA fails to meet
the material threshold of restriction of fundamental rights under Article 21. The Respondent's claim with respect to
"social stability via recognition of (heterosexual) marriages" is vague and does not serve as a legitimate state interest
in denying rights accrued by a lawfully solemnized marriage to queen and trans persons. Any purported justification is
outweighed by the detrimental effects of systemic discrimination and violence on the lives of queen and trans
individuals due to exclusion from the institution of marriage (Justice K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India (1), (2017) 10
1707. The substantial questions of law as to the interpretation of SMA and the Constitution are within the powers of
judicial review of this Hon'ble Court and do not merit deference to the Parliament. The purpose of elevating certain
rights to the stature of guaranteed fundamental rights is to insulate their exercise from the disdain of majorities,
whether legislative or popular. The guarantee of constitutional rights does not depend upon their exercise being
favourably regarded by majoritarian opinion. The test of popular acceptance does not furnish a valid basis to disregard
rights which are conferred with the sanctity of constitutional protection. Discrete and insular minorities face grave
dangers of discrimination for the simple reason that their views, beliefs or way of life does not accord with the
'mainstream'. In a democratic Constitution founded on the rule of law, their rights are as sacred as those conferred on
at paras. 142-147, 292-295);
A Commitment to Rights of Queen and Trans Persons under Constitutional Morality:
1708. The mere fact that queer and trans marriages are considered "unconventional" by social norms does not
justify depriving it of equal protection of law. The freedom of making a choice also encompasses the freedom to make
1709. The rule of law mandates that notions of public morality must give way to constitutional morality in a
democratic state. As a result, the duty of this Hon'ble Court in acting as a counter-majoritarian institution is to
interpret laws that codify inequality on prohibited grounds of discrimination in a manner that protect this guarantee
1710. The State must not use regressive labeling of despised sexualities and gender identities to deny recognition
of marriages under the SMA. Our cultural prejudices must yield to constitutional principles of equality, empathy and
respect. The Constitution is not a "mirror of perverse social discrimination", rather, it promises a mirror in which
equality is reflected brightly. The Constitution contemplates an ever vigilant State, an ever effective State, and ever
sensitive State, and measures the democratic index of the State in terms of capabilities of human beings to live
without discrimination based on principles of equality and fulfillment of individual potential (Report of Justice JS
Verma Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law, 2013);
1711. The Constitution recognizes, protects and celebrates diversity, therefore, application of legislative provisions
contrary to this ethos, and justified by invoking 'public morality', would nonetheless violate constitutional morality
(Naz Foundation V. Government of NCT of Delhi, 2009 (111) DRJ 1);
1712. Section 3(3) of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 ("MHCA") explicitly states that social status or non-
conformity with moral, social, cultural, political or religious beliefs shall not form the basis of determination of mental
illness. This Hon'ble Court has discarded the pathologization model and reframed the concerns relating to queer and
trans individuals in a rights based discourse. The sequitur follows that queer and trans individuals must not be denied
free and equal citizenship in the public sphere, including solemnization and registration of marriages under SMA, by
and Sreeja V. Inspector General of Registration, AIR 2019 Mad 265 at paras. 16-20);
1713. Democratic nations across the world ascribe to commitment to constitutional morality in conducting affairs of
the state, which includes shielding minority groups from public morality of the legislature or society. The Constitution
is nothing if not a document founded on deep political morality. A central feature of the character and functioning of
the state is the dictates of the morality it enforces and the limits to which it may go. While the Constitution tolerates
the right of people to hold beliefs contrary to the Petitioners herein, it does not allow the state to weaponize those
beliefs - even in moderate or gentle versions - into policy, criterion or practice imposed on the whole of society and
defeat the rightful claims of the Petitioners herein. Moral disapproval or a bare desire to harm and disadvantage a
minority group does not furnish a legitimate state interest in denial of recognition of marriages between two
consenting adults irrespective or sexual orientation or gender identity (National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality
V. The Minister of Justice, 1999 (1) SA 6 (CC); Norris V. Ireland, [1988] ECHR 22 (26 October 1988); Lawrence V.
Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003));
1714. It is respectfully submitted that any ostensibly welfare-oriented submissions in defense of the "social,
psychological and other impacts on society, children etc." and the representation of Petitioner's claims as "injurious of
public health, order and morality", barely disguise its contempt, vilification and attempts at delegitimization of the
entire queer and trans community and are consistent with this Hon'ble Court's conception of hate speech. The sanctity
of the judicial proceedings before this Hon'ble Court must not be permitted to serve as a platform for the Respondent
to air flagrantly transphobic and homophobic views cloaked as legal submissions, as this will have the effect
of
exposing members of the queen and trans community to harmful consequences like discrimination, marginalization
and violence in the public sphere, which directly and inextricably follow hate speech. The moral panic sought to be
generated by such rhetoric is aimed to shock and awe and divert the Petitioners herein from advocating the
substantive issues raised for the consideration of this Hon'ble Court, thereby placing a serious barrier on their ability to
477 at paras. 7-8):
1715. The weaponization of "best interests of the child" to undermine gender justice is a well-documented strategy
to stoke moral panic from completely unfounded concerns and disinformation about the well-being of children who are
raised by queen and trans parents, with the aim of translation into social, political and legal action towards restriction
of human rights of queen and trans people. This campaign intentionally masks religious rhetoric to legitimize
opposition to progressive realization of queen and trans rights through the appropriation of secular narratives of child
protection (Manufacturing Moral Panic : Weaponizing Children to Undermine Gender Justice and Human Rights, Elevate
Children Funders Group and Global Philanthropy Project (2021) at pages. 10-13, 53-58);
International and Comparative Law on Queen and Trans Persons' Right to Found a Family:
1716. It is respectfully submitted that the dispute on reliance over "western" jurisprudence is res judicata in light
of this Hon'ble Court's unanimous recognition of the rich history of comparative constitutionalism embedded in the
-280);
1717. On a review of comparative law, including 'marriage equality' decisions of international jurisdictions, this
Hon'ble Court has arrived at settled principles of law governing rights of queen and trans persons, namely (1) sexual
orientation is an intrinsic element of liberty, dignity, privacy, individual autonomy and equality; (2) intimacy between
consenting adults of the same-sex is beyond the legitimate interests of the state; (3) the right to love and to a
partner, to find fulfillment in a same-sex relationship is essential to a society which believes in freedom under a
constitutional order based on rights; (4) sexual orientation implicates negative and positive obligations on the state. It
not only requires the state not to discriminate, but also calls for the state to recognize rights which bring true
fulfillment to same-sex relationships; and 5)The constitutional principles which have led to decriminalization must
continuously engage in a rights discourse to ensure that same-sex relationships find true fulfillment in every facet of
life. The law cannot discriminate against same-sex relationships. It must also take positive steps to achieve equal
1718. As a corollary to the settled principles of law governing rights of queen and trans persons, this Hon'ble Court
has observed that decriminalization is only the first step and the constitutional principles on which it is based have
application to a broader range of entitlements, including the right to solemnize a marriage. The Indian Constitution is
based on an abiding faith in those constitutional values. In the march of civilizations across the spectrum of a
para. 479);
1719. It is settled law that domestic statutes must be applied in a manner consistent with binding international
1720. Section 2(d) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (PHRA) defines "human rights" to mean "the rights
relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in the
International Covenants and enforceable by Courts in India";
1721. Article 10 of the ICESCR states that "the widest possible protection and assistance should be accorded to the
family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society, particularly for its establishment and while it is
responsible for the care and education of dependent children. Marriage must be entered into with the free consent of
the intending spouses";
1722. A key principle underlying the ICESCR is that all member states are mandated to take steps to achieving
progressively the full realization of convention rights by all appropriate means. Hence, the Respondent is precluded
from submitting that the arc of queen and trans rights stop at the threshold of decriminalization. The progressive
realization of the right to marry and found a family means that member states have a binding, specific and continuing
obligation to move as expeditiously and effectively as possible towards the full realization of rights coded in the
ICESCR;
1723. The inability of a member state in realizing convention rights is differentiated from the opposition of
a
member state in taking appropriate measures to realize the rights. In case of inability, a member state has a burden
to justify that it has undertaken every effort in realizing the convention rights. In case of opposition, a member state's
refusal to take appropriate measures will be a violation of convention rights and can be held accountable before
domestic constitutional courts (CESCR General Comment No. 14 : The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of
Health (Art. 12), adopted at the 22nd session of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, on 11 August
2000 (document E/C. 12/2000/4));
1724. Democratic states across the world, including the global south, are increasingly arriving at the consensus
that queen and trans marriages must be recognized and afforded equal protection in law as a constitutional imperative
(Suman Panta V. Ministry of Home Affairs et. al. (Case No. 073-WO-1054, Supreme Court of Nepal) Judicial Yunan
Interpretation No. 748 (Constitutional Court of Taiwan, 2017); Minister of Home Affairs V. Marie Adriaana Fourie et al
(Case CCT 60/04, Constitution Court of South Africa); Advisory Opinion OC-24/17 Requested by Republic of Costa
Rica, Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Obergefell et al V. Hodges, Director, Ohio Department of Health et al, 576
US 644 (2015); Relu Adrian Coman V. Inspectoratul General Pentru Imigrari and Ministerul Afacerilor Interne, Case C-
673/2016, Court of Justice of the European Union, 2018; Guide on Article 12 of the European Convention of Human
Rights, Right to Marry (2021));
1725. This Hon'ble Court must therefore interpret the impugned SMA provisions in light of India's duty to follow
international human rights law as reflected in Principle 24 (Right to Found a Family) of the Yogyakarta Principles,
which mandates all states to adopt all necessary measures to ensure the right to found a family, without
discrimination on basis of sexual orientation or gender identity;
Saving of Validity of pre-existing Marriages where one party has Transitioned to Affirm their Self-
Determined Gender Identity in order to Protect Rights accrued under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution:
1726. In cases of pre-existing marriages recognized under law, where one partner has transitioned to affirm their
self-determined gender identity and parties mutually choose to continue the marriage, there exists uncertainty in
terms of social, economic and legal consequences as to the status of the marriage thereafter. It is submitted that as
long as parties to the marriage do not object to one partner transitioning to affirm their self-determined gender
identity, the law must continue to recognize the validity of the marriage between the parties.
1727. Sections 24-25 of SMA on void and voidable marriages respectively, in context of violation of a condition of a
validly solemnized marriage under Section 4, provide for such declaration only at the instance of one party to the
marriage, and no third party objection to the status of the marriage ought to be permissible in law.
1728. The bouquet of rights which flow from marital and familial ties between parties to a marriage cannot be
arbitrarily snatched from a family where a party to a marriage transitions to affirm their self-determined gender
identity. State institutions and service providers often deny services like banking, insurance, etc. by raising dubious
objections against the status of a marriage where either party to the marriage is a trans person on has transitioned into
another gender identity. The law must recognize and protect such marriages from discrimination and moral policing
which leads to a denial of fundamental rights ('Submissions by LBT Women's Groups to the Law Commission of India
(2018) marked as Annexure-12)
1729. Such marriages solemnized under personal laws can be saved by the device of registration under Sections 15
-16 of SMA;
1730. A de minimis rationale with respect to saving the validity of preexisting marriages where one party has
transitioned does not preclude this Hon'ble Court from intervening because the invasion of the fundamental right to
marry and found a family is not rendered tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number of persons, are
subjected to hostile treatment merely for self-determination of gender identity. The reason why such acts of hostile
discrimination are constitutionally impermissible is because of the chilling effect which they have on the free exercise
of family affairs. The chilling effect on the exercise of the fundamental right poses a grave danger to the unhindered
fulfillment of one's gender identity, as an element of privacy, dignity and family life (Justice K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union
1731. This Hon'ble Court has passed directions to occupy the field of law in absence of statutory guidance in order
PRAYERS
1732. It is therefore, most respectfully prayed that your Lordships may graciously be pleased to:
i. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare that the non-recognition of marriage between persons on
the basis of sexual orientation and/or gender identity under SMA is illegal and unconstitutional;
ii. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare the usage of gender neutral terms like 'spouse' in the
context of solemnization and registration of marriages between LGBTI persons, and all other corresponding
provisions under SMA;
iii. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare that the provisions of law with respect to the "notice,
domicile and objection" framework in Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 of SMA are illegal and unconstitutional;
iv. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare that the validity of marriages already solemnized or
registered under the SMA would not de facto be jeopardized if one spouse transitions to their self-determined
gender identity;
V. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare and recognise the constitutional right of members of the
LGBTI community to have a "chosen family" in lieu of next of kin under all laws, as an intrinsic part of their right
to a dignified life under Article 21;
vi. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare that an unmarried person can nominate 'any person(s)'to
act as their nominee or next of kin, irrespective of whether such person is a 'guardian, close relative or family
member', with respect to healthcare decisions in case of incapacity such as execution of Advance Directives and
assigning any legal right, interest, title, claim or benefit accrued to the person;
vii. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to declare that State Governments must apply all preventive,
remedial, protective and punitive measures, including establishment of safe houses similar to the Garima Greh
welfare scheme, in order to guarantee safety and security of all individuals irrespective of gender identity and
sexual orientation; viii. Issue any other writ, order or direction as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper to
do complete justice in the circumstances of the case.
DRAWN BY:
Suraj Sanap, Adv.
SETTLED BY:
Vrinda Grover, Adv.
NEW DELHI
DATED : 06.04.2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
EXTRAORDINARY ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF THE SCR, 2013
UNDER ARTICLE 32 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 319 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Harish lyer
Petitioner
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS OF SHIVAM SINGH ON BEHALF OF THE
PETITIONER
1733. These submissions (hereinafter, referred to as "Written Submissions") have been filed on behalf of the
Petitioner pursuant to the directions issued by this Hon'ble Court on 13th March 2023. It is respectfully submitted that
these Written Submissions have been designed to aid the final arguments proposed to be advanced on behalf of the
Petitioner.
1734. At the outset, it is humbly stated that the endeavour in these Written Submissions is not to reiterate
arguments that may be canvassed on behalf of the other Petitioners, or to cover every issue that has been framed for
adjudication in the present set of Petitions. Primarily, these Written Submissions seek to canvass two arguments.
a. Upholding the heterosexual notion of marriage as the only constitutionally and legally sanctioned notion of
marriage will only serve to perpetuate gender-based stereotypes proscribed by the Constitution. An exclusion of
same-sex marriages from the purview of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("SMA") is thus in violation of Article 15
(1) of the Constitution;
b. Chapter 11 of the SMA is gender neutral in its tenor. Thus, Section 4 of the SMA can literally (as well as in the
overall context of Chapter 11) be interpreted to include marriages between two gay or trans persons. Resorting to
the provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897, Section 4(c) (which otherwise appears to be unconstitutional)
can be read down such that the singular "the male" and "the female" includes the plural as well.
1735. Before proceeding to expand these arguments in further detail, these Written Submissions will, for
convenience, re-capitulate the other arguments in support of the proposition that an exclusion/prohibition of same-sex
marriages violates Part-III of the Constitution.
A. SUMMATION OF THE CASE AGAINST AN EXCLUSION/PROHIBITION OF SAME SEX MARRIAGES
1736. It is humbly submitted that an exclusion of same sex marriages from the purview of the SMA violates Part
111 of the Constitution of India for the following, amongst other, reasons, each of which is in the alternative, and
without prejudice to the other.
233
a.
A Right to Marry has been recognised as a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
All gay and trans-persons, too, are thus entitled to exercise this right;
b. A decision to marry another individual is a deeply intimate and personal choice234 and thus, forms a facet of the
235
Right to Privacy2 guaranteed by Article of the Constitution. The State does not have any legitimate interest to
interfere with the exercise of this deeply personal and intimate choice;
C. The exclusion of marriages between/involving gay and/or trans-persons from the purview of SMA amounts to
discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity. Two gay persons are prevented from
236
marrying one another only because of their sexual orientation. Likewise, two trans-persons, unless they undergo
Sex Reassignment Surgery are prevented from marrying one another only because of their gender identities. A
trans-person is also prevented from marrying a cis-person, unless they undergo Sex Reassignment Surgery too,
because of their gender identities. This is a violation of the fundamental right enshrined under Article 15 of the
Constitution;
d.
The State is not entitled to justify a violation of Article 15 of the Constitution, on any ground whatsoever, let
alone on the grounds of social mores or popular morality;
e. Depriving two gay and/or trans-persons of the choice to marry individuals of their choice only because of their
sexual orientation or gender identities violates the dignity of an individual.
1737. It is respectfully submitted that an exclusion of same sex marriages from the purview of the SMA does not
only violate the fundamental rights enshrined in Part 111 of the Constitution in the manner set out hereinabove, it also
violates Article 15 of the Constitution because it perpetuates sex and gender-based stereotypes.
B. PERPETUATION OF SEX AND GENDER BASED STEREOTYPES
1738. The manner in which upholding heterosexual marriages as the only permissible form of marriage perpetuates
several sex-and gender-based stereotypes has neatly been set out in academic literature. Deborah Widiss, Elizabeth
Rosenblatt and Douglas NeJaime have succinctly summarised this argument in the following manner,
This is what we will term the "sex stereotype discrimination", or "sex stereotyping" argument. Broadly, this
argument is that a restrictive marriage statute discriminates because it relies upon and perpetuates a system under
which men and women occupy different marriage and family roles : men must "act like husbands" and women must
"act like wives". The sex stereotyping argument may be understood as vindicating anti-subordination values, on the
view that sex stereotypes implicated by the marriage statute are harmful because they perpetuate a patriarchal
view of marriage and family that presumes a breadwinner, head-of-household husband/father and a caretaker,
subordinate wife/mother. "237
1739. A strong case has also been made for how the recognition of same-sex marriages would unshackle the
institution of marriage from these stereotypes.4 238
1740. In this backdrop, it is apposite to consider some of the submissions advanced by the Union of India in its
Counter Affidavit. The Union has more particularly contended,
a. There is an Indian family concept of a husband, a wife and children. The children born out of wedlock are reared
by a cis-man as a father, and a cis-woman as a mother; (Para 19, Page 12 of Union's CA dated 15.03.2023)
b.
marriage, i.e., a husband and a wife, owe certain duties to their children and to the family; (Para 32, Page 42 of
Union's CA dated 15.03.2023)
C. A heterosexual notion of marriage is foundational both to the existence and continuance of the State; (Para 33,
Page 44 of Union's CA dated 15.03.203)
d. No other form of cohabitation enjoys the same status as a heterosexual marriage; (Para 36, Page 45 of Union's
CA dated 15.03.2023)
e. A union between a "man" and a "woman" is intrinsically linked to certain cultural and societal values found in
Indian society. (Para 42, Page 49 of Union's CA dated 15.03.2023)
1741. When these submissions are more closely scrutinised, the following stereotypes emerge,
a. A man, irrespective of his gender or sexual orientation, must play the role of a "husband" in a marriage;
b. A woman, irrespective of her gender or sexual orientation, must play the role of a "wife" in a marriage;
C. One of the primary objectives of a marriage is procreation;
d. Marriage between a cis-man and a cis-woman is fundamental to the existence of the State because one of the
fundamental objectives of marriage is pro-creation;
e. The only legitimate and sanctioned form of cohabitation, and the only legitimate and sanctioned site of sexual
intercourse is a heterosexual marriage;
f. There is an "Indian" notion of marriage, which is imbued with "Indian" morals and values.
1742. It is humbly submitted that these stereotypes not only affect a cis-man and a cis-woman who decide to
enter into a heterosexual marriage, they also affect gay persons and trans-persons equally. All men, irrespective of
their gender identity or sexual orientation, must aspire to discharge the role of a 'husband'. Likewise, for all women.
These stereotypes are ex-facie based on gender identities and create societal pigeonholes that every man and woman
must strive to fit themselves into. Moreover, these stereotypes are perpetuated along the lines of a ground protected
under Article 15(1) of the Constitution, i.e. gender. Effectively, they also perpetuate a stereotypical notion of marriage,
i.e. a patriarchal notion where the husband and the wife have certain identified roles and responsibilities, which roles
and responsibilities are in-turn linked to their gender. The bias/pre-conceived notion that the ultimate purpose of
every marriage is to beget children is also perpetuated. While 'marital status' is not a protected class under the Indian
Constitution, the fact that these stereotypes perpetuate disadvantages based on gender identities and/or sexual
orientation can hardly be disputed.
239
1743. In a concurring opinion (D.Y. Chandrachud J.) in Navtej Johan V. Union of India40 it was inter-alia held that
if
certain characteristics grounded in stereotypes were associated with an entire class of people constituted into groups
by any of the grounds enlisted in Article 15(1) of the Constitution, the classification thus caused would be
constitutionally impermissible. 241 This rationale was carried forward in another concurring opinion (D.Y. Chandrachud
J.)
delivered in Joseph Shine V. Union of India42 wherein it was held that Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
entrenched gender stereotypes, which was contrary to the constitutional vision of empowering people to break through
243
the shackles of gender stereotypes.
1744. In fact, in Joseph Shine, it was also observed that over the course of history, the law had failed to interrogate
stereotypes about the nature, character and abilities of the sexes. In the present instance, the Counter Affidavit
244
filed by the Union of India also fails to undertake this interrogation. While the genesis of what is popularly known as
the 'anti-stereotyping principle' can be traced inter-alia to these opinions in Navtej and Josph Shine, the principle has
now been recognised and applied by this Hon'ble Court in Ministry of Defence V. Babita Puniya
wherein
this
Court
found stereotypes based on the socially ascribed roles of a woman to discriminate against women. In
246
the
present
instance, the stereotypes enlisted hereinabove discriminate against gay and trans-persons. As a consequence, there is
a violation of Article 15(1) of the Constitution. In other words, an exclusion of same-sex marriages from the scheme of
the SMA also violates Article 15(1) because it effectively perpetuates gender-based stereotypes.
1745. Before parting with this argument, and in the alternative to the submission canvassed hereinabove, it is
respectfully stated that even if this Hon'ble Court were to not be pleased to hold that there has been an automatic
violation of Article 15 in light of the fact that gender-based stereotypes are perpetuated, at the very least, there ought
to a heightened scrutiny of the justification put forth by the Union. At this juncture, it would be apposite to mention
that this Hon'ble Court in Anuj Garg V. Union of India47 has held that when a measure is found to be based on
248
sex/gender stereotypes, it must receive heightened scrutiny. Given that the contentions advanced
by
the
Union
of
India are laced with stereotypes founded in gender identities, it is humbly submitted that this Hon'ble Court ought to
test them with a 'deeper judicial scrutiny
C. READING DOWN THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT 1954
1746. It is now a well settled position in law that when there are two possible interpretations of a statute, one that
does not fall afoul of the provisions of the Constitution must be preferred. In the present instance, it is respectfully
submitted that an interpretation of the SMA that excludes/prohibits marriages other than those between a cis-man
and a cis-woman is unconstitutional. Put differently, to read Section 4(c) of the SMA to mean that a marriage can only
be
solemnised between one cis-man and one cis-woman would tantamount to adopting an unconstitutional reading.
1747. Before proceeding to interpret Section 4 of the SMA, it would be pertinent to note that Chapter 11 of the SMA
is otherwise gender-neutral in tenor. Chapter 11 deals with the 'Solemnization of Special Marriages' Section 4(c) of the
SMA is the only provision in Chapter 11 of the SMA that uses the words 'male' and 'female'. To begin with, Section 4,
which lays down the conditions for the solemnization of a special marriage, says that a marriage may be solemnized
between any two persons". Section 5, which deals with the notice of an intended marriage, says that "the parties
to the marriage" must give notice thereof. Section 11, which deals with the appropriate declarations to be given, also
says that "the parties" and three witnesses shall sign a declaration. Section 12, which deals with the place of
solemnization, states that the marriage may be solemnized at such place as "the parties may desire" and in such
form as "the parties may choose to adopt" . Section 13, which deals with a marriage certificate, states that it shall be
signed by "the parties to the marriage" and three witnesses. It is thus that it is stated that Chapter 11 of the SMA is
gender neutral in its tenor. There is nothing in the overall scheme of Chapter 11 of the SMA which would be repugnant
to and/or inconsistent with the solemnization of a gender-neutral marriage. This brings us to the quandary of Section
4(c).
1748. To strike down Section 4(c) as unconstitutional would indeed be undesirable in that the pre-condition for a
minimum age to marry would be done away with. Therefore, the endeavour of this Hon'ble Court must certainly be to
read Section 4(c) in a manner that saves it from the vice of unconstitutionality. It is respectfully submitted that this
can be done by resorting to Section 13(2) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and by reading the word "the" to mean
and include the letter "a", or by reading the word "male"/"female" to include "males"/"females". Simply
249
put,
the
singular "the male" can be read to include the plural "a In other words, two men (whether trans-or
cis-) can solemnize a marriage if they have attained 21 years of age, and two women (whether trans-or cis-) can
solemnize a marriage if they have attained 18 years of age. Not only would this save Section 4(c) from the vice of
unconstitutionality, it would also not be repugnant to the overall scheme of Chapter 11. Lastly, given that the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the SMA states that it is an "Act to provide a special form of marriage", it cannot
be said that this interpretation of the SMA runs contrary to any personal laws or violates a religious notion of marriage
either.
D. OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO THE CONSEQUENTIAL RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS THAT EMANATE OUT OF
A MARRIAGE
1749. In its Counter Affidavit, the Union of India has submitted that striking down/reading down provisions of
legislations such as the SMA would have a knock-on effect on aspects such as adoption, guardianship, maintenance
and the like in that most (if not all) of these rights and obligations are premised on a heterosexual notion of marriage.
It is humbly submitted that historically change in common law has always been incremental. The scope of the present
Petition is limited to seeking a declaration that same-sex/same-gender couples have a fundamental right to marry and
are entitled to have their marriages solemnized under the SMA. Any disability that may ensue subsequent to the
solemnization of a marriage on account of a party's gender identity and/or sexual orientation may have to be
addressed (either by the legislature or by the judiciary) at a subsequent point in time.
1750. On a parting note, it is humbly submitted that the Union of India has over-stated the extent of
disabilities/complications that may arise. It is respectfully stated that several situations may well be addressed by
gender neutral provisions, including some present within the SMA itself. For instance, Section 25 (which deals with
'void' marriages), Section 26 (which deals with 'voidable' marriages) and Section 28 (which deals with 'divorce by
mutual consent') are already gender neutral in nature, and therefore, would confer statutory rights upon parties to a
same-sex/same-gender marriage as well.
1751. In sum, it is humbly submitted that the grant of relief to the Petitioner and similarly situated persons would
in no manner dilute or diminish the marital rights/matrimonial privileges which are available with other members of
society. It is further submitted that the positive conferral of marital rights/matrimonial privileges is not a zero-sum
game and the grant of these rights to the Petitioner would not operate to the detriment of any other person(s).
Assisted by:
Filed by:
1. Ms. Mugdha Pande
2. Mr. Dhruva Gandhi
Kailas Bajirao Autade
3. Mr. Harpreet Singh Gupta
(Advocate on Record)
4. Mr. Avi Srivastava
AOR Code-2645
5. Ms. Shaswati Parhi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1011 OF 2022
IA NO. 57252/23
In the Matter of:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty
Petitioner
V.
Union of India Respondent
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS AND COMPILATION BY ADV. THULASI K RAJ
A. INTRODUCTION
1752. The instant batch of cases raise the question of whether same-sex couples are entitled to legal recognition of
their marriage. Most religious laws on marriage are drafted with an intent to apply to heterosexual couples. The Special
Marriage Act (SMA) makes for an exception in this context, since s.4 refers to solemnisation of marriage between any
two persons. Even though there are references to "the wife" and "the husband" throughout the Act and the 'bride' and
the 'bridegroom' in the Third and Fourth Schedule, an interpretive exercise will render the SMA sufficient to contain
same-sex marriages as well. (please see part C).
1753. This submission is divided into three parts : A, B and C the introduction, the substantive submissions and
reliefs. The second part contains the arguments based on the violation of rights and the third part contains the
possible ways in which a statutory interpretation is possible in order to recognise same sex marriages.
B. SUBMISSIONS
I. REFUSAL TO LEGALLY RECOGNISE SAME SEX MARRIAGE VIOLATES THE RIGHTS TO EQUALITY AND NON-
DISCRIMINATION
1754. Articles 14 and 15 of the Indian Constitution guarantee the rights to equality and non-discrimination. Article
15 categorically prohibits the state from discriminating on the basis of sex. Post Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of India,
orientation also is impermissible under Article 15. Refusing to recognise the same sex-marriage under the currently
legal framework violates these rights.
1755. No nexus : The exclusion of same sex couples from the ambit of SMA also fails to meet the conventional test
of intelligible differentia and rational nexus, requirements under Article 14 for a legislation to pass constitutional
muster. ((Please see State of West Bengal V. Anwar Ali Sarkar 1952 AIR 75, E.P. Royappa V. State Of Tamil Nadu 1974
unconstitutional because of its expressive meaning of treating women as a chattel of a man. The principle espoused by
the Supreme Court was that a law, which expresses lesser respect for one group of persons than the other, violates the
test of Article 14 and 15. In the instant case, by excluding same sex couples, the SMA, if interpreted to extend to only
heterosexual couples, would constitute expressive discrimination.
1757. This is because the law only deems opposite sex relationships to be worthy of the legal protection and social
status of marriage. A same-sex relationship, regardless of the commitment of its partners, their love and devotion for
one another, is inherently deemed as a lesser relationship unworthy of legal and social recognition. The principle in
Joseph Shine prohibits laws which express lesser respect for a protected group.
1758. By refusing to recognise same sex marriage, the state demeans same sex couples. In the expressive theory
of discrimination proposed by Deborah Hellman, to demean "is to treat another as not fully human or not of equal
worth." (Page 35, Chapter 2, When is Discrimination Wrong?). By not extending the benefit of marriage to same sex
couples, the state is enforcing the notion that they are not worthy of the institution of marriage or legal recognition.
1759. Non-recognition of same sex marriage also violates the anti-stereotyping principle enshrined in Anuj Garg V.
Hotel Association of India AIR 2008 SC 6 It was held therein: Strict scrutiny test should be employed while
assessing the implications of this variety of legislations. Legislation should not be only assessed on its proposed aims
but rather on the implications and the effects. The impugned legislation suffers from incurable fixations of stereotype
morality and conception of sexual role. The perspective thus arrived at is outmoded in content and stifling in means.
Non-recognition of same sex marriages is rooted in the stereotype that a true 'marriage' is only one with a man and a
woman. This stereotype emerges from social conventions and homophobic beliefs. It suggests that a man in a same-
sex relationship is insufficiently "manly" or a woman in a same-sex relationship is insufficiently feminine. Such
stereotypes are antithetical to the demands of the Constitution to refrain from regressive genden stereotyping. By non-
recognition of same sex marriages, this belief is granted a legal sanction, which the state is prohibited from granting
under our constitution.
"213. The hallmark of a truly transformative Constitution is that it promotes and engenders societal change
"214. Constitutional values infuse the letter of the law with meaning. True to its transformative vision, the text of
the Constitution. has time and again, been interpreted to challenge hegemonic structures of power and secure the
values of dignity and equality for its citizens."
1761. Non-recognition of same sex marriage also reflects the imposition of beliefs of the majority on the minority
on the notions of marriage and family. These notions change over time and by insisting that the alternative beliefs are
not significant enough, the state is enforcing a hegemonic structure of power on the same sex couples.
11. DENYING THE RIGHT TO LEGAL RECOGNITION OF MARRIAGE CONSTITUTES A VIOLATION OF AN IMPORTANT
SOCIAL GOOD
1762. Despite the opposition to marriage from various circles, it remains a significant social and legal institution. It
offers enormous amount of privileges and rights and it places individuals on a peculiar legal status that is unmatchable
to any other existing institution in the society. However, the understanding of marriage as a heterosexual union
emanates from the outdated understanding of what is constituted by 'marriage. [Please see 'Why Same-Sex Marriage
Now?' by David R. Shumway, Discourse, Fall, 2004, Vol. 26, No. 3, The Problem of Marriage in the New Century (Fall,
2004), pp. 73-84).] Only on challenging this traditional conception of marriage, can the object of legal recognition of
same sex marriage be realised.
17 The expressive argument under Article 15 is reinforced by considering the significance of marriage as a social
good. The message emanating from the denial of the right to marriage is amplified by its social significance. Indian
society places extraordinary value on the institution of marriage. In this context, same-sex couples will not be seen as
equals unless they are granted the right to marry.
111. INON-RECOGNITION OF THE RIGHT TO MARRY VIOLATES THE RIGHTS OF PERSONAL AUTONOMY AND DIGNITY OF
THE SAME SEX COUPLES.
1764. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees the right to personal liberty and dignity. This dignity contains a
cluster of rights of privacy, autonomy and dignity. The rights of choice and partnership are inalienable parts of this
right. Non-recognition of same sex marriage infringes upon this right directly.
"346. Our autonomy as persons is founded on the ability to decide : on what to wear and how to dress, on
what to eat and on the food that we share, on when to speak and what we speak, on the right to believe or not to
believe, on whom to love and whom to partner, and to freely decide on innumerable matters of consequence and
detail to our daily lives.
1766. The right to marry the partner of one's choice was also a matter of consideration of this Hon'ble Court in
"84. A marriage can be dissolved at the behest of parties to it, by a competent court of law. Marital status is
conferred through legislation or, as the case may be, custom. Deprivation of marital status is a matter of serious
import and must be strictly in accordance with law. The High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
226 ought not to have embarked on the course of annulling the marriage. The Constitution recognises the liberty
and autonomy which inheres in each individual. This includes the ability to take decisions on aspects which define
one's personhood and identity. The choice of a partner whether within or outside marriage lies within the exclusive
domain of each individual. Intimacies of marriage lie within a core zone of privacy, which is inviolable. The absolute
right of an individual to choose a life partner is not in the least affected by matters of faith. The Constitution
guarantees to each individual the right freely to practise, profess and propagate religion. Choices of faith and belief
as indeed choices in matters of marriage lie within an area where individual autonomy is supreme. The law
prescribes conditions for a valid marriage. It provides remedies when relationships run aground. Neither the state
nor the law can dictate a choice of partners or limit the free ability of every person to decide on these matters. They
form the essence of personal liberty under the Constitution. Our choices are respected because they are ours.
Social approval for intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them. Indeed, the Constitution
protects personal liberty from disapproving audiences."
"45. When two adults marry out of their volition, they choose their path; they consummate their relationship;
they feel that it is their goal and they have the right to do SO. And it can unequivocally be stated that they have the
right and any infringement of the said right is a constitutional violation. The majority in the name of class or
elevated honour of clan cannot call for their presence or force their appearance as if they are the monarchs of some
indescribable era who have the power, authority and final say to impose any sentence and determine the execution
of the same in the way they desire possibly harbouring the notion that they are a law unto themselves or they are
the ancestors of Caesar or, for that matter, Louis the XIV. The Constitution and the laws of this country do not
countenance such an act and, in fact, the whole activity is illegal and punishable as offence under the criminal law."
private which includes the right to make private, intimate choices. It held as follows:
"Mere absence of a definition which would encompass the many contours of the right to privacy need not deter
us from recognizing privacy interests when we see them. As this judgment will presently show, these interests are
broadly classified into interests pertaining to the physical realm and interests pertaining to the mind. As case law,
both in the U.S. and India show, this concept has travelled far from the mere right to be let alone to recognition of a
large number of privacy interests, which apart from privacy of one's home and protection from unreasonable
searches and seizures have been extended to protecting an individual's interests in making vital personal choices
such as the right to abort a fetus; rights of same sex couples-including the right to marry; rights as to procreation,
contraception, general family relationships, child rearing, education, data protection, etc..
1769. The decision to marry a partner of our choice is the paradigmatic example of a private, intimate choice. It is
perhaps the most important decision a person makes in her life. This decision is protected from the interference of the
state. A state which respects its citizen's right to private, intimate choices will not interfere with a citizen's choice of
marital partner. Prohibiting a marital partner from one's own sex is such an interference.
IV. NON-RECOGNITION OF MARRIAGE VIOLATES THE RIGHT TO SPEECH AND EXPRESSION UNDER ARTICLE 19
438, this court held:
"Gender identity refers to each persons deeply felt internal and individual experience of gender, which may or
may not correspond with the sex assigned at birth, including the personal sense of the body which may involve a
freely chosen, modification of bodily appearance or functions by medical, surgical or other means and other
expressions of gender, including dress, speech and mannerisms. Gender identity, therefore, refers to an individual's
self-identification as a man, woman, transgender or other identified category.
1771. Sexual orientation is intimately connected to the intimate aspects of personal identity. The right to marry of
the homosexual couples is something that emerges out of this identity. When legal recognition of marriage is denied,
this is precisely what is denied to them : the right to self-determination and expression.
1772. The rights of choice and marriage are an integral part of the rights to expression and speech guaranteed
under Articles 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. The right to expression not only extends to speech or writing, but a myriad
of ways in which one is free to express their inner self, their ideas and thoughts. We express ourselves through the
choice of clothing, art, literature and also, the choice of what kind of partner we would like to have. This partnership is
one of the most important choices, since it likely can have a crucial impact on how we lead our lives. Non-recognition
of same sex marriage hits at the root of this choice, since the choice is made difficult to be exercised due to the lack of
legal recognition.
V. INON-RECOGNITION OF THE RIGHT TO MARRY OF SAME SEX COUPLES VIOLATES THE TEST OF PROPORTIONALITY
1773. To restrict this right, the state must show that any of the restrictions provided under Article 19(2) is
attracted. However, none of the grounds specified under Article 19(2) of the Constitution such as sovereignty and
integrity of India, security of the State, friendly relationship with foreign state, public order, decency or morality,
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence is attracted in the instant case.
1774. It is the settled proposition that extra constitutional limitations cannot be imposed on fundamental rights,
particularly on something such as the right to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a). The purpose
of providing expressed restrictions in the Constitution itself is that external limitations cannot be imposed. External
restrictions cannot seek to infringe upon the right to freedom of speech and expression. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Court is confronted with the fundamental rights challenged. The Court held that if a right falls into the ambit of (a)-(g)
of Clause 19(1) of the Indian Constitution, the question to be asked is whether a reasonable restriction is imposed
failing within the scope of Clauses 2 to 6 respectively. The relevant paragraph is extracted as follows:
"The Court, confronted with a challenge to the constitutional validity of any legislative enactment by reference to
Art. 19 of the Constitution, shall first ask what is the sweep of the fundamental right guaranteed by the relevant
sub clause out of Sub clauses (a) to (g) of Clause (1). If the right canvassed fails within the sweep and expanse of
any of the sub clauses of Clause (1), then the next question to be asked would be, whether the impugned law
imposes a reasonable restriction failing with the scope of Clauses (2) to (6) respectively. However, if the right
sought to be canvassed does not fail within the sweep of the fundamental rights but is a mere concomitant or
adjunct or expansion or incidence of that right, then the validity thereof is not to be tested by reference to Clauses
(2) to (6). The test which it would be required to satisfy for its constitutional validity is one of reasonableness, as
propounded in the case of V.G. Row (supra) or if it comes into conflict with any other provision of the Constitution.
1775. It is submitted that the test for measuring the validity of a state action (or inaction) infringing on
fundamental rights, (in this case, the rights of dignity, expression, and liberty) is categorically determined under the
proportionality test, in Indian jurisprudence as recently developed.
"a limitation of a constitutional right will be constitutionally permissible if : (i) it is designated for a proper
purpose; (ii) the measures undertaken to effectuate such a limitation are rationally connected to the fulfillment of
that purpose; (iii) the measures undertaken are necessary in that there are no alternative measures that may
similarly achieve that same purpose with a lesser degree of limitation; and finally (iv) there needs to be a proper
relation ('proportionality stricto sensu" or 'balancing') between the importance of achieving the proper purpose and
the social importance of preventing the limitation on the constitutional right.'
infringe the right to privacy only if the proportionality test is satisfied. In the instant case, the right to marry a partner
of one's choice falls within the right to privacy, a constitutionally guaranteed right. None of the restrictions come into
play in order to make it justifiable for the state to restrict that right, especially considering the centrality of the right to
marry for the right to privacy.
VI. REPLY TO THE ARGUMENTS IN THE COUNTER AFFIDAVIT
BY THE UNION OF INDIA
1778. The argument, made in the counter affidavit by the Union of India, that marriage laws are a legislative
matter fails to stand up to scrutiny. The arguments presented here and by the other petitioners show constitutional
infirmity in the application and interpretation of the SMA. Such constitutional infirmity is clearly a matter for the courts
and not for the legislature. The government's argument is therefore begging the question.
1779. The government suggests in paragraph 36 of its counter affidavit that a denial of same-sex marriages is not
discrimination because same-sex live-in couples are treated the same as opposite-sex live-in couples. This, the
government claims, shows that discrimination occurs not "only" on grounds of sex. This argument, too, ignores the
main question. The discrimination alleged is the denial to marry. Suppose a government prevented women from
attending engineering colleges. According to the logic of the government's reply this would not be discrimination
because women studying subjects other than engineering would be treated alike men studying subjects other than
engineering. This shows the fallacy in the government's argument.
1780. The government also claims that marriage has religious connotations as a sanskar, a holy union, and the like.
While this contention may or may not speak to religious personal laws, it is plainly inapplicable to the SMA which is a
decidedly secular law.
1781. For the same reason, arguments that personal laws have constitutional protection under Article 25 and that
same-sex marriage would disrupt the balance of personal laws do not apply to a claim of recognising same-sex
marriage under the SMA. The SMA has no such constitutional protection because it is not tied a particular religious
custom or religious community.
1782. The government is similarly mistaken that there is a single unified definition of marriage. The SMA does not
define marriage. Various jurisdictions have changed their definition of marriage. The concept of marriage has been
historically evolving. The growing acceptance of inter-case, inter-faith, and inter-racial marriages have been hallmarks
of social progress. The inclusion of same-sex marriage follows this tradition.
1783. One of the most important functions of marriage is the ability to raise children. Same-sex couples seek the
right to adopt children in the same conditions as an opposite-sex couple unable to conceive has this right. The counter
affidavit suggests, in paragraph 18, that the mental and psychological growth of children ("in the natural way") is
safeguarded through marriage. Insofar as this is an argument against same-sex marriage, it is based on prejudiced
and stereotypical notions which are alien to the constitutional scheme. A comprehensive meta-study published in the
prestigious journal BMJ Global Health (Zhang Y, Huang H, Wang M, et al Family outcome disparities between sexual
minority and heterosexual families : a systematic review and meta-analysis BMJ Global Health; 8e010556) has shown
that children raised by same-sex parents face no disadvantage in their development compared to children raised by
opposite-sex parents.
VII. COMPARATIVE JURISPRUDENCE
1784. In the global scenario, the Human Rights Campaign Foundation has compiled data on marriage equality
around the world. According to them, there are 34 countries which have legalised same sex marriage. Out of this, 23
countries have enacted legislations and 10 through judicial decisions. In 2022 alone, Cuba, Andorra and Slovenia have
legalised same sex marriages.
1785. In Obergefell V. Hodges, (2015), Justice Kennedy held for once and for all in the Supreme Court of the
United States in a similar challenge: in forming a marital union, two people become something greater than once they
were. As some of the petitioners in these cases demonstrate, marriage embodies a love that may endure even past
death.. They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the law. The Constitution grants them that right."
1786. In South Africa, in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie With Doctors For Life International (first amicus curiae),
John Jackson Smyth (second amicus curiae) and Marriage Alliance of South Africa (third amicus curiae) CCT 60/04,
the court noted:
"[71] The exclusion of same-sex couples from the benefits and responsibilities of marriage, accordingly, is not a
small and tangential inconvenience resulting from a few surviving relics of societal prejudice destined to evaporate
like the morning dew. It represents a harsh if oblique statement by the law that same-sex couples are outsiders,
and that their need for affirmation and protection of their intimate relations as human beings is somehow less than
that of heterosexual couples. It reinforces the wounding notion that they are to be treated as biological oddities, as
failed or lapsed human beings who do not fit into normal society, and, as such, do not qualify for the full moral
concern and respect that our Constitution seeks to secure for everyone. It signifies that their capacity for love,
commitment and accepting responsibility is by definition less worthy of regard than that of heterosexual couples.
C. RELIEFS AND POSSIBILITIES OF INTERPRETATION
1787. Two possibilities are open before the court to integrate same sex marriages to the legal framework. The first
is to reinterpret the SMA in a way that it contains same sex marriage as well. The second is to issue a declaratory relief
and await for the Parliament to made amends in the law appropriately by giving an appropriate time limit (as done in
South Africa and Taiwan)
1788. Most of the language used in the SMA admits of an interpretation which permits same-sex marriages. Most
importantly, Section 4 in laying out the "conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages" states that a
marriage between "any two persons may be solemnized". This usage of sex-neutral and omission of sex-specific
terminology is significant.
1789. The first relief sought is declaratory relief that the SMA allows the solemnization of same-sex marriages.
1790. Only few provisions of the SMA use sex-specific terminology. There are three types of provisions here : (1)
the usage of the definite article "the" when describing "wife" and "husband" in sections 4(c), 22, 23, 27, (2) the usage
of "living together as husband and wife" in the context of the registration of marriages celebrated in forms other than
the SMA itself in section 15(a) and the Fifth Schedule, and (3) sex-specific language in the Second, Third, and Fourth
Schedules. The following reliefs are sought for each case.
1791. In Sections 4(c), 22 and 27 expressions using of "the male", "the female", "the husband", "the wife" are to
be read as using the indefinite article "a" to indicate that a marriage may have more than a singular male, female,
husband, or wife respectively. For example, Section 27 relating to divorce would then hold that a petition for divorce
can be broad by either a husband or a wife without presupposing whether the marriage has one or two husbands or
wives. (Please see 'Same-sex marriage : All that is needed is a small change in the Special Marriage Act' Indian
Express, 15 March 2023, Bastian Steuwer and Thulasi K. Raj).
1792. In Section 15(a) and the Fifth Schedule, the SMA regulates the recognition of marriages celebrated in other
forms. Section 15(a) stipulates the following condition: ceremony of marriage has been performed between the
parties and they have been living together as husband and wife ever since". The words "as husband and wife" imply
that only opposite sex-couples can fulfil this condition. Given the aforementioned arguments, this is unconstitutional
as violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21.
1793. The words "as husband and wife" should therefore be struck down as unconstitutional. The clause "as
husband and wife" is severable from the rest of the provision. The remainder of Section 15(a) provides the conditions
of a ceremony of marriage and continued living together. These conditions are not violative of any constitutional rights.
Striking down the clause "as husband and wife" is therefore the minimally invasive step to cure the constitutional
defect in Section 15 of the SMA. The same holds, mutatis mutandis for the Fifth Schedule.
1794. The Second, Third, and Fourth Schedule use sex-specific language. As the preceding has made clear, the
SMA needs to be and can be interpreted as permitting same-sex marriages. The Schedules, as they are worded,
prevent the solemnization of marriages by partners who are entitled to such a solemnization. To the extent that they
do this, the Schedules are both unconstitutional and ultra vires its parent act, the SMA.
1795. The relief sought is to declare that the sex-specific terms in the Second, Third, and Fourth Schedule such as
"bride" or "bridegroom" be read in a sex-neutral way. For example, male intending to solemnize the marriage to
another male, may then enter their name under the "Declaration by the Bride" column in the Third Schedule.
1796. In these circumstances, it is prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to accept the above written
submissions and allow the writ petitions as prayed for.
DRAWN & SETTLED BY:
ADV. THULASI K RAJ
DATED : 05.4.2023
MOHAMMAD SADIQUE
ADVOCATE FOR THE APPLICANT
Sameer Samudra V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
Civil Writ Petition No. 1105 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Sameer Samudra and Another Petitioner;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
And
Civil Writ Petition No. 1150 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Nitin Karani and Another Petitioner;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Civil Writ Petition No. 1105 of 2022 and Civil Writ Petition No. 1150 of 2022
Decided on April 17, 2023
ADDITIONAL WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS AND COMPILATION OF DOCUMENTS
INDEX
S No.
Name
1.
Written Submissions on Behalf of Mr. Anand Grover, Sr. Advocate
2.
Roberts V. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 (1984)
3.
Turner V. Safley : 482 U.S. 78 (1987)
4.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People V. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449 (1958)
5.
The Right of Association by William O. Douglas Source : Columbia Law Review, Vol. 63, No. 8 (Dec.,
1963), pp. 1361-1383
6.
Statement by Pinklist India Legislative Inaction on Marriage Equality
ADVOCATE FOR THE PETITIONER : NUPUR KUMAR
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
Civil Writ Petition No. 1105 of 2022
IN THE MATTER OF:
Sameer Samudra and Anr PETITIONER
Versus
Union of India and Ors
RESPONDENTS
AND
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
Civil Writ Petition No. 1150 of 2022
IN THE MATTER OF:
Nitin Karani and Ann
PETITIONER
Versus
Union of India and Ors
RESPONDENTS
Additional Written Submissions on Behalf of Mr. Anand Grover, Senior
Advocate
1. Obergefell by the US Supreme Court
I. It is important to appreciate that firstly, the logic in the decision is the judicial recognition of the Right to Marry
based on the 14th amendment and secondly it upholds the the notion of intimate association. It is inter alia is
based on the following:-
a) The Fourteenth Amendment requires a State to license a marriage between two people of the same sex.
b) It is not the case the US Supreme Court striking down State Statutes preventing non heterosexual marriages.
c) That marriage as an institution is continually evolving;
d) The fundamental liberties protected by the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause extend to certain
personal choices central to individual dignity and autonomy, including intimate choic-es defining personal
identity and beliefs.
e) The right to personal choice regarding marriage is inherent in the concept of individual autautonomy.
Decisions about marriage are among the most intimate that an individual can make.
f) US Supreme Court jurisprudence is that the right to marry is fundamental because it supports a two person
union unlike any other in its importance to the committed individuals. The intimate association protected by
this right was central to Griswold V. Connecticut, which held the Constitution protects the right of married
couples to use contraception.
g) This US Supreme Court's cases and the Nation's traditions make clear that marriage is a keystone of the
Nation's social order.
h) The final basis for protecting the right to marry is that it safeguards children and families and thus draws
meaning from related rights of childrearing, procreation.
2. Mandate of Equality under international law : UN Conventions also mandate the equality in marriage
for
all persons
11. The definition of discrimidnation under CEDAW, article 1 must be read into Indian law. The term "discrimination
against women", under the Decalaration is read mean any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis
of sex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by
women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field. There are similar
provisions in other International Instruments too.
ICCPR
"Article 2
1. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to respect and to ensure to all individuals within its
territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the present Covenant, without distinction of any
kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status.
2.
3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes:
(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as herein recognized are violated shall have an effective
remedy, notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity"
ICESCR
Article 2
1
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to guarantee that the rights enunciated in the present
Covenant will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status."
[In the Toonen decision by the Human Rights Committee held that "other status" includes "sexual orientation."
111. Thus discrimination has to also be seen in terms of India's obligations in International Law.
IV. India is a signatory to multiple international treaties, and these treaties lay down an obligation in India to
recognise same sex marriages. Thus the government has a duty to recognise same sex relationships. When the
government refuses to act on these treaties, this Court can invoke its powers under Article 32 to fill in the gap of
multiple obligations under international statutes, UN Declarations, and Yogyakarta principles that were
incumbent on it, the Government of India had not done anything for the welfare of transgender persons. It was
the opinion of the Court that it cannot be a mute spectator and thus, must act in to fill out the gaps. That, along
with Article 235 of the Constitution, Courts have recognised that there must be recognition of international law
as a source of law. (See paragraph 23 to 26, 53, 54, 55, 58, and 60).
VI. These core principles are reaffirmed through international human rights covenants and treaties, many of which
contain open-ended provisions against discrimination, 13 and have been interpreted to include discrimination on
the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex characteristic. (See for example, Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comments No. 20 E/C.12/GC/20), 2009, para. 27, and No. 22
(E/C.12/GC/22), 2016, at paras. 9, 23; Toonen V. Australia, Human Rights Committee, Communication No.
499/1992 (CCPR/C/50/D/499/1992), para. 8.7; Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comments No. 4
(CRC/GC/2003/4), 2003, para. 6, and No. 9 (CRC/C/GC/9), 2007, para. 8; Committee against Torture, General
Comments No. 2 (CAT/C/GC/2), 2008, para. 21, and No. 3 (CAT/C/GC/3), 2012, paras. 32, 39.)
On Intimate Association
VII. Article 19(1)(a) and Article 19(1)(c) together provide the freedom of speech and expression, and association
respectively. The right to association includes two rights-the right to form expressive associations, such as
a
worker's union and the right to intimate association, such as marriage and familial bonds. It is the case of the
Pitioner that although the jurisprudence around article 19(1)(c) has thus far delt with expressive unions, the
time is ripe for this court to recognise the right to intimate association and expand the jurisprudence.
VIII. The United States Supreme Court, in Roberts V. United States Jaycees where the constitutional validity of
public accommodation laws was under challenge, held that the guarantee under the fourteenth amendment to
the United States constitution protected, among other things, the right to marriage, childbirth, and cohabitation
with one's relatives. These rights form the part of the right to form intimate associations. Such a right would also
entail the freedom to leave such intimate associations. (See, Roberts V. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609
(1984).) The right to form intimate associations is a part of the freedom to form associations under Article 19(1)
(c) of the constitution of India. Such a right to enter into an association has an analogous right to leave the said
association without state interference.
IX. The right to intimate association herein is divided into two parts, the first which examines what rights have
been recognised under the United States law where the doctrine emerged, and the second, examining the
reasonable restrictions on the right to intimate association in India.
3. The Evolution of the Doctrine of Intimate Association
X. Though, under the first Amendment to the United States Constitution recognised the right to intimate
association, in its modern conception was first recognised in Griswold V. Connecticut, where Justice Douglas held
that, "Marriage is a coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and intimate to the degree of
being sacred. It is an association that promotes a way of life, not causes: a harmony in living, not political faiths:
a bilateral loyalty, not commercial or social projects. Yet it is an association for as noble a purpose as any
involved in our prior decisions.
XI. Griswold was part of a larger doctrinal movement : the revival of substantive due process as a guarantee of
individual freedoms. The freedom of intimate association is one of this movement's early products. It is
submitted that the freedom of intimate association, like other constitutional freedoms, is presumptive rather
than absolute. In particular cases, it may give way to overriding governmental interests. Those interests, for the
purposes of the Indian Constitution are located in article 19(4).
XII. In fact, Justice Harlan's seminal opinion in NAACP V. Alabama had referred to "the vital relationship between
freedom to associate and privacy in one's associations." (See NAACP Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449,
462 (1958)) But associational privacy drew from different values than the sense of individual autonomy
conveyed by the right "to be let alone." Privacy in the early right of association cases had more to do with
protecting the boundaries of group autonomy. As Harlan had argued in NAACP V. Alabama, "[i]nviolability of
privacy in group association may in many circumstances be indispensable to preservation of freedom of
association, particularly where a group espouses dissident beliefs."
XIII. That kind of privacy did not mean "not public"-in fact, groups like the NAACP and the Communist Party had
actively sought public visibility and recognition. It was in this group context that Douglas had first argued for
"the need for a pervasive right of privacy against government intrusion" and a "right of privacy implicit in the
First Amendment [that] creates an area into which the Government may not enter." (see, Gibson, 372 U.S. at
569-70 (Douglas, J., concurring). Douglas reiterated these arguments in a lecture that he delivered at Brown
University which was published subsequently in the Columbia Law Review. William O. Douglas, The Right of
Association, 63 COLUM. L. REV. 1361, 1363, 1367 (1963).)
XIV. The modern-day doctrine, now stands firmly on the decision in Jaycees. The majority opinion specifies the
manner in which the judiciary should determine which personal relationships are protected by the intimate
association framework. The Court held that, "The personal affiliations that exemplify these considerations, and
that therefore suggest some relevant limitations on the relationships that might be entitled to this sort of
constitutional protection, are those that attend the creation and sustenance of a family Among other things
[family relationships] are distinguished by such attributes as relative smallness, a high degree of selectivity in
decisions to begin and maintain the affiliation, and seclusion from others in critical aspects of the relationship."
XV. Notably, the functional test laid down does not depend on a finding that the relationship in question is rooted in
any "tradition." Non does it require that a union "look like" a familiar family formation.
In Jaycees, the Court also laid down the limits of state interference. It held,
"Determining the limits of state authority over an individual's freedom to enter into a particular association
therefore unavoidably entails a careful assessment of where that relationship's objective characteristics locate it
on a spectrum from the most intimate to the most attenuated of personal attachments. We need not mark
the
potentially significant points on this terrain with any precision. We note only that factors that may be relevant
include size, purpose, policies, selectivity, congeniality, and other characteristics that in a particular case may be
pertinent"
XVI. The treatment of the freedom of intimate association has evolved into a climate of receptivity toward the full
and equal application of intimate association protections for all citizens. There is a need for this Court to accord
strong equal liberty protections to intimate associations, regardless of sexual orientation, traditional norms,
moral disapproval, or other hurdles that too many disenfranchised individuals have faced over the years in
seeking protection for their most intimate life choices and relationships.
XVII. It is submitted that right to marry is fundamental under substantive due process and equal protection
analysis of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution because the decision to marry
implicates rights to privacy or intimacy under the Ninth Amendment, implicates First Amendment notions of
freedom of religion, expression, and intimate association, implicates due process liberties related to childrearing,
procreation, and education, and because marriage has historically been accorded significant social and political
reverence. The marriage bans both impair a fundamental right and demean a historically stigmatized class of
people.
XVIII. The United States Supreme Court notes that Lawrence V. Texas, which overturned same-sex sodomy laws,
and Turner V. Safley, which held that prisoners could not be barred from marriage, both recognized the right to
enjoy "intimate association." In addition to the right to intimate association, individuals should be able to "define
themselves by their commitment to each other" in marriage. (See, Turner V. Safley, 482 U.S. 78 (1987);
Lawrence V. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003), United States V. Windsor, No. 12-307, slip op. at 22-23 (2013))
XIX. The US Supreme Court in Obergefell relies upon the expression, "intimate" or some derivative of it on a
number of occasions referring to "intimate association," "same-sex intimacy," "intimate bond," "intimate
choices," and the like. The repeated use of this particular phraseology signals the Court's strong rejection of the
States' imposition of their version of morality upon the intimate spheres of private and personal life, particularly
when the "best interests" of children are involved, "the rights of two consenting adults" are involved, and when
the activities "pose no risk of harm to themselves or third parties."
XX. In reaching its decision that gay people are a suspect class entitled to heightened scrutiny review, the
Obergefell Court scolded lower courts and those in opposition to gay rights for taking a pinched and disingenuous
view of its gay rights jurisprudence and for clinging to Bowers and other outdated pre-Lawrence precedent. The
Obergefell opinion proclaims "while [Lawrence] confirmed a dimension of freedom that allows individuals to
engage in intimate association without criminal liability, it does not follow that freedom stops there." The Court
notes "outlaw to outcast may be a step forward, but it does not achieve the full promise of liberty." Gay people
are not outlaws entitled to only rational basis review.
XXI. Marriage defined by Martha Nussbam as:-
"Marriage has, first, a civil rights aspect. Married people get a lot of government benefits that the unmarried
usually do not get : favourable treatment in tax, inheritance, and insurance status; immigration rights; rights in
adoption and custody; decisional and visitation rights in health care and burial; the spousal privilege exemption
when giving testimony in court; and yet others. Marriage has, second, an expressive aspect. When people get
married, they typically make a statement of love and commitment in front of witnesses. Most people who get
married view that statement as a very important part of their lives. Being able to make it, and to make it freely (not
under duress) is taken to be definitive of adult human freedom. The statement made by the marrying couple is
usually seen as involving an answering statement on the part of society : we declare our love and commitment, and
society, in response, recognizes and dignifies that commitment." (See, FROM DISGUST TO HUMANITY : SEXUAL
ORIENTATION AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW by Martha C. Nussbaum, New York : Oxford University Press, 2010)
XXII. Families wouldn't be families if the competent members couldn't exercise some control over membership.
Moreover, family members as individuals would lack all manner of meaningful personal freedoms if they could
not control at least their own membership. Traditionally, and in many families today, not all competent family
members enjoy equal power to determine membership. Patriarchs have long controlled who is welcome within
the family, for instance, casting out children who failed to meet some standard of virtue. Denying other
competent family members (equal) say over membership has far-reaching implications. As much feminist
literature confirms, to have even minimal control over their bodies and their lives, women need a right to
exclude, where that includes the right to refuse a marriage proposal, the right to access contraception, the right
to divorce, and indeed the right to choose not to spend private time with certain people.
XXIII. Where same-sex marriage is not recognized in law, marriage provides benefits which are denied to same-sex
couples on the basis of their orientation; if the function of marriage is the legal recognition of loving, or
"voluntary intimate," relationships, the exclusion of same-sex relationships appears arbitrary and unjustly
discriminatory.
On Transgender Persons and their Marriage
XXIV. There has been tradioinally, no bar on the marriage between non hetrosexual persons. Following exceprts
from various scriptures support this proposition:
Baudhaayana Dharmasootra-
Prashna 1, Adhyaaya 11, Kandikaa 20, Sootra No. 16.
WITH Helf
Meaning: Aachaaryas (authors of Dharma Sutras) state marriage arising out of love to be appropriate for all
individuals.
Govindaswaamin's commentary on the above sootra -
LATE rude - sfd a I de-arria am
- 3fd
Meaning : Love marriage is defined thus - 'where a person enamoured by one marries the one enamoured by
them'. Love born out of mind and expressed by the eyes alone prevails there. Marriage for such a person should
follow that relation of love.
Even Aapastamba states 'where individuals have expressed visual and conscious love for someone, they should
be married with each other and not anyone else'.
Kautiliya Artha Shaastra -
Dharmastheeya Prakaranam (Section 3), Adhyaaya 5, Statement No. 15.
II 15 II
Meaning : Any kind of marriage is approvable (not prohibited), provided it pleases all the concerned persons.
XXV. In India, the transgender population makes up a total of 4.88 lakh, as per the 2011 census. Despite the
Transgender (Protection of Rights) Act and the NALSA judgement, transgender persons continue to be
discriminated against and marginalised.
XXVI. There are distinct references to transgender persons including Shikhandi, Ardhanareeshwara, etc. It is
submitted that that there are diverse transgender identities in India including Hijras, eunuchs, Kothis, Aravanis,
Jogappas, Shiv-Shakthis. This Court, in NALSA V. Union of India has noted the distinct nature of each of these
identities. (see, paragraph 47) There are also multiple references to the transgender persons in the Vedic age
literature. XXVII. In the Mahabharata, the references to Shikhandi are explicit:
Mahaabhaaratam-
Udyoga Parva (Section 5), Adhyaaya 188, Shloka no. 1 to Adhyaaya 192 Shloka no. 10. (A total of 110 Shlokas).
Starting from
froust and grall gRI act
I 49146 II
Upto
dd: fraust Hode
FR EE: fact al II
Marriage of Princess Shikhandi, a transgender person with the Princess of Dashaarna Kingdom. King Drupada was
childless for a long time, performed penance and pleased Lord Shiva, who blessed him with a boon that his wife will
soon give birth to a masculine daughter. A biologically feminine child was born to king Drupada, whom he named
'Shikhandi' and owing to her masculine genden expression, raised her like a man. When Shikhandi reached the age
of maturity, she was married to the princess of Dasharna, daughter of King Hiranyavarman. Thereafter Shikhandi
went to forest, performed penance and having pleased a Divine Yaksha, acquired masculine body from him. He then
returned to the palace and ruled his kingdom.
XXVIII. During the Mughal Era, Hijra persons also occupied high positions in the Islamic religious institutions,
especially in guarding the holy places of Mecca and Medina the person of trust, they were able to influence state
decisions and also received large amount of money to have been closest to kings and queens. (See, Paragraphs
13-20, of NALSA].
XXIX. The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 defines a 'transgender person' in section 2
(k), to mean:-
"a person whose gender does not match with the gender assigned to that person at birth and includes trans-man
or trans-woman (whether or not such person has undergone sex reassignment surgery or hormone therapy or laser
therapy or such other therapy), person with intersex variations, genderqueer and person having such socio-cultural
identities as kinner, hijra, aravani and jogta."
XXX. Section 2 (c) defines a 'family to mean "a group of people related by blood or marriage or by adoption made
in accordance with law."
XXXI. Section 6(2) of the Act allows a transgender person who has obtained a 'certificate of identity' under the Act
to record their gender in all official documents in accordance with the said certificate.
XXXII. Annexure I to the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Rules, 2020 enlists the official
documents in which such change of gender can be recorded. Serial No. 12 in Annexure I is 'Marriage
Certificate'.
XXXIII. Consequently, a person who is already married and who identifies as a transgender person and obtains a
certificate of identity as such under the Act, not only continues to be married but can also officially record the
change in gender in their 'marriage certificate." Marriage does not become void or voidable.
XXXIV. To the extent that Transgender persons who married before obtaining a certificate of identity will have their
marriages officially recognized in their identity as a transgender person but those who wish to marry after
obtaining certificate of identity under the Act will be barred from marrying.
XXXV. This shows that neither the Legislature nor the Executive (that notified the Rules) were averse to the idea of
transgender persons' marriage.
No. 83-724
U.S.
Roberts V. United States Jaycees
468 U.S. 609 (1984)
Decided Jul 3, 1984
APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 83-724.
Argued April 18, 1984 Decided July 3, 1984
Appellee United States Jaycees is a nonprofit national membership corporation whose objective, as stated in its
bylaws, is to pursue such educational and charitable purposes as will promote and foster the growth and
development of young men's civic organizations. The bylaws establish several classes of membership, including
individual regular and associate members and local chapters. Regular membership is limited to young men between
the ages of 18 and 35, while associate membership is available to persons ineligible for regular membership,
principally women and older men. An associate member may not vote or hold local or national office. Two local
chapters in Minnesota have been violating the bylaws for several years by admitting women as regular members,
and, as a result, have had a number of sanctions imposed on them by appellee, including denying their members
eligibility for state or national office. When these chapters were notified by appellee that revocation of their charters
was to be considered, members of both chapters filed discrimination charges with the Minnesota Department of
Human Rights, alleging that the exclusion of women from full membership violated the Minnesota Human Rights
Act (Act), which makes it "an unfair discriminatory practice [t]o deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of
the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of a place of public accommodation
because of race, color, creed, religion, disability, national origin or sex." Before a hearing took place on the state
charges, appellee brought suit against appellant state officials to prevent enforcement of the Act, alleging that, by
requiring appellee to accept women as regular members, application of the Act would violate the male members'
constitutional rights of free speech and association. Ultimately, a state hearing officer decided against appellee, and
the District Court certified to the Minnesota Supreme Court the question whether appellee is "a place of public
accommodation" within the meaning of the Act. That court answered the question in the affirmative, and, in the
course of its holding, suggested that, unlike appellee, the Kiwanis Club might be sufficiently "private" to be outside
the Act's scope. Appellee then amended its 610 federal complaint to claim *610 that the Minnesota Supreme
Court's interpretation of the Act rendered it unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. After trial, the District Court
entered judgment in appellant's favor. The Court of Appeals reversed, holding that application of the Act to
appellee's membership policies would produce a "direct and substantial" interference with appellee's freedom of
association guaranteed by the First Amendment, and, in the alternative, that the Act was vague as construed and
applied and hence unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Held:
1. Application of the Act to appellee to compel it to accept women as regular members does not abridge either
the male members' freedom of intimate association or their freedom of expressive association. Pp. 617-629.
(a) Several features of appellee's organization place it outside the category of highly personal relationships
entitled to constitutional protection against unjustified interference by the State. Local chapters are neither
small nor selective, no criteria being employed for judging applicants for membership. Moreover, many of
the activities central to the formation and maintenance of the association of members with one another
involve the participation of strangers to that relationship, numerous nonmembers of both genders regularly
participating in a substantial portion of the activities. Accordingly, local chapters lack the distinctive
characteristics that might afford constitutional protection to their members' decision to exclude women. Pp.
618-622.
611
(b) Minnesota's compelling interest in eradicating discrimination against its female citizens, an interest
unrelated to the suppression of expression, justifies the impact that application of the Act to appellee may
have on its male members' freedom of expressive association. By prohibiting gender discrimination in
places of public accommodation, the Act protects the State's citizenry from a number of serious social and
personal harms. Assuring women equal access to the goods, privileges, and advantages of a place of public
accommodation clearly furthers compelling state interests. In applying the Act to appellee, the State has
advanced those interests through the least restrictive means of achieving its ends. There is no basis in the
record for concluding that admission of women as full voting members will impede appellee's ability to
engage in its constitutionally protected civic, charitable, lobbying, fundraising, and other activities or to
disseminate its preferred views. In any event, even if enforcement of the Act causes some incidental
abridgment of appellee's protected speech, that effect is not greater than necessary to accomplish the
State's legitimate purposes. Pp. 622-629.
*611
2. The Act is not unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. The due process concerns of the void-for-vagueness
doctrine are not seriously implicated by the Act, either on its face or as construed in this case. The Minnesota
Supreme Court's construction of the Act by use of objective criteria typically employed in determining the
applicability of antidiscrimination statutes to the membership policies of assertedly private clubs, ensures that
the Act's reach is readily ascertainable. The contrast that court drew between appellee and the Kiwanis Club
also disposes of appellee's contention that the Act is unconstitutionally overbroad. That court's articulated
willingness to adopt limiting constructions that would exclude private groups from the Act's reach, together
with the commonly used and sufficiently precise standards it employed to determine that appellee is not such
a group, establishes that the Act, as construed, does not create an unacceptable risk of application to a
substantial amount of protected conduct. Pp. 629-631.
709 F.2d 1560, reversed.
BRENNAN, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which WHITE, MARSHALL, POWELL, and STEVENS, JJ.,
joined, and in Parts I and 111 of which O'CONNOR, J., joined. O'CONNOR, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and
concurring in the judgment, post, p. 631. REHNQUIST, J., concurred in the judgment. BURGER, C. J., and
BLACKMUN, J., took no part in the decision of the case.
Richard L. Varco, Jr., Special Assistant Attorney General of Minnesota, argued the cause for appellants. With him
on the briefs were Hubert H. Humphrey 111, Attorney General, Kent G. Harbison, Chief Deputy Attorney General,
Thomas R. Muck, Deputy Attorney General, and Richard S. Slowes, Assistant Attorney General.
Carl D. Hall, Jr., argued the cause for appellee. With him on the brief was Clay R. Moore.
Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were filed for the State of New York et al. by Robert Abrams, Attorney
General of New York, Lawrence S. Kahn, Rosemarie Rhodes, Shelley B. Mayer and Kim E. Greene, Assistant
Attorney General, John K Van De Kamp, Attorney General of California, Andrea Sheridan Ordin, Chief Assistant
Attorney General, and Marian M. Johnston, Deputy Attorney General; for the Alliance for Women Membership by
Danielle E. deBenedictis; for the American Civil Liberties Union et al. by Laurence H. Tribe, Burt Neuborne,
Isabelle Katz Page 612 Pinzler, E. Richard Larson, and Charles S. Sims; for Community Business Leaders by
Eldon J. Spencer, Jr.: for the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., by Jack Greenberg, Beth J. Lief,
and Judith Reed; for the National League of Cities et al. by Lawrence R Velvet and Elaine D. Kaplan; for the
National Organization for Women et al. by Judith / Avner and Charlotte M. Fischman; and for Women's Issues
Network, Inc., by Neil H. Cogan.
Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed for the Boy Scouts of America by Philip A. Lacovara, Malcolm
E. Wheeler, George A. Davidson, and David K Park; for the Conference of Private Organizations by Leonard J.
Henzke, Jr.: and for Rotary International by William P. Sutter and Wm. John Kennedy.
612 *612
JUSTICE BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case requires us to address a conflict between a State's efforts to eliminate gender-based discrimination
against its citizens and the constitutional freedom of association asserted by members of a private organization. In
the decision under review, the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit concluded that, by requiring the United States
Jaycees to admit women as full voting members, the Minnesota Human Rights Act violates the First and Fourteenth
Amendment rights of the organization's members. We noted probable jurisdiction, Gomez-Bethke V. United States
Jaycees, 464 U.S. 1037 (1984), and now reverse.
IA
The United States Jaycees (Jaycees), founded in 1920 as the Junior Chamber of Commerce, is a nonprofit
membership corporation, incorporated in Missouri with national headquarters in Tulsa, Okla. The objective of the
Jaycees, as set out in its bylaws, is to pursue
"such educational and charitable purposes as will promote and foster the growth and development of young
men's civic organizations in the United States, designed to inculcate in the individual membership of such
organization a spirit of genuine Americanism and civic interest, 613 *613 and as a supplementary education
institution to provide them with opportunity for personal development and achievement and an avenue for
intelligent participation by young men in the affairs of their community, state and nation, and to develop true
friendship and understanding among young men of all nations." Quoted in Brief for Appellee 2.
The organization's bylaws establish seven classes of membership, including individual or regular members,
associate individual members, and local chapters. Regular membership is limited to young men between the ages
of 18 and 35, while associate membership is available to individuals or groups ineligible for regular membership,
principally women and older men. An associate members, whose dues are somewhat lower than those charged
regular members, may not vote, hold local or national office, or participate in certain leadership training and awards
programs. The bylaws define a local chapter as "[a]ny young men's organization of good repute existing in any
community within the United States, organized for purposes similar to and consistent with those" of the national
organization. App. to Juris. Statement A98. The ultimate policymaking authority of the Jaycees rests with an annual
national convention, consisting of delegates from each local chapter, with a national president and board of
directors. At the time of trial in August 1981, the Jaycees had approximately 295,000 members in 7,400 local
chapters affiliated with 51 state organizations. There were at that time about 11,915 associate members. The
national organization's executive vice president estimated at trial that women associate members make up about
two percent of the Jaycees' total membership. Tr. 56.
New members are recruited to the Jaycees through the local chapters, although the state and national
organizations are also actively involved in recruitment through a variety of promotional activities. A new regular
member pays an initial fee followed by annual dues; in exchange, he is 614 entitled *614 to participate in all of the
activities of the local, state, and national organizations. The national headquarters employs a staff to develop
"program kits" for use by local chapters that are designed to enhance individual development, community
development, and members' management skills. These materials include courses in public speaking and personal
finances as well as community programs related to charity, sports, and public health. The national office also makes
available to members a range of personal products, including travel accessories, casual wear, pins, awards, and
other gifts. The programs, products, and other activities of the organization are all regularly featured in publications
made available to the membership, including a magazine entitled "Future."
B
In
1974 and 1975, respectively, the Minneapolis and St. Paul chapters of the Jaycees began admitting women as
regular members. Currently, the memberships and boards of directors of both chapters include a substantial
proportion of women. As a result, the two chapters have been in violation of the national organization's bylaws for
about 10 years. The national organization has imposed a number of sanctions on the Minneapolis and St. Paul
chapters for violating the bylaws, including denying their members eligibility for state or national office or awards
programs, and refusing to count their membership in computing votes at national conventions.
In December 1978, the president of the national organization advised both chapters that a motion to revoke their
charters would be considered at a forthcoming meeting of the national board of directors in Tulsa. Shortly after
receiving this notification, members of both chapters filed charges of discrimination with the Minnesota Department
of Human Rights. The complaints alleged that the exclusion of women from full membership required by the
national organization's bylaws violated the Minnesota Human Rights Act (Act), which provides in part:
615 *615
"It is an unfair discriminatory practice:
"To deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and
accommodations of a place of public accommodation because of race, color, creed, religion, disability, national
origin or sex." Minn. Stat.  303, subd. 3 (1982).
The term "place of public accommodation" is defined in the Act as "a business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public."  301, subd. 18.
After an investigation, the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Human Rights found probable cause to
believe that the sanctions imposed on the local chapters by the national organization violated the statute and
ordered that an evidentiary hearing be held before a state hearing examiner. Before that hearing took place,
however, the national organization brought suit against various state officials, appellants here, in the United States
District Court for the District of Minnesota, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief to prevent enforcement of the
Act. The complaint alleged that, by requiring the organization to accept women as regular members, application of
the Act would violate the male members' constitutional rights of free speech and association. With the agreement of
the parties, the District Court dismissed the suit without prejudice, stating that it could be renewed in the event the
state administrative proceeding resulted in a ruling adverse to the Jaycees.
The proceeding before the Minnesota Human Rights Department hearing examiner then went forward and, upon
its completion, the examiner filed findings of fact and conclusions of law. The examiner concluded that the Jaycees
organization is a "place of public accommodation" within the Act and that it had engaged in an unfair 616
discriminatory practice *616 by excluding women from regular membership. He ordered the national organization to
cease and desist from discriminating against any member or applicant for membership on the basis of sex and from
imposing sanctions on any Minnesota affiliate for admitting women. Minnesota V. United States Jaycees, No. HR-79-
014-GB (Minn. Office of Hearing Examiners for the Dept. of Human Rights, Oct. 9, 1979) (hereinafter Report), App.
to Juris. Statement A107-A109. The Jaycees then filed a renewed complaint in the District Court, which in turn
certified to the Minnesota Supreme Court the question whether the Jaycees organization is a "place of public
accommodation" within the meaning of the State's Human Rights Act. See App. 32.
With the record of the administrative hearing before it, the Minnesota Supreme Court answered that question in
the affirmative. United States Jaycees V. McClure, 305 N.W.2d 764 (1981). Based on the Act's legislative history,
the court determined that the statute is applicable to any "public business facility." Id., at 768. It then concluded
that the Jaycees organization (a) is a "business" in that it sells goods and extends privileges in exchange for annual
membership dues; (b) is a "public" business in that it solicits and recruits dues-paying members based on
unselective criteria; and (c) is a public business "facility" in that it conducts its activities at fixed and mobile sites
within the State of Minnesota. Id, at 768-774.
Subsequently, the Jaycees amended its complaint in the District Court to add a claim that the Minnesota
Supreme Court's interpretation of the Act rendered it unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. The federal suit then
proceeded to trial, after which the District Court entered judgment in favor of the state officials. United States
Jaycees V. McClure, 534 F. Supp. 766 (1982). On appeal, a divided Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed.
United States Jaycees V. McClure, 709 F.2d 1560 (1983). The Court of Appeals determined that, because "the
advocacy of 617 political *617 and public causes, selected by the membership, is a not insubstantial part of what
[the Jaycees] does," the organization's right to select its members is protected by the freedom of association
guaranteed by the First Amendment. Id., at 1570. It further decided that application of the Minnesota statute to the
Jaycees' membership policies would produce a "direct and substantial" interference with that freedom, id., at 1572,
because it would necessarily result in "some change in the Jaycees' philosophical cast," id., at 1571, and would
attach penal sanctions to those responsible for maintaining the policy, id., at 1572. The court concluded that the
State's interest in eradicating discrimination is not sufficiently compelling to outweigh this interference with the
Jaycees' constitutional rights, because the organization is not wholly "public," id., at 1571-1572, 1573, the state
interest had been asserted selectively, id., at 1573, and the antidiscrimination policy could be served in a number
of ways less intrusive of First Amendment freedoms, id., at 1573-1574.
Finally, the court held, in the alternative, that the Minnesota statute is vague as construed and applied and
therefore unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In support of this
conclusion, the court relied on a statement in the opinion of the Minnesota Supreme Court suggesting that, unlike
the Jaycees, the Kiwanis Club is "private" and therefore not subject to the Act. By failing to provide any criteria that
distinguish such "private" organizations from the "public accommodations" covered by the statute, the Court of
Appeals reasoned, the Minnesota Supreme Court's interpretation rendered the Act unconstitutionally vague. Id., at
1576-1578.
11
Our decisions have referred to constitutionally protected "freedom of association" in two distinct senses. In one
line of decisions, the Court has concluded that choices to enter into and maintain 618 certain intimate human
relationships must *618 be secured against undue intrusion by the State because of the role of such relationships
in safeguarding the individual freedom that is central to our constitutional scheme. In this respect, freedom of
association receives protection as a fundamental element of personal libertv. In another set of decisions. the Court
has recognized a right to associate for the purpose of engaging in those activities protected by the First Amendment
- speech, assembly, petition for the redress of grievances, and the exercise of religion. The Constitution guarantees
freedom of association of this kind as an indispensable means of preserving other individual liberties.
The intrinsic and instrumental features of constitutionally protected association may, of course, coincide. In
particular, when the State interferes with individuals' selection of those with whom they wish to join in a common
endeavor, freedom of association in both of its forms may be implicated. The Jaycees contend that this is such a
case. Still, the nature and degree of constitutional protection afforded freedom of association may vary depending
on the extent to which one or the other aspect of the constitutionally protected liberty is at stake in a given case.
We therefore find it useful to consider separately the effect of applying the Minnesota statute to the Jaycees on
what could be called its members' freedom of intimate association and their freedom of expressive association.
A
The Court has long recognized that, because the Bill of Rights is designed to secure individual liberty, it must
afford the formation and preservation of certain kinds of highly personal relationships a substantial measure of
sanctuary from unjustified interference by the State. E. g., Pierce V. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 534-535
(1925); Meyer V. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 399 (1923). Without precisely identifying every consideration that may
underlie this type of constitutional protection, we have noted that certain kinds of personal bonds have played a
619 critical role in the culture *619 and traditions of the Nation by cultivating and transmitting shared ideals and
beliefs; they thereby foster diversity and act as critical buffers between the individual and the power of the State.
See, e.g., Zablocki V. Redhail, 434 U.S. 374, 383-386 (1978); Moore V. East Cleveland, 431 U.S. 494, 503-504
(1977) (plurality opinion); Wisconsin V. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 232 (1972) Griswold V. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479,
482-485 (1965); Pierce V. Society of Sisters, supra, at 535. See also Gilmore V. City of Montgomery, 417 U.S. 556,
575 (1974); NAACP V. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449, 460-462 (1958); Poe V. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 542
-545 (1961) (Harlan, J., dissenting). Moreover, the constitutional shelter afforded such relationships reflects the
realization that individuals draw much of their emotional enrichment from close ties with others. Protecting these
relationships from unwarranted state interference therefore safeguards the ability independently to define one's
identity that is central to any concept of liberty. See, e. g., Quilloin V. Walcott, 434 U.S. 246, 255 (1978); Smith V.
Organization of Foster Families, 431 U.S. 816, 844 (1977); Carey V. Population Services International, 431 U.S.
678, 684-686 (1977); Cleveland Board of Education V. LaFleur, 414 U.S. 632, 639-640 (1974); Stanley V. Illinois,
405 U.S. 645, 651-652 (1972); Stanley V. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557, 564 (1969); Olmstead V. United States, 277 U.S.
438, 478 (1928) (Brandeis, J., dissenting).
The personal affiliations that exemplify these considerations, and that therefore suggest some relevant
limitations on the relationships that might be entitled to this sort of constitutional protection, are those that attend
the creation and sustenance of a family - marriage, e.g., Zablocki V. Redhail, supra; childbirth, e. g., Carey V.
Population Services Internationaln, supra; the raising and education of children, e. g., Smith V. Organization of
Foster Families, supra; and cohabitation with one's relatives, e. g., Moore V. East Cleveland, supra. Family
relationships, by their nature, 620 involve *620 deep attachments and commitments to the necessarily few other
individuals with whom one shares not only a special community of thoughts, experiences, and beliefs but also
distinctively personal aspects of one's life. Among other things, therefore, they are distinguished by such attributes
as relative smallness, a high degree of selectivity in decisions to begin and maintain the affiliation, and seclusion
from others in critical aspects of the relationship. As a general matter, only relationships with these sorts of
qualities are likely to reflect the considerations that have led to an understanding of freedom of association as an
intrinsic element of personal liberty. Conversely an association lacking these qualities - such as a large business
enterprise - seems remote from the concerns giving rise to this constitutional protection. Accordingly, the
Constitution undoubtedly imposes constraints on the State's power to control the selection of one's spouse that
would not apply to regulations affecting the choice of one's fellow employees. Compare Loving V. Virginia, 388 U.S.
1, 12 (1967), with Railway Mail Assn. V. Corsi, 326 U.S. 88, 93-94 (1945).
Between these poles, of course, lies a broad range of human relationships that may make greater or lesser claims
to constitutional protection from particular incursions by the State. Determining the limits of state authority over an
individual's freedom to enter into a particular association therefore unavoidably entails a careful assessment of
where that relationship's objective characteristics locate it on a spectrum from the most intimate to the most
attenuated of personal attachments. See generally Runyon V. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160, 187-189 (1976) (POWELL, J.,
concurring). We need not mark the potentially significant points on this terrain with any precision. We note only
that factors that may be relevant include size, purpose, policies, selectivity, congeniality, and other characteristics
that in a particular case may be pertinent. In this case, however, several features of the Jaycees clearly place the
organization outside of the category of relationships worthy of this kind of constitutional 621 protection.
*621
The undisputed facts reveal that the local chapters of the Jaycees are large and basically unselective groups. At
the time of the state administrative hearing, the Minneapolis chapter had approximately 430 members, while the
St. Paul chapter had about 400. Report, App. to Juris. Statement A-99, A-100. Apart from age and sex, neither the
national organization nor the local chapters employ any criteria forjudging applicants for membership, and new
members are routinely recruited and admitted with no inquiry into their backgrounds. See 1 Tr. of State
Administrative Hearing 124-132, 135-136, 174-176. In fact, a local officer testified that he could recall no instance
in which an applicant had been denied membership on any basis other than age or sex. Id., at 135. Cf. Tillman V.
Wheaton-Haven Recreation Assn., Inc., 410 U.S. 431, 438 91973) (organization whose only selection criterion is
race has "no plan or purpose of exclusiveness" that might make it a private club exempt from federal civil rights
statute); Sullivan V. Little Hunting Park, Inc., 396 U.S. 229, 236 (1969) (same); Daniel V. Paul, 395 U.S. 298, 302
(1969) (same). Furthermore, despite their inability to vote, hold office, or receive certain awards, women affiliated
with the Jaycees attend various meetings, participate in selected projects, and engage in many of the organization's
social functions. See Tr. 58. Indeed, numerous nonmembers of both genders regularly participate in a substantial
portion of activities central to the decision of many members to associate with one another, including many of the
organization's various community programs, awards ceremonies, and recruitment meetings. See, e. g., 305 N.W2d,
at 772; Report, App. to Juris. Statement A102, A103.
In short, the local chapters of the Jaycees are neither small nor selective. Moreover, much of the activity central
to the formation and maintenance of the association involves the participation of strangers to that relationship.
Accordingly, we conclude that the Jaycees chapters lack the distinctive characteristics that might afford
constitutional protection to the decision of its 622 members to exclude women. We turn *622 therefore to consider
the extent to which application of the Minnesota statute to compel the Jaycees to accept women infringes the
group's freedom of expressive association.
B
An individual's freedom to speak, to worship, and to petition the government for the redress of grievances could
not be vigorously protected from interference by the State unless a correlative freedom to engage in group effort
toward those ends were not also guaranteed. See, e. g., Citizens Against Rent Control/Coalition for Fair Housing V.
Berkeley, 454 U.S. 290, 294 (1981). According protection to collective effort on behalf of shared goals is especially
important in preserving political and cultural diversity and in shielding dissident expression from suppression by the
majority. See, e. g., Gilmore V. City of Montgomery, 417 U.S., at 575; Griswold V. Connecticut, 381 U.S., at 482-
485; NAACP V. Button, 371 U.S. 415, 431 (1963); NAACP V. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S., at 462.
Consequently, we have long understood as implicit in the right to engage in activities protected by the First
Amendment a corresponding right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political, social, economic,
educational, religious, and cultural ends. See, e. g., NAACP Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886, 907-909, 932-
933 (1982); Larson V. Valente, 456 U.S. 228, 244-246 (1982); In re Primus, 436 U.S. 412, 426 (1978); Abood V.
Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209, 231 (1977). In view of the various protected activities in which the
Jaycees engages, see infra, at 626-627, that right is plainly implicated in this case.
Government actions that may unconstitutionally infringe upon this freedom can take a number of forms. Among
other things, government may seek to impose penalties or withhold benefits from individuals because of their
membership in a disfavored group, e. g., Healy V. James, 408 U.S. 169, 180-184 (1972); it may attempt to require
623 disclosure of *623 the fact of membership in a group seeking anonymity, e. g., Brown V. Socialist Workers '74
Campaign Committee, 459 U.S. 87, 91-92 (1982); and it may try to interfere with the internal organization or
affairs of the group, e. g., Cousins V. Wigoda, 419 U.S. 477, 487-488 (1975).
By requiring the Jaycees to admit women as full voting members, the Minnesota Act works an infringement of
the last type. There can be no clearer example of an intrusion into the internal structure or affairs of an association
than a regulation that forces the group to accept members it does not desire. Such a regulation may impair the
ability of the original members to express only those views that brought them together. Freedom of association
therefore plainly presupposes a freedom not to associate. See Abood V. Detroit Board of Education, supra, at 234-
235.
The right to associate for expressive purposes is not, however, absolute. Infringements on that right may be
justified by regulations adopted to serve compelling state interests, unrelated to the suppression of ideas, that
cannot be achieved through means significantly less restrictive of associational freedoms. E. g., Brown V. Socialist
Workers '74 Campaign Committee, supra, at 91-92; Democratic Party of United States V. Wisconsin, 450 U.S. 107,
124 (1981); Buckley V. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 25 (1976) (per curiam); Cousins V. Wigoda, supra, at 489; American
Party of Texas V. White, 415 U.S. 767, 780-781 (1974); NAACP V. Button, supra, at 438; Shelton V. Tucker, 364
U.S. 479, 486, 488 (1960). We are persuaded that Minnesota's compelling interest in eradicating discrimination
against its female citizens justifies the impact that application of the statute to the Jaycees may have on the male
members' associational freedoms.
On its face, the Minnesota Act does not aim at the suppression of speech, does not distinguish between
prohibited and permitted activity on the basis of viewpoint, and does not license enforcement authorities to
administer the statute on the basis of such constitutionally impressible 624 criteria. See *624 also infra, at 629-
631. Non does the Jaycees contend that the Act has been applied in this case for the purpose of hampering the
organization's ability to express its views. Instead, as the Minnesota Supreme Court explained, the Act reflects the
State's strong historical commitment to eliminating discrimination and assuring its citizens equal access to publicly
available goods and services. See 305 N.W.2d, at 766-768. That goal, which is unrelated to the suppression of
expression, plainly serves compelling state interests of the highest order.
The Minnesota Human Rights Act at issue here is an example of public accommodations laws that were adopted
by some States beginning a decade before enactment of their federal counterpart, the Civil Rights Act of 1875, ch.
114, 18 Stat. 335. See Discrimination in Access to Public Places A Survey of State and Federal Accommodations
Laws, 7 N.Y. U. Rev. L. Soc. Change 215, 238 (1978) (hereinafter NYU Survey). Indeed, when this Court invalidated
that federal statute in the Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3 (1883), it emphasized the fact that state laws imposed a
variety of equal access obligations on public accommodations. Id., at 19, 25. In response to that decision, many
more States, including Minnesota, adopted statutes prohibiting racial discrimination in public accommodations.
These laws provided the primary means for protecting the civil rights of historically disadvantaged groups until the
Federal Government reentered the field in 1957. See NYU Survey 239; Brief for State of New York et al. as Amid
Curiae 1. Like many other States, Minnesota has progressively broadened the scope of its public accommodations
law in the years since it was first enacted, both with respect to the number and type of covered facilities and with
respect to the groups against whom discrimination is forbidden. See 305 N.W.2d, at 766-768. In 1973, the
Minnesota Legislature added discrimination on the basis of sex to the types of conduct prohibited by the statute.
Act of May 24, 625 1973, ch. 729,  3, 1973 Minn. Laws 2164. *625
By prohibiting gender discrimination in places of public accommodation, the Minnesota Act protects the State's
citizenry from a number of serious social and personal harms. In the context of reviewing state actions under the
Equal Protection Clause, this Court has frequently noted that discrimination based on archaic and overbroad
assumptions about the relative needs and capacities of the sexes forces individuals to labor under stereotypical
notions that often bear no relationship to their actual abilities. It thereby both deprives persons of their individual
dignity and denies society the benefits of wide participation in political, economic, and cultural life. See, e. g.,
Heckler V. Mathews, 465 U.S. 728, 744-745 (1984); Mississippi University for Women V. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 723-
726 (1982); Frontiero V. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 684-687 (1973) (plurality opinion). These concerns are strongly
implicated with respect to gender discrimination in the allocation of publicly available goods and services. Thus, in
upholding Title 11 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 243, 42 U.S.C.  2000a, which forbids race discrimination
in public accommodations, we emphasized that its "fundamental object.. was to vindicate the deprivation of
personal dignity that surely accompanies denials of equal access to public establishments." Heart of Atlanta Motel,
Inc. V. United States, 379 U.S. 241, 250 (1964). That stigmatizing injury, and the denial of equal opportunities that
accompanies it, is surely felt as strongly by persons suffering discrimination on the basis of their sex as by those
treated differently because of their race.
Non is the state interest in assuring equal access limited to the provision of purely tangible goods and services.
See Alfred 1. Snapp Son, Inc. V. Puerto Rico ex rel. Barez, 458 U.S. 592, 609 (1982). A State enjoys broad authority
to create rights of public access on behalf of its citizens. PruneYard Shopping Center V. Robins, 447 U.S. 74, 81-88
(1980). Like many States and municipalities, Minnesota has adopted a functional definition of public
accommodations that reaches various forms of public, quasi-commercial 626 conduct. *626 See 305 N.W.2d at
768; Brief for National League of Cities et al. as Amici Curiae 15-16. This expansive definition reflects a recognition
of the changing nature of the American economy and of the importance, both to the individual and to society, of
removing the barriers to economic advancement and political and social integration that have historically plagued
certain disadvantaged groups, including women. See Califano V. Webster, 430 U.S. 313, 317 (1977) (per curiam);
Frontiero V. Richardson, supra, at 684-686. Thus, in explaining its conclusion that the Jaycees local chapters are
"place[s] of public accommodations" within the meaning of the Act, the Minnesota court noted the various
commercial programs and benefits offered to members and stated that "[leadership skills are goods, [and]
business contacts and employment promotions are 'privileges' and "advantages" 305 N.W.2d, at 772. Assuring
women equal access to such goods, privileges, and advantages clearly furthers compelling state interests.
In applying the Act to the Jaycees, the State has advanced those interests through the least restrictive means of
achieving its ends. Indeed, the Jaycees has failed to demonstrate that the Act imposes any serious burdens on the
male members' freedom of expressive association. See Hishon V. King Spalding, 467 U.S. 69, 78 (1984) (law firm
"has not shown how its ability to fulfill [protected] function [s] would be inhibited by a requirement that it consider
[a woman lawyer] for partnership on her merits"); id., at 81 (POWELL, J., concurring); see also Buckley V. Valeo,
424 U.S., at 71-74; American Party of Texas V. White, 415 U.S., at 790. To be sure, as the Court of Appeals noted,
a "not insubstantial part" of the Jaycees' activities constitutes protected expression on political, economic, cultural,
and social affairs. 709 F.2d, at 1570. Over the years, the national and local levels of the organization have taken
public positions on a number of diverse issues, see id., at 1569-1570; Brief for Appellee 4-5, and members 627 of
the Jaycees regularly engage in a variety of *627 civic, charitable, lobbying, fundraising, and other activities worthy
of constitutional protection under the First Amendment, ibid., see, e. g., Village of Schaumburg V. Citizens for a
Better Environment, 444 U.S. 620, 632 (1980). There is, however, no basis in the record for concluding that
admission of women as full voting members will impede the organization's ability to engage in these protected
activities or to disseminate its preferred views. The Act requires no change in the Jaycees' creed of promoting the
interests of young men, and it imposes no restrictions on the organization's ability to exclude individuals with
ideologies or philosophies different from those of its existing members. Cf. Democratic Party of United States V.
Wisconsin, 450 U.S., at 122 (recognizing the right of political parties to "protect themselves from intrusion by those
with adverse political principles'"). Moreover, the Jaycees already invites women to share the group's views and
philosophy and to participate in much of its training and community activities. Accordingly, any claim that
admission of women as full voting members will impair a symbolic message conveyed by the very fact that women
are not permitted to vote is attenuated at best. Cf. Spence V. Washington, 418 U.S. 405 (1974); Griswold V.
Connecticut, 381 U.S., at 483.
While acknowledging that "the specific content of most of the resolutions adopted over the years by the Jaycees
has nothing to do with sex," 709 F.2d, at 1571, the Court of Appeals nonetheless entertained the hypothesis that
women members might have a different view or agenda with respect to these matters so that, if they are allowed to
vote, "some change in the Jaycees' philosophical cast can reasonably be expected," ibid. It is similarly arguable
that, insofar as the Jaycees is organized to promote the views of young men whatever those views happen to be,
admission of women as voting members will change the message communicated by the group's speech because of
the gender-based assumptions of the audience. Neither supposition, however, is supported by the record. In
claiming that women might have a 628 different *628 attitude about such issues as the federal budget, school
prayer, voting rights, and foreign relations, see id., at 1570, or that the organization's public positions would have a
different effect if the group were not "a purely young men's association," the Jaycees relies solely on unsupported
generalizations about the relative interests and perspectives of men and women. See Brief for Appellee 20-22, and
n. 3. Although such generalizations may or may not have a statistical basis in fact with respect to particular
positions adopted by the Jaycees, we have repeatedly condemned legal decisionmaking that relies uncritically on
such assumptions. See, e. g., Palmore V. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 433-434 (1984); Heckler V. Mathews, 465 U.S., at
745. In the absence of a showing far more substantial than that attempted by the Jaycees, we decline to indulge in
the sexual stereotyping that underlies appellee's contention that, by allowing women to vote, application of the
Minnesota Act will change the content or impact of the organization's speech. Compare Wengler V. Druggists Mutual
Insurance Co., 446 U.S. 142, 151-152 (1980), with Schlesinger V. Ballard, 419 U.S. 498, 508 (1975).
In any event, even if enforcement of the Act causes some incidental abridgment of the Jaycees' protected
speech, that effect is no greater than is necessary to accomplish the State's legitimate purposes. As we have
explained, acts of invidious discrimination in the distribution of publicly available goods, services, and other
advantages cause unique evils that government has a compelling interest to prevent wholly apart from the point
of view such conduct may transmit. Accordingly, like violence or other types of potentially expressive activities that
produce special harms distinct from their communicative impact, such practices are entitled to no constitutional
protection. Runyon V. McCrary, 427 U.S., at 175-176. Compare NAACP V. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S., at 907-
909 (peaceful picketing). with id., at 916 (violence). In 629 prohibiting such practices, the Minnesota Act *629
therefore "responds precisely to the substantive problem which legitimately concerns" the State and abridges no
more speech or associational freedom than is necessary to accomplish that purpose. See City Council of Los Angeles
V. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789, 810 (1984).
111
We turn finally to appellee's contentions that the Minnesota Act, as interpreted by the State's highest court, is
unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. The void-for-vagueness doctrine reflects the principle that "a statute which
either forbids or requires the doing of an act in terms so vague that [persons] of common intelligence must
necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application, violates the first essential of due process of law."
Connally V. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391 (1926). The requirement that government articulate its
aims with a reasonable degree of clarity ensures that state power will be exercised only on behalf of policies
reflecting an authoritative choice among competing social values, reduces the danger of caprice and discrimination
in
the administration of the laws, enables individuals to conform their conduct to the requirements of law, and
permits meaningful judicial review. See, e. g. Kolender V. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352, 357-358 (1983); Grayned V. City
of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108-109 (1972); Giaccio V. Pennsylvania, 382 U.S. 399, 402-404 (1966).
We have little trouble concluding that these concerns are not seriously implicated by the Minnesota Act, either on
its face or as construed in this case. In deciding that the Act reaches the Jaycees, the Minnesota Supreme Court
used a number of specific and objective criteria - regarding the organization's size, selectivity, commercial nature,
and use of public facilities - typically employed in determining the applicability of state and federal
antidiscrimination statutes to the membership policies of assertedly private clubs. See, e. g., Nesmith V. Young
Men's Christian Assn., 397 F.2d 630 96 *630 (CA4 1968); National Organization for Women V. Little League
Baseball, Inc., YII N.J. Super. 522, 318 A.2d 33, affd mem., 67 N.J. 320, 338 A.2d 198 (1974). See generally NYU
Survey 223-224, 250-252. The Court of Appeals seemingly acknowledged that the Minnesota court's construction of
the Act by use of these familiar standards ensures that the reach of the statute is readily ascertainable. It
nevertheless concluded that the Minnesota court introduced a constitutionally fatal element of uncertainty into the
statute by suggesting that the Kiwanis Club might be sufficiently "private" to be outside the scope of the Act. See
709 F.2d, at 1577. Like the dissenting judge in the Court of Appeals, however, we read the illustrative reference to
the Kiwanis Club, which the record indicates has a formal procedure for choosing members on the basis of specific
and selective criteria, as simply providing a further refinement of the standards used to determine whether an
organization is "public" or "private." See id., at 1582 (Lay, C. J., dissenting). By offering this counter-example, the
Minnesota Supreme Court's opinion provided the statute with more, rather than less, definite content.
The contrast between the Jaycees and the Kiwanis Club drawn by the Minnesota court also disposes of appellee's
contention that the Act is unconstitutionally overbroad. The Jaycees argues that the statute is "susceptible of
sweeping and improper application," NAACP V. Button, 371 U.S., at 433, because it could be used to restrict the
membership decisions of wholly private groups organized for a wide variety of political, religious, cultural, or social
purposes. Without considering the extent to which such groups may be entitled to constitutional protection from the
operation of the Minnesota Act, we need only note that the Minnesota Supreme Court expressly rejected the
contention that the Jaycees should "be viewed analogously to private organizations such as the Kiwanis
International Organization." 305 N.W.2d. at 771. The state court's articulated 531 willingness to adopt *631
limiting constructions that would exclude private groups from the statute's reach, together with the commonly used
and sufficiently precise standards it employed to determine that the Jaycees is not such a group, I establish that
the Act, as currently construed, does not create an unacceptable risk of application to a substantial amount of
protected conduct. Cf. Erznoznik V. City of Jacksonville, All U.S. 205, 216-217 (1975); NAACP V. Button, supra, at
434. See New York V. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747, 769, n. 24 (1982).
IV
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
Reversed.
JUSTICE REHNQUIST concurs in the judgment.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE BLACKMUN took no part in the decision of this case.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
I join Parts I and 111 of the Court's opinion, which set out the facts and reject the vagueness and overbreadth
challenges to the Minnesota statute. With respect to Part 11-A of the Court's opinion, I agree with the Court that the
Jaycees cannot claim a right of association deriving from this Court's cases concerning "marriage, procreation,
contraception, family relationships, and child rearing and education." Paul V. Davis, 424 U.S. 693, 713 (1976).
Those cases, "while defying categorical description," ibid., identify certain zones of privacy in which certain personal
relationships or decisions are protected from government interference. Whatever the precise scope of the rights
recognized in such cases, they do not encompass associational rights of a 295,000-member organization whose
activities are not "private" in any meaningful sense of that term. 632 *632
I part company with the Court over its First Amendment analysis in Part 11-B of its opinion. I agree with the
Court that application of the Minnesota law to the Jaycees does not contravene the First Amendment, but I reach
that conclusion for reasons distinct from those offered by the Court. I believe the Court has adopted a test that
unadvisedly casts doubt on the power of States to pursue the profoundly important goal of ensuring
nondiscriminatory access to commercial opportunities in our society. At the same time, the Court has adopted an
approach to the general problem presented by this case that accords insufficient protection to expressive
associations and places inappropriate burdens on groups claiming the protection of the First Amendment.
The Court analyzes Minnesota's attempt to regulate the Jaycees' membership using a test that I find both
overprotective of activities undeserving of constitutional shelter and underprotective of important First Amendment
concerns. The Court declares that the Jaycees' right of association depends on the organization's making a
"substantial" showing that the admission of unwelcome members "will change the message communicated by the
group's speech." See ante, at 626-628. I am not sure what showing the Court thinks would satisfy its requirement
of proof of a membership-message connection, but whatever it means, the focus on such a connection is
objectionable.
Imposing such a requirement, especially in the context of the balancing-of-interests test articulated by the
Court, raises the possibility that certain commercial associations, by engaging occasionally in certain kinds of
expressive activities, might improperly gain protection for discrimination. The Court's focus raises other problems as
well. How are we to analyze the First Amendment associational claims of an organization that invokes its right,
settled by the .33 Court in *633 NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449, 460-466 (1958), to protect the
privacy of its membership? And would the Court's analysis of this case be different if, for example, the Jaycees
membership had a steady history of opposing public issues thought (by the Court) to be favored by women? It
might seem easy to conclude, in the latter case, that the admission of women to the Jaycees' ranks would affect the
content of the organization's message, but I do not believe that should change the outcome of this case. Whether
an association is or is not constitutionally protected in the selection of its membership should not depend on what
the association says or why its members say it.
The Court's readiness to inquire into the connection between membership and message reveals a more
fundamental flaw in its analysis. The Court pursues this inquiry as part of its mechanical application of a
"compelling interest" test, under which the Court weighs the interests of the State of Minnesota in ending gender
discrimination against the Jaycees' First Amendment right of association. The Court entirely neglects to establish at
the threshold that the Jaycees is an association whose activities or purposes should engage the strong protections
that the First Amendment extends to expressive associations.
On the one hand, an association engaged exclusively in protected expression enjoys First Amendment protection
of
both the content of its message and the choice of its members. Protection of the message itself is judged by the
same standards as protection of speech by an individual. Protection of the association's right to define its
membership derives from the recognition that the formation of an expressive association is the creation of a voice,
and the selection of members is the definition of that voice. "In the realm of protected speech, the legislature is
constitutionally disqualified from dictating the speakers who may address a public issue." First National Bank of
Boston V. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765, 784-785 634 (1978); Police Dept. of Chicago V. Mosley, *634 408 U.S. 92, 96
(1972). A ban on specific group voices on public affairs violates the most basic guarantee of the First Amendment -
that citizens, not the government, control the content of public discussion.
On the other hand, there is only minimal constitutional protection of the freedom of commercial association.
There are, of course, some constitutional protections of commercial speech speech intended and used to promote
a commercial transaction with the speaker. But the State is free to impose any rational regulation on the
commercial transaction itself. The Constitution does not guarantee a right to choose employees, customers,
suppliers, or those with whom one engages in simple commercial transactions, without restraint from the State. A
shopkeeper has no constitutional right to deal only with persons of one sex.
The dichotomy between rights of commercial association and rights of expressive association is also found in the
more limited constitutional protections accorded an association's recruitment and solicitation activities and other
dealings with its members and the public. Reasonable, content-neutral state regulation of the time, place, and
manner of an organization's relations with its members or with the State can pass constitutional muster, but only if
the regulation is "narrowly drawn" to serve a "sufficiently strong, subordinating interest" "without unnecessarily
interfering with First Amendment freedoms." Village of Schaumburg V. Citizens for a Better Environment, 444 U.S.
620, 636-637 (1980); see Secretary of State of Maryland V. Joseph H. Munson Co., 467 U.S. 947, 960-961 (1984).
Thus, after careful scrutiny, we have upheld regulations on matters such as the financial dealings between an
association and its members, see Buckley V. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 25 (1976), disclosure of membership lists to the
State, see NAACP V. Alabama, supra, at 463; Shelton V. Tucker, 364 U.S. 479, 486 (1960), access to the ballot,
time limits on registering before elections, and similar matters, see, e. g., Rosario V. Rockefeller, 410 U.S. 635 752
(1973); Dunn *635 Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330 (1972); Bullock V. Carter, 405 U.S. 134 (1972); Jenness V. Fortson,
403 U.S. 431 (1971); Williams V. Rhodes, 393 U.S. 23 (1968). See also Heffron V. International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, Inc., 452 U.S. 640, 649 (1981). By contrast, an organization engaged in commercial activity enjoys
only minimal constitutional protection of its recruitment, training, and solicitation activities. While the Court has
acknowledged a First Amendment right to engage in nondeceptive commercial advertising, governmental regulation
of the commercial recruitment of new members, stockholders, customers, or employees is valid if rationally related
to the government's ends.
Many associations cannot readily be described as purely expressive or purely commercial. No association is likely
ever to be exclusively engaged in expressive activities, if only because it will collect dues from its members or
purchase printing materials or rent lecture halls or serve coffee and cakes at its meetings. And innumerable
commercial associations also engage in some incidental protected speech or advocacy. The standard for deciding
just how much of an association's involvement in commercial activity is enough to suspend the association's First
Amendment right to control its membership cannot, therefore, be articulated with simple precision. Clearly the
standard must accept the reality that even the most expressive of associations is likely to touch, in some way or
other, matters of commerce. The standard must nevertheless give substance to the ideal of complete protection for
purely expressive association, even while it readily permits state regulation of commercial affairs.
In my view, an association should be characterized as commercial, and therefore subject to rationally related
state regulation of its membership and other associational activities, when, and only when, the association's
activities are not predominantly of the type protected by the First Amendment. It is only when the association is
predominantly engaged in protected expression 636 that state regulation of its *636 membership will necessarily
affect, change, dilute, or silence one collective voice that would otherwise be heard. An association must choose its
market. Once it enters the marketplace of commerce in any substantial degree it loses the complete control over its
membership that it would otherwise enjoy if it confined its affairs to the marketplace of ideas.
Determining whether an association's activity is predominantly protected expression will often be difficult, if only
because a broad range of activities can be expressive. It is easy enough to identify expressive words or conduct that
are strident, contentious, or divisive, but protected expression may also take the form of quiet persuasion,
inculcation of traditional values, instruction of the young, and community service. Cf. Pierce V. Society of Sisters,
268 U.S. 510 (1925); Meyer V. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390 (1923). The purposes of an association, and the purposes of
its members in adhering to it, are doubtless relevant in determining whether the association is primarily engaged in
protected expression. Lawyering to advance social goals may be speech, NAACP V. Button, 371 U.S. 415, 429-430
(1963), but ordinary commercial law practice is not, see Hishon V. King Spalding, 467 U.S. 69 (1984). A group
boycott or refusal to deal for political purposes may be speech, NAACP V. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886,
912-915 (1982), though a similar boycott for purposes of maintaining a cartel is not. Even the training of outdoor
survival skills or participation in community service might become expressive when the activity is intended to
develop good morals, reverence, patriotism, and a desire for self-637 improvement.- *637
See, e. g, Girl Scouts of the U.S. A., You Make the Difference (1980); W. Hillcourt The Official Boy Scout
Handbook (1979); P. Fussell, The Boy Scout Handbook and Other Observations 7-8 (1982) "The Official Boy
Scout Handbook, for all its focus on Axmanship, Backpacking. Cooking, First Aid, Flowers, Hiking, Map and
Compass, Semaphore, Trees, and Weather, is another book about goodness. No home, and certainly no
government office, should be without a copy").
The considerations that may enter into the determination of when a particular association of persons is
predominantly engaged in expression are therefore fluid and somewhat uncertain. But the Court has recognized the
need to draw similar lines in the past. Two examples, both addressed in cases decided this Term, stand out.
The first concerns claims of First Amendment protection made by lawyers. On the one hand, some lawyering
activity is undoubtedly protected by the First Amendment. "[Collective activity undertaken to obtain meaningful
access to the courts is a fundamental right within the protection of the First Amendment." In re Primus, 436 U.S.
412, 426 (1978); see NAACP V. Button, supra, at 429-430. On the other hand, ordinary law practice for commercial
ends has never been given special First Amendment protection. "A lawyer's procurement of remunerative
employment is a subject only marginally affected with First Amendment concerns." Ohralik V. Ohio State Bar Assn.,
436 U.S. 447, 459 (1978). We emphasized this point only this Term in Hishon V. King Spalding, supra, where we
readily rejected a large commercial law firm's claim to First Amendment protection for alleged gender-based
discriminatory partnership decisions for associates of the firm. We found no need to inquire into any connection
between gender as a condition of partnership and the speech of the law firm, and we undertook no weighing of
"compelling" state interests against the speech interests of the law firm. As a commercial enterprise, the law firm
could claim no First Amendment immunity from employment discrimination laws, and that result would not have
been altered by a showing that the firm engaged even in a substantial amount of activity entitled to First
Amendment protection.
We have adopted a similar analysis in our cases concerning association with a labor union. A State is free to
impose rational regulation of the membership of a labor union representing "the general business needs of
employees." Railway 638 *638 Mail Assn. V. Corsi, 326 U.S. 88, 94 (1945) (emphasis added). The State may not,
on the other hand, compel association with a union engaged in ideological activities. Abood V. Detroit Board of
Education, 431 U.S. 209, 236 (1977). The Court has thus ruled that a State may compel association for the
commercial purposes of engaging in collective bargaining, administering labor contracts, and adjusting employment
-related grievances, but it may not infringe on associational rights involving ideological or political associations.
Ibid. We applied this distinction in Ellis V. Railway Clerks, 466 U.S. 435 (1984), decided this Term. Again, the
constitutional inquiry is not qualified by any analysis of governmental interests and does not turn on an individual's
ability to establish disagreement with the particular views promulgated by the union. It is enough if the individual
simply expresses unwillingness to be associated with the union's ideological activities.
In summary, this Court's case law recognizes radically different constitutional protections for expressive and
nonexpressive associations. The First Amendment is offended by direct state control of the membership of a private
organization engaged exclusively in protected expressive activity, but no First Amendment interest stands in the
way of a State's rational regulation of economic transactions by or within a commercial association. The proper
approach to analysis of First Amendment claims of associational freedom is, therefore, to distinguish nonexpressive
from expressive associations and to recognize that the former lack the full constitutional protections possessed by
the latter.
11
Minnesota's attempt to regulate the membership of the Jaycees chapters operating in that State presents a
relatively easy case for application of the expressive-commercial dichotomy. Both the Minnesota Supreme Court and
the United States District Court, which expressly adopted the state 639 *639 court's findings, made findings of fact
concerning the commercial nature of the Jaycees' activities. The Court of Appeals, which disagreed with the District
Court over the legal conclusions to be drawn from the facts, did not dispute any of those findings. United States
Jaycees V. McClure, 709 F.2d 1560 (CA8 1983). "The Jaycees is not a political party, or even primarily a political
pressure group, but the advocacy of political and public causes, selected by the membership, is a not insubstantial
part of what it does. [A] good deal of what the [Jaycees] does indisputably comes within the right of association
in pursuance of the specific ends of speech, writing, belief, and assembly for redress of grievances." Id, at 1570.
There is no reason to question the accuracy of this characterization. Notwithstanding its protected expressive
activities, the Jaycees otherwise known as the Junior Chamber of Commerce - is, first and foremost, an
organization that, at both the national and local levels, promotes and practices the art of solicitation and
management. The organization claims that the training it offers its members gives them an advantage in business,
and business firms do indeed sometimes pay the dues of individual memberships for their employees. Jaycees
members hone their solicitation and management skills, under the direction and supervision of the organization,
primarily through their active recruitment of new members. "One of the major activities of the Jaycees is the sale of
memberships in the organization. It encourages continuous recruitment of members with the expressed goal of
increasing membership The Jaycees itself refers to its members as customers and membership as a product it is
selling. More than 80 percent of the national officers' time is dedicated to recruitment, and more than half of the
available achievement awards are in part conditioned on achievement in recruitment." United States Jaycees V.
McClure, 534 F. Supp. 766, 769 (Minn. 1982). The organization encourages record-breaking performance in selling
640 memberships the *640 current records are 348 for most memberships sold in a year by one person. 134 for
most sold in a month, and 1,586 for most sold in a lifetime.
Recruitment and selling are commercial activities, even when conducted for training rather than for profit. The
"not insubstantial" volume of protected Jaycees activity found by the Court of Appeals is simply not enough to
preclude state regulation of the Jaycees' commercial activities. The State of Minnesota has a legitimate interest in
ensuring nondiscriminatory access to the commercial opportunity presented by membership in the Jaycees. The
members of the Jaycees may not claim constitutional immunity from Minnesota's antidiscrimination law by seeking
to exercise their First Amendment rights through this commercial organization.
For these reasons, I agree with the Court that the Jaycees' First Amendment challenge to the application of
Minnesota's public accommodations law is meritless. I therefore concur in Parts I and 111 of the Court's opinion and
in the judgment.
641 *641
Syllabus
TURNER V. SAFLEY ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 85-1384. Argued January 13, 1987-Decided June 1, 1987
1. Respondent inmates brought a class action challenging two regulations promulgated by the Missouri Division of
Corrections. The first permits correspondence between immediate family members who are inmates at different
institutions within the Division's jurisdiction, and between inmates "concerning legal matters," but allows other inmate
correspondence only if each inmate's classification/treatment team deems it in the best interests of the parties. The
second regulation permits an inmate to marry only with the prison superintendent's permission, which can be given
only when there are "compelling reasons" to do so. Testimony indicated that generally only a pregnancy or the birth of
an illegitimate child would be considered "compelling." The Federal District Court found both regulations
unconstitutional, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.
Held:
2. The lower courts erred in ruling that Procunier V. Martinez, 416 U.S. 396, and its progeny require the application
of a strict scrutiny standard of review for resolving respondents' constitutional complaints. Rather, those cases indicate
that a lesser standard is appropriate whereby inquiry is made into whether a prison regulation that impinges on
inmates' constitutional rights is "reasonably related" to legitimate penological interests. In determining
reasonableness, relevant factors include (a) whether there is a "valid, rational connection" between the regulation and
a legitimate and neutral governmental interest put forward to justify it, which connection cannot be so remote as to
render the regulation arbitrary or irrational; (b) whether there are alternative means of exercising the asserted
constitutional right that remain open to inmates, which alternatives, if they exist, will require a measure of judicial
deference to the corrections officials' expertise; (c) whether and the extent to which accommodation of the asserted
right will have an impact on prison staff, on inmates' liberty, and on the allocation of limited prison resources, which
impact, if substantial, will require particular deference to corrections officials; and (d) whether the regulation
represents an "exaggerated response" to prison concerns, the existence of a ready alternative that fully accommodates
the prisoner's rights at de minimis costs to valid penological interests being evidence of unreasonableness. Pp. 84-91.
3. The Missouri inmate correspondence regulation is, on the record here, reasonable and facially valid. The
regulation is logically related to the legitimate security concerns of prison officials, who testified that mail between
prisons can be used to communicate escape plans, to arrange violent acts, and to foster prison gang activity.
Moreover, the regulation does not deprive prisoners of all means of expression, but simply bars communication with a
limited class of people-other inmates - with whom authorities have particular cause to be concerned. The regulation is
entitled to deference on the basis of the significant impact of prison correspondence on the liberty and safety of other
prisoners and prison personnel, in light of officials' testimony that such correspondence facilitates the development of
informal organizations that threaten safety and security at penal institutions. Non is there an obvious, easy alternative
to the regulation, since monitoring inmate correspondence clearly would impose more than a de minimis cost in terms
of the burden on staff resources required to conduct item-by-item censorship, and would create an appreciable risk of
missing dangerous communications. The regulation is content neutral and does not unconstitutionally abridge the First
Amendment rights of prison inmates. Pp. 91-93.
4. The constitutional right of prisoners to marry is impermissibly burdened by the Missouri marriage regulation. Pp.
94-99.
(a) Prisoners have a constitutionally protected right to marry under Zablocki V. Redhail, 434 U. S. 374. Although
such a marriage is subject to substantial restrictions as a result of incarceration, sufficient important attributes of
marriage remain to form a constitutionally protected relationship. Butler V. Wilson, 415 U. S. 953, distinguished.
Pp. 94-96.
(b) The regulation is facially invalid under the reasonable relationship test. Although prison officials may regulate
the time and circumstances under which a marriage takes place, and may require prior approval by the warden,
the almost complete ban on marriages here is not, on the record, reasonably related to legitimate penological
objectives. The contention that the regulation serves security concerns by preventing "love triangles" that may
lead to violent inmate confrontations is without merit, since inmate rivalries are likely to develop with or without
a formal marriage ceremony. Moreover, the regulation's broad prohibition is not justified by the security of fellow
inmates and prison staff, who are not affected where the inmate makes the private decision to marry a civilian.
Rather, the regulation represents an exaggerated response to the claimed security objectives, since allowing
marriages unless the warden finds a threat to security, order, or the public safety represents an obvious, easy
alternative that would accommodate the right to marry while imposing a de minimis burden. Non is the
regulation reasonably related to the articulated rehabilitation goal of fostering self-reliance by female prisoners.
In requiring refusal of permission to marry to all inmates absent a compelling reason, the regulation sweeps
much more broadly than is necessary, in light of officials' testimony that male inmates' marriages had generally
caused them no problems and that they had no objections to prisoners marrying civilians. Pp. 96-99.
777 F. 2d 1307, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
O'Connor, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Rehnquist, C. J., and White, Powell, and Scalia, JJ.,
joined, and in Part III-B of which Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun, and Stevens, JJ., joined. Stevens, J., filed an
opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, in which Brennan, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ., joined, post, p.
100.
Henry T. Herschel, Assistant Attorney General of Missouri, argued the cause for petitioners. With him on the
briefs were William L. Webster, Attorney General, and Michael L. Boicourt.
Floyd R. Finch, Jr., argued the cause and filed a brief for respondents.*
*Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were filed for the United States by Solicitor General Fried, Assistant
Attorney General Trott, Deputy Solicitor General Cohen, and Roger Clegg; and for the State of Arkansas et al. by
Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General of Iowa, Brent R. Appel, Deputy Attorney General, John Steven Clark, Attorney
General of Arkansas, John K. Van de Kamp, Attorney General of California, Lacy H. Thornburg, Attorney General of
North Carolina, Nicholas Spaeth, Attorney General of North Dakota, T. Travis Medlock, Attorney General of South
Carolina, Mark V. Meierhenry, Attorney General of South Dakota, Gerald L. Baliles, Attorney General of Virginia, and
Robert M. Spire, Attorney General of Nebraska.
Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed for the Correctional Association of New York by John H. Hall
and Steven Klugman; for Prisoners' Legal Services of New York, Inc., et al. by Robert Selcov; and for Guadalupe
Guajardo, Jr., et al. by Harry M. Reasonen and Ann Lents.
Jim Mattox, Attorney General of Texas, Mary F. Keller, Executive Assistant Attorney General, and F. Scott McCown
and Michael F. Lynch, Assistant Attorneys General, filed a brief for the State of Texas as amicus curiae.
5. Justice O'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court.
6. This case requires us to determine the constitutionality of regulations promulgated by the Missouri Division of
Corrections relating to inmate marriages and inmate-to-inmate correspondence. The Court of Appeals for the Eighth
Circuit, applying a strict scrutiny analysis, concluded that the regulations violate respondents' constitutional rights. We
hold that a lesser standard of scrutiny is appropriate in determining the constitutionality of the prison rules. Applying
that standard, we uphold the validity of the correspondence regulation, but we conclude that the marriage restriction
cannot be sustained.
I
7. Respondents brought this class action for injunctive relief and damages in the United States District Court for the
Western District of Missouri. The regulations challenged in the complaint were in effect at all prisons within the
jurisdiction of the Missouri Division of Corrections. This litigation focused, however, on practices at the Renz
Correctional Institution (Renz), located in Cedar City, Missouri. The Renz prison population includes both male and
female prisoners of varying security levels. Most of the female prisoners at Renz are classified as medium or maximum
security inmates, while most of the male prisoners are classified as minimum security offenders. Renz is used on
occasion to provide protective custody for inmates from other prisons in the Missouri system. The facility originally was
built as a minimum security prison farm, and it still has a minimum security perimeter without guard towers or walls.
8. Two regulations are at issue here. The first of the challenged regulations relates to correspondence between
inmates at different institutions. It permits such correspondence "with immediate family members who are inmates in
other correctional institutions," and it permits correspondence between inmates "concerning legal matters." Other
correspondence between inmates, however, is permitted only if "the classification/treatment team of each inmate
deems it in the best interest of the parties involved." App. 34. Trial testimony indicated that as a matter of practice,
the determination whether to permit inmates to correspond was based on team members' familiarity with the progress
reports, conduct violations, and psychological reports in the inmates' files rather than on individual review of each
piece of mail. See 777 F. 2d 1307, 1308 (CA8 1985). At Renz, the District Court found that the rule "as practiced is
that inmates may not write non-family inmates." 586 Supp. 589, 591 (WD Mo. 1984).
9. The challenged marriage regulation, which was promulgated while this litigation was pending, permits an inmate
to marry only with the permission of the superintendent of the prison, and provides that such approval should be
given only "when there are compelling reasons to do so." App. 47. The term "compelling" is not defined, but prison
officials testified at trial that generally only a pregnancy or the birth of an illegitimate child would be considered a
compelling reason. See 586 F. Supp., at 592. Prior to the promulgation of this rule, the applicable regulation did not
obligate Missouri Division of Corrections officials to assist an inmate who wanted to get married, but it also did not
specifically authorize the superintendent of an institution to prohibit inmates from getting married. Ibid.
10. The District Court certified respondents as a class pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. The class
certified by the District Court includes "persons who either are or may be confined to the Renz Correctional Center and
who desire to correspond with inmates at other Missouri correctional facilities." It also encompasses a broader group of
persons "who desire to marry inmates of Missouri correctional institutions and whose rights of marriage have been
or will be violated by employees of the Missouri Division of Corrections." See App. 21-22.
11. The District Court issued a memorandum opinion and order finding both the correspondence and marriage
regulations unconstitutional. The court, relying on Procunier V. Martinez, 416 U. S. 396, 413-414 (1974), applied a
strict scrutiny standard. It held the marriage regulation to be an unconstitutional infringement upon the fundamental
right to marry because it was far more restrictive than was either reasonable or essential for the protection of the
State's interests in security and rehabilitation. 586 F. Supp., at 594. The correspondence regulation also was
unnecessarily broad, the court concluded, because prison officials could effectively cope with the security problems
raised by inmate-to-inmate correspondence through less restrictive means, such as scanning the mail of potentially
troublesome inmates. Id., at 596. The District Court also held that the correspondence regulation had been applied in
an arbitrary and capricious manner.
12. The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed. 777 F. 2d 1307 (1985). The Court of Appeals held that the
District Court properly used strict scrutiny in evaluating the constitutionality of the Missouri correspondence and
marriage regulations. Under Procunier V. Martinez, supra, the correspondence regulation could be justified "only if it
furthers an important or substantial governmental interest unrelated to the suppression of expression, and the
limitation is no greater than necessary or essential to protect that interest." 777 F. 2d, at 1310. The correspondence
regulation did not satisfy this standard because it was not the least restrictive means of achieving the security goals of
the regulation. In the Court of Appeals' view, prison officials could meet the problem of inmate conspiracies by
exercising their authority to open and read all prisoner mail. Id., at 1315-1316. The Court of Appeals also concluded
that the marriage rule was not the least restrictive means of achieving the asserted goals of rehabilitation and
security. The goal of rehabilitation could be met through alternatives such as counseling, and violent "love triangles"
were as likely to occur without a formal marriage ceremony as with one. Ibid. Absent evidence that the relationship
was or would become abusive, the connection between an inmate's marriage and the subsequent commission of a
crime was simply too tenuous to justify denial of this constitutional right. Id., at 1315.
13. We granted certiorari, 476 1139 (1986).
11
14. We begin, as did the courts below, with our decision in Procunier V. Martinez, supra, which described the
principles that necessarily frame our analysis of prisoners' constitutional claims. The first of these principles is that
federal courts must take cognizance of the valid constitutional claims of prison inmates. Id., at 405. Prison walls do not
form a barrier separating prison inmates from the protections of the Constitution. Hence, for example, prisoners retain
the constitutional right to petition the government for the redress of grievances, Johnson V. Avery, 393 U. S. 483
(1969); they are protected against invidious racial discrimination by the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, Lee V. Washington, 390 U. S. 333 (1968); and they enjoy the protections of due process, Wolff V.
McDonnell, 418 U. S. 539 (1974); Haines V. Kerner, 404 U. S. 519 (1972). Because prisoners retain these rights, "[w]
hen a prison regulation or practice offends a fundamental constitutional guarantee, federal courts will discharge their
duty to protect constitutional rights." Procunier V. Martinez, 416 U. S., at 405-406.
15. A second principle identified in Martinez, however, is the recognition that "courts are ill equipped to deal with
the increasingly urgent problems of prison administration and reform." Id., at 405. As the Martinez Court
acknowledged, "the problems of prisons in America are complex and intractable, and, more to the point, they are not
readily susceptible of resolution by decree." Id., at 404-405. Running a prison is an inordinately difficult undertaking
that requires expertise, planning, and the commitment of resources, all of which are peculiarly within the province of
the legislative and executive branches of government. Prison administration is, moreover, a task that has been
committed to the responsibility of those branches, and separation of powers concerns counsel a policy of judicial
restraint. Where a state penal system is involved, federal courts have, as we indicated in Martinez, additional reason to
accord deference to the appropriate prison authorities. See id., at 405.
16. Our task, then, as we stated in Martinez, is to formulate a standard of review for prisoners' constitutional claims
that is responsive both to the "policy of judicial restraint regarding prisoner complaints and [to] the need to protect
constitutional rights." Id., at 406. As the Court of Appeals acknowledged, Martinez did not itself resolve the question
that it framed. Martinez involved mail censorship regulations proscribing statements that "unduly complain," "magnify
grievances," or express "inflammatory political, racial, religious or other views." Id., at 415. In that case, the Court
determined that the proper standard of review for prison restrictions on correspondence between prisoners and
members of the general public could be decided without resolving the "broad questions of 'prisoners' rights." Id., at
408. The Martinez Court based its ruling striking down the content-based regulation on the First Amendment rights of
those who are not prisoners, stating that "[w]hatever the status of a prisoner's claim to uncensored correspondence
with an outsider, it is plain that the latter's interest is grounded in the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of
speech." Id., at 408. Our holding therefore turned on the fact that the challenged regulation caused a "consequential
restriction on the First and Fourteenth Amendment rights of those who are not prisoners." Id., at 409 (emphasis
added). We expressly reserved the question of the proper standard of review to apply in cases "involving questions of
'prisoners' rights.'" Ibid.
17. In four cases following Martinez, this Court has addressed such "questions of 'prisoners' rights.'" The first of
these, Pell Procunier, 417 U. S. 817 (1974), decided the same Term as Martinez, involved a constitutional challenge
to a prison regulation prohibiting face-to-face media interviews with individual inmates. The Court rejected the
inmates' First Amendment challenge to the ban on media interviews, noting that judgments regarding prison security
"are peculiarly within the province and professional expertise of corrections officials, and, in the absence of substantial
evidence in the record to indicate that the officials have exaggerated their response to these considerations, courts
should ordinarily defen to their expert judgment in such matters." 417 U. S., at 827.
18. The next case to consider a claim of prisoners' rights was Jones V. North Carolina Prisoners' Union, 433 U. S.
119 (1977). There the Court considered prison regulations that prohibited meetings of a "prisoners' labor union,"
inmate solicitation of other inmates to join the union, and bulk mailings concerning the union from outside sources.
Noting that the lower court in Jones had "got[ten] off on the wrong foot.. by not giving appropriate deference to the
decisions of prison administrators and appropriate recognition to the peculiar and restrictive circumstances of penal
confinement," id., at 125, the Court determined that the First and Fourteenth Amendment rights of prisoners were
"barely implicated" by the prohibition on bulk mailings, see id., at 130, and that the regulation was "reasonable" under
the circumstances. The prisoners' constitutional challenge to the union meeting and solicitation restrictions was also
rejected, because "[t]he ban on inmate solicitation and group meetings was rationally related to the reasonable,
indeed to the central, objectives of prison administration." Id., at 129.
19. Bell V. Wolfish, 441 U. S. 520 (1979), concerned a First Amendment challenge to a Bureau of Prisons rule
restricting inmates' receipt of hardback books unless mailed directly from publishers, book clubs, or bookstores. The
rule was upheld as a "rational response" to a clear security problem. Id., at 550. Because there was "no evidence" that
officials had exaggerated their response to the security problem, the Court held that "the considered judgment of
these experts must control in the absence of prohibitions far more sweeping than those involved here." Id., at 551.
And in Block V. Rutherford, 468 U. S. 576 (1984), a ban on contact visits was upheld on the ground that "responsible,
experienced administrators have determined, in their sound discretion, that such visits will jeopardize the security of
the facility," and the regulation was "reasonably related" to these security concerns. Id., at 589, 586.
20. In none of these four "prisoners' rights" cases did the Court apply a standard of heightened scrutiny, but
instead inquired whether a prison regulation that burdens fundamental rights is "reasonably related" to legitimate
penological objectives, or whether it represents an "exaggerated response" to those concerns. The Court of Appeals in
this case nevertheless concluded that Martinez provided the closest analogy for determining the appropriate standard
of review for resolving respondents' constitutional complaints. The Court of Appeals distinguished this Court's
decisions in Pell, Jones, Bell, and Block as variously involving "time, place, or manner" regulations, or regulations that
restrict "presumptively dangerous" inmate activities. See 777 F. 2d, at 1310-1312. The Court of Appeals
acknowledged that Martinez had expressly reserved the question of the appropriate standard of review based on
inmates' constitutional claims, but it nonetheless believed that the Martinez standard was the proper one to apply to
respondents' constitutional claims.
21. We disagree with the Court of Appeals that the reasoning in our cases subsequent to Martinez can be so
narrowly cabined. In Pell, for example, it was found "relevant" to the reasonableness of a restriction on face-to-face
visits between prisoners and news reporters that prisoners had other means of communicating with members of the
general public. See 417 U. S., at 823-824. These alternative means of communication did not, however, make the
prison regulation a "time, place, or manner" restriction in any ordinary sense of the term. As Pell acknowledged, the
alternative methods of personal communication still available to prisoners would have been "unimpressive" if offered
to justify a restriction on personal communication among members of the general public. Id., at 825. Nevertheless,
they were relevant in determining the scope of the burden placed by the regulation on inmates' First Amendment
rights. Pell thus simply teaches that it is appropriate to consider the extent of this burden when "we [are] called upon
to balance First Amendment rights against [legitimate] governmental interests." Id., at 824.
22. Nor, in our view, can the reasonableness standard adopted in Jones and Bell be construed as applying only to
"presumptively dangerous" inmate activities. To begin with, the Court of Appeals did not indicate how it would identify
such "presumptively dangerous" conduct, other than to conclude that the group meetings in Jones, and the receipt of
hardback books in Bell, both fall into that category. See 777 F. 2d, at 1311-1312. The Court of Appeals found that
correspondence between inmates did not come within this grouping because the court did "not think a letter presents
the same sort of 'obvious security problem' as does a hardback book." Id., at 1312. It is not readily apparent,
however, why hardback books, which can be scanned for contraband by electronic devices and fluoroscopes, see Bell V.
Wolfish, supra, at 574 (Marshall, J., dissenting), are qualitatively different in this respect from inmate correspondence,
which can be written in codes not readily subject to detection; or why coordinated inmate activity within the same
prison is categorically different from inmate activity coordinated by mail among different prison institutions. The
determination that an activity is "presumptively dangerous" appears simply to be a conclusion about the
reasonableness of the prison restriction in light of the articulated security concerns. It therefore provides a tenuous
basis for creating a hierarchy of standards of review.
23. If Pell, Jones, and Bell have not already resolved the question posed in Martinez, we resolve it now : when
a
prison regulation impinges on inmates' constitutional rights, the regulation is valid if it is reasonably related to
legitimate penological interests. In our view, such a standard is necessary if "prison administrators and not the
courts, [are] to make the difficult judgments concerning institutional operations." Jones V. North Carolina Prisoners'
Union, 433 U. S., at 128. Subjecting the day-to-day judgments of prison officials to an inflexible strict scrutiny
analysis would seriously hamper their ability to anticipate security problems and to adopt innovative solutions to the
intractable problems of prison administration. The rule would also distort the decisionmaking process, for every
administrative judgment would be subject to the possibility that some court somewhere would conclude that it had a
less restrictive way of solving the problem at hand. Courts inevitably would become the primary arbiters of what
constitutes the best solution to every administrative problem, thereby "unnecessarily perpetuating] the involvement of
the federal courts in affairs of prison administration." Procunier V. Martinez, 416 at 407.
24. As our opinions in Pell, Bell, and Jones show, several factors are relevant in determining the reasonableness of
the regulation at issue. First, there must be a "valid, rational connection" between the prison regulation and the
legitimate governmental interest put forward to justify it. Block V. Rutherford, supra, at 586. Thus, a regulation cannot
be sustained where the logical connection between the regulation and the asserted goal is so remote as to render the
policy arbitrary or irrational. Moreover, the governmental objective must be a legitimate and neutral one. We have
found it important to inquire whether prison regulations restricting inmates' First Amendment rights operated in a
neutral fashion, without regard to the content of the expression. See Pell V. Procunier, 417 U. S., at 828; Bell V.
Wolfish, 441 U. S., at 551.
25. A second factor relevant in determining the reasonableness of a prison restriction, as Pell shows, is whether
there are alternative means of exercising the right that remain open to prison inmates. Where "other avenues" remain
available for the exercise of the asserted right, see Jones V. North Carolina Prisoners' Union, supra, at 131, courts
should be particularly conscious of the "measure of judicial deference owed to corrections officials in gauging
the
validity of the regulation." Pell V. Procunier, supra, at 827.
26. A third consideration is the impact accommodation of the asserted constitutional right will have on guards and
other inmates, and on the allocation of prison resources generally. In the necessarily closed environment of the
correctional institution, few changes will have no ramifications on the liberty of others or on the use of the prison's
limited resources for preserving institutional order. When accommodation of an asserted right will have a significant
"ripple effect" on fellow inmates or on prison staff, courts should be particularly deferential to the informed discretion
of corrections officials. Cf. Jones V. North Carolina Prisoners' Union, supra, at 132-133.
27. Finally, the absence of ready alternatives is evidence of the reasonableness of a prison regulation. See Block V.
Rutherford, 468 U. S., at 587. By the same token, the existence of obvious, easy alternatives may be evidence that the
regulation is not reasonable, but is an "exaggerated response" to prison concerns. This is not a "least restrictive
alternative" test : prison officials do not have to set up and then shoot down every conceivable alternative method of
accommodat-ing the claimant's constitutional complaint. See ibid. But if an inmate claimant can point to an
alternative that fully accommodates the prisoner's rights at de minimis cost to valid penological interests, a court may
consider that as evidence that the regulation does not satisfy the reasonable relationship standard.
111
28. Applying our analysis to the Missouri rule barring inmate-to-inmate correspondence, we conclude that the
record clearly demonstrates that the regulation was reasonably related to legitimate security interests. We find that
the marriage restriction, however, does not satisfy the reasonable relationship standard, but rather constitutes an
exaggerated response to petitioners' rehabilitation and security concerns.
A
29. According to the testimony at trial, the Missouri correspondence provision was promulgated primarily for
security reasons. Prison officials testified that mail between institutions can be used to communicate escape plans and
to arrange assaults and other violent acts. 2 Tr. 76; 4 id., at 225-228. Witnesses stated that the Missouri Division of
Corrections had a growing problem with prison gangs, and that restricting communications among gang members,
both by transferring gang members to different institutions and by restricting their correspondence, was an important
element in combating this problem. 2 id., at 75-77; 3 id., at 266-267; 4 id., at 226. Officials also testified that the use
of Renz as a facility to provide protective custody for certain inmates could be compromised by permitting
correspondence between inmates at Renz and inmates at other correctional institutions. 3 id., at 264-265.
30. The prohibition on correspondence between institutions is logically connected to these legitimate security
concerns. Undoubtedly, communication with other felons is a potential spur to criminal behavior : this sort of contact
frequently is prohibited even after an inmate has been released on parole. See, e. g., 28 CFR $2.40(a)(10) (1986)
(federal parole conditioned on nonassociation with known criminals, unless permission is granted by the parole
officer). In Missouri prisons, the danger of such coordinated criminal activity is exacerbated by the presence of prison
gangs. The Missouri policy of separating and isolating gang members-a strategy that has been frequently used to
control gang activity, see G. Camp & C. Camp, U. S. Dept. of Justice, Prison Gangs : Their Extent, Nature and Impact
on Prisons 64-65 (1985) logically is furthered by the restriction on prisoner-to-prisoner correspondence. Moreover, the
correspondence regulation does not deprive prisoners of all means of expression. Rather, it bars communication only
with a limited class of other people with whom prison officials have particular cause to be concerned-inmates at other
institutions within the Missouri prison system.
31. We also think that the Court of Appeals' analysis overlooks the impact of respondents' asserted right on other
inmates and prison personnel. Prison officials have stated that in their expert opinion, correspondence between prison
institutions facilitates the development of informal organizations that threaten the core functions of prison
administration, maintaining safety and internal security. As a result, the correspondence rights asserted by
respondents, like the organizational activities at issue in Jones V. North Carolina Prisoners' Union, 433 U. S. 119
(1977), can be exercised only at the cost of significantly less liberty and safety for everyone else, guards and other
prisoners alike. Indeed, the potential "ripple effect" is even broader here than in Jones, because exercise of the right
affects the inmates and staff of more than one institution. Where exercise of a right requires this kind of tradeoff, we
think that the choice made by corrections officials-which is, after all, a judgment "peculiarly within [their] province
and professional expertise," Pell V. Pro-cunier, 417 at 827-should not be lightly set aside by the courts.
32. Finally, there are no obvious, easy alternatives to the policy adopted by petitioners. Other well-run prison
systems, including the Federal Bureau of Prisons, have concluded that substantially similar restrictions on inmate
correspondence were necessary to protect institutional order and security. See, e.g., 28 CFR $540.17 (1986). As
petitioners have shown, the only alternative proffered by the claimant prisoners, the monitoring of inmate
correspondence, clearly would impose more than a de minimis cost on the pursuit of legitimate corrections goals.
Prison officials testified that it would be impossible to read every piece of inmate-to-inmate correspondence, 3 Tr. 159,
4 id., at 42-43, and consequently there would be an appreciable risk of missing dangerous messages. In any event,
prisoners could easily write in jargon or codes to prevent detection of their real messages. See Camp & Camp, supra,
at 130 (noting "frequent" use of coded correspondence by gang members in federal prison); see also Brief for State of
Texas as Amicus Curiae 7-9. The risk of missing dangerous communications, taken together with the sheer burden on
staff resources required to conduct item-by-item censorship, see 3 Tr. 176, supports the judgment of prison officials
that this alternative is not an adequate alternative to restricting correspondence.
33. The prohibition on correspondence is reasonably related to valid corrections goals. The rule is content neutral, it
logically advances the goals of institutional security and safety identified by Missouri prison officials, and it is not an
exaggerated response to those objectives. On that basis, we conclude that the regulation does not unconstitutionally
250
abridge the First Amendment rights of prison inmates.
B
34. In support of the marriage regulation, petitioners first suggest that the rule does not deprive prisoners of a
constitu-
were made by the District Court," post, at 102, n. 2, and have improperly "encroach[ed] into the factfinding
domain of the District Court." Post, at 101.
The District Court's inquiry as to whether the regulations were "needlessly broad" is not just semantically
different from the standard we have articulated in Part 11 : it is the least restrictive alternative test of Procunier V.
Martinez, 416 U. S. 396 (1974). As Martinez states, in a passage quoted by the District Court:
"[T]he limitation of First Amendment freedoms must be no greater than is necessary or essential to the
protection of the particular governmental interest involved. Thus a restriction on inmate correspondence will
be invalid if its sweep is unnecessarily broad." Id., at 413-414
(emphasis added).
35. The District Court's judgment that the correspondence regulation was "unnecessarily sweeping," 586 F. Supp.
589, 596 (WD Mo. 1984), thus was a judgment based on application of an erroneous legal standard The District
Court's findings of fact 7 and 13 likewise are predicated on application of the least restrictive means standard. Finding
7
is that the correspondence rule was applied without a letter-by-letter determination of harm, and without a showing
that "there is no less restrictive alternative" available; finding 13 reiterates that the correspondence rule operated as a
complete ban. See id., at 591-592. These findings are important only if petitioners have to show that the
correspondence regulation satisfies a least restrictive alternative test : they are largely beside the point where the
inquiry is simply whether the regulation is reasonably related to a legitimate governmental interest.
36. Justice Stevens' charge of appellate factfinding likewise suffers from the flawed premise that Part 111-A answers
the question Justice Stevens would pose, namely, whether the correspondence regulation satisfies strict scrutiny.
Thus, our conclusion that there is a logical connection between security concerns identified by petitioners and a ban on
inmate-to-inmate correspondence, see supra, at 91-92, becomes, in Justice Stevens' hands, a searching examination
of the record to determine whether there was sufficient proof that inmate correspondence had actually led to an
escape plot, uprising, or gang violence at Renz. See post, at 106-109. Likewise, our conclusion that monitoring inmate
correspondence "clearly would impose more than a de minimis cost on the pursuit of legitimate corrections goals,"
supra, at 93, is described as a factual "finding" that it tionally protected right. They concede that the decision to marry
is a fundamental right under Zablocki V. Redhail, 434 U. S. 374 (1978), and Loving V. Virginia, 388 U. S. 1 (1967), but
they imply that a different rule should obtain "in a prison forum." See Brief for Petitioners 38, n. 6. Petitioners then
argue that even if the regulation burdens inmates' constitutional rights, the restriction should be tested under a
reasonableness standard. They urge that the restriction is reasonably related to legitimate security and rehabilitation
concerns.
37. We disagree with petitioners that Zablocki does not apply to prison inmates. It is settled that a prison inmate
"retains those [constitutional] rights that are not inconsistent with his status as a prisonen or with the legitimate
penological objectives of the corrections system." Pell V. Procunier, supra, at 822. The right to marry, like many other
rights, is subject to substantial restrictions as a result of incarceration. Many important attributes of marriage remain,
however, after taking into account the limitations imposed by prison life. First, inmate marriages, like others, are
expressions of emotional support and public commitment. These elements are an important and significant aspect of
the marital relationship. In addition, many religions recognize marriage as having spiritual significance; for some
inmates and their spouses, therefore, the commitment of marriage may be an exercise of religious faith as well as an
expression of personal dedication. Third, most inmates eventually will be released by parole or commutation, and
therefore most inmate marriages are formed in the expectation that they ultimately will be fully consummated. Finally,
marital status often is a precondition to the receipt of government benefits (e. g. Social Security benefits), property
rights (e. g., tenancy by the entirety, inheritance rights), and other, less tangible benefits (e. g., legitimation of
children born out of wedlock). These incidents of marriage, like the religious and personal aspects of the marriage
commitment, are unaffected by the fact of confinement or the pursuit of legitimate corrections goals.
38. Taken together, we conclude that these remaining elements are sufficient to form a constitutionally
protected
marital relationship in the prison context. Our decision in Butler V. Wilson, 415 U. S. 953 (1974), summarily affirming
Johnson V. Rockefeller, 365 F. Supp. 377 (SDNY 1973), is not to the contrary. That case involved a prohibition on
marriage only for inmates sentenced to life imprisonment; and, importantly, denial of the right was part of the
punishment for crime. See id., at 381-382 (Lasker, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (asserted
governmental interest of punishing crime sufficiently important to justify deprivation of right); see generally Mandel V.
Bradley, 432 U. S. 173, 176 (1977) ("Because a summary affirmance is an affirmance of the judgment only, the
rationale of the affirmance may not be gleaned solely from the opinion below").
39. The Missouri marriage regulation prohibits inmates from marrying unless the prison superintendent has
approved the marriage after finding that there are compelling reasons for doing so. As noted previously, generally only
pregnancy or birth of a child is considered a "compelling reason" to approve a marriage. In determining whether this
regulation impermissibly burdens the right to marry, we note initially that the regulation prohibits marriages between
inmates and civilians, as well as marriages between inmates. See Brief for Petitioners 40. Although not urged by
respondents, this implication of the interests of nonprisoners may support application of the Martinez standard,
because the regulation may entail a "consequential restriction on the [constitutional] rights of those who are not
prisoners." See Procunier V. Martinez, 416 U. S., at 409. We need not reach this question, however, because even
under the reasonable relationship test, the marriage regulation does not withstand scrutiny.
40. Petitioners have identified both security and rehabilitation concerns in support of the marriage prohibition. The
security concern emphasized by petitioners is that "love triangles" might lead to violent confrontations between
inmates. See Brief for Petitioners 13, 36, 39. With respect to rehabilitation, prison officials testified that female
prisoners often were subject to abuse at home or were overly dependent on male figures, and that this dependence or
abuse was connected to the crimes they had committed. 3 Tr. 154-155. The superintendent at Renz, petitioner William
Turner, testified that in his view, these women prisoners needed to concentrate on developing skills of self-reliance, 1
id., at 80-81, and that the prohibition on marriage furthered this rehabilitative goal. Petitioners emphasize that the
prohibition on marriage should be understood in light of Superintendent Turner's experience with several ill-advised
marriage requests from female inmates. Brief for Petitioners 32-34.
41. We conclude that on this record, the Missouri prison regulation, as written, is not reasonably related to these
penological interests. No doubt legitimate security concerns may require placing reasonable restrictions upon an
inmate's right to marry, and may justify requiring approval of the superintendent. The Missouri regulation, however,
represents an exaggerated response to such security objectives. There are obvious, easy alternatives to the Missouri
regulation that accommodate the right to marry while imposing a de minimis burden on the pursuit of security
objectives. See, e. g., 28 CFR $551.10 (1986) (marriage by inmates in federal prison generally permitted, but not
if
warden finds that it presents a threat to security or order of institution, or to public safety). We are aware of no place
in the record where prison officials testified that such ready alternatives would not fully satisfy their security concerns.
Moreover, with respect to the security concern emphasized in petitioners' brief-the creation of "love triangles"-
petitioners have pointed to nothing in the record suggesting that the marriage regulation was viewed as preventing
such entanglements. Common sense likewise suggests that there is no logical connection between the marriage
restriction and the formation of love triangles surely in prisons housing both male and female prisoners, inmate
rivalries are as likely to develop without a formal marriage ceremony as with one. Finally, this is not an instance where
the "ripple effect" on the security of fellow inmates and prison staff justifies a broad restriction on inmates' rights-
indeed, where the inmate wishes to marry a civilian, the decision to marry (apart from the logistics of the wedding
ceremony) is a completely private one.
42. Nor, on this record, is the marriage restriction reasonably related to the articulated rehabilitation goal. First, in
requiring refusal of permission absent a finding of a compelling reason to allow the marriage, the rule sweeps much
more broadly than can be explained by petitioners' penological objectives. Missouri prison officials testified that
generally they had experienced no problem with the marriage of male inmates, see, e. g.,2 Tr. 21-22, and the District
Court found that such marriages had routinely been allowed as a matter of practice at Missouri correctional institutions
prior to adoption of the rule, 586 F. Supp., at 592. The proffered justification thus does not explain the adoption of a
rule banning marriages by these inmates. Non does it account for the prohibition on inmate marriages to civilians.
Missouri prison officials testified that generally they had no objection to inmate-civilian marriages, see, e. g., 4 Tr. 240
-241, and Superintendent Turner testified that he usually did not object to the marriage of either male or female
prisoners to civilians, 2 id., at 141-142. The rehabilitation concern appears from the record to have been centered
almost exclusively on female inmates marrying other inmates or ex-felons; it does not account for the ban on inmate-
civilian marriages.
43. Moreover, although not necessary to the disposition of this case, we note that on this record the rehabilitative
objective asserted to support the regulation itself is suspect. Of the several female inmates whose marriage requests
were discussed by prison officials at trial, only one was refused on the basis of fostering excessive dependency. The
District Court found that the Missouri prison system operated on the basis of excessive paternalism in that the
proposed marriages of all female inmates were scrutinized carefully even before adoption of the current regulation-only
one was approved at Renz in the period from 1979-1983-whereas the marriages of male inmates during the same
period were routinely approved. That kind of lopsided rehabilitation concern cannot provide a justification for the broad
Missouri marriage rule.
44. It is undisputed that Missouri prison officials may regulate the time and circumstances under which the
marriage ceremony itself takes place. See Brief for Respondents 5. On this record, however, the almost complete ban
on the decision to marry is not reasonably related to legitimate penological objectives. We conclude, therefore, that
the Missouri marriage regulation is facially invalid.
IV
45. We uphold the facial validity of the correspondence regulation, but we conclude that the marriage rule is
constitution-ally infirm. We read petitioners' additional challenge to the District Court's findings of fact to be a claim
that the District Court erred in holding that the correspondence regulation had been applied by prison officials in an
arbitrary and capricious manner. Because the Court of Appeals did not address this question, we remand the issue to
the Court of Appeals for its consideration.
46. Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeals striking down the Missouri marriage regulation is affirmed;
its judgment invalidating the correspondence rule is reversed; and the case is remanded to the Court of Appeals for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is SO ordered.
47. Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Brennan, Justice Marshall, and Justice Blackmun join, concurring in part
and dissenting in part.
48. How a court describes its standard of review when a prison regulation infringes fundamental constitutional
rights often has far less consequence for the inmates than the actual showing that the court demands of the State in
order to uphold the regulation. This case provides a prime example.
49. There would not appear to be much difference between the question whether a prison regulation that burdens
fundamental rights in the quest for security is "needlessly broad" - the standard applied by the District Court and the
Court of Appeals-and this Court's requirement that the regulation must be "reasonably related to legitimate
penological interests," ante, at 89, and may not represent "an 'exaggerated response' to those concerns." Ante, at 87.
But if the standard can be satisfied by nothing more than a "logical connection" between the regulation and any
legitimate penological concern perceived by a cautious warden, see ante, at 94, n. (emphasis in original), it is virtually
meaningless. Application of the standard would seem to permit disregard for inmates' constitutional rights whenever
the imagination of the warden produces a plausible security concern and a deferential trial court is able to discern a
logical connection between that concern and the challenged regulation. Indeed, there is a logical connection between
prison discipline and the use of bull whips on prisoners; and security is logically furthered by a total ban on inmate
communication, not only with other inmates but also with outsiders who conceivably might be interested in arranging
an attack within the prison or an escape from it. Thus, I dissent from Part 11 of the Court's opinion.2
50. I am able to join Part 111-B because the Court's invalidation of the marriage regulation does not rely on a
rejection of a standard of review more stringent than the one announced in Part 11. See ante, at 97. The Court in Part
111-B concludes after careful examination that, even applying a "reasonableness" standard, the marriage regulation
must fail because the justifications asserted on its behalf lack record support. Part 111-A, however, is not only based on
an application of the Court's newly minted standard, see ante, at 89, but also represents the product of a plainly
improper appellate encroachment into the factfinding domain of the District Court. See Icicle Seafoods, Inc. V.
Worthington, 475 U. S. 709, 714 (1986). Indeed, a fundamental difference between the Court of Appeals and this
Court in this case-and the principal point of this dissent-rests in the respective ways the two courts have examined
and made use of the trial record. In my opinion the Court of Appeals correctly held that the trial court's findings of fact
adequately supported its judgment sustaining the inmates' challenge to the mail regulation as it has been
administered at the Renz Correctional Center in Cedar City, Missouri. In contrast, this Court sifts the trial testimony on
its
own 252 in order to uphold a general prohibition against correspondence between unrelated inmates.
51. This is not a case in which it is particularly helpful to begin by determining the "proper" standard of review, as
if the result of that preliminary activity would somehow lighten the Court's duty to decide this case. The precise issue
before us is evident from respondents' complaint, which makes clear that they were not launching an exclusively facial
attack against the correspondence regulation. Respondents instead leveled their primary challenge against the
application of this regulation to mail addressed to or sent by inmates at Renz:
"20. On information and belief, correspondence between non-family members at different institutions within the
Missouri Division of Correction system is permitted at all institutions with the exception of Renz. On information and
belief, defendant Turner and other employees of the Missouri Division of Corrections have a pattern and practice of
refusing to permit inmates of Renz to correspond with or receive letters from inmates at other correctional
institutions, a situation which appears to be unique within the Missouri Division of Corrections.
"21. On information and belief, the reason given for refusing such correspondence is that Superintendent Turner
feels that correspondence between inmates is not in the best interest of any inmate. In this manner defendant
Turner has violated the constitutional right of every inmate residing at Renz and any inmate who desires to
correspond with an inmate residing at Renz." Amended Complaint, App. 11-12.
52. On their face, the regulations generally applicable to the Missouri Correctional System permit correspondence
between unrelated inmates "if the classification/treatment team of each inmate deems it in the best interests of the
parties involved. 253 After a bench trial, however, the District Court found that there was a total ban on such
correspondence at Renz:
"6. The provisions of the divisional correspondence regulation allowing the classification/treatment team of each
inmate to prohibit inmate-to-inmate correspondence have not been followed at Renz. Theoretically the
classification/treatment team uses psychological reports, conduct violations, and progress reports in deciding
whether to permit correspondence. At Renz, however, the rule as practiced is that inmates may not write non-
family inmates or receive mail from non-family inmates. The more restrictive practice is set forth in the Renz
Inmate Orientation Booklet presented to each inmate upon arrival at Renz. The restrictive rule at Renz is commonly
known throughout the Missouri Correctional System.
"7. The Renz rule against inmate-to-inmate correspondence is enforced without a determination that the security
or order of Renz or the rehabilitation of the inmate would be harmed by allowing the particular correspondence to
proceed and without a determination that there is no less restrictive alternative to resolve any legitimate concerns
of the Department of Corrections short of prohibiting all correspondence.
"8. Inmates at most institutions in the Missouri Correctional System are permitted to correspond with inmates in
most other institutions. The greatest restriction on inmate correspondence is practiced at Renz." 586 F. Supp. 589,
591 (WD Mo. 1984).
"13. Correspondence between inmates has been denied despite evidence that the correspondence was desired
simply to maintain wholesome friendships." Id., at 591-592.
53. These factual findings, which bear out respondents' complaint, served as the basis for the District Court's
injunction:
"Even if some restriction on inmate-to-inmate correspondence can be justified, the regulations and practices at
bar must fall. The prohibitions are unnecessarily sweeping. Correspondence is a sufficiently protected right that it
cannot be cut off simply because the recipient is in another prison, and the inmates cannot demonstrate special
cause for the correspondence
"Defendants have failed to demonstrate that the needs of Renz are sufficiently different to justify greater
censorship than is applied by other well-run institutions." Id., at 596.
54. After reviewing the District Court's findings and conclusions, the Court of Appeals held:
"[W]ithout strong evidence that the relationship in question is or will be abusive, the connection between
permitting the desired correspondence or marriage and the subsequent commission of a crime caused thereby is
simply too tenuous to justify denial of those constitutionally protected rights. As to the security concerns, we think
the prison officials' authority to open and read all prisonen mail is sufficient to meet the problem of illegal
conspiracies." 777 F. 2d 1307, 1315-1316 (CA8 1985)
(emphasis added).
55. The Court of Appeals' affirmance of the District Court thus ultimately rests upon a conclusion with which I fully
agree : absent a showing that prison officials would be unable to anticipate and avoid any security problems
associated with the inmate-to-inmate mail that would result from application of the correspondence rule as it is
written and as enforced at other Missouri prisons, the total ban at Renz found by the District Court offends the First
Amendment.
56. The ostensible breadth of the Court of Appeals' opinion furnishes no license for this
254
Court
to
reverse
with
another unnecessarily broad holding. Moreover, even under the Court's newly minted standard, the findings of the
District Court that were upheld by the Court of Appeals clearly dictate affirmance of the judgment below.
11
57. Without explicitly disagreeing with any of the District Court's findings of fact, this Court rejects the trial judge's
conclusion that the total ban on correspondence between inmates at Renz and unrelated inmates in other correctional
facilities was "unnecessarily sweeping" or, to use the language the Court seems to prefer, was an "exaggerated
response" to the security problems predicted by petitioner's expert witnesses. Instead, the Court bases its holding
upon its own highly selective use of factual evidence.
58. The reasons the Court advances in support of its conclusion include (1) speculation about possible "gang
problems," escapes, and secret codes, ante, at 91-93; (2) the fact that the correspondence regulation "does not
deprive prisoners of all means of expression," ante, at 92; and (3) testimony indicat-ing "that it would be impossible
to read every piece of inmate-to-inmate correspondence," ante, at 93. None of these reasons has a sufficient basis in
the record to support the Court's holding on the mail regulation.
59. Speculation about the possible adverse consequences of allowing inmates in different institutions to correspond
with one another is found in the testimony of three witnesses : William Turner, the Superintendent of Renz
Correctional Center; Sally Halford, the Director of the Kansas Correctional Institution at Lansing; and David Blackwell,
the former Director of the Division of Adult Institutions of the Missouri Department of Corrections.
60. Superintendent Turner was unable to offer proof that prohibiting inmate-to-inmate correspondence prevented
the formation or dissemination of escape plots. He merely asserted that the mail regulation assisted him in his duties
to maintain security at Renz [f]rom the standpoint that we don't have escapes, we don't have the problems that are
experienced in other institutions." 2 Tr. 75. Non did the Superintendent's testimony establish that permitting such
correspondence would create a security risk; he could only surmise that the mail policy would inhibit communications
between institutions in the early stages of an uprising. Id., at 76. The Superintendent's testimony is entirely
consistent with the District Court's conclusion that the correspondence regulation was an exaggerated response to the
potential gang problem at Renz.
255
61. Neither of the outside witnesses had any special knowledge of conditions at Renz. Ms. Halford had reviewed the
prison's rules and regulations relevant to this case, had discussed the case with Superintendent Turner, and had
visited Renz for "a couple of hours." 3 id., at 146. Mr. Blackwell was charged with the overall management of
Missouri's adult correctional facilities and did not make daily decisions concerning the inmate correspondence
permitted at Renz. Id., at 259-260. He was "not sure" if he was specifically familiar with the policy at Renz that an
inmate is allowed to correspond with inmates of other institutions only if they are members of the inmate's immediate
family. 4 id., at 44.
62. Neither of them, and indeed, no other witness, even mentioned the possibility of the use of secret codes by
inmates. The Kansas witness testified that Kansas followed a policy of "open correspondence. An inmate can write
to
whomever they please." 3 id., at 158. She identified two problems that might result from that policy. First, in the
preceding year a male inmate had escaped from a minimum security area and helped a female inmate to escape and
remain at large for over a week. The witness speculated that they must have used the mails to plan their escape. The
trial judge discounted this testimony because there was no proof that this or any other escape had been discussed in
correspondence. Id., at 158-159. Second, the Kansas witness suggested that a ban on inmate correspondence would
frustrate the development of a "gang problem." Id., at 160. In view of her acknowledgment that no gang problem had
developed in Kansas despite its open correspondence rule, id., at 158, the trial judge presumably also attached little
weight to this prediction. Indeed, there is a certain irony in the fact that the Kansas expert witness was unable to
persuade her superiors in Kansas to prohibit inmate-to-inmate correspondence, id., at 168, yet this Court apparently
256
finds no reason to discount her speculative testimony.
The Missouri witness, Mr. Blackwell, also testified that one method of trying to discourage the organization of
"gangs" of prisoners with ethnic or religious similarities is "by restricting correspondence." Id., at 267. He did not
testify, however, that a total ban on inmate-to-inmate correspondence was an appropriate response to the potential
gang problem. Indeed, he stated that the State's policy did not include a "carte blanche" denial of such
correspondence, 257 and he did not even know that Renz was enforcing such a total ban. 258 His assertion that an open
correspon-dence policy would pose security problems was backed only by speculation:
[[A]: I am sure that there are some inmates at Renz who would write other inmates at other facilities in an
illegitimate fashion. I also feel certain that there is more of a probability that they would be writing about things
other than just sound positive letter writing, given the nature of the offenders at Renz.
"Q What percentage of the [mail] inmate-to-inmate from Renz Correctional Center have you personally read?
"A Very, very little.
"Q So you are basically speculating about what inmates might write about?
"A : Yes." Aid., at 82-83.
64. Quite clearly, Mr. Blackwell's estimate of the problems justifying some restrictions on inmate-to-inmate
correspondence provides no support for the Renz policy that he did not even know about and that did not conform to
259
the more liberal policy applicable to other institutions in which more serious offenders are incarcerated. As
the
District Court concluded, petitioners "failed to demonstrate that the needs of Renz are sufficiently different to justify
greater censorship than is applied by other well-run institutions. 586 F. Supp., at 596.
65. The Court also relies on the fact that the inmates at Renz were not totally deprived of the opportunity to
communicate with the outside world. This observation is simply irrelevant to the question whether the restrictions that
were enforced were unnecessarily broad. Moreover, an evenhanded acceptance of this sort of argument would require
upholding the Renz marriage regulation-which the Court quite properly invalidates-because that regulation also could
have been even more restrictive.
66. The Court's final reason for concluding that the Renz prohibition on inmate-to-inmate correspondence is
reasonable is its belief that it would be "impossible" to read all such correspondence sent or received by the inmates at
Renz. No such finding of impossibility was made by the District Court, non would it be supported by any of the findings
that it did make. The record tells us nothing about the total volume of inmate mail sent or received at Renz; much less
does it indicate how many letters are sent to, or received from, inmates at other institutions. As the State itself
observed at oral argument about the volume of correspondence:
"The difficulty with our position in the case is, since we had never permitted [mail between inmates], we didn't
have an idea except to say that-you know, except that we had 8,000 inmates, and we figured that they would
write." Tr. of Oral Arg. 14.
67. The testimony the Court does cite to support its conclusion that reviewing inmate-to-inmate mail would be an
insurmountable task was provided by Mr. Blackwell and Ms. Halford. Mr. Blackwell testified that "[t]here is no way we
can read all the mail non would we want to it is impossible." 4 Tr. 41-43. 260 Ms. Halford gave similar testi-mony,4
but again she was referring to "all incoming mail," not to inmate-to-inmate correspondence and, of course, her
262
testimony related to Kansas, not to the relatively small facility at Renz. In short, the evidence in the record is
plainly insufficient to support the Court's de novo finding of impossibility. 263 It does, however, adequately support this
finding by the District Court that the Court ignores:
"14. The staff at Renz has been able to scan and control outgoing and incoming mail, including inmate-to-inmate
correspondence." 586 F. Supp., at 592.
68. Because the record contradicts the conclusion that the administrative burden of screening all inmate-to-inmate
mail would be unbearable, an outright ban is intolerable. The blanket prohibition enforced at Renz is not only an
"excessive response" to any legitimate security concern; it is inconsistent with a consensus of expert opinion-including
264
Kansas correctional authorities-that is far more reliable than the speculation to which this Court accords deference.
111
69. The contrasts between the Court's acceptance of the challenge to the marriage regulation as overbroad and its
265
rejection of the challenge to the correspondence rule are striking and puzzling. The Court inexplicably expresses
different views about the security concerns common to prison marriages and prison mail. In the marriage context
expert speculation about the security problems associated with "love triangles" is summarily rejected, while in the
mail context speculation about the potential "gang problem" and the possible use of codes by prisoners receives
virtually total deference. Moreover, while the Court correctly dismisses as a defense to the marriage rule the
speculation that the inmate's spouse, once released from incarceration, would attempt to aid the inmate in
escaping, 266 the Court grants virtually total credence to similar speculation about escape plans concealed in letters.
70. In addition, the Court disregards the same considerations it relies on to invalidate the marriage regulation when
it
turns to the mail regulation. The marriage rule is said to sweep too broadly because it is more restrictive than the
routine practices at other Missouri correctional institutions, but the mail rule at Renz is not an "exaggerated response"
even though it is more restrictive than practices in the remainder of the State. The Court finds the rehabilitative value
of marriage apparent, but dismisses the value of corresponding with a friend who is also an inmate for the reason that
communication with the outside world is not totally prohibited. The Court relies on the District Court's finding that the
marriage regulation operated on the basis of "excessive paternal-ism" toward female inmates, ante, at 99, but rejects
the same court's factual findings on the correspondence regulation. Unfathomably, while rejecting the
Superintendent's concerns about love triangles as an insufficient and invalid basis for the marriage regulation, the
Court apparently accepts the same concerns as a valid basis for the mail regulation.
267
71. In pointing out these inconsistencies, I do not suggest that the Court's treatment of the marriage regulation is
flawed; as I stated, I concur fully in that part of its opinion. I do suggest that consistent application of the Court's
268
reasoning necessarily leads to a finding that the mail regulation applied at Renz is unconstitutional.
IV
72. To the extent that this Court affirms the judgment of the Court of Appeals, I concur in its opinion. I respectfully
dissent from the Court's partial reversal of that judgment on the basis of its own selective forays into the record. When
all the language about deference and security is set to one side, the Court's erratic use of the record to affirm the
Court of Appeals only partially may rest on an unarticulated assumption that the marital state is fundamentally
different from the exchange of mail in the satisfaction, solace, and support it affords to a confined inmate. Even if such
a difference is recognized in literature, history, or anthropology, the text of the Constitution more clearly protects the
right to communicate than the right to marry. In this case, both of these rights should receive constitutional
recognition and protection.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCE-
MENT OF COLORED PEOPLE V. ALABAMA
ex rel. FLOWERS, ATTORNEY GENERAL.
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF ALABAMA.
No. 169. Argued March 24, 1964-Decided June 1, 1964.
Alleging noncompliance with Alabama's corporate registration and business qualification laws, the State in 1956
brought ouster proceedings against the petitioner, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), a New York membership corporation with an office in Alabama and doing business there, and it was
barred under an ex parte restraining order from operating in the State. Before any hearing on the merits, a
contempt judgment, which the State Supreme Court on procedural grounds refused to review, was rendered against
the NAACP for failure to produce its membership lists and other records under court order. Without reaching the
validity of the underlying restraining order, this Court reversed, and, following reinstatement by the State Supreme
Court of the contempt judgment, reversed again. In 1960 the NAACP, still prohibited from operating in Alabama,
sued in a federal court alleging failure by the Alabama courts to afford it a hearing on the merits. The case reached
this Court a third time and in 1961 was remanded with instructions that the Federal District Court be directed to try
the case on the merits unless the State did so by a certain time. The State Circuit Court then heard the case; found
that the NAACP had violated the State's constitution and laws; and permanently enjoined it from doing business in
the State. The State Supreme Court affirmed, solely on the basis of a procedural rule, which it applied to the
NAACP's brief, that where unrelated assignments of error are argued together and one is without merit, the others
will not be considered. Held:
1. There was substantial compliance with the procedural rule, and failure to consider petitioner's asserted
constitutional rights was wholly unwarranted. Pp. 293-302.
2. In view of what has gone before, this Court is deciding the case on its merits rather than remanding it to the
State Supreme Court for that purpose. P. 302.
3.
Alabama's corporate registration requirements are to ensure amenability of foreign corporations to suit in state
courts and do not provide for a corporation's permanent ouster for failure to register or because it engaged in
other activities, which, in any event, furnished no proper basis for excluding the petitioner from Alabama. Pp.
302-310.
4. This case does not involve the privilege of a corporation to do "business" in a State; it involves the freedom of
individuals to associate for the collective advocacy of ideas. P. 309.
5. While this Court has power to formulate a decree for entry in the state courts, as held in Martin V. Hunter's
Lessee, 1 Wheat. 304, the case is remanded to the State Supreme Court for prompt entry of a decree vacating
the permanent injunction order against petitioner and permitting it to operate in the State, failing which the
NAACP may apply to this Court for further appropriate relief. P. 310.
73. 274 Ala. 544, 150 So. 2d 677, reversed and remanded.
74. Robert L. Carter argued the cause for petitioner. With him on the brief were Fred D. Gray, Arthur D. Shores,
Orzell Billingsley and Peter Hall.
75. Gordon Madison, Assistant Attorney General of Alabama, argued the cause for respondent. With him on the
brief was Richmond M. Flowers, Attorney General of Alabama.
76. Mr. Justice Harlan delivered the opinion of the Court.
77. This case, involving the right of the petitioner, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,
to carry on activities in Alabama, reaches this Court for the fourth time. In 1956 the Attorney General of Alabama
brought a suit in equity to oust the Association, a New York "membership" corporation, from the State. The basis of
the proceeding was the Association's alleged failure to comply with Alabama statutes requiring foreign corporations to
269
register with the Alabama Secretary of State and perform other acts in order to qualify to do business in the State;
the complaint alleged also that certain of the petitioner's activities in Alabama, detailed below, were inimical to the
well-being of citizens of the State.
78. On the day the complaint was filed, the Attorney General obtained an ex parte restraining order barring the
Association, pendente lite, from conducting any business within the State and from taking any steps to qualify to do
business under state law. Before the case was heard on the merits, the Association was adjudged in contempt for
failing to comply with a court order directing it to produce various records, including membership lists. The Supreme
Court of Alabama dismissed a petition for certiorari to review the final judgment of contempt on procedural grounds,
265 Ala. 349, 91 So. 2d 214, which this Court, on review, found inadequate to bar consideration of the Association's
constitutional claims. NAACP V. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S. 449. Upholding those claims, we reversed the
judgment of contempt without reaching the question of the validity of the underlying restraining order.
79. In the second round of these proceedings, the Supreme Court of Alabama, on remand "for proceedings not
inconsistent" with this Court's opinion, 357 U. S., at 467, again affirmed the judgment of contempt which this Court
had overturned. 268 Ala. 531, 109 So. 2d 138. This decision was grounded on belief that this Court's judgment had
rested on a "mistaken premise." Id., at 532, 109 So. 2d, at 139. Observing that the premise of our prior decision had
been one which the State had "plainly, accepted" throughout the prior proceedings here, this Court ruled that the
State could not, for the first time on remand, change its stance. 360 U. S. 240, 243. We noted that the Supreme Court
of Alabama "evidently was not ac-quainted with the detailed basis of the proceedings here" when it reaffirmed the
judgment of contempt, id., at 243-244, and again remanded without considering the validity of the restraining order.
In so doing, the Court said: "We assume that the State Supreme Court will not fail to proceed promptly with the
disposition of the matters left open under our mandate for further proceedings rendered in the prior case. Id., at
245.
80. Our second decision was announced on June 8, 1959. Unable to obtain a hearing on the merits in the Alabama
courts, the Association, in June 1960, commenced proceedings in the United States District Court to obtain a hearing
there. Alleging that the restraining order and the failure of the Alabama courts to afford it a hearing on the validity of
the order were depriving it of constitutional rights, the Association sought to enjoin enforcement of the order. Without
passing on the merits, the District Court dismissed the action, because it would not assume that the executive and
judicial officers of Alabama involved in the litigation would fail to protect "the constitutional rights of all citizens." 190
F. Supp. 583, 586. The Court of Appeals agreed that the matter "should be litigated initially in the courts of the
State." 290 F. 2d 337, 343. It, however, vacated the judgment below and remanded the case to the District Court,
with instructions "to permit the issues presented to be determined with expedition in the State courts," but to retain
jurisdiction and take steps necessary to protect the Association's right to be heard on its constitutional claims. Ibid.
81. The jurisdiction of this Court was invoked a third time. On October 23, 1961, we entered an order as follows:
The judgment below is vacated, and the case is remanded to the Court of Appeals with instructions to direct
the District Court to proceed with the trial of the issues in this action unless within a reasonable time, no later than
January 2, 1962, the State of Alabama shall have accorded to petitioner an opportunity to be heard on its motion to
dissolve the state restraining order of June 1, 1956, and upon the merits of the action in which such order was
issued. Pending the final determination of all proceedings in the state action, the District Court is authorized to
retain jurisdiction over the federal action and to take such steps as may appear necessary and appropriate to assure
a prompt disposition of all issues involved in, or connected with, the state action 368 U. S. 16-17.
82. In December 1961, more than five years after it was "temporarily" ousted from Alabama, the Association
obtained a hearing on the merits in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, the court which had issued the
restraining order in 1956. On December 29, 1961, 270 the Circuit Court entered a final decree in which the court found
that the Association had continued to do business in Alabama "in violation of the Constitution and laws of the state
relating to foreign corporations" and that the Association's activities in the State were "in violation of other laws of the
State of Alabama and are and have been a usurpation and abuse of its corporate functions and detrimental to the
State of Alabama The decree permanently enjoined the Association and those affiliated with it from doing "any
further business of any description or kind" in Alabama and from attempting to qualify to do business there. The
Association appealed to the Supreme Court of Alabama, which, on February 28, 1963, affirmed the judgment below
without considering the merits. 274 Ala. 544, 150 So. 2d 677. The Supreme Court relied wholly on procedural
grounds, detailed more fully below. This Court again granted certiorari, 375 U. S. 810.
I.
83. We consider first the nonfederal basis of the decision of the Alabama Supreme Court, which is asserted by the
State as a barrier to consideration of the constitutionality of the Association's ouster from Alabama.
84. In its Assignment of Errors to the Supreme Court of Alabama, the Association specified 23 claimed errors in the
271
proceedings in the trial court. Each claim of error was separately numbered and set off in a separate paragraph.
Most of the claims alleged that the error involved deprived the Association and those connected with it of rights
protected by the Federal Constitution. The brief filed by the Association in the State Supreme Court is divided into four
sections: "Statement of Case," "Statement of Facts," "Propositions of Law" (containing 15 separately numbered and
paragraphed propositions of law, with a separate list of cases supporting each), and "Argument. The "Argument"
"272
section is subdivided into five parts by Roman numerals unaccompanied by any headings. There is a specific reference
in the "Argument" to each assignment of error on which the Association relied. Only one assignment of
273
error
is
mentioned more than once; that assignment is mentioned twice, both times in connection with the same substantive
issue. In only two paragraphs is there a reference to more than one assigned error, one paragraph including a
discussion of two related assignments and another including a discussion of four related assignments.
85. The Supreme Court of Alabama based its decision entirely on the asserted failure of the Association's brief to
conform to rules of the court. Although it referred to Rule 9 of its Rules, which concerns the form of an appellant's
brief, 274 the Supreme Court gave no indication of any respect in which the Association's brief fell short of the
requirements of that Rule, and appears to have placed no reliance on it at all. See 274 Ala., at 546, 150 So. 2d, at
679. The basis of the decision below was rather "a rule of long standing and frequent application that where unrelated
assignments of error are argued together and one is without merit, the others will not be considered." Ibid. Proceeding
to
apply that rule to the Association's brief, the Supreme Court held that at least one of the assignments of error
contained in each of the five numbered subdivisions of the "Argument" section of the brief was without merit, and that
275
it
would therefore not consider the merit of any of the other assignments. The Attorney General of Alabama argues
that this is a nonfederal ground of decision adequate to bar review in this Court of the serious constitutional claims
which the Association presents. We find this position wholly unacceptable.
86. Paying full respect to the state court's opinion, it seems to us crystal clear that the rule invoked by it cannot
reasonably be deemed applicable to this case. In its brief, the Association referred to each of its assignments of error
separately, and specified the argument pertaining thereto. A separate paragraph was devoted to each of the
assignments of error except, as noted above, for two related assignments included in one paragraph and four other
related assignments included in another paragraph.
87. These six assignments, like all the others, were specified and explicitly tied to the argument relating to each.
We are at a loss to understand how it could be concluded that the structure of the brief did not fully meet the
requirement that unrelated assignments of error not be "argued together." Had the petitioner simply omitted the
Roman numerals which subdivide its "Argument" section, intended presumably as an organizational aid to
understanding, there would have been no conceivable basis for the suggestion that the various errors were argued "in
bulk"; and, indeed, the sole basis mentioned in the Alabama court's opinion for the conclusion that these errors were
grouped for argument is the numbering of subdivisions. The numbering was a mere stylistic device, which cannot
276
well be regarded as detracting from the brief's full conformity with the rule in question. The consideration of asserted
constitutional rights may not be thwarted by simple recitation that there has not been observance of a procedural rule
with which there has been compliance in both substance and form, in every real sense. Davis V. Wechsler, 263 U. S.
22, 24; Staub V. City of Baxley, 355 U. S. 313, 318-320. To the same effect, see this Court's discussion of a similar
aspect of prior proceedings in this case, 357 U. S., at 454-458.
88. The Alabama courts have not heretofore applied their rules respecting the preparation of briefs with the
pointless severity shown here. In the early case of Bell V. Fulgham, 202 Ala. 217, 218, 80 So. 39, 40, the court said:
"The brief filed by appellant is characterized by a degree of informality and an apparent lack of attention to Rule
10
[predecessor to the present Rule 9]; but the rule is directory, and from the time of its adoption the court has
exercised its discretion in the consideration of briefs which fairly and helpfully make the points upon which
appellant relies. Agreeably with the practice thus established, the brief for appellant has been considered."
89. More recently, in Bolton V. Barnett Lumber & Supply Co., 267 Ala. 74, 75, 100 So. 2d 9, the court stated again
that its rule governing the form of an appellant's brief was "directory" and said that "if appellant's brief, even though
not in compliance with the rule, fairly and helpfully makes the points upon which appellant relies, this court may, in its
discretion, consider it." The court noted that it saw "no reason why there should be any real difficulty in complying
with these rules." Ibid.
90. Other cases are in accord. In Brothers V. Brothers, 208 Ala. 258, 259, 94 So. 175, 177, the Alabama Supreme
Court said:
"It is true that the brief for appellant does not refer to the tenth and eleventh assignments of error by number,
as it should in strictness have done. But, in view of the simplicity of the record, and of the facts that only four or
five rulings are discussed, and that specific reference to the assignments was not necessary to our understanding of
the argument, we have preferred to condone the fault in this instance."
91. In Madison Limestone Co. V. McDonald, 264 Ala. 295, 302, 87 So. 2d 539, 544, the court treated as sufficient
three assignments of error which were "not properly expressed." In City of Montgomery V. Mott, 266 Ala. 422, 96 So.
2d 766, there were 25 assignments of error, none of which was referred to by number in the appellant's brief. The
Alabama Supreme Court said that the brief did not "strictly conform" to the rules governing "the form and contents" of
appellants' briefs, but that it did "not feel that the defects in the brief warrant a dismissal of the appeal." Id., at 424,
96 So. 2d, at 767. The court stated: "We have condoned noncompliance with the rule in question when the record is
short and simple and when a strict compliance with the rule is not essential to an understanding of the assignments of
error which are argued in appellant's brief." Ibid. Kendall Alabama Co. V. City of Fort Payne, 262 Ala. 465, 466, 79 So.
2d 801, 802, is to the same effect.
92. In State V. Farabee, 268 Ala. 437, 439, 108 So. 2d 148, 149-150, the court said:
"As pointed out by the appellee, appellant's brief has not complied fully with the standards required by Supreme
Court Rule
9 A concise statement of so much of the record as fully presents every error and exception relied
upon referring to the pages of the transcript did not appear under the heading, 'Statement of the Case. Only two
general propositions of law were set out to sustain the seven assignments of error presented on appeal. And only
one case was cited in appellant's argument, which seemed to argue several assignments together. Nevertheless, we
will exercise our discretion and give consideration to the points argued
(Italics added.)
93. The court thus regarded as too unimportant to prevent consideration of the merits the very ground on which it
relies here, even though it was accompanied by other failures to comply with the rules. In Shelby County V. Baker,
269 Ala. 111, 116, 110 So. 2d 896, 900, the court said:
"Appellant has assigned thirty separate grounds as error, but has argued them in groups, so as to make available
to this Court application of the rule that where assignments of error not kindred in nature are argued together and
one of them is without merit, the others in the group will not be examined However, many of the
assignments
seem to be somewhat kindred, and, in deference to counsel, we will consider them."
(Citations omitted.)
94. In Brooks V. Everett, 271 Ala. 380, 124 So. 2d 100, the court considered assignments of error although there
were 38 of them and none had been "specifically referred to in appellant's brief." Id., at 381, 124 So. 2d, at 102. The
court said: [W]e have held that although appellant's brief does not comply with the rule, if it fairly and helpfully
makes the points upon which appellant relies this court may, in its discretion, consider those points on their merits."
Ibid. See also Stariha V. Hagood, 252 Ala. 158, 162, 40 So. 2d 85, 89; Quinn V. Hannon, 262 Ala. 630, 632-633, 80
So. 2d 239, 241; Thompson V. State, 267 Ala. 22, 25, 99 So. 2d 198, 200.
95. The cases cited in the Alabama Supreme Court's opinion and in the brief of the State Attorney General in
this
Court quite evidently do not support the State's position. In some, there were no assignments of error, Dobson V.
Deason, 258 Ala. 219, 61 So. 2d 764, or none was mentioned in the appellant's brief, Bolton V. Barnett Lumber &
Supply Co., supra; Pak-A-Sak of Alabama, Inc. V. Lauten, 271 Ala. 276, 279, 123 So. 2d 122, 125. In another group of
cases, several different allegations of error were joined in a single assignment of error. Mobile, Jackson & Kansas City
R. Co. V. Bromberg, 141 Ala. 258, 273, 37 So. 395, 398; Alabama Chemical Co. V. Hall, 212 Ala. 8, 10, 101 So. 456,
458; Snellings V. Jones, 33 Ala. App. 301, 303, 33 So. 2d 371, 372. The remaining cases are the only ones which are
at all related to the present case. In them, the Supreme Court of Alabama held that if any one of a group of unrelated
assignments of error which had been argued together, or "in bulk," was insufficient, all of them must fall. Ford V.
Bradford, 218 Ala. 62, 65, 117 So. 429, 431; Taylor V. Taylor, 251 Ala. 374, 383, 37 So. 2d 645, 652-653; First
National Bank of Birmingham V. Lowery, 263 Ala. 36, 41, 81 So. 2d 284, 287; Thompson V. State, 267 Ala. 22, 25, 99
So. 2d 198, 200; Bertolla V. Kaiser, 267 Ala. 435, 440, 103 So. 2d 736, 740; McElhaney V. Singleton, 270 Ala. 162,
167, 117 So. 2d 375, 380; Mize V. Mize, 273 Ala. 369, 370, 141 So. 2d 200, 201. While it does not always appear in
the opinions how the assignments of error were argued, every indication is that, unlike the situation here, they were
grouped together "for the purpose of argument," First National Bank of Birmingham, supra, at 41, 81 So. 2d, at 287,
and were in fact argued as a group, as the words used by the court suggest. In McElhaney, supra, at 166, 117 So. 2d,
at 380, for example, the court quoted the appellant's brief, as follows: "Proposition No. 2 refers to and is covered
by
Assignments 2, 3 & 4 In the remainder of the discussion of these Assignments in the brief, also quoted, ibid.,
they are never again mentioned or distinguished. In Taylor, supra, at 383, 37 So. 2d, at 652, 51 assignments of error
were "grouped and argued together in brief." None of these cases even approaches a ruling that when, as here,
assignments of error are individually specified in connection with the argument relevant to each, they are to be
regarded as "argued in bulk" because, forsooth, the argument as a whole is divided on the pages of the brief into
numbered subdivisions.
96. In sum, we think that what we said when this litigation was first here, with respect to the procedural point
there asserted as a state ground of decision adequate to bar review on the merits, also fits the present situation:
"Novelty in procedural requirements cannot be permitted to thwart review in this Court applied for by those who,
in justified reliance upon prior decisions, seek vindication in state courts of their federal constitutional rights." 357
U. S., at 457-458.
97. The State has urged that if the nonfederal ground relied on below be found inadequate, as we find it to be, the
case be remanded to the Supreme Court of Alabama for decision on the merits. While this might be well enough in
other circumstances, in view of what has gone before, we reject that contention and proceed to the merits.
11.
98. The complaint against the Association, as finally amended, alleged that it was a New York corporation
maintaining an office and doing business in Alabama. The acts charged against the Association were:
(1) that it had "employed on otherwise paid money" to Authurine Lucy and Polly Meyers Hudson to encourage them
to enroll as students in the University of Alabama in order to test the legality of its policy against admitting
Negroes;
(2) that it had furnished legal counsel to represent Authurine Lucy in proceedings to obtain admission to the
University;
(3) that it had "engaged in organizing, supporting and financing an illegal boycott" to compel a bus line in
Montgomery, Alabama, not to segregate passengers according to race;
(4) that it had "falsely charged" officials of the State and the University of Alabama with acts in violation of state
and federal law;
(5) that it had "falsely charged" the Attorney General of Alabama and the Alabama courts with "arbitrary, vindictive,
and collusive" acts intended to prevent it from contesting its ouster from the State "before an impartial judicial
forum," and had "falsely charged" the Circuit Court and Supreme Court of the State with deliberately denying it a
hearing on the merits of its ouster;
(6) that it had "falsely charged" the State and its Attorney General with filing contempt proceedings against it,
knowing the charges therein to be false;
(7) that it had "willfully violated" the order restraining it from carrying on activities in the State;
(8) that it attempted to "pressure" the mayor of Philadelphia, the Governor of Pennsylvania, and the Penn State
football team into "a boycott of the Alabama football team" when the two teams were to play each other in the
Liberty Bowl;
(9) that it had "encouraged, aided, and abetted the unlawful breach of the peace in many cities in Alabama for the
purpose of gaining national notoriety and attention to enable it to raise funds under a false claim that it is for the
protection of alleged constitutional rights";
(10) that it had "encouraged, aided, and abetted a course of conduct within the State of Alabama, seeking to deny
to the citizens of Alabama the constitutional right to voluntarily segregate"; and
(11) that it had carried on its activities in Alabama without complying with state laws requiring foreign corporations
to register and perform other acts in order to do business within the State.
99. All of these acts were alleged to be "causing irreparable injury to the property and civil rights of the residents
and citizens of the State of Alabama for which criminal prosecution and civil actions at law afford no adequate relief
The complaint stated also that "the said conduct, procedure, false allegations, and methods used by Respondent
render totally unacceptable to the State of Alabama and its people the said Respondent corporation and the activities
and business it transacts in this State."
100. The last allegation, that the Association has failed to comply with the statutory requirements for a foreign cor-
poration to do business in Alabama, furnishes no basis under Alabama law for its ouster. The requirements in question
are set out in the Code of Alabama of 1940, Tit. 10,  192-194. These provisions require that before doing business
in Alabama a foreign corporation file with the Secretary of State its articles of incorporation and a written instrument
designating a place of business within the State and an authorized agent residing there. There is a filing fee of $10.
The corporation must file notice of amendments to its articles of incorporation and changes in its place of business or
authorized agent. 277
101. There is nothing in these sections which attaches the consequence of permanent ouster to a foreign
corporation which fails to register. 278 That this is not the effect of the statute is conclusively demonstrated by  194,
which provides the State with a different and complete remedy: [A]ny [foreign] corporation that engages in
or
transacts any business in this state without complying with the provisions of the two preceding sections shall, for each
offense, forfeit and pay to the state the sum of one thousand dollars."
102. Alabama cases confirm that the registration requirements are what they appear on their face to be : provisions
ensuring that foreign corporations will be amenable to suit in Alabama courts. "They constitute a police
,279
regulation
for the protection of the property interests of the citizens of the state The doing of a single act of business, if it be
in the exercise of a corporate function, is prohibited. The policy of the Constitution and statute is to protect our citizens
against the fraud and imposition of insolvent and unreliable corporations, and to place them in an attitude to be
reached by legal process from our courts in favor of citizens having cause of complaint." Alabama Western R. Co. V.
Talley-Bates Const. Co., 162 Ala. 396, 402-403, 50 So. 341, 342. See Armour Packing Co. of La., Ltd. V. Vinegar Bend
Lumber Co., 149 Ala. 205, 42 So. 866; George M. Muller Mfg. Co. V. First National Bank of Dothan, 176 Ala. 229, 57
So. 762. The Attorney General of Alabama has referred us to no case, and we have been able to find none, in which a
foreign corporation was ousted from Alabama for failing to comply with the registration statute.
280
103. The other asserted grounds for excluding the petitioner from Alabama furnish no better foundation for the
action below. The first two grounds relied on are manifestly untenable. Before these proceedings were commenced,
this Court had upheld the right of Authurine Lucy and Polly Anne Meyers to enroll at the University of Alabama. Lucy
V.
Adams, 350 U.S. 1. Neither furnishing them with financial assistance, in effect a scholarship, to attend the University,
non providing them with legal counsel to assist their efforts to gain admission was unlawful or could, consistently with
the decisions of this Court, be inhibited because contrary to the University's policy against admitting Negroes. NAACP
V. Button, 371 U. S. 415.
104. The third charge listed above is scarcely more substantial. Even if we were to indulge the doubtful assumption
that an organized refusal to ride on Montgomery's buses in protest against a policy of racial segregation might, without
more, in some circumstances violate a valid state law, such a violation could not constitutionally be the basis for a
permanent denial of the right to associate for the advocacy of ideas by lawful means. As we said at a prior stage in this
litigation:
"It is beyond debate that freedom to engage in association for the advancement of beliefs and ideas is an
inseparable aspect of the 'liberty' assured by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which
embraces freedom of speech." 357 U. S., at 460.
105. This Court has repeatedly held that a governmental purpose to control or prevent activities constitutionally
subject to state regulation may not be achieved by means which sweep unnecessarily broadly and thereby invade the
area of protected freedoms. See id., at 463-464. LT]he power to regulate must be so exercised as not, in attaining
a permissible end, unduly to infringe the protected freedom." Cantwell V. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 304. [E]ven
though the governmental purpose be legitimate and substantial, that purpose cannot be pursued by means that
broadly stifle fundamental personal liberties when the end can be more narrowly achieved." Shelton V. Tucker, 364 U.
S. 479, 488 (footnote omitted). For other cases elaborating this principle, see Lovell V. Griffin, 303 U. S. 444, 451;
Schneider V. State, 308 U. S. 147, 161, 165; Martin V. Struthers, 319 U. S. 141, 146-149; Saia V. New York, 334 U. S.
558; American Communications Assn. V. Douds, 339 U. S. 382; Kunz V. New York, 340 U. S. 290, 294-295; Louisiana
ex rel. Gremillion V. NAACP, 366 U. S. 293. This principle is applicable here even though the ouster of the petitioner
from Alabama has been accomplished solely by judicial act; "whether legislative or judicial, it is still the application of
state power which we are asked to scrutinize." 357 U. S., at 4
106. In the first proceedings in this case, we held that the compelled disclosure of the names of the petitioner's
members would entail "the likelihood of a substantial restraint upon the exercise by petitioner's members of their right
to freedom of association." 357 U. S., at 462. It is obvious that the complete suppression of the Association's activities
in Alabama which was accomplished by the order below is an even more serious abridgment of that right. The
allegations of illegal conduct contained in the third charge against the petitioner suggest no legitimate governmental
objective which requires such restraint. Compare Kunz V. New York, supra, at 294-295.
107. The fourth, fifth, and sixth charges against the petitioner all involve alleged "false charges" made by the
Association or its representatives against state officials. 281 Without speculating on other possible constitutional
infirmities to which these allegations may be subject, cf. New York Times Co. V. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, we conclude
that, for the reasons discussed above, they furnish no basis for the restriction of the right of the petitioner's members
to associate in Alabama. So too with the seventh charge, which alleges violation of the "temporary" restraining order in
effect from 1956 to 1961 (when it was made permanent). We dispose of this charge on the same basis as the others,
without considering the sufficiency of the evidence to support the finding that there was a violation of the orden or the
serious constitutional questions raised by an order which restrained for so long a time the exercise of unquestionable
constitutional rights on the grounds involved here. We pass the eighth charge without comment; by no stretch can it
be considered germane to the present controversy. The ninth charge, involving alleged breaches of the peace, falls
with the third. "There are appropriate public remedies to protect the peace and order of the community Kunz,
supra, at 294, which do not infringe constitutional rights. The tenth charge, if it adds anything to those which have
gone before, simply challenges the right of the petitioner and its members to express their views, by words and lawful
conduct, on a subject of vital constitutional concern. Such a challenge cannot stand.
108. There is no occasion in this case for us to consider how much survives of the principle that a State can impose
such conditions as it chooses on the right of a foreign corporation to do business within the State, or can exclude it
from
the State altogether. E. g., Crescent Cotton Oil Co. V. Mississippi. 257 U. S. 129, 137. This case, in truth, involves
not the privilege of a corporation to do business in a State, but rather the freedom of individuals to associate for the
collective advocacy of ideas. "Freedoms such as [this] are protected not only against heavy-handed frontal attack,
but also from being stifled by more subtle governmental interference." Bates V. City of Little Rock, 361 U. S. 516, 523.
Non is New York ex rel. Bryant V. Zimmerman, 278 U. S. 63, which involved New York's application of a regulatory
statute to the Ku Klux Klan, more relevant here than it was at the earlier stage of these proceedings where we said
that it "involved markedly different considerations in terms of the interest of the State 357 U. S., at 465. The Court
noted inter alia, that the Bryant decision was "based on the particular character of the Klan's activities, involving acts
of unlawful intimidation and violence, which the Court assumed was before the state legislature when it enacted the
statute, and of which the Court itself took judicial notice." Ibid.
109. The judgment below must be reversed. In view of the history of this case, we are asked to formulate a decree
for entry in the state courts which will assure the Association's right to conduct activities in Alabama without further
delay. While such a course undoubtedly lies within this Court's power, Martin V. Hunter's Lessee, 1 Wheat. 304, we
prefer to follow our usual practice and remand the case to the Supreme Court of Alabama for further proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion. Such proceedings should include the prompt entry of a decree, in accordance with state
procedures, vacating in all respects the permanent injunction order issued by the Circuit Court of Montgomery County,
Alabama, and permitting the Association to take all steps necessary to qualify it to do business in Alabama. Should we
unhappily be mistaken in our belief that the Supreme Court of Alabama will promptly implement this disposition, leave
is given the Association to apply to this Court for further appropriate relief.
Reversed and remanded.
The Right of Association
Author(s) : William O. Douglas
Source Columbia Law Review, Vol. 63, No. 8 (Dec., 1963), pp. 1361-1383
Published by : Columbia Law Review Association, Inc.
Stable URL : http://www.jstor.org/stable/1120696.
Accessed : 11/02/2015 04 : 13
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at.
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a
wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity
and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Columbia Law Review Association, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Columbia Law Review.
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
Vol. 63
DECEMBER 1963
No. 8
282
THE RIGHT OF ASSOCIATION
WILLIAM O. DOUGLAS28
1.
110. My text is a passage from de Tocqueville:
In their political associations the Americans, of all conditions, minds, and ages, daily acquire a general taste for
association and grow accustomed to the use of it. There they meet together in large numbers, they converse, they
listen to one another, and they are mutually stimulated to all sorts of undertakings. They afterwards transfer to civil
life the notions they have thus acquired and make them subservient to a thousand purposes. Thus it is by the
enjoyment of a dangerous freedom that the Americans learn the art of rendering the dangers of freedom less
formidable. 284
111. The right of association is closely related to the right to believe as one chooses and to the right of privacy in
those beliefs.
112. Beginning at least with John Locke, man was considered not an isolated person but as a member of a group.
Yet as Gardner Murphy has pointed out, in prior centuries he was viewed almost without reference to society: "Today,
the fact that every individual is deeply immersed in the life of a group, being shaped and defined by group
membership, roles, and responsibilities, is so patent that one can only marvel that at one time it had been so nearly
forgotten. ,285 The individual character takes shape "as an aspect of the delicate system of interpersonal relations." ,286
113. Talcott Parsons has particularized the need of the individual to identify himself with groups:
solidarity with an informal group, the appeal of which is to "infrarational" sentiments, is a peculiarly potent
measure for allaying the neurotic types of anxiety which are so common. On the other hand, an antagonistic group
is
a peculiarly appropriate symbolic object on which to displace the emotional reactions which cannot be openly
expressed within one's own group, lest they threaten its solidarity. In this whole context it is peculiarly appropriate
287
that groups be available in relation to which the ambivalent structure of emotions can be expressed.
114. Joining groups has been a passion with Americans.
115. Schlesinger reviews the zeal with which Americans in the last century became the world's greatest "joiners":
Now Americans turned with furious zeal to the creation of secret societies cut to their own pattern. In the large
cities some form of organized social commingling seemed called for to replace the spontaneous friendliness of small
rural towns. Liberty and equality this generation was willing to take for granted, but fraternity filled a compelling
human need. Moreover, the romantic opportunity to posture before a mystic brotherhood in all the glory of robe,
plume and sword restored a sense of self-importance bruised by the anonymity of life amidst great crowds. If
further inducement were needed, it was supplied by the provision made by most lodges for sickness and death
benefits for their members
As was to be expected, membership was greatest in the urbanized sections of the country notwithstanding the
energy with which the Negroes of the South aped their white brethren and the increasing interest of Western
farmers in lodge activities. By the end of the period there were over six million names on the rosters of fraternal
bodies. America possessed more secret societies and a larger number of "joiners" than all other nations. 288
116. Today people join groups not only for fraternal reasons.
Our society is honeycombed with interest groups, each with its own ideology, its own creed, its own evaluation of
the immediate unsatisfactory state of affairs, and its own prescription for making the world a better place to live in
the future
Some groups are more effective in making known the urgency of their needs or in gaining the ear of the policy
maker. These groups are rewarded; others, for lack of followers or resources, less successful in pressing their cases,
are not. Thus democratic equality implies not a benign or indifferent government, but only the right of every
individual to join and participate in group action for the purpose of influencing and, if possible, shaping national
policy.
Such a picture of democracy is sharply at odds with the more attractive Jeffersonian ideal of pluralism, which
sprang from and was deeply rooted in a society overwhelmingly populated by free, independent proprietors of one
kind or another. But the world of the Founding Fathers is not ours; nor can it ever be. Just as the individual or the
small entrepreneur is no longer the basic political or economic power unit, so the concept of the 18th -century
democracy and the theory of the competitive market is not an adequate or satisfactory intellectualization of our
social system. Organizations-political, social, and economic-are the primary sources of power. To lament these
hierarchic structures, to decry the gradual feudalization of our society or to deplore the gradual decline of the
individual seem neither to have lessened organizational growth nor in any way changed the path of history. In the
contemporary world, if one is to appreciate the workings of democracy, one must observe these power groups in
action.
289
117. If people are not allowed peacefully to band together, and if our myriad organizations are not allowed to
compete on an equal plane in the battle for men's minds, the result will be a stifling of all but the popular views. Apart
from the Communist Party, few organizations in our history have been outlawed. But the modern witch-hunt has had a
deleterious effect on all unpopular groups, making them a prime target for investigation. It is primarily the First
Amendment that provides these groups with the protection they need if they are to remain viable and continue to
contribute to our Free Society.
The most natural privilege of man, next to the right of acting for himself, is that of combining his exertions with
those of his fellow creatures and of acting in common with them. The right of association therefore appears to me
almost as inalienable in its nature as the right of personal liberty. No legislator can attack it without impairing the
290
foundations of society.
118. Whatever may be all the reasons, the desire to associate is deep in man; and in the Western world the right of
association is a part of the right of expression or of the right of belief. It is the equivalent of saying "This, I believe";
and the "This" may be racial equality, reduction of taxes, socialism, or any number of ideas or causes. The association
with a particular group may mean not an expression of belief in all that the group promotes but only in one or two
parts of a program that seem to one member to be the most critical. A discriminating selection of issues expoused by
the group is customary rather than unusual. Even a Democrat often does not approve everything his party champions.
119. The latent force in association is great-so great that suppression of it may lead in the end to mass explosions.
The idea has been succinctly stated by Ernest Cuneo:
It is a fair hypothesis that there is a latent force in every human being which can be marshaled and multiplied by
mass hypnosis; that is, by proximity to large number of human beings of similar identities bent on expressing the
energy of those identities. Indeed, the American sports term "fan" is an abbreviation of the word "fanatic." Of the
wondrous transcendent power of this fanaticism, the history books furnish ample illustration.
From this it is a fair scientific assumption that if such energies were released individually, they would not explode
en masse. It would follow, therefore, that the curtailment of the movements of the individual leads to mass
291
explosion.
120. De Tocqueville stated the corollary: "in countries where associations are free, secret societies are unknown. In
"292
America there are factions, but no conspiracies.
121. When we treat the right of association we treat therefore with a force that supplies some of the mucilage of
society when allowed free play or causes disintegration when it is suppressed.
11.
122. The matter of belief has created some of the bloodiest chapters of history. The phrase "Big Brother is Watching
You," which George Orwell made famous in his book 1984, is not a new one. It has been reflected in most
governmental regimes from the beginning of time by sectarian rulers bent on ferreting out heretics, by secular rulers
looking for the ideological "subversive." The Inquisition in Europe and the Star Chamber in England were typical of the
institutions that gave force to such regimes. Kings, sitting on uneasy thrones, always sought out the "subversives"
amongst their people. Those who schemed and plotted against the king, collecting arms, making plans for
assassinations and seizure of government arsenals, were of course punished for their overt acts. But what of those
sullen, silent people who wished the king were dead but never put their wishes into action? What greater uneasiness is
there than that created by a host of enemies who have not moved into action but may do so? The law-which was
usually the instrument of the ruler-designed a method of reaching this "subversive" group.
123. British law made it a treasonable crime to "compass or imagine the death of the King, the crime known
as constructive treason. This crime was borrowed from Dionysius (430-367 B.C.) who executed a subject for dreaming
he had killed him. That was sufficient proof, Dionysius said, that the subject had thought about killing him when he
was awake.
124. Jefferson said that this crime of constructive treason "had drawn the Blood of the best and honestest Men in
the Kingdom. ,294 Men were indeed executed merely for uttering treasonable words. In 1351 the British Parliament,
while retaining as one definition of treason the compassing and imagining the death of the King, ameliorated the
plight of the suspects by requiring that there be an overt act. In other words, wishing that the King were dead was not
enough. Doing something about it was necessary. The deed, rather than the thought alone, became a necessary
ingredient of the crime. But reducing treasonable words to writing was considered an overt act. The lease with which
the concept of an overt act was expanded resulted in the American narrow definition of treason viz: "only in levying
war" against the United States "or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort." Since, moreover, the
treasonable act might be only a drummed-up charge, the Framers of our Constitution provided that in order for a
295
charge of treason to be proved, it was necessary to have two witnesses to each overt act.
125. While kings were fearful of treason, theologians were bent on stamping out heresy. One of the charges against
Socrates was "impiety"-that is to say, he denied the existence of the gods that had been recognized by the state.
Every religion at some time and place has been denounced as heresy; and those in power have tried to put it down.
Sects within Christianity have shown the same intolerance. The Reformation is associated with Martin Luther. But prior
to him it broke out many times only to be crushed. When in time the Protestants gained control, they tried to crush
the Catholics; and when the Catholics gained the upper hand, they ferreted out the Protestants. Many devices were
used. Heretical books were destroyed and heretics were burned at the stake or banished. Thus William Tyndale, who
translated the Bible into the vernacular of the sixteenth century, was driven from England, caught by the Inquisition,
tried for heresy, condemned, strangled and burned at the stake. What men believed so bothered some theologians
that the remains of John Wycliffe, who translated the Bible from Latin to English, were exhumed and burned in 1428.
126. The rack, the thumbscrew, the wheel on which men were stretched, these were part of the paraphernalia.
Modern techniques of "brainwashing," artistically used in modern Communist regimes, have led thousands to cast
aside their principles and bow in submission and say with the hero of George Orwell's novel 1984 that they "had won
the victory" over themselves and "loved Big Brother."
127. In the old days those charged with the crime of printing books without a license and those charged with
heresy were required to take the oath ex officio.
128. The oath ex officio made unnecessary an indictment, trial by jury, and, confrontation of accusing witnesses.
The judge ex officio, i.e., by virtue of his office as judge, summoned the party to court on suspicion, on probable
cause, or on whim or caprice, and instituted action against him. It was this practice of requiring the accused to testify
or to go to jail for contempt that was ended in England by Act of Parliament in 1368. After that a presentment or
indictment was necessary to require a man to answer. But this practice obtained only in the King's Courts. The
ecclesiastical courts and the notorious Star Chamber continued to use the oath ex officio. The Puritans learned that
this was the most awesome power the government had over them. It was used to make them follow objectionable
religious ceremonies, to punish them for speech and thought, and to ferret out the nonconformists who surreptitiously
published "dangerous" tracts. Thus experience overseas brought to these shores bitterness against devices that forced
men to convict themselves against conscience and dignity out of their own mouths. Two trials touching freedom of the
press were burned into the memories of the American colonists, the use of the oath ex officio against John Udall in
1589 and John Lilburn in 1647.
129. Thomas More refused to take an oath sustaining an Act of Parliament making the King the head ecclesiastical
authority:
More : I insult no one. I will not take the oath. I will not tell you why I will not.
Norfolk : Then your reasons must be treasonable!
More Not "must be"; may be.
Norfolk : It's a fair assumption!
More : The law requires more than an assumption; the law requires a fact
Cranmer : I cannot judge your legal standing in the case; but until I know the ground of your objections, I can
only guess your spiritual standing too.
More: If you're willing to guess at that, Your Grace, it should be a small matter to guess my objections.
Cromwell: You do have objections to the Act?
Norfolk: Well, we know that, Cromwell!
More : You don't, my lord. You may suppose I have objections. All you know is that I will not swear to it. From
sheer delight to give you trouble it might be.
Norfolk Is it material why you won't ?
More : It's most material. For refusing to swear, my goods are forfeit and | am condemned to life imprisonment.
You cannot lawfully harm me further But if you were right in supposing I had reasons for refusing and right again
in supposing my reasons to be treasonable, the law would let you cut my head off.
130. The test oath has plagued this generation. The oath is old; but never before was it able to bring about the
complete ruination of a person. In this complex, interdependent society there is no escape to a frontier where life can
start over. A person of scruples who refuses the oath and a person who cannot take it because he once sinned are both
thrown into the outer darkness to become the modern untouchables.
131. This history is not well known to this generation. The Fifth Amendment's guarantee against Self Incrimination-
a hard-won right which hundreds of people gave their sweat, blood, and lives to establish-is treated derisively.
Electronics have produced devices which make it easy to invade the privacy of the individual whether he be at home,
in his office, or on the street; and they have made a shambles of the Fourth Amendment. The history of man's right to
be let alone, the relation of that right to freedom of expression and association, guaranteed by the First Amendment,
and his aversion to the test oath and to loyalty oaths have been mostly forgotten.
132. These rights seem more precious in the Dominican Republic than they do at home, for the people of that
nation have fresh memories of Trujillo's atrocities. In thirty-two years he tortured to death 200,000 people.
Dominicans today carry marks of their torture, one common badge being scars from live cigarettes. There is current in
the Republic the story of three women who became "subversive" because they summoned friends to pray for an end of
the tyranny. They died under Trujillo's torture without disclosing the names of their friends. One had her tongue cut
out; one with long tresses died when her head was set on fire; one had sharp sticks driven through her neck. Some
police in the United States still practice the third degree. But it is not so widespread and so well-known as to result in
public apprehension and aversion.
133. This right to be let alone and its relation not only to the Fifth Amendment but to the First and Fourth
Amendments as well is an increasingly important one in the setting of the 1960's. For not only are the means of
penetrating all forms of individual and group privacy and of marshalling public opinion against unpopular minorities
and views becoming more highly developed, but the will to resist erosion of our basic rights also seems to be on the
wane.
134. Whether an individual seeks to be let alone with his thoughts or in the sanctuary of his home, or seeks to
associate with others for the attainment of lawful purposes, his interest in being free from governmental interference is
the same. And, except for the limited situation where there is "probable cause" for believing that he is involved in a
crime, both federal and state governments' disability to intrude upon him must be equally complete if we are to retain
the Free Society envisioned by the Bill of Rights.
III.
135. Recognition of the importance of this principle has led to many attempts to apply the Bill of Rights to the
States.
The
first
appears
in Barron V. Baltimore29 decided in 1833. The argument was that the Fifth Amendment,
"being in favor of the liberty of the citizen, ought to be so construed as to restrain the legislative power of a state, as
well
as that of the United States. ,298 The Court rejected the argument and the result was accepted without dissent
299
until the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment.
136. The theory was adumbrated by Justices Bradley and Swayne in the Slaughter-House Cases
that
the
Bill
of
Rights defined part of the "privileges or immunities" within the meaning of that part of the Fourteenth Amendment
which provides that "No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of
citizens of the United States That view obtained the adherence of Justices Field, Harlan, and Brewer in O'Neil V.
Vermont. 301 Justice Brewer apparently had second thoughts about the matter and changed his mind, since he voted
with the majority in Maxwell V. Dow302 holding, over the first Justice Harlan's dissent, that the grand and petit jury
provisions of the Fifth and Sixth Amendments do not apply to the States. Justice Harlan also consistently maintained
that certain of the safeguards of the Bill of Rights were binding on the States through the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment which provides "[N]on shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law
"303 He urged an historical approach to Due Process. 304
137. The Privileges or Immunities Clause had a short resurgence of vitality in Colgate V. Harvey, where a
305
majority of the Court held that the right to engage in business was a privilege of national citizenship protected against
state action by the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. That case, however, was overruled
in
Madden V. Kentucky and meanwhile only one recurrence of the privileges and immunities theory has appeared
and that was in the civil rights area. 307
138. The other attempt to incorporate the entire Bill of Rights into the Fourteenth Amendment is represented by
Adamson V. California  where four Justices (Black, Douglas, Murphy and Rutledge) expressed the view that the
various parts of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment, including the Due Process Clause, incorporated the
309
entire Bill of Rights. Justices Murphy and Rutledge expressed a variation of that view in the Adamson case to the
effect that perhaps something more than the Bill of Rights was made binding on the States by the Fourteenth
Amendment. I expressed a similar view in Poe V. Ullman.
310
139. Other views are afoot today besides those expressed in the Adamson dissent. One is that recently discussed
by
Justice Brennan. 311 It is most usually attributed to Justice Cardozo and says that certain "fundamental" principles
of liberty and justice are essential to a scheme of "ordered liberty. "312 It was formulated in the recent case of Gideon
V. Wainwright as follows:
those guarantees of the Bill of Rights which are fundamental safeguards of liberty immune from federal
abridgment are equally protected against state invasion by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. 313
140. Another view is represented by Justice Frankfurter's opinions in Adamson V. California  14 and
Rochin
V.
California. According to that approach, the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment is to be determined
315
by judges "within the limits of accepted notions of justice
"316
Decision, it is said, must turn on whether the State's
conduct or procedure offends "those canons of decency and fairness which express the notions of justice of English-
speaking peoples even toward those charged with the most heinous offenses. While this school of thought insists
,317
that selection of the particular provisions of the Bill of Rights that come within those "canons of decency and fairness"
is not to be based "upon the idiosyncracies of a merely personal judgment, ,318 a moment's reflection shows how
defeating that premise is. For the ideas of decency and fairness vary from judge to judge. And, if the consensus of the
majority is thought to be the proper reference for determining these "canons," it should be remembered that the Bill of
Rights is premised on the belief that there are some things even a majority, acting through its "government," cannot
do.
141. Irrespective of the way the absorption has taken place, we now have applicable to the States various
319
320
provisions of the Bill of Rights : First Amendment rights; Fourth Amendment
rights;
the
Just
Compensation
Clause of the Fifth Amendment; 321 part of the Self Incrimination Clause of the Fifth Amendment; 322 and the Right to
Counsel Clause of the Sixth Amendment. 323
142. The First Amendment provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people
peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances."
143. Some have believed that these restraints as applied to the States through the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment are less restrictive on them than they are on the Federal Government. That is the view of the
second Justice Harlan. 324 Justice Jackson expressed the same view in Beauharnais V. Illinois, 325 but that view has not
prevailed. 326 The Court has indeed applied the same First Amendment requirements to the States as to the Federal
Government, a holding clearly inconsistent with the view that First Amendment rights protected against state invasion
by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth are a watered-down version of what the First Amendment guarantees.
IV.
144. I mention this history in some detail because even those in high places do not understand it. Recently the
327
Dean of the Harvard Law School criticized the Court's decision in Engel V. Vitale, holding unconstitutional New
York's requirement for opening public schools with prayer; and the Dean seemed to have difficulty in seeing how the
command of the First Amendment that "Congress shall make no law" can be read to mean a "State shall make no
law." He said the "majority" was being made to "give up its cultural heritage and tradition" simply because it was
being denied power to foist its chosen prayers onto the public schools, which all must support and many "minorities,"
of necessity, must attend. Yet prayer in the home was not proscribed, and no church was closed. Perhaps reflecting his
own bias, the Dean also said that it was desirable that the children who belong to minority groups learn "what it
means to be a member of a minority" and to learn that their "difference is tolerated and accepted. ",328 But the First
Amendment assures minorities more than "toleration"; it allows them to compete evenly with more popular groups in
the battle for men's minds, and it denies the majority power to force the minority to submit. All segments of society
are given freedom to learn what moral and political lessons they chose to learn.
145. History should teach us that most people are sincere in their beliefs, and that the stronger the belief-
especially a belief relating to matters of the mind and heart-the greater the drive to foist it upon others. Only if the
First Amendment retains its role as a bulwark against positions of governmental power being used to convey and
enforce views of a religious or philosophical nature will we be able to avoid not only the bitter strife that will attend the
struggle to gain control of these positions, but also the deadly dullness that will result if the struggle is ever
completely won.
V.
146. If the legislative branch, at the state or federal level, were the guardian of the Constitution as it is in England,
it rather than the judiciary would have the final say as to what rights the Constitution secures to the people. But since
Marbury V. Madison, decided in 1803, it has been deemed the duty of the Supreme Court not only to construe
legislative enactments and enforce legislative requirements but also to pass on the constitutionality of action by the
Congress and the Chief Executive, when it touches on justiciable matters. "[T]he framers of the Constitution
contemplated that instrument as a rule for the government of courts, as well as of the legislature. 330 Chief Justice
Marshall, writing for a unanimous Court, went on to say:
Why otherwise does it direct the judges to take an oath to support it ? This oath certainly applies in an especial
manner, to their conduct in their official character. How immoral to impose it on them, if they were to be used as
the instruments, and the knowing instruments, for violating what they swear to support
331
147. From the beginning, the Congress-which by virtue of Article 111, Section 2, determines the Supreme Court's
appellate jurisdiction-has granted it power to determine whether state decisions comport with the Constitution or
other federal law. That enactment was early upheld. 332 And it was the policy behind that enactment that Mr. Justice
Holmes had in mind when he said:
I do not think the United States would come to an end if we lost our power to declare an Act of Congress void. I
do think the Union would be imperiled if we could not make that declaration as to the laws of the several States. For
one in my place sees how often a local policy prevails with those who are not trained to national views and how
often action is taken that embodies what the Commerce Clause was meant to end.
148. The need of a referee in our federal system has increased with the passage of time, not only in matters of
commerce but in the field of civil rights as well. There is a critical need for a federal agency with power to review all
state action threatening individuals' rights if the Free Society envisioned by the Bill of Rights and existing under a
federal regime is to be our ideal. For in times of crisis, when ideologies clash, it is not easy to engender respect for the
dignity of suspect minorities and for debate of unpopular issues.
149. News around the world brings fresh accounts of regimes of intolerance : the editing of public school text books
in Mexico to make them anti-government and pro-church and to conceal from students that the leader of the Mexican
independence movement was a priest and its chief opponent the church; Nkrumah and his bills of attainder in Ghana;
the South Korean regime and its host of ex post facto laws and its attempts to keep civilians out of politics; the arrest
in Turkey of a man who wrote that Turkey's future lay in socialism; the discipline of artists, writers, and composers in
the Soviet Union who conceive of the arts as something other than propaganda for the Communist philosophy. But we
have similar episodes at home to which we have become insensitive.
150. A professor is discharged because he saw some improvement under Castro in the lot of the peon in Cuba. The
Montana legislature orders a professor investigated because he said that right-wing influence in the State threatened
to make Montana "remain a backwater of Bircherism while the country progresses." Under a new law the postal
officials can stop in customs all material coming from Russia that they deem to be "propaganda," which would include,
I would imagine, alpine photographs and descriptions of the lovely high basins and the rugged peaks of Russian
mountain ranges. The manner in which our school libraries are tested for ideological conformity is told by Nelson and
Roberts in The Censors and the Schools (1963). When government can investigate what people are reading or what
causes they are advocating, have we not brought Big Brother to life?
VI.
151. In recent years the legislative investigating committee has posed a problem of great significance in the field of
civil liberties, as evidenced by Gibson V. Florida Legislative Investigation Comm., where the Court held that a state
334
investigating committee could not require the NAACP to disclose whether known Communists were members of the
organization. "The committee [had] not 'demonstrated so cogent an interest in obtaining and making public' the
membership information sought as to 'justify the substantial abridgment of associational freedom which such
disclosures
[would] effect.' Since Congress can make "no law" abridging freedom of expression, freedom of
,335
religion, freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly and since the First Amendment applied to the States means
that no such law can be made by a State, it would seem that the power to investigate those matters is lacking.
152. When the State or Federal Government is prohibited from legislating on a subject, it has no constitutional
privilege to investigate it. For the power to investigate is only an adjunct of the power to legislate-an auxiliary power
"necessary and appropriate to that end. 336 Investigation to determine how constitutional laws are being administered
marks one limitation. An investigation to determine what constitutional laws should be passed is another. An
337
investigation to permit a legislature properly to perform its powers of internal management is a third. When
the
constitutional limits of lawmaking are passed, investigation is out of bounds. 338 That is to say, investigations by a
339
legislative committee which "could result in no valid legislation on the subject" are beyond the pale. For
it
misses
the whole point of our constitutional history to assume that "government," or any branch of government, somehow
has
rights and powers of its own apart from those necessarily attending the proper performance of its constitutional
functions. As Hannah Arendt recently said, "perhaps the greatest American innovation in politics as such was the
consistent abolition of sovereignty within the body politic of the republic, the insight that in the realm of human affairs
340
sovereignty and tyranny are the same.
153. A Free Society is made up of almost innumerable institutions through which views and opinions are expressed,
opinion is mobilized, and social, economic, religious, educational, and political programs are formulated.
154. In the beginning we had our Committees of Correspondence. They established "speedy and direct channels"
for communication with the people after the ties with England were broken. Their primary purpose was "to bring the
people to understand their interests and act in concert." They indeed enabled the people to become effective "arbiters
of their own political destiny."36
155. Jefferson's grand design included a division "into hundreds" viable ward system through which the people
exercised their rights of sovereignty.
156. These "wards" of Jefferson have appeared in other revolutions-in the Parisian Commune in 1871 and in the
Soviets in the Russian Revolutions of this century. Robespierre, before he came to power and destroyed the societes
populaires, praised them for their ability "'to instruct, to enlighten their fellow citizens on the true principles of the
constitution, and to spread a light without which the constitution will not be able to survive
"342
For
its
survival,
he
maintained, depended on "'the public spirit'" which these groups alone could engender.
343
It was the crushing of the
Soviets that led to the Russian dictatorship with the result that the name Soviet Union has been "a lie ever since.
157. Joining a lawful organization, like attending a church, is an associational activity that comes within the
purview of the First Amendment. "Peaceably to assemble" necessarily involves a coming together, whether regularly or
spasmodically. A coming together is often necessary for communication-for those who listen as well as those who
speak. Demosthenes, it is said, went to the seashore and declaimed to the waves in order to correct a stammer. But
normally a speaker implies an audience. Joining a group is often as vital-to freedom of expression as utterance itself.
Registering as a student in a school or joining a faculty is as vital to freedom of expression as joining a church is to the
free exercise of religion. Joining a political party may be as critical to expression of one's views as hiring reporters is to
the establishment of a free press.
158. Historically the right to assemble was secondary to the right to petition, the latter being the primary right. But
345
today, as the Court said in De Jonge V. Oregon, "the right of peaceful assembly is a right cognate to those of free
speech and free press and is equally fundamental." Assembly, like speech, is indeed essential "in order to maintain the
opportunity for free political discussion, to the end that the government may be responsive to the will of the people
and that changes, if desired, may be obtained by peaceful means." ,,346 "The holding of meetings for peaceable political
action cannot be proscribed. ,347 Unpopular groups343 like popular ones are protected. Unpopular groups, if forced to
undergo extensive investigation or disclose their membership lists, will not only lose many adherents but may also
suffer reprisals or other forms of public hostility. 349 But whether a group is popular or unpopular, the right of privacy
implicit in the First Amendment creates an area into which the Government may not enter.
159. Justice Frankfurter thought that political and academic affiliations have a preferred position under the due
process version of the First Amendment. 350 But the associational rights protected by the First Amendment are in my
view much broader and cover the entire spectrum in political ideology as well as in art, in journalism, in teaching, and
in religion. In my view, government can neither legislate with respect to nor probe the intimacies of political, spiritual,
or intellectual relationships in the myriad of lawful societies and groups, whether popular or unpopular, that exist in
this country.
160. If that is not true, I see no barrier to investigation of newspapers, churches, political parties, clubs, societies,
unions, and any other association-for their political, economic, social, philosophical, or religious views. As Arthur M.
Schlesinger said:
In the United States individualism has meant not the individual's independence of other individuals, but his as
well as their independence of governmental restraint. Traditionally, Americans have distrusted collective
organization as embodied in government while insisting upon their own untrammeled right to form voluntary
associations. This conception of a state of minimal powers actually made it necessary for private citizens to organize
for undertakings too large for a single person. By reverse effect the success of such enterprises hindered the
enlargement of governmental authority.
The trend toward collective activity began slowly in American history, but it gathered impetus as the years
revealed new opportunities and men perceived the advantages to be gained. Broadly speaking, the rise
of
associations paralleled the development of democratic self-confidence and the greater complexity of social and
economic life. Each fresh application of the principle opened the way for further ones and at the same time afforded
the experience needed for more extensive undertakings. In the end no department of human existence remained
unaffected. 351
161. Private organizations often pursue unpopular causes, which produces a great desire to control them. Suppose
that some Congressional Committee decides that racial segregation is detrimental to our national defense and foreign
relations and that integration in all walks of our public life is vital to our survival as a nation. Suppose further that, in
order to ascertain what type of legislation is necessary to further integration, the committee seeks to determine the
effectiveness of such organizations as the Black Muslims and the various White Citizens Councils. Could the Committee
352
353
require these organizations to turn over their membership lists, their mailing lists,
or
divulge
whether
Communists were engaged in writing their tracts?354 The majority would term the legislative purpose benevolent
and
wise. But if such a beneficent program justifies this type of investigation it would also justify scrutiny of the Catholic
Church to determine whether changes should be wrought in its effort to integrate parish schools in Louisiana. And a
change in the Committee's view concerning the merits of integration would seemingly justify an investigation of
private groups such as the NAACP to determine how effective they are in promoting integration. But, as the Court
recently said,
The Constitution protects expression and association without regard to race, creed, or political or religious
affiliation of the members of the group which invokes its shield, or to the truth, popularity, or social utility of the
ideas and beliefs which are offered.
162. The First Amendment provides a shield of anonymity for the members of unpopular but lawful groups. In
356
Talley V. California, the Court held unconstitutional an ordinance requiring handbills to disclose the name and
address of the distributor or printer. The Court said,
Anonymous pamphlets, leaflets, brochures and even books have played an important role in the progress of
mankind. Persecuted groups and sects from time to time throughout history have been able to criticize oppressive
357
practices and laws either anonymously or not at all.
1 A legislative investigating committee could not have obtained this same information even though it was
pursuing a valid legislative purpose. Once the information sought had been obtained, by an investigating committee or
pursuant to statute, the distributor's or printer's right of anonymity would have been invaded.
164. Whether a group is popular or unpopular, the right of privacy implicit in the First Amendment should create an
area into which the Government may not enter.
Freedom of religion and freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment give more than the privilege to
worship, to write, to speak as one chooses; they give freedom not to do nor to act as the government chooses. The
First Amendment in its respect for the conscience of the individual honors the sanctity of thought and belief. To
think as one chooses, to believe what one wishes are important aspects of the constitutional right to be let alone.
165. There is no other course consistent with the Free Society envisioned by the First Amendment. For the views a
citizen entertains, the beliefs he harbors, the utterances he makes, the ideology he embraces, and the people he
associates with are no concern to government-until and unless he moves into action. That article of faith marks indeed
the main difference between the Free Society which we espouse and the dictatorships both on the Left and on the
Right.
166. As Mr. Justice Black said (dissenting) in Barenblatt V. United States : 359
The fact is that once we allow any group which has some political aims or ideas to be driven from the ballot and
from the battle for men's minds because some of its members are bad and some of its tenets are illegal, no group is
safe. Today we deal with Communists or suspected Communists. In 1920, instead, the New York Assembly
suspended duly elected legislators on the ground that, being Socialists, they were disloyal to the country's
principles. In the 1830's the Masons were hunted as outlaws and subversives, and abolitionists were considered
revolutionaries of the most dangerous kind in both North and South. Earlier still, at the time of the universally un-
lamented alien and sedition laws, Thomas Jefferson's party was attacked and its members were derisively called
"Jacobins." Fisher Ames described the party as a "French faction" guilty of "subversion" and "officered, regimented
and formed to subordination." Its members, he claimed, intended to "take arms against the laws as soon as they
dare." History should teach us then, that in times of high emotional excitement minority parties and groups which
advocate extremely unpopular social or governmental innovations will always be typed as criminal gangs and
attempts will always be made to drive them out. It was knowledge of this fact, and of its great dangers, that caused
the Founders of our land to enact the First Amendment as a guarantee that neither Congress non the people would
do anything to hinder or destroy the capacity of individuals and groups to seek converts and votes for any cause,
however radical or unpalatable their principles might seem under the accepted notions of the time.
167. A future swing to the Right may produce a national conviction that our survival as a Nation lies only with
"Fortress America." An Internal Security or Foreign Relations Committee may then ferret out those who once believed
in the United Nations and the Rule of Law in world affairs; for they will want information about who might presently
hold such views; and this information will have to be obtained to ascertain whether new laws are needed in the
interest of self-preservation, "the ultimate value of any society. "360 A swing to the Left may convince almost all that
survival as a "society" lies only with world federalism and that Nation-State sovereignty can only produce nuclear war
that will destroy mankind. In the first case past members of the Americans for Democratic Action, and in the second
case past members of the John Birch Society, will be exposed to ridicule and denied employment, or even tossed in
jail if they refuse to respond to questioning; new test oaths will be devised.
168. If a group is engaging in acts or a course of conduct that is criminal, it can be prosecuted, and it and its
members can be investigated, save as the Self-incrimination Clause of the Fifth Amendment sets up a barrier.
In
362
Louisiana ex rel. Gremillion V. NAACP, a state statute requiring the NAACP to register and disclose its membership
lists was involved. Enforcement of that law was denied on the ground that the legislature was "in an area where, as
Shelton V. Tucker 363 emphasized, any regulation must be highly selective in order to survive challenge under the
First Amendment.
,364
At one extreme is criminal conduct which cannot have shelter in the First Amendment. At the other extreme are
regulatory measures which, no matter how sophisticated, cannot be employed in purpose or in effect to stifle,
365
penalize, or curb the exercise of First Amendment rights.
169. A Florida court, in sustaining an examination of the files of the NAACP on the ground that Communists were
members of it said that a requirement of nondisclosure would provide an "ideological asylum for those who would
destroy by violence the very foundations upon which their governmental sanctuary stands. But there
,,366
was
no
showing that the NAACP was engaged in any criminal activity of any kind. The same court in Graham V. Florida
Legislative Investigation Comm., 367 conceded that the NAACP was "an organization perfectly legitimate but allegedly
unpopular in the community." Whether it had members who were Communists or who had committed crimes was
immaterial.
170. Most groups are organized for a limited purpose. And, while members of any organization may be in general
agreement regarding its primary purpose, their views as to how best to effectuate that purpose will vary greatly. Their
views on other matters may be poles apart, as I have already said. In International Assn of Machinists V. Street, the
368
369
Court recognized this fact insofar as mandatory organizations are concerned and construed the Railway Labor Act
as
prohibiting a majority of the union membership from making a minority support political causes not related to the
370
union's statutory purposes. I expressed the view that the same result was dictated by the First Amendment.
171. A corollary is that lawful groups be free from attempts to determine whether they may contain criminal or
other undesirable types. A person, even a Communist, may sincerely believe in and attempt to further the
organization's legitimate purposes, and, at least to this extent, he must be protected by the First Amendment. Even if
he has no plausible and lawful purpose in joining an organization, must the other members help rout him out? Under
the First Amendment it would seem that a lawful voluntary organization can no more be held responsible for the
perverse views of one of its members than a member of a mandatory organization can be held responsible for the
organization's views which transcend the justification for its mandatory character.
172. If the files of the NAACP can be ransacked because some criminal may have joined it, then all walls of privacy
are broken down. By that reasoning the records of the confessional can be ransacked because a "subversive" or a
criminal was implicated. (Parenthetically confessionals were "bugged" by Trujillo in the Dominican Republic and no
voice, ecclesiastical or otherwise, was raised in protest.) By that reasoning an entire church can be investigated
because one member was an ideological stray or had once been a Communist or because the minister's sermon
paralleled the party line. By that reasoning the files of any society or club can be seized because members of a
"subversive" group infiltrated it.
When some kinds of associations are prohibited and others allowed, it is difficult to distinguish the former from
the latter beforehand. In this state of doubt men abstain from them altogether, and a sort of public opinion passes
current which tends to cause any association whatsoever to be regarded as a bold and almost an illicit enterprise.
371
173. In my view the State and the Federal Government by force of the First Amendment are barred from
investigating any person's faith or ideology by summoning officers or members of his society, church, or club.
174. Government can intervene only when belief, thought, or expression moves into the realm of action that is
inimical to society. That was Jefferson's view. In his Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom he spoke primarily of
religious liberty but in terms applicable to freedom of the mind in all of its aspects. It was his view that in the Free
Society men's ideas and beliefs, their speech and advocacy are no proper concern of government. Only when they
become brigaded with action can government move against them. Jefferson said,
that the opinions of men are not the object of civil government, nor under its jurisdiction;
that
it
is
time
enough for the rightful purposes of civil government for its officers to interfere when principles break out into overt
372
acts against peace and good order
175. Madison too knew that tolerance for all ideas across the spectrum was the only true guarantee of freedom of
the mind:
Whilst all authority in it will be derived from and dependent on the society, the society itself will be broken into
so many parts, interests and classes of citizens, that the rights of individuals, or of the minority, will be in little
danger from interested combinations of the majority. In a free government the security for civil rights must be the
same as that for religious rights. It consists in the one case in the multiplicity of interests, and in the other in the
multiplicity of sects. The degree of security in both cases will depend on the number of interests and sects
373
176. Once the investigator has only the conscience of government as a guide, the conscience can become
374
"ravenous" as Cromwell, bent on destroying Thomas More, said in A Man For All Seasons. The First Amendment
mirrors many episodes where men, harried and harassed by government, sought refuge in their conscience as these
lines of Thomas More show:
More: And when we stand before God, and you are sent to Paradise for doing according to your conscience, and
I am damned for not doing according to mine, will you come with me, for fellowship?
Cranmen So those of us whose names are there are damned, Sir Thomas?
More : I don't know, Your Grace. I have no window to look into another man's conscience. I condemn no one.
Cranmer : Then the matter is capable of question?
More Certainly.
Cranmer : But that you owe obedience to your King is not capable of question. So weigh a doubt against
a
certainty-and sign.
More : Some men think the Earth is round, others think it flat; it is a matter capable of question. But if it is flat,
will the King's command make it round ? And if it is round, will the King's command flatten it? No, I will not
375
sign.
177. The Court was responsible for letting the camel's nose into the tent. Speech was free, it was said, except and
unless there was "clear and present danger" that the evil feared might be triggered by the speech. Yet it is doubtful
376
that professional revolutionaries ever did much to advance or make revolution.
The outbreak of most revolutions has surprised the revolutionist groups and parties no less than all others, and
there exists hardly a revolution whose outbreak could be blamed upon their activities. It usually was the other way
round revolution broke out and liberated, as it were, the professional revolutionists from wherever they happened
to be-from jail, or from the coffee house, or from the library. Not even Lenin's party of professional revolutionists
would ever have been able to "make" a revolution; the best they could do was to be around, or to hurry home, at
the right moment, that is, at the moment of collapse. Tocqueville's observation in 1848, that the monarchy fell
"before rather than beneath the blows of the victors, who were as astonished at their triumph as were the
vanquished at their defeat," has been verified over and over again.
178. Nevertheless an investigation to determine whether a "clear and present danger" existed became legitimate.
In Dennis V. United States, 378 even the "clear and present danger" test was abandoned; the danger need not be "clear
and present" but only prospective-"as speedily as circumstances would permit. And so investigation seemed
",379
at
once to have almost no limits. And that has been the main impact of the decisions.
179. In Uphaus V. Wyman,* 380 the Court held that New Hampshire could require the production of an organization's
summer camp guest list because its Executive Director "had participated in 'Communist front' activities" and had
invited "'not less than nineteen speakers to talk [to the group who] had either been members of the Communist
Party or had connections or affiliations with it or with one or more of the organizations cited as subversive or
Communist controlled in the United States Attorney General's list.' ,381 Thus the State's "interest of self-preservation"
was found to outweigh "individual rights in an associational privacy. In Barenblatt V.
,382
United
States,
383
the Court
sustained the conviction of a House Un-American Activities Committee witness who, during the course of an
investigation of Communist activity in education, had refused to answer, on First Amendment grounds, whether he
was then or had been a member of the Communist Party. The Court said Congress has "wide power to legislate in the
field of Communist activity and to conduct appropriate investigations in aid thereof "384 It concluded
"that
the
balance between the individual and the governmental interests here at stake must be struck in favor of the latter, and
385
that therefore the provisions of the First Amendment have not been offended.'
180. This balancing approach was reaffirmed in Wilkinson V. United States 386 and Braden V. United States
Although the evidence in each case showed that the witnesses were called only because they had opposed the
existence and activity of the House Un-American Activities Committee, clearly lawful political activity within the
purview of the First Amendment, the answer was: "The subcommittee had reasonable ground to suppose that the
petitioner was an active Communist Party member, and that as such he possessed information that would
substantially aid it in its legislative investigation. As the Barenblatt opinion makes clear, it is the nature of the
Communist activity involved, whether the momentary conduct is legitimate or illegitimate politically, that establishes
the Governments over-balancing interest.' ,388
181. Watkins V. United States389 seems truer to our constitutional theory. There the Court examined closely the
authority of the Committee, excluded questions whose pertinency was not clear, held the Bill of Rights to be applicable
to investigations, said that the Congress was not "a law enforcement or trial agency," and added:
These are functions of the executive and judicial departments of government. No inquiry is an end in itself; it
must be related to, and in furtherance of, a legitimate task of the Congress. Investigations conducted solely for the
390
personal aggrandizement of the investigators or to "punish" those investigated are indefensible
182. There is eminent historical authority for that view. In 1794 the Whiskey Rebellion took place in western
Pennsvlvania-a rebellion against a heavv tax on whiskev. the farmer's main cash crop. The rebellion was suppressed
and a Resolution was introduced in the House criticizing the societies or groups behind the rebellion but not naming
them. The Resolution read:
As part of this subject, we cannot withhold our reprobation of the self-created societies, which have risen up in
some parts of the Union, misrepresenting the conduct of the Government, and disturbing the operation of the laws,
and which, by deceiving and inflaming the ignorant and the weak, may naturally be supposed to have stimulated
and urged the insurrection.
183. James Madison, creator of the Bill of Rights, spoke against the Resolution, and it was defeated. What Madison
said has a modern ring:
Opinions are not the objects of legislation. You animadvert on the abuse of reserved rights : how far', will this
go ? It may extend to the liberty of speech, and of the press. It is in vain to say that this indiscriminate censure
is
no punishment. If it falls on classes, or individuals, it will be a severe punishment Murder, or treason, cannot
be
noticed by the Legislature. Is not this proposition, if voted, a vote of attainder? To consider a principle, we must try
its nature, and see how far it will go in the present case, he considered the effects of the principle contended for
would be pernicious. If we advert to the nature of Republican Government, we shall find that the censorial power is
in the people over the Government, and not in the Government over the people.
392
184. Irving Brant had this to say about that episode:
First, a resolution whose targets were identified only as "self-created societies" was stamped as a bill of attainder
-punishment without a judicial trial-by the man who is known as the father of the Constitution and author of the Bill
of Rights. Secondly, Madison applied this prohibition to a resolution of one legislative house, acting by itself. What
cannot be done by law-that is, what Congress is forbidden to do by the Constitution-he declared, one house cannot
do. If that is true, can a committee of the house do what the house is forbidden to do, what Congress is forbidden
to do?3 393
185. Where government is the Big Brother, privacy gives way to surveillance, and the Thought Police, to use
Orwell's phrase, take over. But our commitment is otherwise. By the First Amendment we have staked our security on
freedom to promote a multiplicity of ideas, to associate at will with kindred spirits, and to defy governmental intrusion
into those precincts.
186. The right of association which the First Amendment protects serves an important national cause. The idea was
eloquently expressed by de Tocque-ville whose dicta end this lecture as well as start it:
An association for political, commercial, or manufacturing purposes, or even for those of science and literature, is
a powerful and enlightened member of the community, which cannot be disposed of at pleasure or oppressed
without remonstrance, and which, by defending its own rights against the encroachments of the government, saves
the common liberties of the country.
The Pink List INDIA
Statement on Legislative Inaction on Marriage Equality
187. The Central Government, in a filing before the Supreme Court in response to a number of petitions demanding
marriage equality pending before the court, has argued that the legislature and not the judiciary - is the competent
authority tasked with deciding whether the right to marry should be extended to the LGBTQ+ community. The
government has asked the court to decide on two questions to determine the validity of the admissibility of these
petitions before the question of marriage equality is decided on its merits:
1. In view of the law-making power only being available with the competent legislature under Article 246 of the
Constitution of India read with (Entry 5 List 111) of VII Schedule of Constitution, can a constitutional court
legislate to create a separate socio-legal institution of marriage between persons not contemplated by the
existing legislation or interpret the existing legislation in such a way that it destroys the fundamental fabric of
the existing legislations which necessarily presuppose a marriage between a biological man and a biological
woman?
2. While creating an institution like marriage, which is essentially a socio-legal concept, is it not constitutionally
imperative to leave the question to the appropriate legislature which represent the democratic mandate, which
would decide the issues based on societal ethos, societal values and larger societal acceptability in the Indian
context of understanding of marriage as an institution?
188. The question of whether the Supreme Court has the power to decide upon the creation of a separate
institution of marriage must be deliberated upon by legal experts. However, the government's assertion that marriage
equality is an issue "not contemplated by the existing legislation" is inaccurate at best and misleading at worst. While
arguing that it is "constitutionally imperative to leave the question to the appropriate legislature which represents the
democratic mandate," the government has conveniently ignored its own repeated attempts to prevent any discussions
around marriage equality in parliament.
189. Since 2019, Pink List India has tracked the views of Indian politicians on LGBTQ+ rights. We have maintained
an exhaustive record on our website, with individual report cards available for each elected representative in the Lok
Sabha with their track record on LGBTQ+ issues - both within and outside parliament. Four separate instances
demonstrate that parliament has failed to discuss the expansion of the definition of family, despite having had the
opportunity to do so.
Questions in Parliament
190. In May 2008, Shahid Siddiqui of the RLD asked a question in the Rajya Sabha on whether the government
intended to recognise same-sex marriage. 395 In December 2020, Derek O' Brien of the TMC asked a similar question in
the Rajya Sabha. In both cases, the government responded that it had no intentions to take any such steps.
396
The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill
191. In 2018, concerns were raised around restricting queer couples (who are currently not eligible to adopt
children in India) from becoming parents.
192. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar of the TMC, Lavu Sri. Krishna Devarayalu of the YSRCP, Sangeeta Kumari of the BJP,
Hema Malini of the BJP, Anubhav Mohanty of the BJD, Gautham Sigamani of the DMK, Supriya Sule of the NCP, T
Sumathy of the DMK, and Shashi Tharoon of the INC spoke out against the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill while referring
to the harm it causes to LGBTQ+ individuals in the Lok Sabha.
193. The then health minister, JP Nadda, and BJP MP Nishikant Dubey prevented further conversations on the issue
by claiming that the bill was restricted to conventional understandings of a family. Anupriya Patel of the Apna Dal
(Sonelal), who was the Union Minister of State for Health, defended the exclusion of single and gay people by saying,
"A child needs a normal family, a mother and father. ",397
The Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act
194. In 2021, MPs raised concerns around the bill failing to allow single men and LGBTQ+ couples from availing
ART treatments.
195. Sangeeta Azad of the BSP, Karti Chidambaram of the INC, Adhir Ranjan Choudhary of the INC, Kakoli Ghosh
Dastidar of the TMC, Hasnain Masoodi of the JKNC, Anubhav Mohanty of the BJD, Pratima Mondal of the TMC and
Supriya Sule of the NCP specifically mentioned the violation of the rights of the LGBTQ+ community in the Lok Sabha.
Their concerns were not met with a response from the government. 398
Private Member Bills
196. In April 2022, Supriya Sule of the NCP introduced a private member's bill to bring about changes to the
Special Marriage Act in favour of LGBTQ+ couples. In the same parliamentary session, Dr. DNV Senthilkumar of the
DMK introduced another private member's bill to enshrine rights to marriage, adoption, guardianship, surrogacy, and
400
prohibition against discrimination at the workplace and in housing. Both bills have not yet been taken up for
consideration by the Lok Sabha, and will most likely lapse before the term of the 17th Lok Sabha comes to an end next
year.
197. This demonstrates that Parliament has been seized of the issue of marriage equality, of the challenges posed
to the exercise of fundamental rights by LGBTQ+ citizens of India, and of the far-reaching ramifications the denial of
recognition of marriage has for access to a range of other rights and privileges extended to cisgender heterosexual
citizens of the country.
198. The government's stated desire to decide upon the question of marriage equality through deliberations in the
legislature, therefore, is not accompanied by any demonstration of actual intent in allowing these deliberations from
taking place in Parliament. This reflects a broader refusal of parliament to engage on questions around LGBTQ+
rights between 2015 and 2016, two private member bills by Shashi Tharoor of the INC proposing the reading down
of Section 377 were prevented from being introduced in the Lok Sabha.
199. In the face of legislative inaction, and a lack of demonstrable legislative intent, judicial recourse remains the
only alternative available to the LGBTQ+ community in India to ensure both a protection of fundamental rights and an
extension of recognition by the state.
200. To access Pink List India's archive on statements by Lok Sabha MPs, head to pinklistindia.com/pinksabhal
Akkai Padmashali V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Dr. Akkai Padmashali and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondents.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 159 of 2023
Decided on April 24, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Jayna Kothari, Sr. Adv. Advocate for the Petitioners
INDEX
S. No.
Particulars
1.
Supplementary Written Submissions on Behalf of Jayna Kothari, Sr. Adv.
2.
Proposed Reading of Special Marriage Act, 1954
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 159 of 2023
In the Matter of:
Dr. Akkai Padmashali and Ors
Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondents
BRIEF NOTE ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS BY JAYNA KOTHARI SR. ADV.
1. A claim for Marriage Equality for all Persons" and not just Same Sex Marriage Transgender Persons'
right to Gender Identity
1. Transgender persons are persons whose gender identity does not match with the sex assigned to that person at
birth and includes inter-sex persons, socio-cultural identities as kinner, hijra, aravani and jogta which do not fall under
pg 742 @ 766]
2. This Hon'ble Court in NALSA recognized transgender persons as having a fundamental right to self-determine
their gender identity as male, female or transgender, even without medical gender re-assignment and granted legal
recognition to their self-determined gender identity. [NALSA, supra, Paras 21, 22 (PDF Pg 769), Paras 74, 76 (PDF
pg. 794), Paras 80 - 83 (PDF pg. 796)].
3. In granting legal recognition to a transgender person's self-determined gender identity, this Hon'ble Court
recognized their fundamental right to equal protection of the laws and to a life of dignity under Articles 14, 15, 16, 19
and 21 of the Constitution. In NALSA this Court held that such legal recognition would allow for various other civil
rights to be available to transgender persons in a meaningful manner, including the right to marry. [NALSA, supra,
Para 119 (PDF pg. 808)]
4. Despite having these rights, transgender persons today are unable to realise them as either they are unable to
afford the medical re-assignment procedures, or they are unable to procure the gender change in their legal
documents to be able to enjoy the rights conferred on them. As a result, a vast majority of transgender persons
continue to be deprived of equal protection of the laws, despite the same having been expressly recognized by this
Court in NALSA.
11. The Right to have a Family should be recognised under the right to life under Art. 21:
5. The right to marry is an essential facet of a person's right to life. Apart from social status and acceptance, and
the availability of various civil rights, it is pertinent to note that marriage is the most significant way in which a person
can start their own family.
6. In case of an overwhelming majority of transgender persons, one of the first indignities that they endure is loss
of family. Transgender persons are disowned by their families. When they express a gender identity different from the
sex assigned at birth, they are either thrown out by their families, or face immense hardship and violence in the house
forcing them to leave their homes. By being allowed to marry legally, trans persons would be able to have their own
family, with or without children, with a person who accepts them for who they are.
7. Having the love, care and support of a family is an essential ingredient for a person to live a full life, and to
realise their potential as a human being. Families provide love and care, and provide economic and psychological
functions of support and physical intimacy. Therefore, it is respectfully submitted that the right to have a 'family life' is
an integral part of one's right to dignity under Article 21, and consequently, it is essential to legally enable a
transgender person to marry a person of their choice.
8. Members of the trans community are already having their own families, including by adopting children. Marriage,
gives their family a legal recognition and their families are accepted and recognised in the eyes of law and in society.
9. The importance of family life as a facet of one's dignity and autonomy has been constitutionally recognised by
"271. We need also emphasise the lack of substance in the submission that privacy is a privilege for the few.
Every individual in society irrespective of social class or economic status is entitled to the intimacy and autonomy
which privacy protects.. The sanctity of marriage, the liberty of procreation, the choice of a family life and the
dignity of being are matters which concern every individual, irrespective of social strata or economic well-being. The
pursuit of happiness is founded upon autonomy and dignity. Both are essential attributes of privacy which makes no
distinction between the birth marks of individuals."
[K.S. Puttaswamy, Para 271, PDF Pg. 94 @ 577, Vol I - Judgment Compilation].
"298... The intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom of thought,
the freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination When these guarantees intersect
with gender, they create a private space which protects all those elements which are crucial to gender identity. The
family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the individual. Above all, the
privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be exercised."
[K.S. Puttaswamy, supra, Para 298, @ PDF Pg 591 (592)]
645. It is an individual's choice as to who enters his house, how he lives and in what relationship. The
privacy of the home must protect the family, marriage. procreation and sexual orientation which are all
important aspects of dignity."
[K.S. Puttaswamy, supra, Para 645, @ PDF pg. 728]
10. This Court has acknowledged unconventional families and the need to recognise them in Deepika Singh V.
Compilation):
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with the mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the form of
domestic, unmarried partnerships or queer relationships. Household may be a single parent household for any
number of reasons, including the death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly, the guardians and caretakers
(who traditionally occupy the roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may change with the remarriage,
adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be typical but they are as real
as their traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family unit are equally deserving
not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social welfare legislation. The
black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which are different from
traditional ones.
"48.. we have no doubt that the right to meaningful family life, which allows a person to live a
fulfilling life and helps in retaining her/his physical, psychological and emotional integrity would find a
place in the four corners of Article 21 of the Constitution of India."
[PDF Pg. 279 @ Vol. 111, High Court Judgments]
12. Under European jurisprudence and international treaties, the right to marry is understood as part of the right to
have a family and the guarantee to having a family life:
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR): Article 16. "Men and women of full age, without any limitation
due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights
as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution." [PDF pg. 3725 of Compilation 111 - Statutory Materials].
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR): Article 23 (1). The family is the natural and
fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State. (2). The right of men and
women of marriageable age to marry and to found a family shall be recognized.
[PDF pg. 3609 of Compilation 111 - Statutory Materials]
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union : Article 9. "All persons have the right to marry and the
right to found a family".
European Convention on Human Rights : Article 8. "Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
family life, his home and his correspondence".
Article 12: "Men and women of marriageable age have the right to marry and to found a family, according to the
national laws governing the exercise of this right."
The Yogyakarta Principles which have been followed by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA:
Principle 24 : Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity.
Families exist in diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation
or gender identity of any of its members.
It calls for States to:
"Ensure that laws and policies recognise the diversity of family forms", and to "ensure that in States that
recognise same-sex marriages or registered partnerships, any entitlement, privilege, obligation or benefit available
to different-sex married or registered partners is equally available to same-sex married or registered partners".
[PDF pg. 3781 of Compilation 111 - Statutory Materials]
Oliari V. Italy, (Applications nos. 18766/11 and 36030/11) : The European Court of Human Rights held that the
absence of a legal framework allowing for recognition and protection of same-sex relationships violates the rights
under Article 8 of the Convention and the State should fulfil its obligations to secure the right of the applicants to
respect for their private and family life. [Vol IV. Para 200, PDF pg. 2510 @ 2569]
Christine Goodwin V. United Kingdom, (Application no. 28957/95) (ECHR) held: "The Court finds no justification
for barring the transsexual from enjoying the right to marry under any circumstances. The Court concludes that
there has been a breach of Article 12 of the Convention in the present case.
[Vol IV., Para 103, PDF pg. 534 @ 563]
13. Thus the fundamental right to have a family should extend to all persons under Article 21 of the Constitution.
In order to meaningfully confer the right to a dignified life to transgender persons, it is of crucial importance to
recognize their right to marry so that they can realise their right to have a family.
111. Denial of the right to marry and the right to a family to transgender persons amounts to discrimination
on the basis of their gender identity:
14. The denial to transgender persons of the right to marry and have a family under the SMA due to their gender
identity due to the statutory requirements prescribed under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 of only permitting
marriage between a 'male' and 'female', amounts to discrimination under Article 15(1) of the Constitution, as 'sex' is
held to include discrimination due to gender identity.
15. The SMA thus, in orden to guarantee the right to marry and have a family to transgender persons and to ensure
that their fundamental rights under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 are not violated, and is constitutionally compliant, has
to be read to apply to all 'persons' and 'spouses'
"32. The struggle of citizens belonging to sexual minorities is located within the larger history of the struggles
against various forms of social subordination in India. The order of nature that Section 377 speaks of is not just
about nonprocreative sex but is about forms of intimacy which the social order finds "disturbing". This includes
various forms of transgression such as inter-caste and inter-community relationships which are sought to be curbed
by society. What links LGBT individuals to couples who love across caste and community lines is the fact that both
are exercising their right to love at enormous personal risk and in the process disrupting existing lines of social
authority. Thus, a re-imagination of the order of nature as being not only about the prohibition of non-procreative
sex but instead about the limits imposed by structures such as gender, caste, class, religion and community makes
the right to love not just a separate battle for LGBT individuals, but a battle for all.'
[Navtej Johan V. Union of India, Para 425, (PDF Pg. 814 @ 1029)
Place New Delhi
Date 24.04.2023
[JAYNA KOTHARI]
Senior Advocate for the Petitioner
PROPOSED READING OF SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT 1954
Section 2(b): "degrees of prohibited relationship" - a man and any of the persons mentioned in Part I of the
First Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part I and Part 11 of the said Schedule are within
the degrees of prohibited relationship.
Section 4(c): the male has completed the age of 21 years, the female has completed the age of 18 years where
the parties are male or female, or where persons have completed 18 years.
Section 22. Restitution of conjugal rights - When either the husband or the wife spouse has,
without
reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the
district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made
in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
[Explanation-Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal from the
society, the burden of providing reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from the society.]
Section 23 : Judicial separation.-(1) A petition for judicial separation may be presented to the district court
by either by the husband or the wife spouse,
Section 27: Divorce- [(1)] Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition for
divorce may be presented to the district court by the husband or the wife either spouse on the ground that the
respondent-
(a)
(b)
27[(1A): A wife person may also present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground,-
(i) that her husband their spouse has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or
bestiality;
Section 27(i) stays as it is.
31. Court to which petition should be made-
(i) the marriage was solemnised or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition resides, or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or
(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where the petitioner is a woman, where she is residing on the date of
presentation of the petition;
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the respondent is at
that time residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been heard of as being alive for
a period of seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him the respondent if he the respondent
were alive.]
(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under sub-section (1), the district court may,
by virtue of this sub-section, entertain a petition by a wife woman domiciled in the territories to which this Act
extends for nullity of marriage or for divorce if she is resident in the said territories and has been ordinarily resident
therein for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition and the husband her
spouse is not resident in the said territories.
Section 36. Alimony pendente lite.-Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI it appears to the
district court that the wife has a spouse has no independent income sufficient for their her support and the
necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the said spouse the wife order the husband the
other spouse to pay to her the expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or monthly during the proceeding such sum
as having regard to the husband's said spouse's income, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.
Section 37. Permanent alimony and maintenance.-(1 Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter V or
Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on application made to
it for the purpose, order that the husband either spouse shall secure to the wife for her the other spouse for their
maintenance and support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband's other's property such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life, as, having regard to her their own
property, if any, her husband's their spouse's property and ability [the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case], it may seem to the court to be just.
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife spouse in whose favour an order has been made under this
section has remarried or is not leading a chaste life, [it may, at the instance of the husband other spouse vary,
modify or rescind any such order and in such manner as the court may deem just.]
44. Punishment of bigamy.-Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, during the
lifetime of his or her wife or husband their spouse, contracts any other marriage shall be subject to the penalties
provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), for the offence of marrying again
during the lifetime of a husband or wife spouse, and the marriage so contracted shall be void.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 11)
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM SPOUSE
I, A,B... hereby declare as follows: -
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow, widower or a divorcee, as the case may be).
2. I have completed years of age.
3. I am not related to C.D. (the bride spouse) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
4. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I either know or
believe it to be false on do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine.
Akkai Padmashali V. Union of India
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
In the Matter of:
Dr. Akkai Padmashali and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 159 of 2023
Decided on May 10, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Jayna Kothari, Sr. Adv. Advocate for the Petitioners
INDEX
S. No.
Particulars
1.
Rejoinder Submissions on behalf of Jayna Kothari, Senior Advocate
2.
Parliamentary Debates on Special Marriage Act
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 159 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Dr. Akkai Padmashali and Ors Petitioners
V.
Union of India
Respondent
REJOINDER SUBMISSIONS - JAYNA KOTHARI, SENIOR ADVOCATE
The following are brief submissions to respond to some of the legal arguments of the Respondents and also some
of the questions raised by this Hon'ble Court.
1. The core of the SMA is to make marriage contractual and give all persons the full freedom of choice in
marriage:
1.1 The debates on the Special Marriage Bill in the Lok Sabha shed light on the legislative intent and more
importantly, on what forms the core of the Special Marriage Act. The SMA was enacted to be a progressive law
which can provide for a contractual form of marriage. The essential element was to facilitate a union founded on
freedom of choice. Marriage between a man and woman i.e. opposite sex marriage is not the fundamental feature
of the SMA and not the 'grain of the legislation' (to borrow the words from Ghaidan). The fundamental feature is
freedom of choice.
Extracts of Parliamentary Debates on the SMA:
1.2 The Parliamentary debates at the time of the introduction of the Special Marriage Bill in the Indian Parliament
noted that one of the main objects of this Act was to "make it more progressive and to encourage marriages. It
does not take religion into account and permits marriages between different castes and creeds." The Parliamentary
Debates on the SMA, clearly shows that the core of the SMA is that it out in place a contractual law for marriage
based on the choice and freedom of the parties. Some of the relevant extracts from the Parliamentary debates are
as under:
Shrimati Renu Chakravarty, Parliamentary Debates, Lok Sabha, 16 December 1953, Special Marriage Bill (@p.
11 and 14)
"Now, a new society has come into being when there is need for free labour power which reflect itself in the
growth of ideas about individual freedom, then certainly we must come to this question about free choice of
marriage. It is no use saying that it is immoral, it is not right. We believe and we stand by this fact that
there should be free choice of marriage, and therefore, this contractual marriage as enunciated in this
Bill we support. We do not think that just because a person marries out of his or her free choice, it becomes
unholy; that the bride and the bridegroom see into the soul of each other only if they are married according to
religion, and otherwise not.'
"If a new method of marriage is to be there, people are going to marry against orthodox methods.
Let us be very clear on that point. They are going to marry against the will of such people as the
previous speakers. So, it is very necessary that this question of consent should not be there.
Lastly, / would like to submit that we do need a codified law and a more progressive outlook
regarding marriage as a contract, based on love, respect for each other, and the building up of a happy
home for our children. It is on this basis that the entire law has to be looked upon, not from the idea of
orthodoxy or that those that believe in customary law are the sole repositories of morality."
Sri D.C. Sharma Parliamentary Debates, Lok Sabha, 17 December 1953. Special Marriage Bill (@p. 21)
There are SO many kinds of marriages enumerated in our sastras. All these marriages are there because our
social circumstances needed them. / do not see any reason why this kind of contractual form of marriage
which is a need brought about by the new social circumstances should be a taboo and should be
frowned upon. Democracy means freedom of choice. We can choose in marriage anybody we like. /
think this Bill gives us that freedom of choice. This is a freedom which cannot be denied to men and
women. If they can have political freedom and freedom in other spheres of life, / do not see why they
should not have freedom in the choice of their partners. / think this is only an extension of the liberty
which we have granted in so many spheres of life. / think the principle is already there. It is only being
legalized here so that there may not be any untoward consequences.
Shrimati Maydeo, Parliamentary Debates, Lok Sabha, 17 December 1953, Special Marriage Bill (@p. 26)
"One other point which / came across and with which / am surprised is in the schedule, page 8. When the
notice is to be given, it is said that the bridegroom should say that he is unmarried, widower, and divorcee and
in the case of the bride, it is stated, that she should call herself a spinster. Why should she be treated SO harshly
under law? The meaning of the word 'spinster' is not very happy. That means an elderly woman who is
unmarried. But then a bride can be a very pretty young girl of 18 years. Why should she call herself a spinster? /
feel that this word 'spinster' should be changed into 'unmarried'.
Shri Raghubir Sahai, Parliamentary Debates, Lok Sabha, 17 December 1953, Special Marriage Bill (@p.26
The only point that can now arise in the consideration of the Bill is why, if a legislation of this kind existed
since 1872, bring a new Bill. There is a sound and a very good reason for it. The reason is that since
then, society has changed, times have changed, many new features have arisen and we have to take
note of public opinion, and all that, and therefore, some changes had to be made in the old Bill.
Sir, with your permission, / beg to point out that the most important changes that have been introduced in
this Bill as compared with the 1872 legislation are:
(1) That this Bill is made applicable to all the citizens of India, irrespective of their religion;
(2) That it is made applicable to the citizens of India outside, or in other words, it will have extra territorial
jurisdiction;
(3) That the age limit for marriage has been fixed at 18; formerly, in the 1872 legislation, the age limit fixed for
a girl was only 14; and
(4) That this Bill provides for the legislation of those marriages also which had been performed either before or
after the passing of the Bill under some other form or under some other law."
Shri Gadgill, Parliamentary Debates, Lok Sabha, 17 December 1953, Special Marriage Bill (@ p. 32, 34)
We are living, as has been well recognized by Mr. Chatterjee, in the year 1953 and we are living under a
Constitution where certain principles are guaranteed to individuals, liberty of speech, liberty of
association which in my opinion includes the right of every person to choose his or her partner as he
or she desires. Marriage is a joint enterprise.
Marriage is a joint enterprise where the partners share their ambitions and achievements, their
sorrows and joys and those delicacies which nature desires them to enjoy and not to express. Nor can
we by any act permit this noble conception being sabotaged. / think we owe it to the Constitution and
the principles guaranteed therein that there must be full freedom for marriage and it should not be
restricted by all such restrictions as are contemplated in those sections to which a reference was
made by Srimati Uma Nehru and also Mr. Chatterjee."
1.3 It is therefore respectfully submitted that the essence of the SMA is to give legal recognition to a contractual
form of marriage based in freedom of choice and respect for one another.
2. Reading in/giving Purposive Interpretation to legislation:
2.1 In order to bring legislation within the framework of the Constitution, this Hon'ble Court has read up or read
down statutes to bring them in conformity with Constitutional provisions, particularly relating to fundamental
to Section 376 of the IPC : [paras 88, 101, 105, 107 and 168, Vol 11, PDF pg. 2209 @ 2257, 2262-2264, and 2285]
88 There is therefore no doubt that the impact and effect of Exception 2 to Section 375 of the IPC has to be
considered not with the blinkered vision of the days gone by but with the social realities of today. Traditions that
might have been acceptable at some historical point of time are not cast in stone. If times and situations change,
so must views, traditions and conventions.
101. The entire issue of the interpretation of the JJ Act, the POCSO Act, the PCMA and Exception 2 to Section
375 of the IPC can be looked at from yet another perspective, the perspective of purposive and harmonious
construction of statutes relating to the same subject matter. Long ago, it was said by Lord Denning that when a
defect appears, a judge cannot fold his hands and blame the draftsman but must also consider the social
conditions and give force and life to the intention of the Legislature. It was said in Seaford Court Estates Ltd. V.
Asher that: "A judge, believing himself to be fettered by the supposed rule that he must look to the language and
nothing else, laments that the draftsmen have not provided for this or that, or have been guilty of some or other
ambiguity. It would certainly save the judges trouble if Acts of Parliament were drafted with divine prescience
and perfect clarity. In the absence of it, when a defect appears a judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame
the draftsman. He must set to work on the constructive task of finding the intention of Parliament, and he must
do this not only from the language of the statute, but also from a consideration of the social conditions which
gave rise to it, and of the mischief which it was passed to remedy, and then he must supplement the written
word SO as to give "force and life" to the intention of the legislature."
105. Viewed from any perspective, there seems to be no reason to arbitrarily discriminate against a girl child
who is married between 15 and 18 years of age. On the contrary, there is every reason to give a harmonious and
purposive construction to the pro-child statutes to preserve and protect the human rights of the married girl
child.
107. On a complete assessment of the law and the documentary material, it appears that there are really five
options before us (i) To let the incongruity remain as it is - this does not seem a viable option to us, given that
the lives of thousands of young girls are at stake; (ii) To strike down as unconstitutional Exception 2 to Section
375 of the IPC - in the present case this is also not a viable option since this relief was given up and no such
issue was raised; (iii) To reduce the age of consent from 18 years to 15 years - this too is not a viable option and
would ultimately be for Parliament to decide; (iv) To bring the POCSO Act in consonance with Exception 2 to
Section 375 of the IPC - this is also not a viable option since it would require not only a retrograde amendment
to the POCSO Act but also to several other pro-child statutes; (v) To read Exception 2 to Section 375 of the
IPC in a purposive manner to make it in consonance with the POCSO Act, the spirit of other pro-child
legislations and the human rights of a married girl child. Being purposive and harmonious
constructionists, we are of opinion that this is the only pragmatic option available. Therefore, we are
left
with absolutely no other option but to harmonize the system of laws relating to children and require Exception 2
to Section 375 of the IPC to now be meaningfully read as: "Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his
own wife, the wife not being under eighteen years of age, is not rape." It is only through this reading that the
intent of social justice to the married girl child and the constitutional vision of the framers of our Constitution can
be preserved and protected and perhaps given impetus.
Justice Deepak Gupta:
168. Therefore, the principle is that normally the Courts should raise a presumption in favour of the impugned
law; however, if the law under challenge violates the fundamental rights of the citizens, the law is arbitrary, or is
discriminatory, the Courts can either hold the law to be totally unconstitutional and strike down the law or the
Court may read down the law in such a manner that the law when read down does not violate the
Constitution. While the Courts must show restraint while dealing with such issues, the Court cannot shut its
eyes to the violations of the fundamental rights of the citizens. Therefore, if the legislature enacts a law which is
violative of the fundamental rights of the citizens, is arbitrary and discriminatory then the Court would be
failing in its duty if it does not either strike down the law or read down the law in such a manner that it
falls within the four corners of the Constitution."
Section 6(a) of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 as "in the absence of" to fulfil the principle of gender
equality under the constitution. It held as follows [paras 45-47, Vol 11, PDF pg. 1904 @ 1922-1923]:
45. Be it noted further, that gender equality is one of the basic principles of our Constitution and in the event
the word 'after' is to be read to mean a disqualification of a mother to act as a guardian during the
lifetime of the father, the same would definitely run counter to the basic requirement of the
constitutional mandate and would lead to a differentiation between male and female. Normal rules of
interpretation shall have to bow down to the requirement of the Constitution since the Constitution is
supreme and the statute shall have to be in accordance therewith and not de hors the same. The father
by reason of a dominant personality cannot be ascribed to have a preferential right over the mother in the matter
of guardianship since both fall within the same category and in that view of the matter the word 'after' shall have
to be interpreted in terms of the constitutional safe-guard and guarantee so as to give a proper and effective
meaning to the words used.
46. In our opinion the word 'after' shall have to be given a meaning which would sub-serve the need
of the situation viz., welfare of the minor and having due regard to the factum that law courts endeavour to
retain the legislation rather than declaring it to be a void, we do feel it expedient to record that the word 'after'
does not necessarily mean after the death of the father, on the contrary, it depicts an intent SO as to ascribe the
meaning thereto as 'in the absence of '- be it temporary or otherwise or total apathy of the father towards the
child or even inability of the father by reason of ailment or otherwise and it is only in the event of such a
meaning being ascribed to the word 'after' as used in Section 6 then and in that event the same would be in
accordance with the intent of the legislation viz. welfare of the child.
47. In that view of the matter question of ascribing the literal meaning to the word 'after' in the
context does not and cannot arise having due regard to the object of the statute, read with the
constitutional guarantee of gender equality and to give a full play to the legislative intent, since any
other interpretation would render the statute void and which situation in our view ought to be avoided.
words 'adult male' would be struck down. It held [Vol 11. PDF Pg. 2058]:
"We, therefore, strike down the words "adult male" before the word "person" in Section 2(g) as
these words discriminate between persons similarly situate, and far from being in tune with are
contrary to the object sought to be achieved by the 2005 Act.
3.
In NALSA V. Union of India, this Hon'ble Court specifically recognized the right of all transgender
persons to marry:
3.1 In giving legal recognition to a transgender person's self-determined gender identity, this Hon'ble Court
specifically recognised the equal protection of the laws and to a life of dignity under Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21
to transgender persons. This Court held that such recognition would allow for various other civil rights to be
available in a meaningful manner, specifically the right to marry. [Para 119, NALSA, PDF pg. 808]
"119. Therefore, gender identification becomes very essential component which is required for enjoying civil
rights by this community. It is only with this recognition that many rights attached to the sexual
recognition as "third gender" would be available to this community more meaningfully viz. the right to
vote, the right to own property, the right to marry, the right to claim a formal identity through a
passport and a ration card, a driver's licence, the right to education, employment, health and SO on.
3.2 In Arunkumar V. Inspector General of Registration, (2019) 4 Mad LJ 503 [Judgments Compilation Vol. 111,
PDF Pg 95-103], the Madras High Court declared that transgender persons who are neither male/female fall within
the expression "person" and hence entitled to legal protection of laws in all spheres of State activity as enjoyed by
any other citizen of this country. Discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation or gender identity, therefore,
impairs equality before law and equal protection of law and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The
Madras High Court held that the expression "bride" in Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 to mean and
include a transwoman identifying as a woman, thereby interpreting the law to allow solemnization of marriages
involving trans persons.
3.3 In Christine Goodwin V. United Kingdom, (Application no. 28957/95) the European Court of Human Rights
recognized that there was no basis for denying transgender persons the right to marry, and held [Para 103, Vol IV,
PDF pg. 534@563]:
"The Court finds no justification for barring the transsexual from enjoying the right to marry under
any circumstances. The Court concludes that there has been a breach of Article 12 of the Convention in the
present case. Article 12 of the Convention, which provides as follows: "Men and women of marriageable age
have the right to marry and to found a family, according to the national laws governing the exercise of this
right.'
3.4 It is respectfully submitted that trans persons who identify themselves within the gender binary of male and
female are able to get married under existing provisions of the SMA. However, a vast majority of the trans
community, who identify themselves as transgender, or are unable to undergo the medical reassignment procedure,
are unable to exercise their right to marry and form a family of their choice. Hence the SMA ought to be read in an
inclusive manner to include all "persons", and not just "males" and females".
3.5 Therefore, in order to bring the provisions of the SMA in tune with the Constitutional guarantees already
recognized for transgender persons, the SMA must be construed to include all 'persons' within its coverage.
Place New Delhi
Date 10.05.2023
Counsel
for the Petitioners
Wednesday,
16th December, 1953
PARLIAMENTARY
DEBATES
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE
OFFICIAL REPORT
PARLIAMENT SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
Price Six Annas (Inland)
Price Two Shillings (Foreign)
Dated 25.11.2010
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
(Part II-Proceedings other than Questions and Answers)
OFFICIAL REPORT
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE
Wednesday, 16th December, 1953
The House met at Half Past One of the Clock
[Mr. Deputy-Speaker in the Chair]
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
(See Part 1)
2.30 p.m.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
4. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: | have to inform the hon. Members that I have received the following letter from Shri
Bharat Lal Tudu:
"I
have the honour to inform you that as I am down with fever since the commencement of this session
of
Parliament I am not in a position to attend the meetings of this session.
I pray that you be kind enough to grant me leave of absence for the whole of this session."
5. Is it the pleasure of the House that permission be granted to Shri Bharat Lal Tudu for remaining absent from all
meetings of the House till the end of the present session?
6. Leave was granted.
ELECTION TO COMMITTEES
(1) Central Silk Board (2) Council of the Indian Institute of Science
7. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: I have to inform the House that the following Members have been elected to serve on the
Central Silk Board and the Council of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, namely,
I. Central Silk Board
Shri N. Rachiah.
11. Council of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Shri G. R. Damodaran.
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE
AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA AND STATE GOVERNMENTS
8. The Deputy-Minister of Finance (Shri M. C. Shah): I beg to lay on the Table, under sub-section 4 of section
21 and sub-section 2 of section 21A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, a copy of each of the following papers: -
(i) Amendments to the Principal and Subsidiary agreements between the Reserve Bank of India and the
Governments of Part 'A' States (except Madras and Andhra), with effect from the 1st April, 1953.
(ii) The Principal and Subsidiary agreements between the Reserve Bank of India and the Governments of Part 'A'
States (except Madras and PSD.
9. Shrimati Renu Chakravartty: Mr. Deputy-Speaker, Sir, | do not propose to answer the various things that have
been said just now because I feel it is very difficult to answer people whose mind still remains in mediaeval times. It
is even more difficult to convince anybody who thinks that he himself has the monopoly of all morality and everybody
else who demands progress, immediately should be dubbed as irreligious. We support this Bill because the principles
underlying this Bill is progress. The entire idea is to have a contractual form of marriage without the necessity of
repudiating religion, which was necessary in the Bill of 1872. We also support it because we hope that this is the first
step towards the codification of the law applying to the citizens of India.
10. How and when such a law will come into being I am, of course, very doubtful, because considering the time
that has taken the Hindu law to be codified, I am afraid it is very difficult to believe that we shall have one system of
codified law for the whole of India in the very near future. Nevertheless, it is a step in the right direction, although I
would just say this, that there are many parts in this Bill which, to me, are very retrogressive. The very idea in the Bill,
that of giving the right of contractual marriage without repudiating religion, that very principle has been repudiated in
certain clauses of the Bill. Of that more later, Sir.
11. But I would like to answer one general argument which is always brought forward by people who always oppose
any new progressive laws, viz., that it goes against Hindu society, that it goes against Hindu religion. The face of
society changes. We regard society as dynamic, and we recognise that through the ages society has changed and the
superstructure of society, i.e., the customs, have changed also. When we look at tribal society, we find that they have
certain systems, and we see that they are still in vogue in many places in India. They answer to certain conditions,
certain standards of objective reality, and they have set up according tp these certain standards, certain customs.
When we come in later ages to feudal times, when we see that the means of production has gone into the hands of
man, women automatically become subjected. We begin to see them becoming more and more akin to a commodity;
they can be exchanged for money. We see such things as polygamy, dowry etc. These are things which emanated from
the objective reality of society. Now, a new society has come into being when there is need for free labour power which
reflects itself in the growth of ideas about individual freedom, then certainly we must come to this question about free
choice of marriage. It is no use saying that it is immoral, it is hot right. We believe and we stand by this fact that
there should be free choice of marriage, and therefore, this contractual marriage as enunciated in this Bill we sup-port.
We do not think that just because a person marries out of his or her free choice, it becomes unholy; that the bride and
Ore bridegroom see into the soul of each other only if they are married according to religion, and otherwise not. It is, |
think, so much bunkum. Our ideas must not depend on such things. We must react to things objectively. We may not
like it at all. We may dislike that our sons and daughters should marry according to their choice on they should react in
such a way. way. We may have very strong feelings about it, but at the same time we have to recognise that new
times have come, ideas have changed, and according to those ideas, we have to give legality. We are not going to
allow such marriages to remain illegal. We have to think of the children that may come after them and we have to
think of the happiness of those young men and women who are today reacting to certain new necessities of life.
Whether we like it or not we will have to accept it and we will have to make legislation for it.
12. Certainly at the present stage this Bill is of a permissive character because still there are many people who are
very orthodox, who believe that we must marry according to customary law. There is nothing to prevent them from
doing it, but I think it is wrong to compare the idea of allowing people to marry according to the law they like, and the
permissive character of whether we allow 6a-coity or not. I think it is a completely different analogy and something
that is brought just with the idea of confusing issues.
13. It is because of the modern times that this measure has come into existence. The principle behind it is modern,
and therefore it must be supported. The recognition of contractual marriage which does not insist on a declaration of
irreligiousness or a repudiation of religion is the only new progressive point which has been added to the law of 1872.
Otherwise, it is the same old thing, the same old Act of 1872, and the same outmoded outlook remains in this Bill. At
that time what were the circumstances? When the law of 1872 was passed, orthodoxy was completely entrenched, and
in spite of that, new ideas had come, new ideas had been superimposed upon our society, and society was forced to
make certain concessions?
14. The Act of 1872 was passed in mid-Victorian times when the new concepts of individual freedom had just come
into our country. Therefore, what did the orthodox do? While, on the one hand they had to accept the idea of
contractual marriage, at the same time they tried in every way to hedge in the people who wanted to marry according
to this law by all sorts of preventive methods. In every way they tried to prohibit the people from utilising this law by
victimising them in many ways. For instance, one of the most abnoxious clauses was that it asked them to deny their
religion. Secondly, they considered them an outcaste by declaring their severance from the joint family property.
Thirdly. they gave their parents the right to adopt according to Hindu law while the son was living. That was an
indirect method of penalising the person from getting the property of his father.
15. Shri Algu Rai Shastri: Either he should have the wife or the property.
16. Shrimati Renu Chakravartty: You will have your say no doubt. I must have my say now.
17. Also the men and women who married under this law had the right of adoption taken away from them. That is,
they were no longen regarded as Hindus. They no longer needed the pinda and therefore they should not have the
right to adopt. Now, this method of penalising those who go in for this form of marriage has been left intact in the Bill.
Therefore, I would like to bring before this House the big contradiction between the supposed principles enunciated in
bringing forward this Bill, and at the same time the retention of these particular clauses which contradict this idea of
allowing contractual marriage without repudiation of religion. Those very things are repudiated by the retention of
these clauses as they were in the original Act of 1872. The old Act has been bodily incorporated and the modem
demands will not be satisfied by it. It is just like the analogy of the new wine in the old bottle. Pour the new wine in
the old bottle, and the old bottle bursts. It is therefore that I say that this Bill will defeat itself. The principles are
good, but due to the very fact that it has incorporated the very clauses which were there to victimise and penalise
people utilising this form of marriage, the very purpose of the Bill will be defeated and therefore I say that this Bill is
really giving with one hand and taking away with the other. That is. it is a sort of negative Bill which does not answer
the needs of the times. Therefore, we demand very categorically that there should be no clause about severance from
Joint family property. Why should there be penalising? When we accept the fact that people are not going to lose caste
or repudiate religion by marrying according to this law, why should there be this clause about severance from the
family, and the denial of the right of being a part of the joint family? Why should there be no adoption for the people
who marry under this Act. They are human beings. This right must not be taken away from them, nor must they be
victimised by disinheritance by the clause that the father can adopt a son in case his own son marries according to this
law. Another point which has struck me. as I went through the Bill is that this Bill is really legislation by reference.
5 p.m.
18. Mr. Deputy Speaker: There does not seem to be any disinheritance.
19. Shrimati Renu Chakravartty: There is severance from the family.
20. Mr. Deputy Speaker: Inheritance is there-but survivorship goes-under the Caste Disabilities Removal Act.
21. Shrimati Renu Chakrayartty: I will not go into the details, I shall argue that point when the amendment
comes up. Since there is severance, he will not have any right to anything that accumulates in the joint family.
Therefore there seems to be some penalisation. Any way, I am not going into the details just now.
22. As I was looking through the provisions of this Bill, one thing which I noticed was that this is a piece of
legislation by reference. You have always to refer back to old Acts, which had been passed in the far distant past in
some cases, and in the near future. in other cases. But generally these are very old Acts to which reference has been
made in the Bill. We have to refer to the Caste Disabilities Removal Act. This is a modern Act. but then we have also to
refer to the Indian Divorce Act, which is already outmoded. and the Christians themselves are demanding certain
amendments and changes in that Act. Yet we are incorporating in this Bill provisions with reference to the Indian
Divorce Act. We have also to refer to the Indian Succession Act. When the situation has changed, and we really need a
new law, we should definitely have a law in toto, and not a law by reference. Legislation is not only good
draftsmanship, but it must also meet the needs of the times. When there are new times which need a new Act, a new
approach should have been there, and a new law should have been brought forward, and not legislation by reference.
23. For instance, when we have accepted that a contractual marriage does not necessitate the denial of one's
religion. there can be no two opinions on the question of losing caste. Therefore, the question of the Caste Disabilities
Removal Act does not arise, and the question of severance does not arise. If today, we are to apply the Indian Divorce
Act, we will find that it is not only outmoded, but it will also bring us to certain difficulties. If we depend on the Indian
Divorce Act, and one of the parties ceases to be a Christian, divorce may be granted. But here, there is no question of
any difference between a Christian or any other caste or religion. Therefore this Bill will bring in certain anomalies. If
the Indian Divorce Act applied to some marriages which were solemnised earlier, and are now registered according to
the present Bill, some cases will arise where the marriages will become null and void. There will be complications
about the legitimacy of the children etc. So, the entire question has to be viewed again. Why do you want to legislate
by reference? Why cannot you have a new law and a new Act answering to the needs of the times?
24. Then again, we have been referred to the Indian Succession Act. The provisions regarding intestate succession
in
the Indian Succession Act do not apply to Hindus, 'Muslims, Buddhists. Sikhs and Jains. I think the relevant
Sections are Sections 29 and 58. This is also a question which has to be thought over. Why do you want to incorporate
these provisions, and bring in additional difficulties in the way? I am not referring to the Indian Succession Act in
detail, but there are other difficulties also which have not been foreseen in the body of the Bill. For instance, what
about the law guiding the inheritance of children of earlier marriages under different laws?
25. These are some of the points which I would like to point out. Why is it that we are asked to go back and refer to
outmoded enactments which had been passed in mid-Victorian times, or even later on, but which really go against the
principles of this Bill, and add to the difficulties and lacunae which will come about by the passing of this Bill. We feel
that a new law should have been brought in, a com-pletely new law which should have been viewed from the point of
Science and objective reality.
26. Lastly,-a by no means less important-everything has to be viewed from the point of view of the children, and
the welfare of a happy home life. It is the children that are most important, and so I may be allowed to make a few
remarks about them as well. When we view it from the point of view of the children, we have to see that there must be
a water-tight guarantee for the legitimacy and the maintenance of children born of an earlier marriage, declared
invalid by this Bill. That is a thing, which must be guaranteed first, because actually there may be a few such cases.
So, the question of legitimacy also should be provided for in this Bill. The economic stability of the children must also
be ensured. Why should there be the question of a severance from the family? Why should the children be severed
from the family? They should remain within the family, and should be entitled to all the love, advantages as well as
the responsibilities of the family, as it exists today. The main point I would like to point out is that the inheritance of
the children born of an earlier marriase under another law may be complicated by this severance. I feel that the law
should be made very easy, and answer the needs of the times.
27. The question of consent also has been put in in the Bill. I think this should be deleted, because here again
there are certain complications which are likely to arise. Under the Hindu Divorce and Marriage Bill, which has been
introduced, the age of consent is 16, but here it is 21; so, when there is a provision that the age of consent is 16, that
should have been accepted in this Bill. Moreover, when the ques-tion of consent is there, nothing has been provided in
the Bill as to who will be the guardian in the absence of the father. We know often that even when the mother is a
guardian, if any body comes forward and says that he is the guardian, marriages are solemnised and we know what
hap-pens in such cases.
28. If a new method of marriage is to be there, people are going to marry against the orthodox methods. Let us be
very clear on that point. They are going to marry against the will of such people as the previous speakers. So it is very
necessary that this question of consent should not be there. Regard ing objections which can be raised, I think the
provision should be made in such a way that it will not lead to har-assment. | shall deal with this point in detail, when
the amendments are taken up.
29. Lastly I would like to submit that we do need a codified law, and a more progressive outlook regarding-
marriage as a contract, based on love, respect for each other, and the building up of a happy home for our children. It
is
on this basis that the entire law has to be looked upon, not from the idea of orthodoxy or that those that believe in
customary law are the sole repositories of morality.
30. With these few words, I support the Bill in principle.
31. Dr. N. B. Khare; Sir, I am going to confine myself only to the proposition before the House, moved by my hon.
friend the Law Minister, about this so-called special marriage. I saw quite a sudden and magic change in the attitude
of this House with regard to this motion. On the 14th, when this motion was first moved before the House, I am very
clear in my mind, and you will also agree with me, that the whole House, particularly the majority of the Members of
the majority party seemed to be against this motion, and against the idea that this motion is regular, legal or proper.
32. Shri A. M. Thomas (Ernakulam) : You are mistaken.
33. Dr. N. B. Khare: Whatever that may be, that is my impression, and I have a right to place it before the house.
34. Pandit K. C. Sharma (Meerut Distt-South) : He has a right to be mistaken, and he is always mistaken.
35. Dr. N. B. Khare: I say this because I was present all throughout, and | heard the voices of no, no, sit down etc.
from the Congress benches, and my hon. friend the Law Minister was hooted down; he had to sit down, and he was
not even heard. That shows the attitude on the 14th. But today I And that there is a sudden and magic change in that
attitude, as I said before. The House seems to be today very much agreeable to this motion and to the idea that it
should be taken into consideration and perhaps passed also-l am sure it will be passed.
36. Shri Algu Rai Shastri: Wisdorn grows.
37. Dr. N. B. Khare: After all, we are talking of special marriage, and I think we have developed an inordinate love
for this special marriage, and love, as everybody knows, is blind, and knows no laws. After all, it is love that compels
one sometimes to commit kidnapping. trespass and what not, and sometimes even breaking of the law. So to enable
us to consider this motion, we can afford to break all our Rules, our Constitution, our procedure, and everything else.
It is all right, and we can go ahead, for it is a very good example.
38. When that is being done, I must also say what has brought about this change, from the 14th to the 16th
December 1953, within a period of 48 hours. One single event has brought about this change, as I read in the papers
also this morning.
39. This change which I have seen today obviously ana manifestly before my eyes reminds me of the old pouramc
story of the, copies, the pows, the Copal or the Gopivallabh.
40. Pandit K. C. Sharma: On a point of order, Sir. Is the hon. Member entitled to go into a discussion of the Bill or
into the conduct of hon. Members of this House? He need not go into details about how others behave. Let him behave
himself.
41. Shrl Algu Ral Shastrl: He is developing his argument. He should be permitted.
42. Dr. N. B. Khare: Sir, this reminds me of the story that whenever the Gopi* or the yows used to go astray, the
madhura, sweet music of the Murali of Krishna Bhagwan used to bring them to their senses and used to captivate their
hearts. The same thing happened here, Sir. As soon as a certain person came here and uttered his mantra or his
music, all the Gopis and gows had been thoroughly attracted.
43. Mr. Chairman: May I suggest to the hon. Member that it would be worthwhile if he refers to the provisions of
the Bill?
44. Dr. N. B. Khare: I am referring to the Motion which is being passed. We are talking of marriage. I am for
monogamy; I am not for polygamy.
45. Shri D. C. Sharma: (Hoshiarpur) : May I know, Sir, it the hon. Member thinks himself to be a Gopi?
46. Dr. N. B. Khare: If the cap fits him, he may wear it. (Interruptions) He has provoked me. The cap fits him. I do
not dance to any body's tune.
47. Mr. Chairman: I would appeal to hon. Members not to provoke the hon. Member who is speaking.
48. Dr. N. B. Khare: Therefore, Sir, I may tell you that I am for monogamy and this Special Marriage Bill also
provides for monogamy. But, Sir, I am suprised to And that in this House Itself there is complete polygamy ruling-
one Gopi Vallabh and hundreds of Gopis dancing to his tune.
49. Shri Bhagwat Jha Azad (Purnea cum Santal Parganas) : With one Kubja.
50. Pandit K. C. Sharma: I am rather surprised at the arguments of my mends both supporting this Bill as well as
opposing it. It is a simple measure. In this country in the Hindu, Christian, and Mohammedan religions, marriage is
predominantly governed by personal law and there are rules of conduct for the husband and wife in all these reli-sions.
Then cases had happened when marriages were to be performed and the people did not belong to these religions. So
in 1872 a law was passed-the Special Marriage Act-under which certain people who did not belong to certain religions
could perform their marriages, and the basis of the marriage was contractual, i.e. as human beings, the young man
taking the young woman as wife and the young woman taking the young man as husband. When they took each other
as husband and wife, it did not follow that they said goodbye, as Mr. Nandlal Sharma said, to everything decent in
human life. That is not the question. The words 'husband' and 'wife' are significant words. They carry certain
implications, a certain significance, a certain meaning behind them, and the young man and the young girl who took
each other as husband and wife undertook to observe the law of decency and good conduct in society. It cannot be
said that because they married beyond the Hindu, Muslim, Christian or any other religion, therefore. they said goodbye
to everything that was good in those religions. That is not the point. For my friend's information. I may say that even
in the Rigveda it is said:
"Ye, the young girl, go to the youngest man. Be thou mother of heroic children for the good of society."
51. There 'the good of the society' means the good of the race. Therefore, the emphasis is not on the performance
of vagya as such; the emphasis is on keeping the thread of the race alive. What is important is the progeny. Therefore,
the emphasis lies with regard to the race, not with regard to religion. Even on the principle laid down in the Rigveda.
in marriage the question of religion goes in the background and the question of race comes first, and it cannot be said
that the race belongs only to those who believe in the Hindu religion or in any other religion. Therefore, on the basis of
marriage under the Rigveda idea, a Hindu can marry a non-Hindu for the perpetuation of the race; it would be within
the idea, within the concept of Rigveda marriage.
52. Anyhow, in 1872 a law was passed The condition was that the couple did not belong to certain religions and
they could marry and make a declaration that A and 'B' did not belong to this or that religion. Now, in 1923 Sir Hari
Singh Gour brought in an amendment in which he said that if both the parties belonged to the same religion - Hindu.
Sikh, Buddhist or Jain religion-they can marry, and the declaration was to be made that both the parties oelonged to
that religion. In the 1872 Act, the condition was that they did not belong to certain religion. After the amendment of
1923, the condition was that they belonged to the same religion. Now, in this proposed Bill, this condition, i.e. this
declaration, is being done away with. The marriage under both the Acts,-i. under the 1872 Act as well as after the
1923 Act-was a marriage in the contractual form. The contractual form, I may again mention, is not doing away with
everything ethical or decent in life. The simple difference was that the sacramental forms were done away with, that a
Hindu was not required to go 7 times round the sacred fire. But it does not follow that because he has not gone round
the sacred fire seven times, therefore everything that was said before the sacred fire was not in the mind of the girl or
the boy. They say 'we observe the rule of piety'. When they marry, the girl and the boy do not say 'We say goodbye to
everything that is pious or decent in human life'. That is not the point.
[Pandit K. C. Sharma]
53. In the form in which it is presented, this Bill takes away this declaration that they belong to the same religion-
Hindu, Jain, Buddhist or Sikh religion. Under the proposed Bill, any Indian citizen can marry another Indian citizen, of
course of the other sex.
54. Then, Sir, the condition prevailing up to this time was that cases were known in large numbers in which the
young man in order to get the young girl would say that he is not a Muslim or he is not a Hindu, though he is a Muslim
or Hindu all the while. In order to get the woman, he will make a false declaration. To do away with that necessity of
making a false declaration, this Bill comes to our rescue. The only difference that it makes is that the young man or
the young woman is not required to make false declarations before the Registrar. They come as man and woman
belonging to this country only stating that they are 21 or such and such age and they are Indian citizens and they
want to take each other as husband and wife and therefore they are married. This is the only difference; there is no
other difference. Sir. law is made under economic, social conditions and intellectual receptivity. 'Intellectual' when it is
used in relation to the conditions of law. Includes ethical conceptions or morality. Whether it is a good law or a bad law
depends on the circumstances which warrant the enactment of a proposed law. I may cite the example of a recent
Bombay marriage, in which a man and a woman did not like to go even to the Registrar of Marriages, but made a
certain contract, the woman stating that "these would be conditions for my living with the husband" and the husband
laying down certain conditions for keeping the woman as his wife and they both agreeing that while they live as
husband and wife, those are the conditions which each of them undertakes to observe. So this is a social condition.
The receptivity of the people demands that we have come to a stage where such a law is a necessity and therefore it is
quite in the fitness of things that such a law be passed.
55. Again, there is a chapter "Registration of Marriages solemnised in other form". My friend. Mr. Deshpande, made
much of it, but I may remind him that there was an amendment to the Special Marriage Act and it is already the law
that if marriages are performed in any other farm, husband and wife agreeing together, writing to the Registrar, can
get the marriage converted into a marriage under the Special Marriage Act, and then the marriage will be considered
as one performed under that Act. So, there is nothing new in it. It is already a law in existence. There is nothing new
in it and when this amendment was brought, I was against it, not because it was a bad law as such, but because when
the marriage has already been performed in another form, it was not a question between A and B, that is, husband
and wife, but there might also be the question of A, B, C and D, that is, the husband, the wife and two children, and
after the marriage has been registered as a marriage under the Special Marriage Act, then inheritance would be
governed by the Succession Act. Thus, in the same family two forms of law of inheritance will come into existence-one,
the law of surviorship and the other, the law of succession. That was my objection to that amendment. I am still of the
opinion that registration of marriages solemnised in other forms is not a good law. For when a marriage is done in a
religious form, it is both sacramental end contractual. It might be predominantly sacramental, but the element of
contract is always present there, whether it is a Hindu marriage or a Muhammadan marriage or a Christian marriage.
It is wrong tosay that a marriage performed under the personal law is cent, per cent, a religious marriage or a
sacramental marriage. They undertake certain obligations there as husband and wife, which is a form of contract, and
that contract is enforceable in civil courts. Even a personal law marriage is to-some extent a contractual marriage So,
this marriage under the personal laws is sacramental as well as contractual. At the time when the marriage was
performed, it should not be open under any circumstances-I am talking of the case of personal law marriages-to the
parties to say "goodbye" to what they once promised. That was my objection and I still do not regard it as a good law.
There is nothing of religion in it and nothing ethical la involved. Because a young man goes to the Registrar and says
"I take this young lady as my wife", does it mean that to everything decent and ethical in human life they say 'good-
bye'? There is nothing of the sort. Human life is human life. It is good and decent whether you stand by the scripture
or you stand by the social virtues. A virtue is not simply because It is there in certain secred books; it is a virtue when
it is acted upon in society; scriptures are meant for social life and not meant for libraries. Therefore. to say that
anything irreligious is being done is wrong and the impression created that certain sections of the House are bent
upon acting in a way which is against certain tenets of religion is entirely unfounded. As I said, a law is to be passed
on the conditions, economic, social and intellectual and the word 'intellectual' if comprehensive enough to include
ethical conception. I also laid that a Bombay marriage warrants the enactment of such a law because two educated
persons quite decent in life, quite respected in society and doing useful work, have married in a form of contract and
they live together peacefully, happily etc. Therefore, conditions obtain where such a Bill is now necessary. I again
repeat it is against no religion, no ethical principles, no decencies of life. It is a perfect piece of legislation.
56. Mr. Chairman: I think we are near-ing 5-30. At 5-30 we have to commence discussion on a matter of public
importance. I think there Is hardly a minute or two now.
57. An Hon. Member: Somebody may begin, Sir, his speech.
58. Shri D. C. Sharma: Mr. Chairman. Sir, I think this question is going to be a barometer of the social conscience
of those people who are going to speak on it and of those who are going to judge it. I believe, Sir, that social
legislation of a progressive type is always productive of many surprising reactions. One of the reactions that it
produces is a shock reaction and I was not surprised when I listened to the speech of some hon. Members on this side
of the House who thought that the heavens are going to fall because this Bill has been introduced. I believe, Sir, that
the heavens are not going to fall when this Bill is going to be passed. On the other hand, I believe that India will have
a new social outlook on life and a new social outlook of our own. I think that this Bill will in many ways re-vitalise our
home life and social life.
59. Shri Algu Rai Shastri: I doubt very much.
60. Shri D. C. Sharma: Sir, I shall continue tomorrow.
INTERIM COMPENSATION TO DISPLACED PERSONS
61. Mr. Chairman: Now, we may lake up the discussion of a matter of very great importance, namely, the scheme
to pay interim compensation to displaced persons for their properties left in Pakistan. The hon. Member Shri Gidwani
has given notice. | think that as the total time for the discussion is only one hour, 15 minutes may be given to Shri
Gidwani, 15 minutes for the hon. Minister to reply and 6 minutes each to those persons who have sent in their names
and who wish to take part in the debate.
62. Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani (New Delhi) : 5 minutes is quite useless. It is such an important subject that the
time should be extended beyond one hour for the discussion.
Mr. Chairman: The hon. lady Member realises that by convention that in a matter to be discussed only for in
short duration. So far as the present programme is concerned, it is fixed. I think it is only a matter of urgent
importance, for a short duration. Therefore, I am going to give 15 minutes to Committee of the National Cadet Corps
for a term of one year."
The motion was adopted.
64. Mr. Speaker: I have to inform Members that the following dates have been fixed for receiving nominations and
withdrawal of candidatures, and for holding an election, if necessary. in connection with the Central Advisory
Committee of the National Cadet Corps, namely:-
Date for nomination: 18th December, 1953 (Friday) (Interruptions.)
Members will be obliging the Chair by not talking so loudly.
Date for withdrawal: 19th December, 1953 (Saturday.)
Date for election: 23rd December, 1953 (Wednesday.)
65. The nominations for the Committee and the withdrawal of candidatures will be received in the Parliamentary
Notice Office upto 4 p.m. on the dates mentioned for the purpose.
66. The election which will be conducted by means of the single transferable vote, will be held in Committee Room
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House between the hours 2-30 and 5 p.m.
PRISONERS (ATTENDANCE IN COURTS) BILL
67. The Deputy Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Datar): I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for
the attendance of prisoners in courts and tor obtaining their evidence therein.
68. Mr. Speaker: The question in:
"That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for the attendance of prisoners in courts and for obtaining
their evidence therein.'
69. The motion was adopted.
70. Shri Datar: In introduce the Bill.
SPECIAL MARRIAGE BILL
71. Mr. Speaker : The House will now proceed with the further consideration of the following motion moved by Shri
C. C. Biswas on the 14th December, 1953, namely:
"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Coun-cil of States that the House do join in the Joint
Committee of the Houses on the Bill to provide a special form of marriage in certain cases, and for the re-gistration
of such and certain other marriages and resolves that the following members of the House of the People be
nominated to serve on the said Joint Committee namely Shri Hari Vinayak Pataskar, Sbrimati Indira A. Maydeo, Shri
Narhar Vishnu Gadgil, Pandit Balkrishma Sharma, Shri Nardeo Snatak, Shri Ram Saran, Shri Muham-med Khuda
Bukhsb, Shrimati Sushama Sen, Shri Awadeshwar Prasad Sinha, Dr. Hari Mohan, Shri Dodda Thimmaiah, Shri G. R.
Damodaran, Shri C. P. Mathew, Shri T. N. Vishwanatha Reddy, Shri Tek Chand, Shrimati Subhad-ra Joshi, Shrimati
B, Khongmen, Shri B. N. Mishra, Shri N. Somana, Shri Purnendu Sekhar Naskar, Shri B. Pocker Saheb, Her Highness
Rajmata Kamlendu Mati Shah, Shrimati Sucheta Kri-palani, Shrimati Renu Chakra-vartty, Dr. A. Krishnaswami. Shri
M. R. Krishna, Shri B. Ramachandra Reddi, Shri P. N. Rajabhoj, Shri K. A Damodara Menon, Shri Tridib Kumar Chau-
duhri"
72. The House will also take up further consideration of the amendments proved by Dr. Lanka Sundaram, Shri Nemi
Chandra Kasliwal and Shri S. V. Ramaswamy.
73. Shri D. C. Sharma (Hoshiarpur) Mr. Speaker, Sir, I said yesterday that this is a very useful piece of legislation
and that some sections of the House had been unduly alarmed by it When one looks through this Bill, one comes to
the conclusion that-at best it is an enabling measure. It has no air of compulsion about it. It is permissive; it is not
mandatory.
[Mr. Deputy-Speaker in the Chair]
74. From that point of view, it does not interfere with any one's religion, with any one's customs, with any kind of
ceremonies if a person wants to preserve them at all costs. Still it has been said that it goes against Hindu society and
that it goes against so many other things.
75. Sir, an best. Member yesterday gave a definition of a Hindu, and I felt very happy to listen to it. I felt that that
definition would be applicable to any person professing any religion so long as he was a good man. That was the
definition which was given. I think that that definition could apply to all persons of all creeds and castes and all
denominations and I think that is the beauty of Hinduism. Hinduism is a catholic religion. It is an all-embracing
religion. It is not an exclusive religion. When you here a religion which is all-inclusive, you imply that it would give you
freedom of choice in many ways. I believe that in the matter of marriage, which affects almost every person in this
world, this freedom of choice is something which is highly desirable. At the same time, I do not believe that this Bill
goes against the injunctions of the Vedas and Sastras to which reference was made. I am not a Pandit in any sense of
the term. But I believe that all scriptures of the Hindu reli-gion enjoin on as one thing. Their marriage is one and that
is that all human beings should be able to live happily in loss world. Happiness is perhaps one of the biggest things
aimed at by religion. I believe that this from of marriage will promote the happiness of marry persons and therefore,
one should not bring in Sastras in order to penalise those persons who want this kind of marriage.
76. I should say that this is a Bill which is an amendment of an old Bill. The world is moving and moving rather
fast. The march of time is inexorable. I believe that if such a Bill could be passed in the world of 1872, there is no
reason why this Bill should not be passed in 1953, to apply to Indians in other parts of the world also, so that people
may not say that Hindu society has been a static society, that it has been stuck up, that it has not made progress, etc.
There are new social strains and pressures visible in the society even in this matter. On account of these stresses and
strains which are new, we require new measures. After all, there was an old measure. This is a mea-sure which seeks
to amend an old measure. I do not think that all the exaggerated alarms that were raised yesterday are justified in
point of fact. What does this Bill say? This Bill says that there should be a contractual form of marriage. I do not know
much about Sastras. But, I have some slight knowledge of Hindu history and Indian history. I can say that we had so
many kinds of marriages. What was the kind of marriage that the revered Shri Rama-chandra celebrated? It was one
form of marriage, swayamvara, of which we know nothing these days. What was the kind of marriage that king
Duabyanta celebrated with Sakunta-la? That was another kind of marriage. There are so many kinds of marriages
enumerated in our sastras. All these marriages are there because our social circumstances needed them. I do not see
any reason why this kind of contractual form of marriage which is a need brought about by the new social
circumstances should be a taboo and should be frowned upon Democracy means freedem of choice. We can choose in
marriage any body we like. I think this Bill gives us that freedom of choice. This is a freedom which cannot be denied
to men and women. It cannot be denied to persons when they receive high education, when they are brought up in a
democratic atmosphere, and when they are taught that they should love freedom. If they can have political freedom
and freedom in other spheres of life, I do not tee why they should not have freedom in the choice of their partners. I
think this is only an extension of the liberty which we have granted in so many spheres of life. I think this principle is
already there. It is only being legalised here so that there may not be any untoward consequences. Under the old Bill
of 1872, one had to for-swear religion before he could marry under that Act. According to this Bill, one need not
forswear religion. I think this Bill is a more wise document and one which is helpful to the preservation of our religion
and consolidation of our religion. Therefore I think that those people who think that this is a blow aimed at our
religious susceptibilities, are talking of something which is not here. This Bill is very good in that provision has been
made so far as extra-territoria-lity is concerned. I believe that this will take us a long way in the direction of social
reform which is very much needed.
77. At the same time, I would like to make a few suggestions for the consideration of the Law Minister. I think that
a Bill should be brought dealing with foreign marriages. I do not say that it should be on the model of the Foreign
Marriage Act in England or other countries. A Bill should be brought here to meet the need of the times. Those persons
who suffer from certain kinds of diseases-in this we may take the advice of our health experts-should be prevented
from contracting marriages and punished if there is a breach. The age of content should be 21 years I remember
listening to a debate on the floor of the House when it was said that the age of consent should be raised. I think our
social circumstances demand that it should be done. I think that there should be no at tempt made to disintegrate our
joint family system. It is said that if a person is married under this Act, it will have the effect of severing him from the
joint family.
3 p.m.
78. I think this should not be done because, when all is said and done, the Joint family system has done a lot of
good to our country, and we should not aim at anything which tries to undo it. At the same time, I should say that so
far as the issues of these marriages are concerned, their religion should be determined by the father and if that is not
possible, some other steps should be taken so that this matter is not left in doubt.
79. I should also suggest that the parents of those children who are married under this Act should not be allowed
to adopt another child, because that will mean a kind of blow at the joint family.
80. So far as the prohibited area is concerned, I think this Bill has gone quite far, but I would suggest that to far at
the prohibition within the limits of relationship is concerned, the question should be gone into very carefully and very
thoroughly. It is no use bringing in legislation on that point which does not have validity according to our religious and
customary sanctions and also scientific sanctions.
81. These are the suggestions I wish to bring to the notice of the Law Minister. I hope I will be able to give some
more suggestions when the Bill is taken up for Clause by Clause consideration. I welcome this Bill, and I think most of
the people in the country welcome this Bill which is a very progressive measure.
Ange
firer
with players 1 by 4 issue
His $ HE illin 1244 24
who U 314 de you
of 1412 we 14 with # DAB
waje I IDUS 19 we Hit y DE RJK
$ be bajas I has you # whole us
EV you 12 The Ris be leto
I 1048 BHA # 14 HE 42 10200
1st way an # sade $ way car lot Date way
an 1 way The isn 314 it the to seef 704.
# 4jth 10811 1424 18th 21bef
-212
2b
HE
LA
whaths
pa
2012
BY
be
way
High star (4
AS
2b
&
1344
26PAJ
IS
$
24
was
2b as by thes U HIH # I 210 H E was
z words 23160 2.21 the Ht (8)
will (2110 the B 200 yey And 1434
way 264 $ AS I pajik 142 whole
AP # HE 14 $20 WITH & A 28 I List
psjur
134
P
#
AS
to
HE
stof
Are
1012
Hall
ww
210
4
12h
#
>If
use
to
HE
4
may
1.42
the
blue
E
B
DIE
=8 130 # BE 3.1 give
to
12112
the 20.14 4123 If for. USED #
BUP 1th * UP Mar Ltt (2110 Pk bill
DAY in Are we subject 19 1211
to
4>2 $ 1 20.14 & its 1 2b 14 was
AS lett I de up just 34 #2 AS
I the 1998 1643 year 1 is
2b 42 19 2346 file 4 was 14 way
as 12th HE day for. WHEE # the I
103 HIGH on is likby be 24 we way
like 222 eyes 124 3 124
134 be B pain bit Ave Lic # was as
the pl ib # HL as bid DIE &
LINE 14 way as waje I 704 we JUKE 2b
[*** like
"pr7 'Ind
robn
ozhoon
qM oos
ENITNO
TO
'SL
69th
pr7 083 CPM oos
OOS
as sky 3 #: w hib F
unto Bill 1st US DAY 2b
2/5 4 I 1 wale 4, you year (3
yes yet youb say be 1 Dab As to
4, 1244 Diek I nib 12 to (2110 1243
you 12110 is side 2k 1 (2110 Lt 1096
1 to 10 (hbj11b isn 2149 # 14
the 4 KWD Day 1st with 'blaj H2 $
'ne) 1224 was 1 WITH by pain in Lis
& JUP it 2n 14 bitt # I 18 &
- stay to 201 inajus with (In 2012/18 1224 sof
Phy 2n print HS I Mer Date we yesjy
1298 L AS I fine DIE 12 was # 2b
23100 20 ? you to I 1218
w let # DE 1 PLE P was
I 22 DOB you 12 ? 124 #
A 13113 1424 12 *** I 220 and
may Bibby 2 par 2148 12 DAY
theiry ## yes Are wab Hall 15%
14 b HE AP 124.10 184 the leak 12
11 us web # sough 3.25 1.00 If
1 AND 2x4 A 238 $10 Lie was
phis Ho 24 be 1 Delab by I payer
THE work 1513 her LA Litt# 14 A
is
'19't
yes
14
#
THE
2.
Le)
12
the LIKE his 2b LAS his A Ho BE 18
I 1 Lilk His 26th JENE B $1.4
was HIDH play $ Halla 14 you 19
2.2 yn 1 was 214 yes I As Jus
132 2143 2k & in to leith
2140 # WAS 11 see 2 par his LASE
you LUV 2 2n was 12P18
12 HE 1615 way with was 14 bus
20 with 2122 LIE by years to b
# is 211 & LINDE as I were Ltd as 24
user 4 21th day Apr 10th 12143
''pt7 'I/d 083 OOS
ENITO
woo CM
7 OLD abed
SSS
'sl Kepuow
H
pi7 'Ind 283 qM OOS
and # letter Jells 4 in UNDS
1624 14 be lasts you I Daley
BV
the
yes 4 Dbe use 'to wajis (Phils
2pm It with be 7 the be 12blk
2palk 2b 166 Any yaj for pullo his I Are
I like 14 HS yej The PLUS
hits the I in Let # (pleate th b98 2fts
y 2/t 34 'Ib 1004 PH #F to
your zp $1 a the Lt Use 4
plt of make to 2019 P you 't's
U with $ with
way I Apr is Until late to algejs
14 with base I de # like
stop
I
Are
line
#
ltb
Yag
by
for time 212 20 List be gite it taj
yes will It In to but #
I 212 be
LINE 2b 2/1 els # & HE
your DAIS He Join to JAIN seef
764. WHEN # : all the while
I H 18 # 'RL8
243 Do : (halk we) us
I we to LDP 2AR WITH
12142 12 et Jalk your 2013
by leg. WHITH 12 # I 20c. 1024 26/27
Dib
# your 1 # they hes you we 11t 2h
13n # I to # Dbe $ your 15 del P UT
2k de ejided 4AJE to thkaj talk 14
I UNL UNIPED which "
pap
the years # 'If HE UND ejhay He
Its
bik & w PH IS # HE
2 ejhay 6 10kzj # # HE de 31 b
10101(4) pay $ HILL HOLDER as the 15
# lake is of de Dr 13 1212 was
I 4 24 be 14 AS
4 1005 H HE 2 programs
"pr7 'I^d 083
rober ozhoon
Com oos
ENITNO
TO
'SL
e
pr7 7^d 083 CAM oos
IDS
farm
f
family
at
afer
fater
54
farer
ster
Afaction
far
anf*
82. Mr. Depaty-Speaker: Let me make one suggestion. I find a number of hon. Members are desirous of parti-
oipating in this discussion. It has been the practice of this House that that hon. Member whose name is included in the
list of Members of the Select Committee has not been allowed to participate in the discussion. The number of
members of the Select Committee is so large that I am not able to find out, when many hon Members stand up, who
are members of the Select Committee and who are not. I therefore leave it to them not to try to catch my eye. Those
who are members of the Select Committee may not stand up.
83. Shri Gadgil: May I say something, Sir? Even if the Member happens to be included in the Select Committee it
is possible that he may have some good points on which it is necessary to know the reactions of the House. If you
make a hard and fast rule-of course the House is competent to do that-it will not be conducive for the purposes of
having a good and all-pervading discussion. I am, therefore, suggesting that in suitable cases exception may be
made. I want to speak.
84. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: Suitable cases will always be borne in mind. But, whenever an hon. Member is a
member of the Select Committee, he will, when he wants to address the House, kindly inform me that he is a member
of the Select Committee, and say that notwithstanding that he wants to apeak.
85. Start Gadgil: That is what I have done.
86. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: Shrimati May-deo.
87. Shri S.S. More (Sholapur) : She is a member of the Select Committee, Sir.
88. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: Is she?
89. Shrimati Maydeo (Poona South) : Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sir, although | am welcoming this tiny bit of
legislation, which is part of the Hindu Code Bill, I am not satisfied because
90. The Minister of Law and Minority Affairs (Shri Biswas): It is not a part of the Hindu Code Bill at all.
91. Shrimati Maydeo: In the name of civil marriage, it was a part of the Hindu Code Bill. There is only a little
change. There are some reforms made and because it is made applicable to all, it is little different. It was also
included in the Hindu Code Bill in the name of civil marriage and so we were waiting for all the other sections, the
Hindu Marriage, Divorce and Inheritance Bill and also on Succession. We would have welcomed them first. But, even
otherwise, we are satisfied that at least a beginning has been made.
92. There are some clauses which are welcome to society; but there are many other clauses also which need
changes and amendments. As there is not much time, I will confine myself only to a few. I would like to point out that
in clause 7(2), the number of days has been changed from 14 to 30. But, I would like to say that where the consent of
the parents of both the parties has already been obtained, the limit of 30 days should be changed to 14 days, because
in many cases it is necessary that the marriage should be celebrated earlier. Therefore, when the consent of the
parents has been obtained, there should not be this condition that 30 days should lapse after the notice is given.
93. Then there is clause 18 to which my hon. friend Mrs. Uma Nehru referred. I do not understand why the couple
marrying under the Special Marriage Act should be treated as step-children and why they should be asked, by law, to
sever from the joint family. As social workers who are very devoted to Harijan uplift, we, who are for social legislation,
used to ask boys and girls to marry under the Special Marriage Act to get all the advantages of the law, so long as no
monogamy law or divorce law was brought into our country. Many young boys and girls listened to me. Why should
they be asked to sever themselves from the family? Even after their marriage, they are as dear to us as they were
before. Why should it be supposed as if they are dead to their parents. Why should the parents also be allowed to take
another son in adoption as if the son who has married under the Spe-cial Marriage Act is dead to them? I do not
understand why such a treatment should be given to couples marrying under the Special Marriage Act. They should be
allowed all the facilities and they should be allowed to stay in their families and with their parents. One should not be
asked to seven his connection with the family or even be debarred from the right of adoption. There is every possibility
of a couple marrying under the Special Marriage Act not getting an issue at ell. Why should they be debarred from
adopting a child to satisfy their love for children? So, I think that these clauses 18 to 21 are not necessory at all, and
they should be deleted.
94. One other point which I came across and with which I am surprised is in the schedule, page 8. When the notice
is to be given, it is said that the bridegroom should say that he is unmarried, widower or divorcee and in the case of
the bride, it is stated, that she should call herserf a spinster. Why should she be treated so harshly under law? The
meaning of the word 'spinster' is not very happy. That means an elderly woman who is unmarried. But then a bride
can be a very pretty young girl of 18 years. Why should she call herself a spinster? I feel that this word 'spinster'
should be changed into 'unmarried'.
95. There are many other clauses also which need changes, but I keep them for the Select Committee.
96. Thank you. Sir, for giving ma an opportunity.
97. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: I will call only non-Select Committee members. Shri Raghubir Sahal.
98. Shri U. M. Trivedi (Chittor) : Is the speaker alweys to be from the right side?
99. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: Anyhow, I have begun there and let it go that way.
100. Shri Raghubir Sahal (Etah Distt.- North East Budaun Distt.-East) I rise, Sir, to give my whole-hearted
support to this Bill. I was rather amazed yesterday when two hon. Members of this House belonging to the Opposition
Benches raised an alarm in violent speeches opposing the Bill. I thought if any outsider had heard those speeches, he
might have come to the conclusion that perhaps a very novel, unique and unheard of principle was being introduced
by the Indian Government in this legislation. There was nothing of that kind in this Bill. As bee been pointed out by
some hon. Members, this Bill is net a new Bill at all; it is only a re-hash of a Bill that was enacted in the year 1872,
something like 81 years back, and since then, that piece of legislation is there on the statute book. The only point that
can new arise in the consideration of the Bill is why, if a legislation of this kind existed since 1872, bring a new Bill.
There is a sound and a very good reason for It. The reason is that since then, society has changed. times have
changed, many new features have arisen and we have to take note of public opinion and all that, and therefore, some
changes had to be made in the old Bill. This Bill has been pleced now with certain changes here and there.
101. Sir, with your permission, I beg to point out that the most important changes that have been introduced in
this Bill, as compared with the 1872 legislation, are-
(1) That this Bill is made applicable to all the eithers of India, irrespective of their religion;
(2) That it is made applicable to the ettlzens of India outside, or in other words, it will have extra-territorial
jurisdiction;
(3) That the age emit far marriage has been fixed at 18 formerly, in the 1872 legislation, the age limit fixed for a
girl was only 14; and
(4) That this Bill provides for the legislation of those marriages also which had been performed either before or after
the passing of the Bill under some other form or under some other law.
102. Now the question arises-does this Bill come into conflict with any of the notions of Hindu religion, and is it
such that unnecessary fuss should be created in regard to the passage of the Bill As pointed out by me, the 1872
legislation was passed and it has been in existence all this time. Never did public opinion demand the abrogation of
that Act and it does not now behove any people in the country to raise a voice of protest against the Bill at all.
Moreover, there is one point that is to be considered - in this connection. Before bringing this Bill, it was perhaps
necessary for the Government to have placed those figures before us as to how far the whole legislation of 1872 was
availed of by the public. I may point out that I wrote a letter to the Director-General of Registration of Marriages in
this connection and I wanted to elicit Information as to how many marriages, since the passage of the 1872 Act, have
been registered under that Act. I am sorry to say that no such information was forthcoming. That information would
have given us some clue as to how far the 1872 legislation was popular in this country.
103. One very good feature of the Bill is that it is only a permissive Bill. There a nothing of a mandatory nature in
it. It is not an obligatory Bill; it is not an obligatory legislation; anybody who likes to make use of the provisions of the
Bill is at liberty to do so, and one who does not like it, is at liberty not to avail of it. There should be no occasion for
the opposition of the Bill. The reason why I welcome the Bill is that it provides a simple method of marriage, a method
which will be inexpensive. Only the other day, when the Dowry Bill introduced by our revered sister Shrimati Uma
Nehru in the House, was under consideration, the point was elaborated that the marriages of these days are very very
expensive, and in that connection our hon. Law Minister pointed out that it was the intention of the Government to
bring a Bill restricting expenses in marriages. I don't know when that Bill would be forthcoming but till then, the
passage of this Bill will have a very salutary effect, because it provides a very simple and inexpensive form
of
marriage.
104. Having said this, | would like now to point out that there are certain defects also in the Bill. I hope the hon
Law Minister will take note of them because he is the man who will pilot the Bill through the Select Committee and,
after it has emerged from the Select Committee, through both the Council of States and this House. For instance, Sir,
in clause 4, the age limit has been fixed at 18 for those who enter into a marriage alliance under this provision. | wish
to point out that these are days when notions and ideas. have undergone a very great change. The limit of 18 years is
not proper. To my mind, it appears that at least 21 should have been fixed both for the girl as well as for the boy.
105. An Hon. Member: A boy of 21
106. Shri Raghubir Sahai: The second suggestion that I wish to make is that under the Bill, it is obligatory that
whenever a boy and a girl intend to marry under the provisions of this Bill they have to give notice. There is no
provision here with regard to giving information to the parents of the boy or the girl. If both of them happen to be in a
foreign country-suppose a young boy has been sent from India and a young girl has also been sent from India, to
carry on their education in England-and if they fall in love with each other and decide to marry
107. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: It is already late.
108. Shri Raghubir Sahai: I will bring my remarks to a close very soon. I wish that in such cases the notice
should go to the parents of the boy and the girl in India, so that, if necessary, the parents could raise objection with
regard to the age of the boy and the girl or with regard to the prohibited relationship or with regard to any other
relevant matter. That has not been provided in this Bill.
109. Then, Sir, as has been pointed out by other learned friends, when a marriage has been performed under the
provisions of this Bill, why these persons should be deprived of the right of adoption? Why should there be a severance
of their connection from the joint family? These are also points that should be considered by the Joint Select
Committee.
110. One other point that | wish to make is that in clause 14, it is provided that "any marriage solemnized, whether
before or after the commencement of this Act other than a marriage solemnized under Special Marriage Act," may be
registered "under this Part by a Marriage Officer in, India." Sir, I for one, cannot understand the utility of this
provision. It has been said in the 'notes on clauses' under this clause that it provides for the registration under this Act
of marriages solemnized in other forms, so as to enable the parties thereto to avail themselves of the benefits of this
Act. What are those benefits? One of them is that he would not have the right of adoption. The other is that he would
sever his connection from the joint family. Now, Sir, I submit that this is no benefit at all, it is a positive loss, so to
say. When a marriage has already taken place, who is going to get it registered again under this Bill for the sake of
these two negative benefits-I cannot possibly understand. These are no positive benefits. These are positive losses.
Therefore. It will be well on the part of the Select Committee to take these points into consideration.
111. Shri N. C. Chatterjee (Hooghly): Mr. Deputy-Speaker, Sir, the hon. lady Member from the communist beach
said yesterday that she welcomes this Bill because it is based on progress. Progress towards what, Sir? Progress
towards uplift, progress towards cohesion, or progress towards social disintegration and dismemberment of the Hindu
coparcenership? is that a desirable consummation? You are setting at naught, Sir, the fundamental principle of Hindu
marriage which is, that it is a sacrament. Its cardinal principle is that it is an indissoluble union. Are you not going to
lay an axe at the very root, the very fundamental concept, of Indian marriage which has ruled our society for at least
5,000 years? Will that be a progress ahead, or are you merely imitating the western countries?
112. Sir, when | was a student in the University of London 30 years back, | used to go to the Courts in London, and
I found that besides fashionable leaders like Sir John Simon, most of the lucrative practice was in the patents and
trade-marks cases. The patents and trade-mark practitioners had the most paying practice. After I retired from the
bench, when I went there in 1949, I found that the most lucrative practice was the divorce court practice. As a matter
of fact, this will be a lawyer's paradise; as a lawyer, one should welcome this wonderful measure sponsored by the
hon. Law Minister. He has done some good at least to this profession, to which he belongs. Are you not introducing all
the filth, all the degradation, all the ignominy and all that goes with it, in introducing this kind of legislative measure?
Will that be a desirable consummation? Why did you want independence? The lady Member said there are men who
still cling to the medieval outlook of life; and that is they are opposing this Bill. Shri Aurobindo cannot be accused of
having a medieval outlook of life. He was the greatest fighter from India's emancipation, and was one of the greatest
prophets that this country has produced. He said India can best develop herself and serve humanity by being herself,
and following the law of her own nature, her swabhava and swadharma. Are you, by passing this legislation, following
India's Swa-dharma, India's tradition? Are you going to fulfil India's destiny according to India's tradition, according
to India's norm? We must keep our own culture, our equilibrium, our spiritual poise, our dharma, that is, the essence
of our being, our inborn nature, and we have to assimilate it and re-create our country, our Indian society, on its old,
own moorings.
113. Sir, great writers and thinkers have said-Dr. Radhakrishnan. in his great lectures in the Oxford University has
said-great civilizations have perished, but the civilization of India still lives. Assyria and Babylon have vanished; the
great civilizations of Home and Carthage are mere legends but India lives. Our civilization is still a dynamic force.
Throughout mil-lenium, millions and millions of people have cherished and lived for that civilisation. Why do we live in
that way? We live because we cherish and adhere to certain eternal truths. Those eternal truths are not to be lightly
set aside. Are you not setting aside some of these cardinal truths? Are you not setting at naught some of the
fundamental norms of life and society? I ask you to consider that. India lives, Hindu civilization lives, because you are
rooted to certain traditions and norms and customs relating to marriage and adoption and succession. They should
never be made a plaything of politics. Invaders came, Alexander came, Mohammed Gori came, Mahmud of Ghazni
came, barbarisms came : we have resisted or absorbed most of them, and we also assimilated some of them, but also
at the same time, we taught them these eternal truths and they have adopted them, and they were very proud of
them. What I am saying, Sir, is this : that if you discard those truths, if we discard those eternal principles, then you
are really retarding progress and our self-development, that strange alchemy,-The self development through which
India has lived and by means of which India has subdued and vanquished all her invaders, all her enemies.
114. Now, I submit, Sir, that before you make divorce cheap, before you open the floodgates of all those kinds of
divorce litigation which disfigure other countries and other civilizations, we must pause and consider. This is the
country of Sita, Savitri and Dama-yarrti; in the sanctity and purity and chastity of onr womanhood, India's soul has
been dedicated.
115. Shri Gadgil: Is there anything about chastity in this Bill?
116. Shrl N. C. Chatterjee: Mr. Gadgil seems to laugh at it. But I would ask him seriously to consider : are we
going to ennoble womanhood by making divorce cheap, or are you going to discard the glory of our womanhood?
117. Dr. N. B. Khare (Gwalior) : He wants freedom of cohabitation.
118. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: As a matter of fact
119. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: As far as possible, words which are not quite decent need not be used in the House. No
doubt such words may be Justified by some other meaning, that two people can live together, but equally, the other
meaning does not look so decent, and it is also capable of argument. I request that hon. Members may not use such
words in their natural instinct to be humorous, and avoid such words.
120. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: Our concept, Sir, is one of indissoluble fellowship between man and woman, and
marriage is not an end in itself. Will you snap that sacramental tie, reduce it to a contractual relationship and. more or
lest, a commercial bargain? I resent this remark of my hon. friend who said that she will have contract based on love.
No, Sir. Go to the western countries. What has happened? There has been so much disruption and disintegration of
family life, so much degradation by the so-called freedom, the loosening of the marital tie, loosening of family
affection, What has happened there is really the womenfolk have not progressed, no progress in the real sense at all.
It has been one of degradation. For man, it is different : to disrupt a family life and be divorced-that is one thing for a
man who is absorbed in his work, in his occupation and in his vocation. But what about the woman? You completely
disintegrate her life and consign her to a life of loneliness and misery, especially in a country like ours where ninety
per cent, of the womenfolk are ignorant. You place them at the mercy of men.
121. What is the kind of legislation you are having. Sir, I am submitting that clause 14 is fundamentally an
improper piece of legislation. It says:
"Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, may be registered under
this Part by a Marriage Officer in India" if certain conditions are fulfilled.
122. What right has this Parliament, Sir. to pay with the sacramental marriages. which were entered into. 20 years
back, 30 years back or 40 years back. Men and women entered into a tie.
123. Sbri Gadgil: It is not obligatory : it is permissible.
124. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: I know. But Mr. Gadgil ought to know that our women are illiterate and helpless. It will
be very easy to get a consent and it will be very easy to keep them at the mercy of menfolk. You can easily get a
registration; they do not realise the implication of it.
125. Shri Gadgil: The experience is the other way about
126. Shri N. C. Ckatterjee: It may be so in Maharashtra or elsewhere
127. Shri S. S. More: What is it in Bengal?
128. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: What I point out is this. Sir, is it right, is it fair, Sir, to millions of people who have
entered into matrimonial relationship under Hindu law, knowing fully the implications thereof, having childern,
governed under a peculiar system of succession, having rights and liabilities, etc.? Under Mitakshara immediately they
are born they are members of a coparcenary. By virtue of their birth they have certain rights as coparceners. What
right have you to say that under a retrospective piece of legislation, you will bring them within the ambit of this Act?
You can legislate for fashionable ladies, or westernised women, or progressive ladies, if you like, and say men and
women who do not want Hindu marriages under the sacramental law, under the Vedic law, under the Brahmo form of
marriage, can do whatever they like. But what right have you to say that marriages which were entered into two
decades back, or thirty years back, will be brought within this law. I do not think, Sir, it is right. This kind
of
retroactive legislation, in spite of the paramountcy and sovereignty of Parliament, is most undesirable. You ought not
to do it. We know you call it permissive. But it makes the floodgates open and thereby you will encourage such
marriages. It will not be right, Sir, on our part to play with sacramental marriages.
129. Throughout the millenium of Indian history what has happened? India has survived. India's civilization has
survived : it has survived the cataclysm of politics; it has survived hundreds of Invaders and conquerers, because we
did not allow even princes, or legislatures, or any political party or even a Minister, however, influential he may be to
play with our social system. Our law of marriage was kept intact. | do not say it never changed. It changed from time
to time, because Hinduism is an organic growth. Therefore Hindu law developed from stage to stage. The law as it is
administered today is not the same law as it was in the days of Manu. But. Sir, that was a gradual development, as a
result of progressive social consciousness. Don't try to tamper with that.
130. If I may say so, Sir, codification is not always desirable. Napoleon did it to Fiance, but when it was tried in
Germany it led to terrible difficulties.
[Shri N. C. Chatterjee]
131. As a matter of fact, the unification of Germany was to a large extent imped-ed by premature codification,
premature imitation of other systems of law. That is a point to be seriously considered. Savingy pointed out the
dangers of codification. Don't think codification is the summum bonum. You are not merely codifying. You are
introducing certain provisions which disrupt coparceners, which disrupt sacramental marriages, which lead to the
fragmentation of the cardinal principle of indissolubility of marriage. Is that a desirable consummation? Could you do it
lightheartedly.
132. The hon. the Law Minister says it is not a part of the Hindu Code. But aren't you bringing in part of the Hindu
Code by the side-door, in a camouflaged manner? Aren't you copying some portions of the Hindu Code in this Bill? I
have been elected. Sir. to this House by a constituency where the main issue was the Hindu Code. The distinguished
lady who opposed me was one of the biggest supporters of the Hindu Code. My election, Sir, is a repudiation by my
constituency of this Bill. There are very few electoral contests where the issue came out so prominently.
133. Shri V. G. Deshpande (Guna) : Our Law Minister was not elected at all!
134. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: He is a Member of the Council of States and is in an advantageous position that way.
He has not to go through the test of facing the electorate.
135. Then again, look at clause 18. Under the garb of giving something to the women, or something to the
progressive men, clause 18 has been drafted as follows:
"Effect of marriage on member of undivided family : The marriage solemnized under this Act of any member of
an undivided family who professes the Hindu, Buddhist. Sikh or Jaina religion shall be deemed to effect his
severance from such family."
136. Shri S. S. More: That clause ought to go.
137. Shri Biswas: This provision had been there since the Act of 1872.
138. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: Because it was in the Act of 1872 it must be in the Act of 1953! Therefore, what was
there in the Code of Manu should be consistently here in the law of Mr. C. C. Biswas.
139. What are you doing here? What has marriage to do with coparcenary? If you are really sincere in going ahead,
if you believe in progress, if you are champions of emancipation of women, why do you disrupt coparcenary? Sir,
according to this Bill, if it is enacted, a Hindu can marry a Hindu, a Brahmin can marry a Brahmin, a Muslim can marry
a Muslim, a Christian can marry a Christian
140. Mr. Deputy-Speaker: A Hindu can marry a Christian also.
141. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: Supposing a Hindu marries a Hindu, a Brahmin marries a Brahmin, what crime has he
committed, whereby there should be disruption of coparcenary? You are throwing them immediately out.
142. Shri Gadgil: Break this nexus between religion and property.
143. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: What I am pointing out is this : this Bill is not well-conceived; it is ill-conceived. The
real design is simply to destroy coparcenary, destroy sacramental marriages, destroy the Vedic conception of
indissolubility of marriage.
144. Then under clause 20 no person who has his marriage solemnized under this Act shall have a right of
adoption. Supposing a Hindu boy marries a Hindu girl. Then under this 'progressive' Bill why take away the right of
adoption? What crime have they committed that you take away from them the inherent right of a Hindu.
145. Now you have also brought in the Divorce Act and there you say the old Act of 1869 shall apply. You are
repealing the Act of 1872 and trying to make it more progressive, but you are thinking of the Divorce Act of 1869.
146. The Minister of Home Affairs and States (Dr. Katju): Shall we say of 1953?
147. Shri N. C. Chatterjee: What I am pointing out is this. If you really want to fulfil the obligation which you took
upon yourself by the Constitution, of having a proper civil code for all, produce that civil code : let us discuss it; let us
see what it is. Let us analyse it and tackle it on its merits. Otherwise, do not go in this piecemeal fashion with so-
called progressive measures, taking away coparcenary rights and disrupting the old Mitak-shara family. It will lead to
terrible difficulties. You know that hundreds and hundreds and thousands and thousands of firms and business
concerns are run by Mitakshara coparcenaries. Assuming that anybody avails of this the result would be automatic
disruption of those joint family businesses leading to the upsetting of the entire economic life of the nation. I do not
think that is proper.
148. You know Mr. J. D. Mayne. the greatest authority on Hindu Law, has said it is an impossible task really to
codify Hindu Law in a manner which will satisfy all sections. He said : | defy anybody to do it. Some attempt was
made. It was not satisfactory. But what is more important is this. The growth of our common law of the Hindus was
arrested under the British regime. The British Judges tried to be more conservative than Manu. They did not recognise
customs and usages which came under the auspices of great commentators who reflected really the growing
consciousness of the nation in different regional groups. That was stopped. In independent India that factor has gone.
Our judges should not be living under that condition. They know Parasara. Manu and Yagnavalkiya. They can recognise
the customs. They know the people. They can see that the organic growth of Hindu law is not retarded and full play is
allowed for the development of common law which is the reflex of the national will.
604 PSD.
149. Sari Gadgil: Mr. Deputy-Speaker, as I listened to my friend Mr. Chatterjee I felt that whatever was said when
the Abolition of Sati Act was passed. when the Removal of Caste Disabilities Act was passed, when the Widow
Remarriage Act was passed, when the Child Marriage Restraint Act was passed and when the Hindu Marriage Act of
1949 was passed, the same line of argument even now was being adopted that the Hindu culture and Hindu
civilisation are in danger.
150. Shri S. S. More: That shows their consistency.
151. Shri V. G. Deshpande: And your inconsistency.
152. Shri Gadgil: Well, consistency is the virtue of a wellknown animal. | need not refer to it. We are living, as has
been well recognised by Mr. Chatterjee, in the year 1953 and we are living under a Constitution where certain
principles are guaranteed to individuals. liberty of speech, liberty of association which in my opinion includes the right
of every person to choose his or her partner as he or she desires. Marriage is a joint enterprise.
153. Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Muzaffar-pur Central) : Limited concern.
154. Shri Gadgil: With us it is limited. I do not know what it is with you.
155. Marriage is a joint enterprise where the partners share their ambitions and achievements, their sorrows and
joys and those delicacies which nature desires them to enjoy and not to express. Non can we by any act permit this
noble conception being sabotaged. I think we owe it to the Constitution and the principles guaranteed therein that
there must be full freedom for marriage and it should not be restricted by all such restrictions as are contemplated in
those sections to which a reference was made by Shrimati Uma Nehru as also by Mr. Chatterjee. If that freedom is to
be full, then the nexus between religion and property must be broken. Why should a man be prevented from marrying
a girl of his choice because certain consequences in the matter of inheritance or succession will follow?
156. Shri V. G. Deshpande: Why should you restrict?
157. Dr. N. B. Khare: For full freedom there should be no marriage.
158. Shri Gadgil: I am glad. If Dr. Khar? who is ex-President of the Hindu Ma-hasabha thinks that there should be
no institution of marriage, I think many will agree. But so far as I am able to see the well expressed sense and quite
good sense of the House, everybody is agreed that there must be the institution of marriage.
159. Shri V. G. Deshpande: And restrictions also.
160. Shri Gadgil: Whatever restrictions we may like to impose must be reasonable restrictions and not restrictions
that will prevent the expansion of the personality of this spouse or that spouse.
161. Sir, there is nothing in this which is against Hindu Law. My friend said that the Hindu society has survived.
One of the fundamental principles of Hindu religion, according to him, is the conception of four varnas, chatur varna.
The very fact that only one-fourth of the people can fight means that three-fourths are left out. Either we accept this
as a matter of fundamental value or we do not accept it. All along the genius of Hindu law and dharma has been to
provide good principles, enunciate them and provide for apavad or apod dharma so as to keep the vyavahara
with the spirit of the times. Every age has a amriti of its own. There are those things which are really reasonable like
the restrictions with respect to blood relationship, and there is nothing in this Bill which goes fundamentally against
the spirit or the genius of Hindu dharma. I will. Sir, with your permission read the opinion of Justice Panchapakesa
Ayyar. He has said:
"In the golden age the law of Manu; in the silver Me the law of Goutama : in the bronze age the law of Sankha
and Likhita; and in the iron age the law of Parasara-shows this. I have known some orthodox leading Ayyars and Ay
-yangprs object violently to their sons marrying Non-Hindu or European girls and boycotting the couples for some
time and later on fondling the grandchildren as if they were the progeny through Brahmin girls. Ultimately, blood
tells, and views based on custom finally melt at the call of blood. Our secular state must progress. No one will be
prepared in this atomic age to die for another unless he is capable of becoming a brother-in-law, and not always
remain a "brother" citizen. Intermar-riageability may take time, but it will come when education becomes universal
and culture becomes uniform. The questions of the religion and caste of the progeny of such mixed unions will solve
themselves, as they did even in ancient India. The castes them-selves may dissolve, and religion may become one
of the heart instead of one, of external ritual and name with the appropriate caste marks, horizontal, vertical,
angular, triangular or circular as now. As the proposed marriage law is optional. I am for it, for time, the old gypsy,
will not stay and put up his caravan even for one day. If we delay, hundreds of youngmen and women who love one
another may have to live in adultery or fornication or illegitimate unions. and our sages always wanted to prevent
it hence their allowing unapproved marriages like anu-loma unions and the Rakshasa, paisacha, asura and
Gandharva marriages. Let us follow them. and the rule of live and let livel"
4 P.M.
162. Sir, there is nothing in this Bill which is against the genius of Hindu law. What this Bill does is merely to
regularise what is happening plus removing certain impediments or certain restrictions which one meets with in the
provisions of the Special Marriage Act of 1872. Here under this Bill you can celebrate the marriage according to your
own desires, according to any form you like, and the marriage officer will merely ask each party to say whether he or
she accepts him or her as his or her lawful wife or husband. Beyond that nothing has been contemplated. What used
to be the practice? The marriage would be registered under the provisions of the Special Marriage Act and the parties
would come Lome and again have sort of ritual, as was done in the case of my two daughters-I can speak with
experience. That is not now necessary and from that point of view, it is a distinct mark of progress, a distinct
progressive step.
1 Sir, when we have adopted an ideal of creating a casteless and a classless society in our Constitution, for one
of the Directive Principles lays it down, surely then our objective having been firmly and finally defined, all those
intermediate steps or programmes must be so taken that together and collectively they will have the effect of bringing
that happy day much nearer. I want to ask my friend, Mr. Chatterjee, what exactly is there which is against Hindu
Dharma. My regret is that it is permissive. The other May I had some discussion with my friend, the Law Minister, and
I
suggested to him that so far as the question of going through the form of special marriage was concerned, that was
all right so far as it went. And as I said a few minutes ago, this nexus between religion and property must be broken;
otherwise, the freedom that we have promised in this and in the Constitution can never be realised to the fullest
possible extent. What I then suggested further was that every marriage whenever It had taken place-ten years, thirty
years or forty years-should be registered not because it Imposed this, that and the other; when the property
provisions were removed, then it would satisfy the conscience of my triend, Shri Chatterjee. What is the perpose that I
am pleading this for? When we are having a planned economy, when we have to face the question of a terrible
increase of population some thirty years hence-and the Census Commissioner has drawn a picture, a very dismal
picture-we must in the matter of population also have some plan, and no plan can be evolved or worked up unless we
have firm, correct-one hundred per cent. correct-data.
164. Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Statistical marriage.
165. Shri Gadgil: All right. If we make the minimum age of marriage, say, 16, what will be the sociological
consequences of that?
166. Shri V. G. Deshpande: 16 or 60?
167. Shri Gadgil: 16.
168. Shri V. G. Deshpande: I thought it was 60.
169. Shri Gadgil: Well, that is the Sana-tanist conception.
170. The point is that we must have recorded facts, that a marriage has taken place at a particular time and that
marriage now being registered for this purpose has, as a result of social consequences, so many children bom. so
many dead and so many living, so that we can in that relevant period of a man's and woman's life And out what would
approximately be the births and hereby arrange an entire economic programme which we want to evolve. Otherwise, if
we do not do it now, some years hence we will be faced with a situation which will be very difficult to get over and will
be overwhelming.
171. Whenever there is any progressive measure, it is always the good peasants and the ignorant masses who are
thrown at our face, by saying They do not want it'. I remember, Sir, in 1936 when my friend. Mr. B. Das moved his Bill
to increase the marriageable age of girls, there was a huge opposition. We carried it through and when I went to
Poona, all the Congress workers said: What have you done?
Aditi Anand V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Aditi Anand & Anr.
Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1141 of 2022
Decided on
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, Senior Advocate
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
WITH REGARD TO THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT 1954
[Please Note: These are substituted submissions in supersession of the prior submissions which form a part of
Compilation-I (Petitioners) at Pgs. 323-390]
INDEX
INTRODUCTION: THE LIVES OF THE PETITIONERS
1.
THE INDIAN PARLIAMENT IS A CREATURE OF THE CONSTITUTION AND DOES NOT ENJOY
UNFETTERED SOVEREIGNTY. THE SUPREMACY OF THE CONSTITUTION IS PROTECTED BY THIS
HON'BLE COURT WHICH ACTS AS ITS INTERPRETER (JUDICIAL REVIEW).
11.
THIS HON'BLE COURT'S POWER OF JUDICIAL REVIEW (ARTICLE 32) OVER LEGISLATIVE
ACTION IS PART OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF THE CONSTITUTION. SUCH POWER CANNOT BE
ABROGATED WITHOUT AFFECTING THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF THE CONSTITUTION.
a. Facets of the 'basic structure' of the Constitution
b. Judicial review is part of the basic structure
C. Article 32 is the soul of the Indian Constitution
111.
CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS ARE EMPOWERED TO REVIEW STATUTORY LAW TO ENSURE ITS
CONFORMITY WITH CONSTITUTIONAL VALUES. SUCH COURTS DO NOT NEED TO WAIT FOR THE
LEGISLATURE TO ENACT/AMEND LAW TO RECOGNIZE SAME-SEX MARRIAGE
IV.
THE PROVISIONS OF SMA, INSOFAR AS THEY DO NOT RECOGNIZE SAME-SEX MARRIAGES ARE
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AS BEING VIOLATIVE OF ARTICLES 14, 15, 19, 21 AND 25 OF THE
CONSTITUTION. HENCE, TO SAVE IT FROM THE VICE OF UNCONSTITUTIONALITY, THE SMA
MUST BE READ DOWN TO RECOGNISE SAME-SEX MARRIAGES.
a. Non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA contravenes the rights of LGBT persons to
marry a person of their choice as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
b. The non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA violates the rights of LGBT couples under
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
(i) The exclusions of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA does not pass the rational nexus
test
(ii) Excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA is manifestly arbitrary.
(iii) Denying same-sex couples the right to marry enjoyed by opposite-sex couples amounts to
discrimination on the grounds of 'sex' and 'sexual orientation'.
(iv) Non-recognition of same-sex marriages results in differential treatment of LGBT persons and
excludes them from the multitude of legal benefits that marriage encompasses.
C. Denying legal recognition to same-sex marriages violates their right to freedom of expression and
association guaranteed under Article 19
d. Exclusion of same-sex marriages under the SMA is violative of the rights guaranteed under Article 25.
e. SMA ought to be interpreted to recognise same-sex marriages to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality
V.
RECOGNITION OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGES UNDER THE SMA IS CONSISTENT WITH THE
EVOLVING CONCEPTION OF THE INSTITUTION OF MARRIAGE.
Judicial contribution to the ever-evolving institution of 'marriage'
VI.
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IS A TIME HONOURED TRADITION IN THE INDIAN SOCIETY
VII.
OPPOSITION TO THE HINDU CODE: SIMILAR TO PRESENT DAY OPPOSITION TO SAME SEX
MARRIAGE
Justifying the Reform of the Hindu Code
VIII.
THE GENDERED REFERENCES IN THE PROVISIONS OF SMA ARE CAPABLE OF BEING READ TO
RECOGNIZE SAME-SEX MARRIAGES
a. Test of 'workability' enables gender neutral reading
b. Rule of 'reading down' can validate same-sex marriage under SMA
IX.
THERE IS GROWING INTERNATIONAL CONSENSUS RECOGNIZING SAME-SEX AND GENDER NON
-CONFORMING MARRIAGES, AND THE SAME IS IN LINE WITH INDIA'S INTERNATIONAL
OBLIGATIONS
a. India has an international obligation to recognize marriage equality
b. There is an increasing international judicial consensus around sexual orientation equality, including
recognizing same-sex marriages
CONCLUSION
ANNEXURE 1- TABLE ON ILLUSTRATIVE BUNDLE OF RIGHTS ENJOYED BY MARRIED COUPLES
AND THEIR CHILDREN
ANNEXURE 2- TABLE ON INDICATIVE CHANGES MADE TO PERSONAL LAWS, CIVIL UNIFORM
MARITAL LAWS, AND CUSTOMS THROUGH LEGISLATIONS AND PRECEDENTS
ANNEXURE 3- LIST OF NEWS REPORTS & OTHER SOURCES DEPICTING MARRIAGE & JOINT
SUICIDES AMONGST SAME-SEX COUPLES
ANNEXURE 4- TABLE ON THE PROPOSED WORKABILITY OF THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954
ANNEXURE 5- TABLE ON LEGAL STATUS OF SAME-SEX UNIONS ACROSS THE WORLD
ANNEXURE 6 - A STUDY TITLED 'THE ANTICIPATED IMPACT OF LGBTQIA+ MARRIAGE
EQUALITY LEGISLATION ON INDIAN SOCIETY AND MENTAL HEALTH'
INTRODUCTION: THE LIVES OF THE PETITIONERS
1. Aditi and Susan have been in a committed relationship and lived together in a shared household for more than a
decade. They share household responsibilities, care for each other in sickness and health, and hold out to the world
that they are a couple. They shifted to New Delhi during the COVID-19 pandemic after having lived together in
Mumbai for 7 years.
2. Aditi and Susan are also parents, raising a child together. With the full support of their families, Aditi went ahead
for single-parent adoption. She and Susan take equal responsibility for nurturing, loving, and bringing up their child
but despite the deep emotional bonds built by both sets of parents and grandparents with the child, Susan, her
parents, and her siblings have no legal relationship with their child, the existing legal framework does not allow Susan
and Aditi to marry, and hence to be parents together.
3. As LGBTQ persons, the Petitioners faced many challenges due to their sexual orientation. Each struggled with
sorrow, shame, guilt, and fear during their youth. They were fortunate that when they opened up to their families
about their sexual orientation and their relationship, their families responded with love and acceptance.
4. Today Aditi and Susan are part of a happy family, where they have a loving relationship with each other's parents
and siblings. To have a successful marriage is hard work for any couple, but Aditi and Susan had to go the extra mile
to make their relationship work and to bring their two families together since they had to do all of this without the
social and legal adhesion provided by the institution of marriage. In the eyes of the law, their happy family is no
family at all.
5. Both sets of Petitioners seek the following reliefs from this Hon'ble Court:
i) A writ of mandamus declaring that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ('SMA') is unconstitutional insofar as it does
not provide for solemnization of marriage between an LGBTQ couple; OR
ii) A writ of mandamus declaring that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ought to apply to all couples regardless of
their gender identity and sexual orientation, and reading the SMA so as to apply to all couples irrespective of
their gender identity and sexual orientation.
I. The Indian Parliament is a creature of the Constitution and does not enjoy unfettered sovereignty. The
supremacy of the Constitution is protected by this Hon'ble Court which acts as its interpreter (Judicial
Review).
6. The exclusion of the recognition of same-sex marriage from a legislation governing marriage i.e., SMA, renders
the legislation violative of Part 111 of the Constitution. Denying LGBT couples the right to marry is violative of their
constitutionally guaranteed rights. Before delving into the violations of their fundamental rights, it will be relevant to
deal with the Union's preliminary issues in relation to the captioned challenge to the SMA.
7. The Union of India/Respondent has brought on record its position on the recognition of same-sex marriages by
way of a common counter-affidavit & Application for 'preliminary adjudication of issue of vital importance" (I.A. No.
7807/2023) in the main matter, i.e., Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborthy V. Union of India [W.P. (C) No. 1011/2022].
8. It is the contention of the Union that granting recognition to same-sex marriages is a 'legislative function" and
cannot be a subject matter of judicial adjudication. The Union contends that it is the legislature that grants legal
recognition to marriages based on societal ethos, societal values. The Union also contends that a decision by the Court
in recognising marriage equality would mean "virtual judicial rewriting of an entire branch of law". The above
submissions are in violation of the principles of separation of powers and institutional design as envisaged by the
Constitution of India.
9. The Union's contentions have been made without appreciating the design of the parliamentary form of
government in India. The Parliament in India is regulated by and subjected to the Constitution of India. India adopted
a parliamentary model that is distinct from Britain's model of unfettered parliamentary sovereignty. To provide a
better understanding of India's parliamentary model it will be relevant to contrast it with the Britain's traditional
parliamentary model. British Parliament enjoys unchecked sovereignty. However, in many parliamentary systems,
such as India, there are checks, such as the Constitution. India's Parliament is checked by the Constitution and is not
an unfettered sovereign. The Indian Parliament has strong checks in the form of this Hon'ble Supreme Court.
10. India's brand of separation of powers has been articulated by this Hon'ble Court. The Court has distinguished
India's separation of powers model from that of Britain and the United States. This Hon'ble Court has observed that
how parliamentary sovereignty in India is limited by the Constitution, unlike in the United Kingdom.
Parliament from that of Britain by observing that:
[Harilal Kania, C.J.]
"324. the principal point of distinction between the British Parliament and the Indian Parliament remains and,
that is, that the Indian Parliament is the creature of the Constitution of India and its powers, rights, privileges and
obligations have to be found in the relevant articles of the Constitution of India. It is not a sovereign body,
uncontrolled with unlimited powers. The Constitution of India has conferred on the Indian Parliament powers to
make laws in respect of matters specified in the appropriate places and Schedules, and curtailed its rights and
powers under certain other articles and in particular by the articles found in Part 111 dealing with Fundamental
Rights."
12. This Hon'ble Court further consolidates this understanding of the nature of Parliament in Powers, Privileges and
Immunities of State Legislatures, In re, (1965) 1 SCR 413. A 7-Judge bench of this Hon'ble Court also elucidated its
understanding of the restraints on the legislature in India. This Hon'ble Court explains the nature of a federal
constitution, by distinguishing the Indian constitution from English common law conceptions of sovereignty, in the
following terms:
[P.B. Gajendragadkar, C.J.]
"38. In dealing with this question, it is necessary to bear in mind one fundamental feature of a Federal
Constitution. In England, Parliament is sovereign; and in the words of Dicey, the three distinguishing features of the
principle of Parliamentary Sovereignty are that Parliament has the right to make or unmake any law whatever; that
no person or body is recognised by the law of England as having a right to override or set aside the legislation of
Parliament, and that the right or power of Parliament extends to every part of the Queen's dominions [The Law of
the Constitution by A.V. Dicey, p. xxxiv] On the other hand, the essential characteristic of federalism is "the
distribution of limited executive, legislative and judicial authority among bodies which are coordinate
with and independent of each other". The supremacy of the constitution is fundamental to the existence
of a federal State in order to prevent either the legislature of the federal unit or those of the member
States from destroying or impairing that delicate balance of power which satisfies the particular
requirements of States which are desirous of union, but not prepared to merge their individuality in a
unity. This supremacy of the constitution is protected by the authority of an independent judicial body to
act
as the interpreter of a scheme of distribution of powers. Nor is any change possible in the constitution by
the ordinary process of federal or State legislation [ Ibid p. IXXVII] Thus the dominant characteristic of the
British Constitution cannot be claimed by a Federal Constitution like ours."
This Hon'ble Court locates the difference between the British and the Indian Parliament not only in the
supremacy of the Constitution in India, but also in the demands of federalism and the role of the judiciary. So, not
only is Parliament's ability to make law subservient to the Constitution, and subject to it, but also the extent of that
law-making power is curtailed by the federal design envisaged and the interpretation of the courts of that federal
power.
Judges) of this Hon'ble Court shed light on the concept of a 'limited government' and held that the Judiciary is the
interpreter and guardian of the Constitution and limits the powers of various organs of the State in accordance with
constitutional guarantees. The following excerpts from the decision are being reproduced hereinafter:
[B.C. Ray, J.]
61. But where, as in this country and unlike in England, there is a written Constitution which constitutes
the fundamental and in that sense a
"higher law" and acts as a limitation upon the legislature and other organs of the State as grantees
under the Constitution, the usual incidents of parliamentary sovereignty do not obtain and the concept is
one of 'limited government'. Judicial review is, indeed, an incident of and flows from this concept of the
fundamental and the higher law being the touchstone of the limits of the powers of the various organs of the State
which derive power and authority under the Constitution and that the judicial wing is the interpreter of the
Constitution and, therefore, of the limits of authority of the different organs of the State. It is to be noted
that the British Parliament with the Crown is supreme and its powers are unlimited and courts have no power of
judicial review of legislation.
62. In a federal set up the judiciary becomes the guardian of the Constitution. The interpretation of the
Constitution as a legal instrument and its obligation is the function of the courts..."
14. In the present case the SMA to the extent that it does not recognize same-sex marriage, is not within the
limitations imposed by the Constitution which is supreme in the Indian context. Therefore, this Hon'ble Court being
guarantor of fundamental rights can rightfully exercise its power of judicial review by interpreting the statute in a
manner that is consistent with the rights guaranteed under the Constitution.
11. This Hon'ble Court's power of judicial review (Article 32) over Legislative action is part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. Such power cannot be abrogated without affecting the basic structure of the
Constitution.
a. Facets of the 'basic structure' of the Constitution
15. The basic structure doctrine was propounded by a 13-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court in Kesavananda Bharati
amending power under Article 368 of the Constitution is comprehensive enough to cover the amendment of any part
of the Constitution including the fundamental rights, the power could not be exercised so as to destroy those features
of the Constitution which constitute its basic structure'. The majority view in Kesavananda
Bharati was summarized (at Pg. 1007 of the Report, post Para. 2144), in the following manner:
'Article 368 does not enable Parliament to alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution."
16. The various facets of the "basic structure" were laid down in the said decision. The relevant excerpt is
reproduced hereinafter:
[S.M. Sikri, C.J.]
"292. The learned Attorney-General said that every provision of the Constitution is essential; otherwise it would
not have been put in the Constitution. This is true. But this does not place every provision of the Constitution in the
same position. The true position is that every provision of the Constitution can be amended provided in the result
the basic foundation and structure of the constitution remains the same. The basic structure may be said to consist
of the following features:
(1) Supremacy of the Constitution;
(2) Republican and Democratic form of Government;
(3) Secular character of the Constitution;
(4) Separation of powers between the legislature, the executive and the judiciary;
(5) Federal character of the Constitution.
293. The above structure is built on the basic foundation i.e. the dignity and freedom of the individual. This is of
supreme importance. This cannot by any form of amendment be destroyed
294. The above foundation and the above basic features are easily discernible not only from the preamble but
the whole scheme of the Constitution, which / have already discussed."
b. Judicial review is part of the basic structure
17. Over time, by way of judicial precedents, this Hon'ble Court has further added various features to this list of
basic structural features including judicial review. The doctrine of judicial review was added to the list of basic features
decision pertained to the 42nd Amendment Act of Indian Constitution. In a majority verdict, this Hon'ble Court upheld
the power of judicial review of constitutional amendments. It was held that:
[Bhagwati, J.]
"87. It is a cardinal principle of our Constitution that no one howsoever highly placed and no authority however
lofty can claim to be the sole judge
of its power under the Constitution or whether its action is within the confines of such power laid down by the
Constitution. The judiciary is the interpreter of the Constitution and to the judiciary is assigned the
delicate task to determine what is the power conferred on each branch of government, whether it is
limited, and if SO, what are the limits and whether any action of that branch transgresses such limits. It
is for the judiciary to uphold the constitutional values and to enforce the constitutional limitations. That
is the essence of the rule of law, which inter alia requires that "the exercise of powers by the government whether it
be the legislature or the executive or any other authority, be conditioned by the Constitution and the law". The
power of judicial review is an integral part of our constitutional system and without it, there will be no government
of laws and the rule of law would become a teasing illusion and a promise of unreality. / am of the view that if
there is one feature of our Constitution which, more than any other, is basic and fundamental to the
maintenance of democracy and the rule of law, it is the power of judicial review and it is unquestionably,
to my mind, part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Of course, when / say this / should not be taken to
suggest that effective alternative institutional mechanisms or arrangements for judicial review cannot be made by
Parliament. But what / wish to emphasise is that judicial review is a vital principle of our Constitution and
it cannot be abrogated without affecting the basic structure of the Constitution.
18. As is evident from the above decision the power of judicial review as conferred upon this Hon'ble Court under
Article 32 of the Constitution, is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The Constitution of India is unique in
making the right to move this Hon'ble Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights, a fundamental right in itself.
Petitioners are before this Hon'ble Court under Article 32 of the Constitution because their rights have been infringed.
Aditi, Susan and their child are not legally recognized as a family. When Petitioners approach this Court under Article
32 of the Constitution, there can be no question of leaving their rights to the Parliament to decide.
that the power of judicial review as conferred by Article 32 on this Hon'ble Court is a part of the basic structure of the
Constitution. The following was held:
[A.M. Ahmadi, C.J.]
"78. The legitimacy of the power of courts within constitutional democracies to review legislative action has been
questioned since the time it was first conceived. The Constitution of India, being alive to such criticism, has, while
conferring such power upon the higher judiciary, incorporated important safeguards. The Judges of the
superior
courts have been entrusted with the task of upholding the Constitution and to this end, have been
conferred the power to interpret it. It is they who have to ensure that the balance of power envisaged by the
Constitution is maintained and that the legislature and the executive do not, in the discharge of their functions,
transgress constitutional limitations. It is equally their duty to oversee that the judicial decisions rendered by those
who man the subordinate courts and tribunals do not fall foul of strict standards of legal correctness and judicial
independence. The constitutional safeguards which ensure the independence of the Judges of the superior judiciary,
are not available to the Judges of the subordinate judiciary or to those who man tribunals created by ordinary
legislations. Consequently, Judges of the latter category can never be considered full and effective substitutes for
the superior judiciary in discharging the function of constitutional interpretation. We, therefore, hold that the
power of judicial review over legislative action vested in the High Courts under Article 226 and in this
Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution,
constituting part of its basic structure. Ordinarily, therefore, the power of High Courts and the Supreme Court
to test the constitutional validity of legislations can never be ousted or excluded."
20. This Hon'ble Court has held that Judicial Review is in fact a duty cast upon the higher judiciary to safeguard the
Constitution. The contention of the Union to the effect that the Judiciary is encroaching on the powers of the
Legislature (i.e., to confer recognition to same-sex marriages) is unfounded and opposed to a catena of judgments of
this Hon'ble Court.
C. Article 32 is the soul of the Indian Constitution
21. This Hon'ble Court in State of West Bengal V. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal,
[D.K. Jain, J.]
"51. The Constitution of India expressly confers the power of judicial review on this Court and the High Courts
under Articles 32 and 226 respectively.
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar described Article 32 as the very soul of the Constitution-the very heart of it-the
most important article. By now, it is
well-settled that the power of judicial review, vested in the Supreme Court and the High Courts under
the said articles of the Constitution, is an integral part and essential feature of the Constitution,
constituting part of its basic structure. Moreover, Article 13 of the Constitution not only declares the pre-
Constitution laws as void to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the fundamental rights, it also prohibits
the State from making a law which either takes away totally or abrogates in part a fundamental right. Therefore,
judicial review of laws is embedded in the Constitution by virtue of Article 13 read with Articles 32 and 226 of the
Constitution.
22. Judicial review is one of the ways this Court fulfils its role as a counter majoritarian institution within the
constitutional scheme. By protecting constitutional morality against social morality, it protects minorities against the
tyrannies of majority rule. When it exercises its powers of judicial review, this Court tests legislation against the
fundamental rights guaranteed to the individual under the Constitution. It is submitted that the rights of sexual
minorities and transgender persons under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 are violated by matrimonial statutes. Hence,
this is a fit case for this Hon'ble Court to exercise its powers of judicial review under Article 32.
23. It will be relevant to appreciate the Preamble of the Constitution which states as follows:
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a 1 [SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST
SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the 2 [unity and integrity
of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twentysixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE
TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION."
24. The right to move this Hon'ble Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights under Article 32 gives effect to
the phrase to secure to all its citizens". As stated in preceding sections, Parliament is a creature of the Constitution
and is bound by
constitutional principles. Therefore, this Hon'ble Court can rightfully exercise its power of judicial review, which is
a
part of the 'Basic structure' of the Constitution, to interpret the statute in a manner that is consistent with the
rights guaranteed under the Constitution.
111. Constitutional Courts are empowered to review statutory law to ensure its conformity with
constitutional values. Such Courts do not need to wait for the Legislature to enact/amend law to recognize
same-sex marriage.
25. The Respondent, in its common counter-affidavit has inter alia contended the following:
The competent legislature can only enact a law which would govern personal relationships including marriage,
divorce, etc.
- Granting recognition and conferring rights recognising human relations is a legislative function and cannot be made a
subject matter of judicial adjudication.
- Any deviation from the concept of marriage being a relationship between a biological man and a biological woman,
can occur only before the competent legislature.
The said contentions are patently erroneous and ignore well-settled legal precedents of this Hon'ble Court.
26. Before we delve into dissecting the legality of the contentions raised by the Respondent, it will be relevant to
see if any steps were taken by the Respondent to enact any legislation to recognize same-sex marriages. In response
to an unstarred question (No. 4644) raised on the floor of the Lok Sabha on 24.03.2021 as to "whether the
Government proposes to make Special Marriage Act and the Foreign Marriage Act applicable to all couples regardless
to gender identity and sexual orientation", the Minister of Law and Justice responded categorically that there is no
such proposal. Since the Legislature has decided not to take any steps in this regard, the Petitioners were constrained
to approach the Court to enforce
their fundamental right to marry a person of their choice, as well as their fundamental right to equality and non-
discrimination.
27. It is submitted that any law by a competent legislature is subject to judicial review and/ or judicial
interpretation in order to make it consistent with Constitutional values and rights. Further, "cultural ethos", "social
standards", "national acceptability" and "societal values" must give way to constitutional morality in the face of
violation of fundamental rights of citizens.
28. The contention of the State that the field of personal relationships (including marriage, divorce, etc.) ought to
be left to the legislature is in gross violation of numerous precedents of this Hon'ble Court which have subjected laws
of marriage, succession and divorce to judicial review. The Petitioners cannot be left remediless when they have
approached the Court to enforce their fundamental rights to marry a person of their choice, equality and non-
discrimination. The issue of whether LGBT rights can be left to the legislature to decide is now no longer res integra. A
144. The purpose of elevating certain rights to the stature of guaranteed fundamental rights is to
insulate their exercise from the disdain of majorities, whether legislative or popular. The guarantee of
constitutional rights does not depend upon their exercise being favourably regarded by majoritarian
opinion. The test of popular acceptance does not furnish a valid basis to disregard rights which are conferred with
the sanctity of constitutional protection. Discrete and insular minorities face grave dangers of discrimination for the
simple reason that their views, beliefs or way of life does not accord with the "mainstream". Yet in a democratic
Constitution founded on the Rule of Law, their rights are as sacred as those conferred on other citizens to protect
their freedoms and liberties."
1 wherein it was held that "the competent legislature shall be free to consider the desirability and propriety of
deleting Section 377 IPC from the statute book or amend the same.. Hence, the exclusion
of certain citizens from the full enjoyment of rights guaranteed by law is a question to be determined by this
Hon'ble Court and cannot be left to the Legislature.
with the view as laid down in Para. 144 and observed that:
"647. / am in agreement with the view of Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, J., who in paras 144 to 146 of his judgment,
states that the right to privacy cannot be denied, even if there is a miniscule fraction of the population which is
affected. The majoritarian concept does not apply to constitutional rights and the courts are often called up on to
take what may be categorised as a non-majoritarian view, in the check and balance of power envisaged under the
Constitution of India. One's sexual orientation is undoubtedly an attribute of privacy."
30. The aforesaid contentions of the Respondent have been also dealt with in detail and rejected in Navtej Singh
[R.F. Nariman, J.]
352. Another argument raised on behalf of the interveners is that change in society, if any, can be reflected
by amending laws by the elected representatives of the people. Thus, it would be open to Parliament to carve
out an exception from Section 377, but this Court should not indulge in taking upon itself the guardianship of
changing societal mores. Such an argument must be emphatically rejected. The very purpose of the
fundamental rights chapter in the Constitution of India is to withdraw the subject of liberty and dignity
of the individual and place such subject beyond the reach of majoritarian governments so that
constitutional morality can be applied by this Court to give effect to the rights, among others, of
"discrete and insular" minorities. One such minority has knocked on the doors of this Court as this Court is the
custodian of the fundamental rights of citizens. These fundamental rights do not depend upon the outcome of
elections. And, it is not left to majoritarian governments to prescribe what shall be orthodox in matters
concerning social morality. The fundamental rights chapter is like the North Star in the universe of
constitutionalism in India. Constitutional morality always trumps any imposition of a particular view of
social morality by shifting and different majoritarian regimes.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
"514. Under our constitutional scheme, no minority group must suffer deprivation of a constitutional right
because they do not adhere to the majoritarian way of life. By the application of Section 377 of the Penal Code,
MSM and transgender persons are excluded from access to healthcare due to the societal stigma attached to their
sexual identity. Being particularly
vulnerable g to contraction of HIV, this deprivation can only be described as cruel and debilitating. The indignity
suffered by the sexual minority cannot, by any means, stand the test of constitutional validity.
521. The power to enact legislation in the field of criminal law has been entrusted to Parliament and, subject to
its authority, to the State Legislatures. Both Parliament and the State Legislatures can enact laws providing for
offences arising out of legislation falling within their legislative domains. The authority to enact law, however, is
subject to the validity of the law being scrutinised on the touchstone of constitutional safeguards. A citizen, or, as in
the present case, a community of citizens, having addressed a challenge to the validity of a law which creates an
offence, the authority to determine that question is entrusted to the judicial branch in the exercise of the power of
judicial review. The Court will not, as it does not, in the exercise of judicial review, second guess a value judgment
made by the legislature on the need for or the efficacy of legislation. But where a law creating an offence is found to
be offensive to fundamental rights, such a law is not immune to challenge. The constitutional authority which
is
entrusted to the legislatures to create offences is subject to the mandate of a written Constitution. Where the
validity of the law is called into question, judicial review will extend to scrutinising whether the law is manifestly
arbitrary in its encroachment on fundamental liberties. If a law discriminates against a group or a community
of citizens by denying them full and equal participation as citizens, in the rights and liberties granted by
the Constitution, it would be for the Court to adjudicate upon validity of such a law.
608. LGBT individuals living under the threats of conformity grounded in cultural morality have been denied a
basic human existence. They have been stereotyped and prejudiced. Constitutional morality requires this Court not
to turn a blind eye to their right to an equal participation of citizenship and an equal enjoyment of living.
Constitutional morality requires that this Court must act as a counter-majoritarian institution which
discharges the responsibility of protecting constitutionally entrenched rights, regardless of what the
majority may believe. Constitutional morality must turn into a habit of citizens. By e respecting the dignity of
LGBT individuals, this Court is only fulfilling the foundational promises of our Constitution.
643.7. The conclusion in Suresh Kumar Koushal case to await legislative amendments to this provision may not
be necessary. Once it is brought to the notice of the Court of any violation of the fundamental rights of a
citizen, or a group of citizens the Court will not remain a mute spectator, and wait for a majoritarian
Government to bring about such a change. Given the role of this Court as the sentinel on the qui vive, it
is the constitutional duty of this Court to review the provisions of the impugned section, and read it
down to the extent of its inconsistency with the Constitution. In the present case, reading down Section 377
is necessary to exclude consensual sexual relationships between adults, whether of the same sex or otherwise, in
private, so as to remove the vagueness of the provision to the extent it is inconsistent with Part 111 of the
Constitution.
31. Further, the contentions of the Respondent do not have any legal basis in view of the judgment of this Hon'ble
The dynamic of our constitutional system is that individuals need not await legislative action before asserting a
fundamental right. The Nation's courts are open to injured individuals who come to them to vindicate their own
direct, personal stake in our basic charter. An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection when he or
she is harmed, even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act. This
is
why
'fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote; they depend on the outcome of no elections'.
dealing with the issue of appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, laid down the
scope of review by Constitutional Courts in the following manner:
[K.M. Joseph, J.]
"94. Democracy is meaningful only if the sublime goals enshrined in the preamble to the Constitution receive the
undivided attention of the rulers, namely, social, political and economic justice. The concepts of liberty, equality and
fraternity must not be strange bedfellows to the ruling class. Democracy can be achieved only when the governing
dispensation sincerely endeavours to observe the fundamental rights in letter and spirit. Democracy also, needless
to say, would become fragile and may collapse, if only lip service is paid to the rule of law. We cannot be oblivious
to the fact that the founding fathers have contemplated that not only must India aspire for a democratic form of
government and life but it is their unambiguous aim that India must be a Democratic Republic. A brute majority
generated by a democratic process must conform to constitutional safeguards and the demands of
constitutional morality. A Democratic Republic contemplates that majoritarian forces which may be
compatible with a democracy, must be counter balanced by protection accorded to those not in the
majority. When we speak about the minority, the expression is not to be conflated with or limited to
linguistic or religious minorities.
153. Democracy is not satisfied merely by abiding by proper elections and legislative supremacy. Democracy has
its own internal morality based on
the dignity and equality of all human beings. Thus, in addition to formal requirements (elections and the rule of
the majority), there are also substantive requirements. These are reflected in the supremacy of such underlying
democratic values and principles as separation of powers, the rule of law, and independence of the judiciary. They
are based on such fundamental values as tolerance, good faith, justice, reasonableness, and public order. Above
all, democracy cannot exist without the protection of individual human rights - rights SO essential that
they must be insulated from the power of the majority.
224.
While, it is true that, ordinarily, the Court cannot, without anything more, usurp what is purely a
legislative power or function, in the context of the Constitution, which clothes the citizens with Fundamental
Rights and provides for constitutional goals to be achieved and inertia of the Legislative Department
producing a clear situation, where there exist veritable gaps or a vacuum, the Court may not shy away
from what essentially would be part of its judicial function."
has observed that:
[S. Ravindra Bhat, J.]
29. As the organ entrusted with the task of interpreting the laws and the Constitution, the word of this Court is
final. Undoubtedly its role is as a coequal branch of governance; nevertheless, its duty to interpret the law and say
what its silences (or ambiguities) denote, in the particular contexts that it has to contend with, involve making
choices. These choices are not made randomly, or arbitrarily [ Michael Kirby, "Indian and Australian Constitutional
Law : A Recent Study in Contrasts", (2018) 60 JILI 1, p. 30; Also see Herbert Weschler, "Towards Neutral Principles
of Constitutional Law", (1959) 73 Harv L Rev 1.], but based on a careful analysis of the rights involved, the
remedies proposed by the legislative or executive measure, the extent of limits imposed by the Constitution, and so
on. The history of the legislation or the measure, or indeed the provision of the Constitution plays a role in this
process. Interpretation involves an element of line drawing, of making choices. This Court's decisions are replete
with such instances
in considering the constitutional validity of a provision of law passed by the Parliament in the following terms:
[S. Ravindra Bhat, J.]
"139. The role of this court in considering whether or not provisions of law or executive policies are in consonance
with the Constitution is well recognized and cannot be overemphasized. The Attorney General's assertion that the
executive or indeed the Parliament acts within its rights
in interpreting the Constitution, and therefore this court should adopt a deferential standard in matters of policy
are therefore insubstantial, and also disquieting. As conceded by the Union, if a law (passed validly in exercise of its
exclusive power by the Parliament on its interpretation of the Constitution) violates any express provision or
principle that lies at the core of any express provision or provisions, this Court's voice is decisive and final."
35. In light of the above, the contentions of the Respondent are rejected. The present case is concerned with the
constitutional validity of the SMA insofar as it denies the fundamental rights of the Petitioners under Articles 14, 15,
19, and 21 solely on the ground of their sexual orientation and gender identity. In granting relief, this Hon'ble Court
would not be legislating but would be rightfully exercising its power of judicial review by interpreting the statute in a
manner that is consistent with the rights guaranteed under the Constitution.
IV. The provisions of SMA, insofar as they do not recognize same-sex marriages are unconstitutional as
being violative of Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution. Hence, to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality, the SMA must be read down to recognise same-sex marriages.
36. It is submitted that provisions of the SMA, insofar as they do not recognise same sex marriage violate
fundamental rights enshrined under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution. To save them from the vice of
unconstitutionality, the SMA must be interpreted to recognise the right of LGBT persons to get married.
persons enjoy all the rights and privileges guaranteed under the Constitution. Denying LGBT couples the right to marry
is violative of their constitutional rights.
a. Non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA contravenes the rights of LGBT persons to marry a
person of their choice as guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
38. The right to marry a person of one's choice, which is a momentous and life-changing decision, is an integral
aspect of the right to life, dignity, decisional autonomy, privacy and personal liberty enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution. Marriage is one of the most memorable events in any person's life and is an institution that brings great
joy not only to the two individuals but also to their families. It is submitted that denying LGBT persons this right to
choose their life partner and form a union which enjoys legal recognition violates their rights under Article 21.
39. The right to life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution encompasses the right to marry a
person of one's choice. Freedom of choice in matters of marriage and family life is protected by liberty granted under
Article 21. Expression of one's choice is a fundamental right under Article 21. A three-judge bench of this Hon'ble
one's choice is protected under Article 21:
[DY Chandrachud, J]
"86. The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution. The Constitution
guarantees the right to life. The law may regulate (subject to constitutional compliance) the conditions of a valid
marriage, as it may regulate the situations in which a marital tie can be ended or annulled. These remedies are
available to parties to a marriage for it is they who decide best on whether they should accept each other into a
marital tie or continue in that relationship. Society has no role to play in determining our choice of partners.
87. The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual will
have a protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside marriage."
40. More recently, this Hon'ble Court in Laxmibai Chandaragi B. V. State of Karnataka, (WP (Cr.) No. 359/ 2020
decided on 08.02.2021) reaffirmed this right as being integral to the "dignity" of the individual, which is immune to
the concepts of "class honour" or "group thinking." The Court held that:
"10. the choice of an individual is an inextricable part of dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where is
erosion of choice. Such a right or choice is not is not expected to succumb to the concept of "class honour" or
"group thinking".
41. The right to marry is a fundamental right that is not predicated on coming together for the purpose of
procreation, and people exercise the choice to come together for marriage for a variety of reasons. A constitution
the only purpose of marriage.
[Deepak Mishra, CJI and A.N. Khanwalikar, J.]
"230. With the passage of time and evolution of the society, procreation is not the only reason for which people
choose to come together, have live-in relationships, perform coitus or even marry. They do SO for a whole lot of
reasons including emotional companionship..."
42. This Hon'ble Court has time and again ruled that this right of individuals supersedes the considerations of social
or communities.
persons who defy social conventions to enter into inter-religious and inter-caste marriages. Similarly, society may
disapprove of same-sex marriages, in line with its disapproval of inter-caste and inter-religious marriages, however,
the Courts have a constitutional mandate to enforce the constitutional right of choice of marital partner, and non-
discrimination.
44. Excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA denies the LGBT persons' right to get married, which
is an integral aspect of decisional autonomy guaranteed under Article 21. A 9-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court in
life, decisions in respect of family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are intrinsic to the dignity of the
individual and inherent in the right to privacy safeguarded under Article 21.
45. A statute which inhibits LGBT persons from marrying a partner of their choice violates Article 21. Therefore,
insofar as it does not include within its ambit LGBT couples, the SMA violates Article 21.
46. The Respondent, in its common counter-affidavit filed in the main matter, i.e., Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborthy
V.
Union of India [W.P. (C) No. 1011/2022] has contended that the right to marry a person of one's own choice,
guaranteed under Article 21, can be curtailed on the ground of legitimate state interest, to preserve the notion of
marriage as a heteronormative institution, which is deeply and intrinsically ingrained in the Indian society. However,
the counter-affidavit falls hopelessly short of demonstrating any state interest, much less a legitimate one, to deny
recognition to same-sex marriages under the SMA.
47. It is submitted that the non-recognition of same-sex marriage does not meet the three-fold test for "legitimate
existence of a law; (ii) the need of legitimate state aim; and (iii) the proportionality of the means adopted to achieve
the object sought to be fulfilled by the law. This Hon'ble Court has given a narrow meaning to "legitimate state aim" to
include -
[Dy Chandrachud, J.]
"328. for instance protecting national security, preventing and investigating crime, encouraging innovation and
the spread of knowledge, and preventing the dissipation of social welfare benefits."
In light of this narrow import given to "legitimate state aim", it is submitted that the restriction of legal
recognition to opposite-sex marriages does not fit the parameters of the test of legitimate state interest. In fact, the
Respondent, in its counter-affidavit has once again, as it had before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, failed to rely
on or even refer to the 9-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court on the 'legitimate state interest" test.
48. Further, the 9-Judge Bench of this Hon'ble Court, in setting out the test, has held that if rights are restricted on
the ground of legitimate state interest the same must be independently tested on the anvil of the fundamental rights
that the restriction relates to (Para 526). The Petitioners herein have challenged the provisions of the SMA as violating
their fundamental rights under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21 and 25 of the Constitution. Thus, in the absence of a clear
legitimate state interest being demonstrated, the rights of LGBTQ persons cannot be curtailed on the basis of this
ground.
49. In Navtej Johan (cited supra), it was held that:
"561.6 Sexual orientation implicates negative and positive obligations on the state. It not only requires the state
not to discriminate, but also calls for the state to recognise rights which bring true fulfillment to same-sex
relationships
618.3. The choice of whom to partner, the ability to find fulfilment in sexual intimacies and the right not to be
subjected to discriminatory behaviour are intrinsic to the constitutional protection of sexual orientation"
The right to choose a marital partner is a positive obligation of the State to be fulfilled through its existing
marriage laws. Excluding same-sex marriage from a legislation governing marriage, renders the SMA violative of
part 111 of the constitution. Instead, the Act should be interpreted so as to allow same sex couples to enable
exercise of their fundamental right to marry.
b. The non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA violates the rights of LGBT couples under
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
50. The non-recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA violates Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution, as
(a) the exclusion of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA does not pass the rational nexus test; and (b)
excluding same- sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA is manifestly arbitrary; (c) denying same-sex couples the
right to marry, enjoyed by opposite-sex couples amounts to discrimination on the ground of 'sex' and 'sexual
orientation'; and (d) non- recognition of same-sex marriages results in differential treatment of LGBT persons under
different laws.
(i) The exclusions of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA does not pass the rational nexus test.
51. The exclusion of same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA amounts to drawing a distinction between a
same-sex couple and an opposite-sex couple. Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality before the law and the
equal protection of laws. In Navtej Johan (supra) it was held that LGBTQIA+ couples are guaranteed the right to
equality:
[Indu Malhotra, J.]
"561.7... The law cannot discriminate against same sex relationships. It must also take positive steps to achieve
equal protection.
[DY Chandrachud, J.]
618.4 Members of the LGBT community are entitled to the benefit of an equal citizenship, without discrimination,
and to the equal protection of law..."
52. The said classification between same-sex couples and opposite-sex couples does not pass the rational nexus
test of Article 14. For a classification to be valid under Article 14, it must pass the twin tests of (i) intelligible
differentia; and (ii) rational nexus to the object of the statute. The classification arising from this interpretation
of Section 4 of SMA does not satisfy the two tests and is hence, violative of Article 14.
53. Section 4 of the SMA contemplates marriage between a man and a woman and "bride" and "bridegroom".
Contrary to what the Union of India contends, no Indian statute refers to a "biological man" or "biological woman".
Matrimonial statutes do not require an opposite sex couple to prove that they are a "biological" man and woman before
they may marry.
54. The impugned statutes create two classes of citizens-opposite-sex couples, and LGBTQ couples. The exclusion
of LGBTQ couples from the statutory institution of marriage fails the rational nexus test.
55. There is no constitutionally valid, intelligible differentia between LGBTQIA+ and non-LGBTOIA+ persons. The
classification in the present case is based only on the sexual orientation and gender identity of the parties to a
marriage, which is constitutionally impermissible.
56. The Special Marriage Act, 1954, was introduced to provide a civil form of marriage for couples who cannot or
choose not to marry under their personal law. The preamble of the SMA reads -
An Act to provide a special form of marriage in certain cases, for the registration of such and certain other
marriages and for divorce.
57. The SMA provides a mode of marriage outside the personal law regime. No issues of personal law arise for
consideration.
58. Section 4 of the SMA provides conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages, as under -
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages.-
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to the solemnization of
marriages, a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a) neither party has a spouse living;
(b) neither party-
(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such
an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or
(iii) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity;
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship: Provided that where a custom governing at
least one of the parties permits of a marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding
that they are within the degrees of prohibited relationship; and
(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, both parties are citizens of India
domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends.
Explanation. this section, "custom", in relation to a person belonging to any tribe, community, group or
family, means any rule which the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf as applicable to members of that tribe, community, group or family:
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of any tribe, community, group or
family, unless the State Government is satisfied-
(i) that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time among those members;
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and
(iii) that such rule, if applicable only to a family, has not been discontinued by the family."
59. Nothing in Section 4 of the SMA justifies excluding LGBTQ couples from solemnizing a special marriage.
OnLine Del 725 has held that 'Special Marriage Act was enacted to enable a special form of marriage for any Indian
national, professing different faiths, or desiring a civil form of marriage." (Para 9).
61. Thereafter in MV. A, (2018) 248 DLT 466, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court summarized the position of law on the
application of personal law to the marriages registered/ solemnized under the SMA, as under -
"10. Summary of Principles
10.1. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 provides a special form of marriage, its registration and divorce. A marriage
between any two persons belonging to any religion or creed may be solemnized under this Act. Being a secular
Act, it plays a key role in liberating individuals from the traditional requirements of marriage. It provides for a
civil law of marriage that would enable individuals to get married outside of their respective community
mandates.
10.2. The Special Marriage Act 1954 is not concerned with the religion of the parties to an intended marriage.
Under the Act any person, whichever religion he or she professes, may marry either within his or her community
or in a community other than his or her own. provided that the intended marriage in either case is in accord with
the conditions for marriage laid down in the Act. Is all this relevant here?
10.3. No religious rituals or ceremonies are required from the marriage to be completed under the Special Marriage
Act. It is up to the parties to decide whether they want to do marriage rituals or not. The marriage solemnized
under Special Marriage Act is registered and a Certificate of Marriage is given to the parties. The Certificate shall
be signed by the parties to the marriage and witnesses which is deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact
that a marriage under this Act has been solemnized.
10.4. The Special Marriage Act provides an option of turning an existing religious marriage solemnized in any other
form under any other law into a civil marriage by registering it under its provisions, provided that it is in accord
with the condition for marriage laid down under the Act. This provision of subsequent registration enables parties
to avail secular and uniform remedies despite the solemnization of marriage through performance of religious
ceremonies under one's own personal laws. This aids them in overcoming the constraints or discrimination faced
in their own personal laws.
10.5. The unique feature of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is compulsory registration of marriage under the Act
which protects the interest of the parties and the children born out of wedlock.
10.6. The Registration Certificate of the marriage between the parties is conclusive evidence of the fact that their
marriage was solemnised under the Special Marriage Act. Therefore, evidence with regard to the fact that their
marriage was actually solemnised under any other Act at any other time, cannot be allowed. There can be no
issue that the Special Marriage Act would apply.
10.7. When a person solemnizes marriage under this law then the marriage is not governed by personal laws but
by Special Marriage Act. The rights and duties arising out of marriage are governed by the Special Marriage Act
and the succession is governed by Indian Succession Act, 1925, and not by the personal laws.
10.8. Having married under the Special Marriage Act, if a person contracts a second marriage, he shall be
deemed to have committed an offence under Section 494 or 495 IPC.' [Emphasis supplied]"
62. Furthermore, the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Abdur Rahim Undre (Dr.) V. Padma Abdur Rahim Undre, 1982
irrespective of caste, creed or religion, as under -
"23. It can safely be said that Special Marriage Act is in reality an Indian Marriage Act, which applies to all Indian
Communities irrespective of caste, creed or religion. The concept of marriage under the said Act. is monogamous,
that is union for life, dissoluble by judicial authorities. Under the said law all modern matrimonial reliefs are made
available to both the spouses in the event of break down of marriage on an application to the Court of competent
jurisdiction. Even the religious marriages can be registered under the said Act. On such registration the religious
marriage can be converted into secular marriage. In this context it is also pertinent to note that between 1954 to
1969 two Indian citizens domiciled in India could have married under Special Marriage Act-even outside India. A
marriage which is monogamous in form continues to be so, where-as original religious marriage can be converted
into a secular marriage. However, a secular marriage cannot be converted into religious marriage. Therefore if there
is in the field an Indian enactment which is applicable to all the citizens of India irrespective of their religion, then
SO far as secular marriages are concerned the said law will become lex domicilli of India for the purposes of
matrimonial reliefs. Such an interpretation will be in tune with Article 44 as well as the preamble of the
Constitution. It cannot also be forgotten that the establishment of a secular society is the aim and goal of Indian
Constitution. Therefore in the area and field which is secular or non-religious laws will have to be common for all
citizens of India, and that is what has been done, though to limited extent by enacting Special Marriage Act. The
said Act at least leaves a choice open which is available to all the citizens of India irrespective of their caste, creed
or religion. In Mohammedan Law Marriage is a Civil Contract. Hence SO far as relationship flowing from contract of
marriage is concerned, including its dissolution, the area and field is secular in nature.
24. In this context it will have to be remembered that if two interpretations are reasonably possible regarding
the provisions of law, then the law will have to be interpreted and applied in the perspective of Part IV of the
Constitution, which deals with directive principles of the State policy and benefit of reasonable doubt of law and
fact, if there be such doubt must go
to the weaker section, in the present case to women (See AIR 1978 SC 474). In this context a reference also
could usefully be made to the decision of Karnataka High Court in AIR 1976 Kant 200, Raj Mohammad V.
Saheeda, wherein E.S. Vyankataramayya J. (as he then was), has observed that our notions of law will have to be
altered in such a way as to bring them in conformity with modern social conditions." [Emphasis supplied]"
As held in MV A (cited supra), the object of the SMA is to "liberate individuals from the traditional marriage."
The SMA's object is to remove any forms of constraints on marriage on external considerations such as religion, caste,
creed etc. The exclusion of LGBTQ couples from the SMA has no rational nexus with the object of the legislation.
64. Further, classifying couples based on their sexual orientation or gender identity is unreasonable because there is
no intelligible differentia between LGBTQ and opposite-sex couples. In this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
"14. It is true that a classification need not be made with mathematical precision but, if there be little or no
difference between the persons or things which have been grouped together and those left out of the
group, in that case, the classification cannot be said to be a reasonable one."
65. It is clear from the decisions in Navtej Johan (Supra.) and National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India,
non has any intelligible differentia. When the basis of the classification itself is discriminatory in its effect, the
exclusion of LGBTQ couples under the SMA fails the first part of the rational nexus test.
66. Further, Johar (Supra.) (Paragraphs 230 and 231) held that with the passage of time and evolution of the
society, procreation is not the only reason for which people choose to come together for marriage. But even otherwise,
non-LGBT couples may have children who are biologically related to only one or even neither parent.
recognized the changing concept of "family" as under:
"26. The predominant understanding of the concept of a "family" both in the law and in society is that it consists
of a single, unchanging unit with a mother and a father (who remain constant over time) and their children. This
assumption ignores both, the many circumstances which may lead to a change in one's familial structure, and the
fact that many families do not conform to this expectation to begin with. Familial relationships may take the
form of domestic, unmarried partnerships or queer relationships. A household may be a single parent
household for any number of reasons, including the death of a spouse, separation, or divorce. Similarly,
the guardians and caretakers (who traditionally occupy the roles of the "mother" and the "father") of children may
change with remarriage, adoption, or fostering. These manifestations of love and of families may not be
typical but they are as real as their traditional counterparts. Such atypical manifestations of the family
unit are equally deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available under social
welfare legislation. The black letter of the law must not be relied upon to disadvantage families which
are different from traditional ones... [Emphasis supplied]
68. The contention of the Union of India that the legislative intent behind the impugned statutes is the conception
of a so-called "Indian family unit" including a "biological man" and "biological woman" and the "children born of their
union" militates against the aforesaid finding of the Supreme Court. Rather, marriage furnishes an emotional
satisfaction that may not be found in any other relationships [Navtej Johar (Supra.) (Paragraphs 230 and 231)]. Other
couples who are unable to bear children, such as older couples or infertile couples, are not excluded from the
institution of marriage.
69. Therefore, there is no rational basis for making a distinction between LGBTQ couples and opposite sex couples.
Non does the Union identify any such intelligible differentia other than to say that marriage as an institution provides
for rights, obligations and privileges and that there is a "normative basis" for such exclusions. Not only is the
assumption of "normative basis" historically inaccurate, as there are numerous recorded instances of same-sex
marriages, but even otherwise, our Constitution does not countenance that discrimination should continue merely
because it has been sanctioned historically.
70. It is reiterated that the classification, in order to be constitutionally permissible, must be based on intelligible
Section 2(q) of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 ('DV Act') to delete the words "adult male"
from the definition of "respondent", as the same was based on the "microscopic classification" between male and
female, and adult and non-adult. This Hon'ble Court has warned against the overemphasis on the doctrine of
classification and held that a valid classification must be based on a real and substantial difference and the same must
have a just and reasonable relation with the object of the legislation.
the basis of sexual orientation as impermissible.
[Indu Malhotra, J.]
"637.3 The natural or innate orientation of a person cannot be a ground for discrimination. Where a legislation
discriminates on the basis of an intrinsic and core trait of an individual, it cannot form a reasonable classification
based on intelligible differentia."
72. Thus, in light of the legislative object of the SMA, a classification between same- sex couples and opposite-sex
couples under Section 4 of SMA neither has an intelligible differentia, nor a reasonable nexus to the object of SMA.
In
fact, this classification defeats the very purpose for which the statute was enacted.
(ii) Excluding same-sex marriages from the ambit of the SMA is manifestly arbitrary.
73. It is submitted that the provisions of the SMA, insofar as they exclude same-sex marriages, are manifestly
arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. This Hon'ble Court in Shayara Bano V. Union of India (2017) 9
adequate determining principles, as also if it is excessive or disproportionate. The SMA, insofar as it precludes same-
sex marriages is manifestly arbitrary as the same is not based on any fair or reasonable justification for the exclusion
of same-sex couples.
or discrimination based on 'sexual orientation' cannot be permitted. As such, the non-recognition of same-sex
marriages under Section 4 of the SMA lacks a sound determining principle and is hence, manifestly arbitrary.
(iii) Denying same-sex couples the right to marry enjoyed by opposite-sex couples amounts to discrimination on
the grounds of 'sex' and 'sexual orientation'.
75. The SMA, insofar as it denies recognition to same-sex marriages discriminates between same-sex and opposite-
sex couples solely on the basis of 'sex' and 'sexual orientation', based on a stereotypical notion of gender and is
therefore, in the teeth of Article 15 of the Constitution.
76. Article 15 prohibits discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. In National Legal Services Authority V.
"sex" under Articles 15 and 16, also includes "discrimination on the ground of gender identity." Relying on this
sexual orientation is a protected ground under Article 15 and all persons have a right to not be discriminated against
on the basis of their sexual orientation under any legislation.
[Indu Malhotra J.]
"638.2. The term "sex", as it occurs in Article 15 has been given an expansive interpretation by this Court in
National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India [National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India, (2014) 5
Sex as it occurs in Article 15, is not merely restricted to the biological attributes of an individual, but also
includes their "sexual identity and character". The J.S. Verma Committee [ Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law (2013).] had recommended that "sex" under Article 15 must include "sexual
orientation":
"65. Further, we are clear that Article 15(c) of the Constitution of India uses the word "sex" as including sexual
orientation.'
The prohibition against discrimination under Article 15 on the ground of "sex" should therefore
encompass instances where such discrimination takes place on the basis of one's sexual
orientation." [Emphasis Supplied]
77. The Court in Navtej Singh Johar's case (cited supra) further held in paragraph 428, that "while assessing
whether a law infringes a fundamental right, it is not the intention of the lawmaker that is determinative, but whether
the effect or operation of the law infringes fundamental rights."
78. Additionally, the SMA in excluding same-sex marriages, discriminates against same-sex individuals on the
ground of their choice of marital partner. This amounts to discrimination on the basis of sex of their partner, and is
prohibited under Article 15 of the Constitution. The exclusion of same-sex marriages under the SMA is predicated upon
on a heteronormative conception of marriage based on stereotypes of sex and gender, and as such, the same is
violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
79. By recognizing marriages only between opposite sex couples, the effect of the law is to deny LGBT couples like
the Petitioners the right to solemnize their marriage solely on the ground of their sexual orientation and the same is in
violation of the object of the SMA.
80. The non-recognition of the marriage of the Petitioners under the SMA renders them strangers in law, even when
they have been in committed long term relationships that are identical to those of opposite sex married couples that
the SMA recognizes. Further, excluding same sex couples from the bundle of rights
available to married couples discriminates against same sex couples solely on the ground of sexual orientation.
(iv) Non-recognition of same-sex marriages results in differential treatment of LGBT persons and excludes them
from the multitude of legal benefits that marriage encompasses.
81. Marriage is a bundle of rights - such as the right to live in a shared household, parenthood, inheritance,
adoption, joint ownership of properties and bank accounts, etc. The non-recognition of same-sex marriages denies
same-sex couples the legal protection of these rights conferred upon married couples, which become automatically
available to opposite-sex couples. Same-sex couples have the same level of commitment, love, respect and emotional
attachment to each other as exists in opposite-sex couples. Denying them the rights enjoyed by an opposite-sex
married couple is violative of their rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution.
82. The Petitioners herein, cannot open a joint bank account or a locker, or avail of medical insurance as a family.
They cannot name each other as nominees in their bank accounts or insurance policies. The Petitioners cannot include
each other's names in their property papers though they both would be happy to extend this right of joint ownership
to each other.
83. It is submitted that this exposes a gaping hole in the law which fails to ensure to same-sex partners the basic
rights which flow from a marriage. As such, same-sex couples are deprived of a host of rights and privileges including
- (i) the benefits available to spouses under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in case of demise of one spouse due to
vehicular accidents; (ii) the benefits under the Income Tax Act, 1961; (iii) spousal privilege under Section 122 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872; (iv) donation of organs under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994; (v) benefits
under labour laws, to name a few.
the importance of institutions of marriage and family to an individual's right to self-determination, an integral facet of
the guarantee of dignity protected under Article 21, as follows:
[Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
"298. The intersection between one's mental integrity and privacy entitles the individual to freedom
of thought, the freedom to believe in what is right, and the freedom of self-determination When these
guarantees intersect with gender, they create a private space which protects all those elements which are crucial to
gender identity. The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of
the individual. Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an inviolable right to determine how
freedom shall be exercised." [Emphasis supplied]
Denying LGBT couples such as the Petitioners the protection of the rights and privileges conferred upon married
couples infringes upon their right to choose a partner, and found a family, guaranteed under Article 21. Treating
them differently from opposite-sex married couples, who enjoy these rights and privileges violates their right to
equal protection of laws and non-discrimination enshrined under Articles 14 and 15.
85. There are numerous statutes, rules and regulations providing benefits to a married couple in different ways,
wherefrom the Petitioners are excluded, impacting their day to day lives. Such beneficial statutes etc. will apply to
same-sex couples, as they apply to opposite-sex couples, in case recognition is granted to them under the SMA
regime. Some of such rights conferred upon an opposite-sex married couple and their family members, particularly the
monetary benefits, under various laws, are discussed herein below:
SL.
BENEFITS ACCRUING
APPLICABLE LAW(S)
NO.
1.
Payment of Gratuity in favour of
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
family members upon death of
the Spouse working as an
In terms of Section 4 of the said Act, upon death
Employee.
of the employee, the Gratuity shall be payable to the
nominee or, if no nominee has been made, to the
legal heirs of such employee.
Further, as per Section 6(3) of the Act, for the
purpose of Gratuity, an employee who has a family
can only nominate his / her family members as a
nominee and any nomination outside family is
void.
Note: Section 2(h) of the Act defines family as:
The employee himself or herself, spouse, his/ her
children (married or unmarried), his/her dependant
parents, dependant parents of the spouse and the
widow and children of the predeceased son, if any.
2.
Entitlement towards Provident Fund
Employees Provident Fund Scheme, 1952
Per Paragraph 70 of the Scheme, upon death of an
employee, the amount standing in favour of such
employee as Provident Fund shall be payable to the
nominee appointed by him/ her.
Nominee as per Paragraph 61 read with Paragraph 2
(g) of the Scheme can only be:
a. For a male employee - his wife, his children
(married or unmarried), his dependant parents and
his deceased son's widow and children.
b. For a female employee - her husband, her children
(married or unmarried), her dependant parents, her
husband's dependant parents
and her deceased son's widow and children.
3.
Entitlement of Pension, Supreme
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and
Court Judges
Conditions of Service) Act, 1958
Per Section 16A - If a Supreme Court Judge dies
before retirement, only his/her family members shall be
entitled to receive the family pension.
Note: Surviving spouse of the deceased Supreme Court
Judge shall be the first in order of family persons who are
entitled to receive the pension amount.
4.
Entitlement of Pension with respect
Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 2021
to Spouse who was a Central
Rule 50 - If a Central Government employee dies during
Government Employee
the receipt of pension, only his/her family members shall
be entitled to receive the family pension.
Surviving spouse of the deceased central government
employee is the first in order to receive the pension.
5.
Entitlement to amounts standing in
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and Payment of
the credit of deceased Spouse as
Wages (Nomination) Rules, 2009
Wages
Section 25A of the Act - Upon death of an employee,
all amount which were payable to him/her as wages shall
be paid to the nominated person.
Further, as per Rule 3, if an employee at the time of
making a nomination has a family, he/she shall make the
nomination of spouse as the first order of preference.
6.
Tax Benefits in case of payments
income Tax Act
made on behalf of Spouse or Child qua
Section 80C - Certain Tax Deductions can be claimed
life insurance, annuity, provident fund,
by the Assessee for expenses inter-alia on account of:
etc.
a. Annuity to spouse or children
b. Life Insurance for spouse or children
C. LIC Mutual Fund for spouse or children
d. Tuition Fee towards education of spouse or children.
7.
Entitlement to extend Medical
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948
Benefits to Spouse
In terms of Section 56, an insured employee along with
his family is entitled to medical benefits arising from the
contributions made by employer towards such employee
and his/her family's insurance. Family includes -
spouse, children, dependant parents.
8.
Spouse can be made a Beneficial
Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015
Nominee under an Insurance Policy
As per Section 39(6) and Section 39 9(7), a person is
entitled to make his/her spouse as beneficial nominee to
the insurance policy availed. In the instance of death of
the insured, the nominee (spouse) shall be entitled to
benefits arising from the insurance policy.
An illustrative list of more than 20 such statutes which confer benefits upon a married couple and their children
is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure-1
C. Denying legal recognition to same-sex marriages violates their right to freedom of expression and
association guaranteed under Article 19.
86. To deny according legitimacy to an individual's choice of partner would be in gross violation of their rights
guaranteed under Articles 19 of the Constitution. Article 19(1)(a) guarantees to all citizens of India the right to
freedom of expression. The Petitioners' choice of life partner is an essential facet of their freedom of expression and is
protected under Article 19(1)(a)
87. Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution confers upon the Petitioners the freedom of association and the right to form
recognised the equal entitlement of LGBT persons to the full range of constitutional rights. As such, depriving same-
sex couples of their right to form a union is violative of the constitutional guarantee of association under Article 19(1)
(c).
88. This Hon'ble Court has, in a plethora of recent judgements, held that an individual's right to marry a person of
their choice, irrespective of the barriers of caste, class or community, is inherent in their freedom of expression and
"43. Honour killing guillotines individual liberty, freedom of choice and one's own perception of choice. It has to
be sublimely borne in mind that when two adults consensually choose each other as life partners, it is a
manifestation of their choice which is recognised under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Such a right has the
sanction of the constitutional law and once that is recognised, the said right needs to be protected and it cannot
succumb to the conception of class honour or group thinking which is conceived of on some notion that remotely
does not have any legitimacy."
below:
[Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
"346. Our autonomy as persons is founded on the ability to decide: on what to wear and how to dress, on
what to eat and on the food that we share, on when to speak and what we speak, on the right to believe or not to
believe, on whom to love and whom to partner, and to freely decide on innumerable matters of consequence and
detail to our daily lives."
The strength of the Constitution, therefore, lies in the guarantee which it affords that each individual will have a
protected entitlement in determining a choice of partner to share intimacies within or outside marriage."
90. It is pertinent to note that the SMA is fully capable of being interpreted in an inclusive manner so as to
recognise same-sex marriages. Therefore, once it is established that a person enjoys the fundamental right to marry a
person of their choice under Articles 19 & 21 of the Constitution, coupled with the fact that the Act itself does not bar
same-sex marriages, the State ought to necessarily register and recognize such marriages under law.
91. In addition to the above, it is submitted that the plea for recognition of same-sex marriages is also specifically
while stating the importance of this Hon'ble Court laid down the following:
"71. The principles referred to above clearly indicate that the freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 19
(1)(a) includes the freedom to express one's chosen gender identity through varied ways and means by way of
expression, speech, mannerism, clothing, etc.
72. Gender identity, therefore, lies at the core of one's personal identity, gender expression and presentation
and, therefore, it will have to be protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. A transgender's
personality could be expressed by the transgender's behaviour and presentation. State cannot prohibit, restrict or
interfere with a transgender's C expression of such personality, which reflects that inherent personality. Often the
State and its authorities either due to ignorance or otherwise fail to digest the innate character and identity of such
persons. We, therefore, hold that values of privacy, self-identity, autonomy and personal integrity are
fundamental rights guaranteed to members of the transgender community under Article 19(1)(o) of the
Constitution of India and the State is bound to protect and recognise those rights.
92. In conclusion, the freedom of expression and association under Article 19 includes the freedom to express one's
chosen sexual orientation through a variety of ways. This Hon'ble Court has observed that both sexual orientation and
gender identity are equally integral to an individual's personality and is one of the most basic aspects of self-
determination, dignity and freedom. It is submitted that the plea to extend the regime of the SMA to apply to same
sex marriages is duly covered by the aforesaid judgement. Whether it is between people of the same sex or of the
opposite sex, marriage is a form of expression of one's sexual orientation. In fact, for same-sex couples, who continue
to be discriminated against, marriage is one of the most powerful ways in which they can express their identity and
also achieve social acceptance.
d. Exclusion of same-sex marriages under the SMA is violative of the rights guaranteed under Article 25.
93. Marriage is a matter of conscience. It is one of the most personal associations between two individuals
recognized, protected, as well as incentivised by the law. A partner is one's companion on life's ethical, moral,
financial, and social journey. It is submitted that the choice of a marital partner is a facet of freedom of conscience
under Article 25 of the Constitution. Article 25 guarantees all persons the freedom of conscience and the right to freely
profess, practice and propagate religion. This entitlement is only subject to public order, morality, health and to other
provisions of Part 111 of the Constitution. It is submitted that by not recognising same-sex marriages, the SMA denies
this aspect of the individual's exercise of the freedom of conscience to LGBT persons.
94. Article 25 grants the freedom of conscience equally to every individual, irrespective of their gender identity and
sexual orientation. Conscience is the innermost thought or the sense of moral correctness that governs or influences
the
actions of an individual. It corresponds to the mental process of belief or non-belief.
401
is a matter of "purely private thought" which may touch upon areas broader than religious beliefs "such as political
beliefs etc." It was held that this forms part of liberty guaranteed to an individual under Article 21. Further, in Indian
a
cognitive process that elicits emotion and associations based on an individual's beliefs, rests only in individuals."
96. Explaining the ambit of freedom of conscience as protected under Article 25 and the equal entitlement of the
nature of the right conferred by this Article, this Hon'ble Court held -
[Dr. Chandrachud, J]
"208*. In clause (1), Article 25 protects the equal entitlement of all persons to a freedom of conscience and to
freely profess, protect and propagate religion. By conferring this right on all persons, the Constitution emphasises
the universal nature of the right. By all persons, the Constitution means exactly what it says: every individual in
society without distinction of any kind whatsoever is entitled to the right. By speaking of an equal entitlement, the
Constitution places every individual on an even platform. Having guaranteed equality before the law and the equal
protection of laws in Article 14, the draftspersons specifically continued the theme of an equal entitlement as an
intrinsic element of the freedom of conscience and of the right to profess, practise and propagate religion. There are
three defining features of clause (1) of Article 25: first, the entitlement of all persons without exception, second,
the recognition of an equal entitlement; and third, the recognition both of the freedom of conscience and the right
freely to profess, practise and propagate religion. The right under Article 25(1) is evidently an individual right for, it
is
in the individual that a conscience inheres. Moreover, it is the individual who professes, practises and propagates
religion. Freedom of religion in Article 25(1) is a right which the Constitution recognises as dwelling in each
individual or natural person.
97. Marriage, as a choice of one's life partner, one's companion for the journey of life, constitutes an important facet
of the freedom of conscience protected under Article 25 of the Constitution. In the absence of the freedom to choose a
life partner, LGBT persons are deprived of their freedom of thought and belief, as guaranteed under Article 25.
98. This Hon'ble Court has categorically stated that under Article 25, all persons, regardless of any other factors, are
equally entitled to freedom of conscience and to freely profess, protect and propagate religion. When the aforesaid
ratio is applied herein, the inevitable conclusion is that when a marriage between opposite sex couples is recognized
under law, same-sex couples, who are equally entitled to the freedom of conscience and the right to practice their
religion, ought to be permitted to have their marriages recognized under the Act. Any other course of action would
be
impermissible as per Article 25 of the Constitution. Sexual orientation of individuals cannot be a factor in barring them
from the equal entitlement to freedom of conscience and the right to practice religion.
aspects of faith and belief, marriage and family as being integral to the dignitarian guarantee:
[Dr. Chandrachud, J.]
"298.
The family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are all integral to the dignity of the
individual. Read in conjunction with Article 21, liberty enables the individual to have a choice of
preferences on various facets of life including what and how one will eat, the way one will dress, the
faith one will espouse and a myriad other matters on which autonomy and self-determination require a
choice to be made within the privacy of the mind. The constitutional right to the freedom of religion
under Article 25 has implicit within it the ability to choose a faith and the freedom to express or not
express those choices to the world. These are some illustrations of the manner in which privacy facilitates
freedom and is intrinsic to the exercise of liberty. Privacy is the ultimate expression of the sanctity of the
individual. It is a constitutional value which straddles
across the spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for the individual a zone of choice and self-
determination." [Emphasis supplied]
100. It is submitted that the protection extended to the sphere of marriage and family as being an aspect of privacy
is thus inextricably linked to the choice in matters of faith and belief and the freedom to publicly express these
choices. The right to form a religious union, the right to choose between a religious and a civil marriage, the right to
establish a family and raise children as believers of a particular religion are all expressions of the right to freedom of
conscience and religion under Article 25 of the Constitution and are protected also as an expression of the individuals'
right to privacy and dignity under Article 21.
101. Further, it is submitted that inclusion of same sex marriages under the Act neither contravenes any other
individual's rights under Article 25 non is injurious to public order, morality or health. Therefore, there exists no
constitutional fetter that prevent this Hon'ble Court from recognizing same sex marriages under the Act.
e. SMA ought to be interpreted to recognise same-sex marriages to save it from the vice of
unconstitutionality.
102. If a plain and literal interpretation of a statute results in the violation of any fundamental rights, this Hon'ble
Court has the power to read the provisions of the statute in a manner that conforms with the Constitution. In fact, the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 has already been interpreted in this manner by the Hon'ble Madras High Court in Arun
definition of "bride". Similarly, the SMA may be read in a manner so as to recognize same-sex marriages and in turn
conform with the Constitution.
[R.F. Nariman, J.]
"56. And this brings us to the question as to when petitions have been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution
of India, is it permissible for us to state that we will not decide an alleged breach of a fundamental right, but will
send the matter back to the legislature to remedy such a wrong.
58. We are heartened to note that in a recent US Supreme Court decision the same thing has been said with
respect to knocking at the doors of the US Supreme Court in order to vindicate a basic right. In Obergefell V.
"The dynamic of our constitutional system is that individuals need not await legislative action before asserting a
fundamental right. The Nation's courts are open to injured individuals who come to them to vindicate their own
direct, personal stake in our basic charter. An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection when he or
she is harmed, even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act. The idea of the
Constitution was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them beyond
the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied by the courts'. West
rights may not be submitted to a vote; they depend on the outcome of no elections."
104. This Hon'ble Court has also held that the rule of adherence to a literal construction / plain meaning
construction is not absolute and may be departed from if it renders the impugned provision unconstitutional. In State
"14. It is true that there are situations in which courts are compelled to subordinate the plain meaning of
statutory language. Not unoften, courts do read down the plain language of a provision or give it a restricted
meaning, where, to do otherwise may be clearly opposed to the object and scheme of the Act or may lead to an
absurd, illogical or unconstitutional result..
82
106. The provisions of SMA are broad enough to be interpreted to include same-sex marriages. Therefore, it is
submitted that this Hon'ble Court ought to declare that the SMA be interpreted in a manner so as to recognise the
right of LGBT persons to get married in accordance with their traditional rites and ceremonies so as to prevent it from
falling foul of the fundamental rights enshrined under Article 21, 14, 15, 19, and 25 of the Constitution.
V. Recognition of same-sex marriages under the SMA is consistent with the evolving conception of the
institution of marriage.
107. The institution of marriage has evolved through legislation and judicial interpretation, to remove restrictions
and prohibitions on categories of persons who were not allowed to marry. For instance, widows, divorcees, sagotra and
inter-caste couples who could not marry have been permitted to marry; divorce has been introduced to enable parties
to end an unhappy union; and minimum age for marriage has been introduced to ensure that girl children were not
forced into marriages.
108. Pertinently, the Government of India has also very recently sought to raise the marriageable age of women
402
from 18 to 21 years, to bring it at par with that of men. A Bill to this effect introduced in the Lok Sabha in 2021 has
been referred to a Standing Committee.
109. Surprisingly, the Respondent, in its common counter-affidavit filed in the main matter, i.e., Supriyo @ Supriya
Chakraborthy V. Union of India [W.P. (C) No. 1011/2022] has relied on the grossly outdated definition of "Marriage" as
provided in the 4th Edition of the Black's Law Dictionary (1968), to further its misplaced contention that marriage is a
union between a "biological man" and a "biological
woman". The contemporary definition of "Marriage" as found in the Black's Law Dictionary (11th Edition, 2019) is
as follows:
"Marriage, n. 1. The legal union of a couple as spouses. The essentials of a valid marriage are (1) parties legally
capable of contracting to marry, (2) mutual consent or agreement, and (3) an actual contracting in the form
prescribed by law. Marriage has important consequences in many areas of the law such as torts, criminal law,
evidence, debtor-creditor relations, property and contracts. - Also termed matrimony; conjugal union.
"403
The two definitions may be compared:
Revised 4th Edition of Black's Law Dictionary
11th edition of Black's Law Dictionary (2019)
(1968)
"Marriage, as distinguished from the agreement to
"The legal union of a couple as spouses. The
marry and from the act of becoming married, is the
essentials of a valid marriage are (1) parties legally
civil status, condition, on relation of one man and one
capable of contracting to marry, (2) mutual consent or
woman united in law for life, for the discharge to each
agreement, (3) an actual contracting in the form
other and the community of the duties legally
prescribed by law."
incumbent on those whose association is founded on
the distinction of sex"
Thus, 'marriage' today, is defined as a legally recognised union of spouses, without any reference to the gender
of the spouses. In fact, the Dictionary also has a defining entry for "same-sex marriage", which is defined as -
"The ceremonial union of two people of the same sex. A marriage between two men or two women."4
110. By citing a definition from a 1968 edition, the Respondent no. 1 Union has failed to note how the jurisprudence
of marriage equality has subsequently developed in that jurisdiction. The US Supreme Court judgments in United
States V. Windsor [570 US 744 (2013)]. and Obergefell V. Hodges [576 US 644 (2015)] both upheld marriage equality
111. Petitioners emphasize that they are citing US law merely because, Black's being an American publication,
Petitioners seek to demonstrate how greatly the law has changed in that jurisdiction. The Petitioners submit that as
suggested by the Respondent, the definition of "marriage" may be understood with the aid of legal dictionaries,
however, it is prudent to rely on the latest edition. The legal definition as well as the societal perception of the
institution of marriage has surpassed its heteronormative conception as a union between a "biological man" and a
"biological woman". In light of this, it is imperative that this Hon'ble Court extends legal recognition to same-sex
marriages.
112. It will also be relevant herein to rely on the decision of the Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of
Home Affairs V. Fourie, [2005] ZACC 19. In the said decision, the Constitutional Court of South Africa unanimously
held that the common law definition of marriage under the Marriage Act was violative of the Constitution. The common
law definition of marriage used the terms 'husband' and 'wife' instead of spouse, which excluded same-sex couples
from its ambit. Further it was held that the exclusion of same-sex couples from the common law definition of marriage
and the Marriage Act was discriminatory and upheld the right of same-sex couples to marry. The Court stated that the
exclusion of same-sex couples was unconstitutional, and gays and lesbians had the right to marry. The decision also
spoke to the evolving nature of rights in relation to marriage systems and family:
"[102] Indeed, rights by their nature will atrophy if they are frozen. As the conditions of humanity alter and as
ideas of justice and equity evolve, so do concepts of rights take on new texture and meaning. The horizon of rights
is as limitless as the hopes and expectations of humanity. What was regarded by the law as just yesterday is
condemned as unjust today. When the Universal Declaration was adopted, colonialism and racial discrimination
were seen as natural phenomena, embodied in the laws of the so-called civilised nations, and blessed by as many
religious leaders as they were denounced. 102 Patriarchy, at least as old as most marriage systems, defended as
being based on biological fact and which was supported by many a religious leader, is no longer accepted as the
norm, at least in large
parts of the world. Severe chastisement of women and children was tolerated by family law and international
legal instruments then, but is today considered intolerable. Similarly, though many of the values of family life have
remained constant, both the family and the law relating to the family have been utterly transformed."
Judicial contribution to the ever-evolving institution of 'marriage'
113. Courts have consistently taken a liberal and progressive view of the concept of marriage as an evolving
State enacts a legislation of marriage it is nevertheless bound by the norms of a liberal Constitution which emphasise
dignity, equality, and liberty:
[D. Y. Chandrachud]
"212. The State undoubtedly has a legitimate interest in regulating many aspects of marriage. That is the
foundation on which the State does regulate rights, entitlements and duties, primarily bearing on its civil nature.
When the State enacts and enforces such legislation, it does SO on the postulate that marriage as a social institution
has a significant bearing on the social fabric. But in doing so, the State is equally governed by the norms of a liberal
Constitution which emphasise dignity, equality and liberty as its cardinal values."
39 also acknowledged how the notion of marriage had changed since the enactment the Indian Penal Code in 1860:
'102. The background in which this provision was enacted now needs to be stated. In 1860, when the Penal
Code was enacted, the vast majority of the population in this country, namely, Hindus, had no law of divorce as
marriage was considered to be a sacrament. Equally, a Hindu man could marry any number of women until 1955.
Two of the fundamental props or bases of this archaic law have since gone. Post 1955-1956, with the advent of
the "Hindu Code", so to speak, a Hindu man can marry only one wife; and adultery has been made a ground for
divorce in Hindu Law.
109. The moving times have not left the law behind as we have just seen, and SO far as engaging the
attention of law-makers when reform of penal law is undertaken, we may only hasten to add that even when the
CrPC was fully replaced in 1973, Section 198 continued to be on the statute book. Even as of today, Section 497
IPC continues to be on the statute book. When these sections are wholly outdated and have outlived their purpose,
not only does
the maxim of Roman law, cessante ratione legis, cessati ipsa lex, apply to interdict such law, but when such law
falls foul of constitutional guarantees, it is this Court's solemn duty not to wait for legislation but to strike down
277, it is only the minority view of Khehar, C.J. and S. Abdul Nazeer, J., that one must wait for the law to change
legislatively by way of social reform. The majority view was the exact opposite, which is why Triple Talaq was found
constitutionally infirm and struck down by the majority.
115. Therefore, Courts have actively participated in the evolution of marriage as an institution has been evolving
with time, particularly with respect to broadening the domain of who can marry whom. At one point, sagotras, widows,
divorcees, and persons of different castes and religions could not marry. All these restrictions have been eliminated
over time.
116. For instance, from being a polygamous institution marriages became a monogamous institution. From not
permitting inter-caste marriages, marriages between castes began to be permitted and have even been encouraged by
the same gotra (lineage/ descendants in an unbroken male line from a common male ancestor or patriline), not only
also specifically held that community diktats on marrying within the same gotra will have no value in light of the
constitutional right to marry a partner of one's choice. A table demonstrating how marriage as an institution has
undergone changes and developments over centuries in India is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure-2.
lamented the exclusion of LGBT couples from the enjoyment of fundamental rights easily available to opposite-sex
couples and recognised the colonial origins of the same, based on the criminalisation brought about by Section 377 of
the Indian Penal Code.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
"372. The lethargy of the law is manifest yet again. A hundred and fifty-eight years ago, a colonial legislature
made it criminal, even for consenting adults of the same gender, to find fulfilment in love. The law deprived them of
the simple right as human beings to live, love and partner as nature made them. The human instinct to love was
caged by constraining the physical manifestation of their sexuality. Gays and lesbians were made subordinate to
the authority of a coercive State. A charter of morality made their relationships hateful. The criminal law became a
willing instrument of repression. To engage in "carnal intercourse" against "the order of nature" risked being tucked
away for ten years in a jail. The offence would be investigated by searching the most intimate of spaces to find tell-
tale signs of intercourse. Civilisation has been brutal."
118. Thus, prior to the enactment of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, same-sex unions were neither prohibited nor
regulated in the Indian subcontinent. Scholars such as Ruth Vanita and Devdutt Pattanaik have documented the traces
of same-sex couples in Indian mythology, citing examples from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas.
405
The restriction on same-sex marriage, therefore, is a colonial construct and cannot be permitted to continue in light of
the evolution of the institution of marriage.
119. Courts have also been at the forefront of reforming marriage as an institution by rendering progressive
decisions
regarding
divorce4
maintenance4
guardianship,
408
and
succession40
Constitutional
courts
have
interfered to strike down customary practices in personal laws, and also, recognised irretrievable breakdown of
marriage as a potential ground of divorce. In Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum AIR 1985 SC 945, this Hon'ble
Court expanded the rights of a Muslim wife to seek maintenance under S. 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
by holding therein that such a remedy was not in conflict with the personal laws
interpreted Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 to recognise the right of a Hindu mother as
a natural guardian of her minor son to ensure its conformity with the Constitutional guarantee of equality & non-
discrimination under Articles 14 and 15.
120. The notion that marriage is only for procreative purposes has also been discarded over time which has been
[Deepak Misra, CJI]
"230. With the passage of time and evolution of the society, procreation is not the only reason for which people
choose to come together, have live-in relationships, perform coitus or even marry. They do SO for a whole lot of
reasons including emotional companionship."
held that "statutes particularly those governing and regulating human relations are dynamic in nature and their
interpretation, with societal changes, cannot remain static. Law cannot be a fossil."
recognised that family units may manifest in atypical ways and has upheld the need to legally recognise these non-
traditional manifestations of familial relationships. Denying legal recognition to the Petitioners' marriage violates their
fundamental right to found a family.
123. In light of the above, it is submitted that recognising same-sex marriages such as that of the Petitioners' is
therefore, in consonance with the evolving nature of marriage as a legal and social institution. It is submitted that
Section 4 of the SMA which provides for the solemnisation of a marriage between "any two persons" is permissive
enough to be interpreted as including within its ambit same-sex marriages.
VI. Same-sex marriage is a time honoured tradition in the Indian society
124. It is the contention of the Union that the Petitioners in the present batch matters do not represent the entire
population of the country. The Petitions present "mere urban elitist views for the purpose of social acceptance". It is
further contended that the views of all rural, semi-rural and urban population will have to be taken into consideration.
As a result, the representatives of the people/appropriate legislature, who reflect the views and voices of far wider
spectrum, can only decide policy as to marriage.
125. It is reiterated that Devdutt Pattanaik (scholar) has documented the traces of same-sex couples in Indian
mythology, citing examples from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas410,
126. Indian society is diverse and has a vast range of cultural and societal values. Many Indian families and
communities, having Indian cultural and societal values, have been accepting same-sex marriage for many decades.
Scholars like Ruth Vanita have documented hundreds of cases of same sex couples since the 1980s who have
undergone rituals of a marriage to "compel their communities to consider same sex relationships in terms of love and
commitment rather than simply in terms of sex.: 411
127. Scholar and author Ruth Vanita, in her book titled Love's Rite: Same-Sex Marriages in Modern India, has
compiled concrete data in the form of newspaper reports, showing that hundreds of young women, and a few men
have got married to each other. These persons are from low-income groups and are non-English speaking, and do not
even know words like 'lesbian,' 'gay', 'queer' or 'homosexual'. These couples include women from all four varnas,
Dalits, Adivasis, fisherwomen, factory workers, students, nurses, and domestic helpers.
In many cases, the families of these couples have accepted and celebrated these weddings, and some even at a
time when same-sex marriage was not legally recognized anywhere in the world or only recognized in a few
countries. This is contrary to the contention of the Union of India that same-sex marriage is a concern only of the
elite upper class.
128. A few instances of same sex marriage amongst non-English speaking, low-income group persons are as
follows:
(i) Leela Namdeo and Urmila Srivastava, two policewomen in Madhya Pradesh, got married in 1987. One woman is
Kayastha and the other Dalit. Pertinently, in the year 1987, same-sex marriage was not legally recognized
412
anywhere in the world.
(ii) Tanuja Chouhan and Jaya Verma, both working as nurses in Patna, got married in April, 2001, in Ambikapur,
Bihar. This wedding was attended by 100 people and Jaya's entire family was present. Jaya's family and the
guests, who were all Indians, accepted the wedding, at a time when homosexuality was still criminalized in
India, and same-sex marriage had been recognized in only one country just the previous month [Netherlands on
01.04.2001]. 413
(iii) In June 2002, Vegavahini Subramaniam and Vaijayanthimala Nagarajan, who hail from Tamil Nadu, got
married in Seattle, WA. Several of their family members, including Vegavahini's father and Vaijayanthimala's
mother, participated in the wedding. At this time, same-sex marriage was not legal in Seattle or in USA. It was
legalized in Seattle 10 years later, in the year 2012, and throughout USA only in 2015.
(iv) In the year 2006, Wetka and Melka, two tribal women who are agricultural labourers residing Dandabadi Village
in Koraput, Odisha, persuaded their
community to consent to and bless their marriage, and even had a ceremony led by the local priest.
(v) In the year 2019 Deepshikha and Abhilasha, from the Village Hamirpur in Uttar Pradesh went to the local
Registrar's office and asked to be married. When they were refused, they garlanded each other in front of the
Registrar's office and executed a notarized affidavit of the life partnership between them.
415
129. Further, scores of young same-sex couples, all of them non-English speaking and from low-income families,
have committed joint suicide owing to the opposition to their relationship. In their suicide notes, several have said
that they will be married or will be husband and wife in the next life. Thus, in India in particular, acceptance and
recognition of same-sex marriage can be a matter of life and death. A few such instances are as follows:
(i) In the year 1991 two men got married and lived together "as husband and wife" in Trissur, Kerala. In 1993, they
stabbed each other to death because of "the non-recognition of their marriage.
(ii) Several couples who committed suicide together asked to be cremated together. Sumathi and Geetalakshmi in
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, who had been living together for three years, wrote in their suicide note, "We cannot
live apart from each other" and asked to be cremated on the same pyre, which was done.
417
(iii) In 1992, Rekha Puri (aged 22) and Gayatri Parayar (aged 18) hanged themselves together after their families
refused to let them marry each other. Gayatri was wearing sindoor when she died, and they wrote in their suicide
note, "we want to live as husband and wife in the life beyond the grave.
"418
(iv) In 2018, Bhavna Thakore and Asha Thakore jumped into the Sabarmati river together and drowned themselves
in Ahmedabad, Gujarat. In their suicide note, they wrote, "We have left this world to live with each other. The
world did not allow us to stay together. Perhaps in the next birth we will meet again".
419
There are numerous other such instances of marriages and suicides amongst same-sex couples, a non-
exhaustive list of the reporting of which has been provided in Annexure-3 to the present Submissions.
130. However, since same-sex marriages have not been granted recognition under the statutes governing marriage,
they are constrained to operate under the shadow of the law while being deprived of a legally protected marital rights.
131. As demonstrated in preceding paragraphs, same-sex customary marriages have historically taken place, in the
absence of legal recognition. As a result, such marriages lack the various protections which a opposite sex marriage
has to offer. Such a popular practice must be given legality so as to avoid multiple irregular marriages and further to
avoid the risk of driving people out of the fold of the society.
132. Further, a study titled 'The Anticipated Impact of LGBTQIA- Marriage Equality Legislation on Indian Society
and Mental Health (Dated 16.04.2023), based on an online survey conducted by a group of six researchers, found that
legalisation of same-sex marriage/marriage equality would lead to the improvement in wellbeing, legal safety and
access to legal rights for LGBTQIA+ individuals. Further, it was found that legalisation of marriage of LGBTQIA+
individuals would create a stronger sense of community and social support and enable them to secure essential rights
The survey was carried out to understand the stance of
Indians towards legalisation of same-sex marriage. The following are a few key findings from the survey:
(i) 95% of the Respondents welcomed legalisation of marriage for LGBTQIA+ individuals.
(ii) 93% of the Respondents believed that legalisation of same-sex marriage will improve mental health outcomes,
including reduced levels of anxiety, depression, suicidal thoughts, grief, etc., in LGBTQIA+ youth and families.
(iii) 87% of respondents agreed that decriminalising homosexuality reduced the stigma and increased support,
acceptance and a sense of belonging (in relation to LGBTQIA+ individuals)
The said study is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure-6. The Indian Psychiatric Society has also issued
multiple statements in support of legalising same-sex marriages. The said statements form a part of the common
compilation filed by the Petitioners.
VII. Opposition to the Hindu Code: Similar to present day opposition to same sex marriage
133. The codification of Hindu personal laws commenced in 1941 with the colonial Government appointing the
Hindu Law Committee42 to examine women's property rights under Hindu law. Expressing concerns about the
piecemeal nature of reforms in women's property rights, the Committee opined - "We ourselves think that the time
has now arrived to attempt a Code of Hindu Law". Accordingly, the first draft of the Hindu Code Bill ('the Hindu
Code') was prepared in by the Hindu Law Committee. 421 Post-independence, the Hindu
Code
was
revived
and
redrafted by a departmental committee headed by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. Despite, 4 years of deliberations, the Code
could not be passed. As such, the Hindu Code was split up into Bills and passed separately, the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 being the
first, followed by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956422 the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 195644 and the
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956424
134. There was vociferous opposition to the Hindu Code Bill. Inter-caste marriages, Sagotra marriages and the
prescription of monogamy were met with great opposition. Divorce was also met with great resistance and became a
point of significant contention. Despite, such vehement opposition, the above reforms have stood the test of time and
the society has prospered overall as a result. Today, the objections raised on behalf of the Union of India opposing the
recognition of same-sex marriage are akin to the opposition to the Hindu Code. To illustrate the nature of the
opposition to the Hindu Code, a few extracts of the discussions undertaken by members of the Constituent Assembly
(Legislative) are being reproduced hereinafter:
i) Opposition to the Hindu Code on grounds that it was against the structure and fabric of Hindu society.
This is not a simple measure. But the fact is that this Bill aims at the utter demolition of the entire structure and
fabric of Hindu society. It aims at changing the law of marriage, the law divorce, the law of adoption, law relating to
minority and guardianship, the Law of the Hindu joint family, the law of succession and everything that constitute
and what remains of the features of Hindu society. The very foundations not only of one pillar but of all the pillars
on which the Hindu society rests, are shaken. Therefore, Sir, it is but neat and proper that we as legislators, we who
are the guardians of the interests of the people should discharge our duty to the best of our ability and see how far
the measure that we are considering is wanted by public opinion in the country."
Pandit Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava4
ii) Opposition to the Hindu Code that it regulated/attached conditions to a sacramental marriage.
"My fundamental objection to these marriages is, that while on the one hand it characterises one form of
marriage as sacramental marriage, inside this sacramental cover there has been introduced a number of things
which cannot conceivably be called sacramental or sacred ceremonial marriage. Look at the prohibited degrees. Look
at the character of the parties. It can easily be an intercaste marriage, a marriage outside caste, marriage of
sagotras, and at the same time it would be sacramental marriage. It is rather curious, Sir, that while a sacramental
form of marriage is being prescribed, along side with it there is a civil marriage. / do not know how it finds a place
in the Hindu code itself."
- Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra
iii) Opposition to the Hindu Code to the extent that it permitted dissolution of marriage.
"I feel that the basic conception of Hindu marriage has suffered the rudest possible shock by introduction into it
of the matter of divorce which is SO repugnant to Hindu notions of marriage. Hindu marriage as ought to be known
to everyone who professes himself to be a Hindu, who honestly takes pride in calling himself a Hindu, as / myself
do, is a sacrament and not a civil contract and as such it will not be difficult for him to admit that divorce is
absolutely foreign to its concept. Union by marriage, according to the Hindu Shastras is sacred and absolutely
indissoluble."
-Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra4
"My submission, therefore, is that the provisions for judicial separation and for dissolution of marriage as
incorporated in clauses 30 and 33 are not only opposed to accepted ideals of Hindu Society, they are diagonally
opposed to our civilization and culture. They are directly contradictory to the sacramental marriage because it is not
a contractual relationship that can be brought to an end by the whim and caprice of any of the parties but it is
sacred bond of union which has its root in the past and which will have its effect in the future. That is the
conception of Hindu marriage. These provisions of judicial separation or dissolution of marriage are diagonally
opposed to what is our conception of marriage
-Pandit Mukut Bihari Lal Bhargava 428
Justifying the Reform of the Hindu Code
135. The marriage reforms sought to be introduced by the Hindu Code were eventually enacted as 4 separate acts
by the then newly formed Parliament (post the 1952 General Elections). There was considerable public opposition to
the marriage reforms that the Hindu Code put forward. Dr. Ambedkar addressed such opposition/public opinion
against the Hindu Code in the following terms:
"Sir, much has been made of the fact that there is a great deal of public opinion which is opposed to this
Bill. / have certainly not weighed the opinions that we have received but / do like to say this, that this is hardly a
question which we can decide by counting heads. This is not a question which we can decide in
accordance with the opinion of the majority. When society is in a transitory stage, leaving the past, going to
the future, there are bound to be opposing considerations: one pulling towards the past and one pulling towards the
future and the test that we can apply is no other than the test of one's conscience. / have not the slightest
doubt in my mind that the provisions of this Bill are in perfect consonance with the conscience of the
community, and / have therefore, no hesitation in putting forth this measure although it may be as a matter of
fact that a large majority of our countrymen do not accept it.
,429
136. Historically, even reform in marriage to abolish social evils was opposed on the ground of such practices being
sanctioned by the Hindu Dharma. Despite such opposition, reforms such as increasing the age of marriage and
abolition of Sati were introduced. Such opposition has never deterred reform of the institution of marriage. Reform of
the institution of marriage has been brought about time and again keeping in mind principles of equality and free
choice. The following extracts from the debates relating to the Hindu Code capture the discussion around the necessity
for reform and those reacting against it:
"Again, Sir, honourable Members will recollect the opposition that was started against the Sarda Act, which
tabooed child-marriage, on the ground that Hindu Dharma was in danger and that Hindu religion and Hindu
society were in danger. In the last century when the custom of sati, cremation of the widow with her husband,
was sought to be abolished, these same reactionaries who block the road to progress denounced the
attempt stating that the Hindu-Dharma sanctioned sati and that it granted the highest salvation to women
and therefore it should be continued. In spite of
their agitation and obstruction, much-needed reforms like that were put through."
Shri H.V. Kamath43 430
"If marriage is a matter of free choice, why should there be legal impediments in it ? Why should a
person belonging to one section or one community not marry a woman belonging to another? All these
artificial man-made impediments must go. / do not remember any case in which the son of a Brahmin was born
with a copy of Vedas or a Kshatrya born with a sword or a Harijan born with a broom. At birth they are all alike and
at death they are all alike. In between the two, it is the duty of the society and the State to see that the same
atmosphere of equality shall prevail. Anybody who argues against this, argues against humanity, argues against the
very principle which goes to make a man, argues against self-respect."
Shri Gadgil (Minister of Works, Production and Supply)431
the right of individuals to marry a person of their choice, especially in case of inter-caste and inter-community unions
which do not receive societal sanction. In similar vein, the Petitioners have sought the protection of this Hon'ble Court
for realising their fundamental right to love, companionship and family. Denying LGBT couples like the Petitioners the
right to solemnize a marriage according to their traditional rites and ceremonies would amount to treating them
differently from opposite-sex couples insofar as marriage is concerned and would defeat the very purpose for which the
SMA was enacted.
VIII. The gendered references in the provisions of SMA are capable of being read to recognize same-sex
marriages. a. Test of 'workability' enables gender neutral reading
138. It is further submitted that nothing in the SMA prevents 'working' the statute in a gender-neutral manner. The
principle of interpretation that is known as the Test of
'workability' or 'the statute to be construed to make it effective and workable" 432j applicable in the present
circumstances. As per the workability principle, the Court strongly leans against a construction which reduces the
statute to futility43 or unconstitutionality. The captioned principle calls for a construction in favour of workability of
a
provision/rule/statute. The construction which makes the rule otiose or unworkable should be avoided where
2
constructions are possible, and the court should lean in favour of the construction which would make the rule
workable and further the purpose for which the rule is intended. 434 In other words, if more than one construction
is
possible, the one which preserves its workability and efficacy should be preferred to the other which would render it
otiose or sterile. 435
139. A statute is designed to be workable, and the interpretation thereof by a Court should be to secure that object,
unless crucial omission or clear direction makes that end unattainable. A statute or any enacting provision therein
436
must be so construed as to make it effective and operative on the principle expressed in the maxim 'ut res magis
valeat quam pereat' 437 The maxim implies that a statute must be construed reasonably. A provision must be so
interpreted as to achieve the aim of workability of the enactment as a whole while giving it a purposive interpretation
in preference to textual interpretation.
b. Rule of 'reading down' can validate same-sex marriage under SMA
140. Alternatively, the rule of 'reading down' may be applied. Such a principle of statutory interpretation states that
where 2 interpretations are possible, one which validates the legislation must be preferred. The Courts can, having
regard to the Preamble, objects, scheme, historical background and the mischief of the Act
seeks to eliminate, read down a provision, with a view to uphold the validity of a legislation. The said rule was
applied by Courts to salvage a legislation to achieve its objective and not to let it fall merely because of a possible
ingenious interpretation. 439 The rule of 'reading down' is similar to the rule of 'harmonious construction'. The rule of
'reading down' is to be used for the limited purpose of making a particular provision workable and to bring it in
harmony with other provisions of the statute. It is to be used keeping in view the scheme of the statute and to fulfil
440
its purposes.
141. In this case, the SMA must be read down to recognise same-sex marriages. This would ensure that the SMA is
in tune with its object. The SMA embodied the recognition of the freedom to choose a life partner and individual
autonomy in matters of marriage and family.
142. Further, the gendered references in the SMA can be read and interpreted in a manner so as to be workable
even for same sex couples in tune with S. 13 (1) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 which provides that:
"13. Gender and number.-In all Central Acts and Regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context,-
(1) words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include females."
Pertinently, there is nothing repugnant to the subject or context of the SMA in reading the words importing
masculine gender to be taken to include females as well.
143. In view of the above, the provisions of the SMA are either gender neutral or can be interpreted in a manner to
be gender neutral in order to protect it from the vice of unconstitutionality. If this Hon'ble Court grants declaratory
relief in the present batch of petitions, the gendered provisions of the impugned matrimonial statues are workable and
can be read in a gender-neutral manner qua LGBTQ couples.
All provisions are capable of being read in context of LGBTQ couples without violence to the language, intent or
scope of the impugned legislations.
144. Many provisions, such as those relating to degrees of prohibited relationships, will continue to apply as is to
LGBTQ couples. Many matrimonial reliefs such as maintenance, restitution of conjugal rights, judicial separation and
divorce are already genden neutral in that they are available to husbands and wives on the same grounds. Hence, they
present no difficulty in their application to LGBTQ couples.
145. Where these matrimonial reliefs are available only to wives, these can be read in a gender-neutral manner in
their application to LGBTQ couples. Thus, for example, the relief of divorce on grounds that the husband has been
convicted of rape would apply against either husband or a transman in a petition under Section 27 (1A) (i) of the SMA.
Similarly, either spouse of an LGBTQ couple could apply for maintenance under Section 36 or 37 SMA. Section 31(1)
(iiia) provides that where the wife is the Petitioner, she may move the petition wherever she resides. This provision
can apply to either spouse in an LGBTQ marriage.
146. It is reiterated that all the provisions of the SMA are capable of being read to recognise same-sex marriages. A
chart prepared compiling the various provisions of the SMA containing gendered references along with a comment on
their workability is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure-4. In light of this, it is submitted that this Hon'ble
Court ought to declare that the SMA be interpreted in a manner so as to recognise the right of LGBT persons to get
married in accordance with their traditional rites and ceremonies.
IX. There is growing international consensus recognizing same-sex and gender non-conforming marriages,
and the same is in line with India's international obligations
a. India has an international obligation to recognize marriage equality
147. Over and above its constitutional obligations, India also has an international obligation to uphold and protect
the rights of the LGBTQIA+ community.
International law recognizes a person's rights to marry a partner of their choice and to found a family, which is
not limited or restricted in any manner by their sexual orientation and/or gender identity.
148. India has ratified and is party to two major international conventions, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). This Hon'ble Court has time and
again held that the fundamental rights enshrined in Part 111 of our Constitution are in consonance with the UDHR and
the
ICCPR; 441 and further that it is a generally recognised principle in a national legal system that in the event
of
442
doubt, the national rule is to be interpreted in accordance with the State's international obligations.
149. Article 16 of the UDHR provides as under -
"Article 16
1. Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and
to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
3. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State."
150. Article 23 of the ICCPR provides as under -
"Article 23
1. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State.
2. The right of men and women of marriageable age to marry and to found a family shall be recognized.
3. No marriage shall be entered into without the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
4. States Parties to the present Covenant shall take appropriate steps to ensure equality of rights and
responsibilities of spouses as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. In the case of dissolution,
provision shall be made for the necessary protection of any children."
151. Jurisprudence developed by this Hon'ble Court has also recognized the Yogyakarta Principles, i.e. the Principles
on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. This
Hon'ble Court in NALSA (cited supra) had held that -
"60. the international conventions, including Yogyakarta Principles, which we have found not inconsistent with
the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the Indian Constitution, must be recognised and followed, which
has sufficient legal and historical justification in our country."
152. The Yogyakarta Principles "conform to our constitutional view of the fundamental rights of the citizens of India
and persons who come to this Court", and hence, must be recognized to enable LGBTQ couples to participate in the
institution of marriage. [Johar, per Nariman, J. (paragraph 355)]
153. The Yogyakarta Principles were adopted in 2007 as a coherent and comprehensive identification of the
obligation of States to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights of all persons regardless of their sexual orientation
or gender identity. The Yogyakarta Principles specifically iterate an obligation to ensure that irrespective of gender
identity, sexual orientation, gender expression or sex characteristics, all persons have the right to universal enjoyment
of human rights, right against non-discrimination, right to recognition before the Law, right to found a family and
participate in cultural life of a community, right to economic, social and cultural rights, right to expression, opinion and
forming association etc.
154. Principle 24 provides for the right to found a family, as under -
"Everyone has the right to found a family, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. Families exist in
diverse forms. No family may be subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or gender
identity of any of its members.
States shall:
A. Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure the right to found a family, including
through access to adoption or assisted procreation (including donor insemination), without discrimination on the basis
of sexual orientation or gender identity;
B. Ensure that laws and policies recognise the diversity of family forms, including those not defined by descent or
marriage, and take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that no family may be
subjected to discrimination on the basis of the sexual orientation or gender identity of any of its members,
including with regard to family-related social welfare and other public benefits, employment, and immigration;
C.
Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that in all actions or decisions
concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law,
administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration,
and that the sexual orientation or gender identity of the child or of any family member or other person may not
be considered incompatible with such best interests;
D. In all actions or decisions concerning children, ensure that a child who is capable of forming personal views can
exercise the right to express those views freely, and that such views are given due weight in accordance with the
age and maturity of the child;
E. Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that in states that
recognise same-sex marriages or registered partnerships, any entitlement, privilege, obligation or
benefit available to different-sex married or registered partners is equally available to same- sex
married or registered partners;
F. Take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure that any obligation,
entitlement, privilege, obligation or benefit available to different-sex unmarried partners is equally
available to same- sex unmarried partners;
G. Ensure that marriages and other legally-recognised partnerships may be entered into only with the
free and full consent of the intending spouses or partners. [Emphasis supplied]"
b. There is an increasing international judicial consensus around sexual orientation equality, including
recognizing same-sex marriages
155. Countries around the world have increasingly begun to recognize rights of the LGBTQIA+ community,
including the right to marry a person of one's choice. In Navtej Johan (Supra.), this Hon'ble Court has recognized that
[DY Chandrachud, J.]
5 We are aware that socio-historical contexts differ from one jurisdiction to another and that we must
therefore look at comparative law-making allowances for them. However, the overwhelming weight of international
opinion and the dramatic increase in the pace of recognition of fundamental rights for same sex couples reflects a
growing consensus towards sexual orientation equality. We feel inclined to concur with the accumulated wisdom
reflected in these judgments, not to determine the meaning of the guarantees contained within the Indian
Constitution, but to provide a sound and appreciable confirmation of our conclusions about those guarantees."
156. At present, more than 30 countries have legalized same-sex marriage. Notably, inter alia Austria, Brazil, Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Slovenia, South Africa, Nepal, Taiwan, United States of America, Ecuador, Argentina, Brazil,
Colombia, Uruguay, have granted legal recognition to same-sex marriage by way of judicial pronouncements.
Table on Legal Status of Same-sex Unions across the world, is annexed and marked as Annexure-5.
157. The US Supreme Court, in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015) (9-judge bench), read a right to same-
sex marriage into the equality clause. It was held that the Constitution entitles same-sex couples to civil marriage "on
the same terms and conditions as opposite-sex couples." Justice Anthony Kennedy speaking for the majority held
that:
The right to marry is a fundamental right inherent in the liberty of the person, and under the Due Process and
Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment couples of the same-sex may not be deprived of that right
and that liberty"
158. Justice Kennedy further held as under:
"This analysis compels the conclusion that same-sex couples may exercise the right to marry. The four principles
and traditions to be discussed demonstrate that the reasons marriage is fundamental under the Constitution apply
with equal force to same-sex couples.
159. The US Supreme Court further held that:
"No union is more profound than marriage, for it embodies the highest ideals of love, fidelity, devotion, sacrifice,
and family. In forming a marital union, two people become something greater than once they were. As some of the
petitioners in these cases demonstrate, marriage embodies a love that may endure even past death. It would
misunderstand these men and women to say they disrespect the idea of marriage. Their plea is that they do respect
it, respect it SO deeply that they seek to find its fulfillment for themselves. Their hope is not to be condemned to
live in loneliness, excluded from one of civilization's oldest institutions. They ask for equal dignity in the eyes of the
law. The Constitution grants them that right"
held that same-sex married couples cannot be treated differently than opposite-sex married couples. Thus, the court
held relevant state laws to be unconstitutional to the extent that they treated same-sex couples differently from
opposite-sex couples.
161. On 12.06.2019, Ecuador's Constitution Court (10-18-CN/19) ruled to overhaul the country's laws and hold that
legislation prohibiting same sex marriage was discriminatory and unconstitutional, and that same-sex couples enjoy
equal rights.
162. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights, in 2018, issued an advisory opinion (Advisory Opinion OC-24/17)
to Costa Rica that signatories of the American Convention on Human Rights are obliged to make same-sex marriage
legal. It was held that:
States must ensure access to all the legal institutions that exist in their domestic laws to guarantee the
protection of all the rights of families composed of same sex couples, without discrimination in relation to families
constituted by heterosexual couples."
1 The ECtHR in Oliari V. Italy, 2015 ECHR 176, held that gay couples are equally capable of entering into stable
and committed relationships in the same way as heterosexual couples. It further affirmed the view that same sex
couples are in need of legal recognition and protection of their relationship.
164. In Oliari, the ECtHR further noted that there exists a clear gap between the social reality of the applicants
(same sex couples), who openly live their relationship, such as the Petitioners in the present case, and the law, which
fails to formally
recognize same sex partnerships. In doing so, the State authorities have overstepped their margin of
appreciation and failed to fulfil their positive obligation to ensure that the applicants have available specific legal
framework providing for the recognition and protection of their same sex unions.
165. Most recently in Case of Fedotova V. Russia, Applications nos. 40792/10, 30538/14 and 43439/14, the Grand
Chamber of the ECtHR dealt with the importance and need for recognition and protection of same-sex marriage as
under
[Majority opinion 14:3]
200. The Court accepts that gaining official recognition for their relationship has an intrinsic value for the
applicants. Such recognition forms part of the development of both their personal and their social identity
201. The Court has already held that partnerships constituting an officially recognised alternative to marriage have
an intrinsic value for same-sex couples irrespective of the legal effects, however narrow or extensive, that they
produce. Accordingly, official recognition of same-sex couples confers an existence and a legitimacy on
them vis--vis the outside world.
202. Beyond the essential need for official recognition, same-sex couples, like different-sex couples, have "basic
needs" for protection. Indeed, the recognition and the protection of a couple are inextricably linked. The Court
has held on a number of occasions that same-sex couples are in a relevantly similar situation to different-sex
couples as regards their need for formal acknowledgment and protection of their relationship.
203. In the present case, the Court can only conclude that in the absence of official recognition, same-sex couples
are nothing more than de facto unions under Russian law. The partners are unable to regulate fundamental
aspects of life as a couple such as those concerning property, maintenance and inheritance except as
private individuals entering into contracts under the ordinary law, rather than as an officially
recognised couple. Nor are they able to rely on the existence of their relationship in dealings with the
judicial or administrative authorities. Indeed, the fact that same-sex partners are required to apply to
the domestic courts for protection of their basic needs as a couple constitutes in itself a hindrance to
respect for their private and family life. [Emphasis supplied]
166. The Constitutional Court of Austria ruled on 04.12.2017 (G-258-259 of 2017) that denial of marriage equality
was discriminatory, legalizing same-sex marriage, and held as under:
"The distinction in the law between opposite-sex and same-sex relationships as two different legal institutions
thus violates the principle of equality, which forbids any discrimination of individuals on grounds of personal
characteristics, such as their sexual orientation."
167. Recently on 08.07.2022, the Constitutional Court of Slovenia (6:3) (Decision No. U-1-486/20, Up-572/18)
legalized same-sex marriage and adoption by same-sex couples. It was held that Slovenia's statutory provisions
allowing for only opposite-sex marriages and adoptions violated a constitutional prohibition against discrimination. It
was held that such discrimination cannot be justified by the traditional meaning of marriage as a union of husband
and wife, nor can it be justified by the special protection of the family.
168. The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Minister of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT 60/04, and Lesbian and
Gay Equality Project V. Minister of Home Affairs, Case CCT 10/05, held that same-sex couples have a constitutional
right to marry at par with entitlements and responsibilities enjoyed by heterosexual couples. The Constitutional Court
of South Africa held as under:
"81 A law that creates institutions which enable heterosexual couples to declare their public commitment to
each other and achieve the status, entitlements and responsibilities that flow from marriage, but does not provide
any mechanism for same-sex couples to achieve the same, discriminates unfairly against same-sex couples. It gives
to the one and not to the other. The instruments created by the legal system exclude from their reach persons
entitled to be protected by them.
169. The Supreme Court of Nepal in Sunil Babu Pant V. Nepal Government, (2008) 2 NJA LJ 262, in relation to same
-sex marriages, have held as under:
"Looking at the issue of same sex marriage, we hold that it is an inherent right of an adult to have marital
relation with another adult with his/her free consent and according to her/his will."
170. The Taiwan Constitutional Court ruled in 2017 (Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 748) that marriage could not
be restricted to opposite-sex couples, and held as under:
The current provisions of the Marriage Chapter do not allow two persons of the same sex to create a union of
intimate and exclusive nature for the purpose of living a common life. This is obviously a gross legislative flaw. To
such extent, the provisions of the Marriage Chapter are incompatible with the spirit and meaning of the freedom of
marriage as protected by Article 22 of the Constitution."
171. Thus, it may be seen that constitutional courts around the world have leaned in favour of recognizing marriage
equality.
172. The growing international consensus towards development of LGBT rights provides a confirmation for this
Hon'ble Court to recognize marriage equality. As held by this Hon'ble Court in Johar, in the march of civilisation across
the spectrum of a compassionate global order, India cannot be left behind [Para 564].
CONCLUSION
Indians from the equal enjoyment of the most basic of their fundamental rights.
[D.Y. Chandrachud, J.]
405. Indian citizens belonging to sexual minorities have waited. They have waited and watched as their fellow
citizens were freed from the British yoke while their fundamental freedoms remained restrained under an
antiquated and anachronistic colonial era law - forcing them to live in hiding, in fear, and as second-class citizens.
In seeking an adjudication of the validity of Section 377, these citizens urge that the acts which the provision
makes culpable should be decriminalised. But this case involves much more than merely decriminalising certain
conduct which has been proscribed by a colonial law. The case is about an aspiration to realise constitutional rights.
It is about a right which every human being has, to live with dignity. It is about enabling these citizens to realise
the worth of equal citizenship. Above all, our decision will speak to the transformative power of the Constitution. For
it is in the transformation of society that the Constitution seeks to assure the values of a just, humane and
compassionate existence to all her citizens."
174. The right to love, seek companionship, found a family are essential to an individual's pursuit of happiness and
are inherent in the guarantees of our Constitution. The Petitioners herein, have come before this Hon'ble Court to
enable realization of their Constitutional rights and to enable their full citizenship.
Drawn By:
Bhabna Das, Govind Manoharan, Utkarsh Pratap, Sai Kaushal, Lavkesh Bhambhani, Advocates
Settled By:
Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, Senior Advocate
ANNEXURE 1- TABLE ON ILLUSTRATIVE BUNDLE OF RIGHTS ENJOYED BY MARRIED COUPLES AND
THEIR CHILDREN
Matrimonial Rights and Remedies
S.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
1.
Right
to
Maintenance
and
order/ decree of maintenance may be enforced like a decree of a civil court
Alimony
through the provisions which are available for enforcing a money decree, viz.
civil detention, attachment of property, etc.
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any
time subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either
the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall
pay to the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or
such monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the
applicant as, having regard to the respondent's own income and other
property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant, the conduct
of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may seem to the court to
be just, and any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on
the immovable property of the respondent.
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is, a change in the circumstances of
either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may
at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such
manner as the court may deem just.
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has
not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he has had sexual
intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may at the instance of the other
party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may
deem just.
The Special Marriage Act, 1954
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any court exercising
jurisdiction under Chapter V or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any
decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on application made to it for
the purpose, order that the husband shall secure to the wife for her
maintenance and support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband's
property, such gross sum or such monthly or periodical payment of money for
a term not exceeding her life, as,
having regard to her own property, if any, her husband's property and
ability the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may
seem to the court to be just.
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances
of either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section
(1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such
order in such manner as it may seem to the court to be just.
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an orden has
been made under this section has remarried or is not leading a chaste life,
it may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify or rescind any such
order and in such manner as the court may deem just.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
40. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any Court exercising
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any
time subsequent thereto, on an application made to it for the purpose by
either the wife or the husband, order that the defendant shall pay to the
plaintiff for her or his maintenance and support, such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical sum, for a term not exceeding the life of the plaintiff as
having regard to the defendant's own income and other property, if any, the
income and other property of the plaintiff, the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case, it may seem to the Court to be just, and any such
payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the movable or
immovable property of the defendant.
(2) The Court if it is satisfied that there is change in the circumstances of
either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may,
at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such
manner as the Court may deem just.
(3) The Court if it is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she
has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he had
sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may, at the instance
of the other party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner
as the Court may deem just.
The Divorce Act, 1869
37. Power to order permanent alimony. Where a decree of dissolution
of the marriage or a decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the
District Court may order that the husband shall], to the satisfaction of the
Court, secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum of
money for any term not exceeding her own life, as, having regard to her
fortune (if any), to the ability of the husband, and to the
conduct of the parties, it thinks reasonable; and for that purpose may
cause a proper instrument to be executed by all necessary parties.
Power to order monthly or weekly payments.-In every such case the
Court may make an order on the husband for payment to the wife of such
The surest way t legal research!
monthly or weekly sums for her maintenance and support as the Court may
think reasonable:
Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes unable to
make such payments, it shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify
the order, or temporarily to suspend the same as to the whole or any part
of the money so ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order
wholly or in part, as to the Court seems fit.
2.
Right in respect
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
of joint property
27. Disposal of property.- In any proceeding under this Act, the court
may make such provisions in the decree as it deems just and proper with
respect to any property presented, at or about the time of marriage, which
may belong jointly to both the husband and the wife.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
42. Disposal of joint property. In any suit under this Act the Court may
make such provisions in the final decree as it may deem just and proper with
respect to property presented at or about the time of marriage which may
belong jointly to both the husband and wife.
3.
Restitution
of
This Hon'ble Court in Saroj Rani V. Sudarshan Kumar Chadha, (1984) 4
Conjugal Rights
prevention of break-up of marriage and is not violative of either Articles 14 or
21 of the Constitution.
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
9. Restitution of conjugal rights. When either the husband or the wife
has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other
aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district court, for restitution of
conjugal rights and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements
made in such petition and that there is no legal ground why the application
should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation.-Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable
excuse for withdrawal from the society, the burden of proving reasonable
excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
The Special Marriage Act, 1954
22. Restitution of conjugal rights.- When either the husband or the wife
has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from
the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the
district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there
is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation.-Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable
excuse for withdrawal from the society, the burden of proving reasonable
excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
36. Suit for restitution of conjugal rights.- Where a husband shall have
deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with his wife, or where a
wife shall have deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with her
husband, the party so deserted or with whom cohabitation shall have so
ceased may sue for the restitution of his or her conjugal rights and the Court,
if satisfied of the truth of the allegations contained in the plaint, and that
there is no just ground why relief should not be granted, may proceed to
decree such restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
The Divorce Act, 1869
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights.- When either the
husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the
society of the other, either wife or husband may apply, by petition to the
District Court, for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there
is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
4.
Right to sue
This Hon'ble Court in Pinakin Mahipatray Rawal V. State of Gujarat, (2013)
third party who
attempts
to
"17. Action for alienation of affection lies for all improper intrusions or
alienate
affection
assaults on the marriage relationship by another, whether or not associated
of one's spouse
with "extramarital sex", his or her continued overtures or sexual liaisons can
be construed as something akin to an assumption of risk that his/ her conduct
will injure the marriage and give rise to an action. But all the same, a person
is not liable for alienation of affection for merely becoming a passive object of
affection. The liability arises only if there is any active participation, initiation
or encouragement on the part of the defendant. Acts which lead to the loss of
affection must be wrongful, intentional, calculated to entice the affection of
one spouse away from the other, in order to support a cause of action for
alienation of affection. For proving a claim for alienation of affection it is not
necessary for a party to prove an adulterous relationship."
11. Right of spouse and children for maintenance
S.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
No.
1.
Right
to
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.- (1) If
maintenance of
any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain-
wife and children
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
under Section 125
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable
of
the
Criminal
to maintain itself, or
Procedure Code
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal,
order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his
wife or such child, father or mother, at such monthly rate, as such Magistrate
thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from
time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child
referred to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her
majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female
child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the
proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-
section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of
such proceeding which the Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the
same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim
maintenance and expenses for proceeding under the second proviso shall, as
far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the service of
notice of the application to such person. Explanation.- For the purposes of this
Chapter,
(a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority
Act, 1875 (9 of 1875), is deemed not to have attained his majority;
(b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a
divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.
(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and
expenses for proceeding shall be payable
from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the
application for maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of
proceeding, as the case may be.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the
order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for
levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may
sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each month's allowance for
the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the
case may be, remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if
sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recoverv of anv amount due
under this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such
amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition
of her living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may
consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under
this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just
ground for so doing.
Explanation.- a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or
keeps a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal
to live with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or
the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,
from her husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if,
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if
they are living separately by mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this
section is living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to
live with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual consent,
the Magistrate shall cancel the order.
111. Rights in case of succession and intestate succession
S.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
No.
1.
Rights in case of
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956
intestate
8. General rules of succession in the case of males. The property of a
succession
male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the provisions of this
Chapter-
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in Class I of the
Schedule;
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of Class I, then upon the heirs, being the
relatives specified in Class 11 of the Schedule;
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon the agnates
of the deceased; and
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the deceased.
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.- Among the heirs
specified in the Schedule, those in Class I shall take simultaneously and to
the exclusion of all other heirs; those in the first entry in Class II shall be
preferred to those in the second entry; those in the second entry shall be
preferred to those in the third entry; and so on in succession.
10. Distribution of property among heirs in Class I of the Schedule.-
The property of an intestate shall be divided among the heirs in Class I of
the Schedule in accordance with the following rules:
Rule 1.-The intestate's widow, or if there are more widows than one, all
the widows together, shall take one share.
Rule 2.-The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate
shall each take one share.
Rule 3.-The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased son or each pre-
deceased daughter of the intestate shall take between them one share.
Rule 4.-The distribution of the share referred to in Rule 3- ) among the
heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased son shall be so made that his widow
(or widows together) and the surviving sons and daughters get equal
portions; and the branch of his predeceased sons gets the same portion; i)
among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased daughter shall be so made
that the surviving sons and daughters get equal portions.
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 8)
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS 11
Class /
Son; daughter; widow; mother; son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-
deceased son; son of a pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased
daughter; widow of a pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-
deceased son; daughter of a predeceased son of a pre-deceased son; widow of a
pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son: son of a pre-deceased daughter of
a
predeceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a predeceased
daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased son of a predeceased daughter; daughter
of a pre-deceased daughter of a predeceased son.
This Hon'ble Court in K.C. Laxmana V. K.C. Chandrappa Gowda & Anr.,
"15. In the instant case, it is admitted by the second defendant that the
settlement deed dated 22.03.1980 (Ex.P-1) is, in fact, a gift-deed which was
executed by the first defendant in favour of the second defendant 'out of love
and affection' and by virtue of which the second defendant was given
a
portion of the joint family property. It is well-settled that a Hindu father or
any other managing member of a HUF has power to make a gift of ancestral
property only for a 'pious purpose' and what is understood by the term 'pious
purpose' is a gift for charitable and/or religious purpose. Therefore, a deed of
gift in regard to the ancestral property executed 'out of love and affection
does not come within the scope of the term 'pious purpose'. It is irrelevant if
such gift or settlement was made by a donor, i.e. the first defendant, in favour
of a donee who was raised by the donor without any relationship, i.e. the
second defendant. The gift deed in the instant case is not for any charitable or
religious purpose."
The Indian Succession Act, 1925
Part V: Intestate Succession
Chapter 11: Rules in cases of intestates other than Parsis
33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or
widow and kindred only, or widow and no kindred.- Where the intestate
has left a widow-
(a) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one-third of his property shall
belong to his widow, and the remaining two-thirds shall go to his lineal
descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(b) save as provided by Section 33-A], if he has left no lineal descendant, but
has left persons who are of kindred to him, one- half of his property shall
belong to his widow, and the other half shall go to those who are of kindred
to him, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(c) if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his property
shall belong to his widow.
33-A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal
descendants.- (1) Where the intestate has left a widow but no lineal
descendants and the nett value of his property does not exceed five thousand
rupees, the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.
(2) Where the nett value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand
rupees, the widow shall be entitled to five thousand rupees thereof and
shall have a charge upon the whole of such property for such sum of five
thousand rupees, with interest thereon from the date of the death of the
intestate at 4 per cent per annum until payment.
(3) The provision for the widow made by this section shall be in addition and
without prejudice to her interest and share in the
residue of the estate of such intestate remaining after payment of the said sum
of five thousand rupees, with interest as aforesaid, and such residue shall be
distributed in accordance with the provisions of Section 33 as if it were the whole
of such intestate's property.
(4) The nett value of the property shall be ascertained by deducting from the
gross value thereof all debts, and all funeral and administration expenses of the
intestate, and all other lawful liabilities and charges to which the property shall
be subject.
(5) This section shall not apply-
(a) to the property of-
(i) any Indian Christian,
(ii) any child or grandchild of any male person who is or was at
the time of his death an Indian Christian, or
(iii) any person professing the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
religion the succession to whose property is, under Section
24 of the Special Marriage Act, 1872, regulated by the
provisions of this Act;
(b) unless the deceased dies intestate in respect of all his property.
35. Rights of widower.- A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in
respect of her property, if she dies intestate, as a widow has in respect of her
husband's property, if he dies intestate.
37. Where intestate has left child or children only. - Where the intestate has
left surviving him a child or children, but no more remote lineal descendant
through a deceased child, the property shall belong to his surviving child, if there
is only one, or shall be equally divided among all his surviving children.
Chapter 111: Special Rules for Parsi Intestates
51. Division of intestate's property among widow, widower, children and
parents.- (1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the property of which a
Parsi dies intestate shall be divided,-
a) where such Parsi dies leaving a widow or widower and children, among the
widow or widower, and children so that the widow or widower and each
child receive equal shares;
b) where such Parsi dies leaving children, but no widow or widower,
among the children in equal shares.
(2) Where a Parsi dies leaving one or both parents in addition to children or
widow or widower and children, the property of which such Parsi dies intestate
shall be so divided that the parent or each of the parents shall receive a share
equal to half the share of each child.
54. Division of property where intestate leaves no lineal descendant but
leaves a widow or widower or a widow or widower of any lineal
descendant.- Where a Parsi dies without leaving any lineal descendant but
leaving a widow or widower or
a widow or widower of a lineal descendant, the property of which the intestate
dies intestate shall be divided in accordance with the following rules, namely,
a) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower but no widow or widower of a
lineal descendant, the widow or widower shall take half the said property;
b) if the intestate leaves a widow or widower and also a widow or widower of
any lineal descendant, his widow or her widower shall receive one-third of
the said property and the widow or widower of any lineal descendant shall
receive another one-third or if there is more than one such widow or
widower of lineal descendants, the last mentioned one-third shall be
divided equally among them.
c) if the intestate leaves no widow or widower, but one widow or widower of a
lineal descendant, such widow or widower of the lineal descendant shall
receive one-third of the said property or, if the intestate leaves no widow or
widower but more than one widow or widower of lineal descendants, two-
thirds of the said property shall be divided among such widows or widowers
of the lineal descendants in equal shares;
d) the residue after the division specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause
(c) has been made shall be distributed among the relatives of the intestate
in the orden specified in Part I of Schedule 11; and the next-of-kin standing
first in Part I of that Schedule shall be preferred to those, standing second,
the second to the third and so on in succession, provided that the property
shall be so distributed that each male and female standing in the same
degree of propinquity shall receive equal shares;
e) if there are no relatives entitled to the residue under clause (d), the
whole of the residue shall be distributed in proportion to the shares specified
among the persons entitled to receive shares under this section.
Muslim Law
This Hon'ble Court in Jamil Ahmad. V. Vth Addl. Distt. Judge, Moradabad, (2001)
left by a deceased Muslim is called matruka. The scheme of distribution of
matruka among the heirs of a deceased Muslim is that first that part of the
matruka which is covered by a will of the deceased, if there is a valid will
(subject to a maximum of 1/3rd of the total matruka provided it is not in favour
of an heir) will be separated and given to the legatee. The balance of matruka
alone is distributable among the heirs and in the proportion ordained under the
Mohammedan Law.
IV. Right of married couples to be parents together
S. No.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
1.
Only
married
The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956
couples
are
7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption. Any male Hindu who is
entitled to adopt
of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or a
as a couple
daughter in adoption:
Provided that, if he has a wife living, he shall not adopt except with the
consent of his wife unless the wife has completely and finally renounced the
world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.
Explanation.-If a person has more than one wife living at the time of
adoption, the consent of all the wives is necessary unless the consent of
any one of them is unnecessary for any of the reasons specified in the
preceding proviso.
8. Capacity of a female Hindu to take in adoption.-
Any female Hindu who is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity
to take a son or daughter in adoption:
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or
daughter except with the consent of her husband unless the husband has
completely and finally renounced the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or
has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound
mind.
14. Determination of adoptive mother in certain cases.- (1) Where a
Hindu who has a wife living adopts a child she shall be deemed to be the
adoptive mother.
(2) Where an adoption has been made with the consent of more than one
wife, the seniormost in marriage among them shall be deemed to be the
adoptive mother and the others to be stepmothers.
(3) Where a widower or a bachelor adopts a child, any wife whom he
subsequently marries shall be deemed to be the stepmother of the adopted
child.
(4) Where a widow or an unmarried woman adopts a child, any husband
whom she marries subsequently shall be deemed to be the stepfather of
the adopted child.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
57. Eligibility of prospective adoptive parents.- (1) The prospective
adoptive parents shall be physically fit, financially sound, mentally alert and
highly motivated to adopt a child for providing a good upbringing to him.
(2)
In case of a couple, the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be
required.
(3) A single or divorced person can also adopt, subject to fulfilment of the
criteria and in accordance with the provisions of adoption regulations framed by
the Authority.
(4) A single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child.
(5) Any other criteria that may be specified in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority.
The Adoption Regulations, 2022
5. Eligibility criteria for prospective adoptive parents.-(1) The prospective
adoptive parents shall be physically, mentally, emotionally and financially
capable, they shall not have any life threatening medical condition and they
should not have been convicted in criminal act of any nature or accused in any
case of child rights violation.
(2) Any prospective adoptive parent, irrespective of their marital status and
whether or not they have biological son or daughter, can adopt a child subject to
the following, namely:
a) the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall
be required, in case of a married couple;
b) a single female can adopt a child of any gender;
c) a single male shall not be eligible to adopt a girl child.
(3) No child shall be given in adoption to a couple unless they have at least two
years of stable marital relationship except in the cases of relative or step-parent
adoption.
Office Memorandum issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority
bearing S.No. CARAICA013/1/2022 Administration dated 16 June 2022
2. The cases of single PAPs engaged in live-in relationship have been discussed
in the Steering Committee of Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) during
its 31st Meeting held on 18th April, 2022. It has been decided to go with the
earlier decision of 14th Steering Committee Meeting held on 10th May, 2018 that
the cases of single PAP in a live-in relationship with a partner will not be
considered eligible to adopt a child and their registration from concerned
agencies/authorities will not be considered for approval.
3. The decision has been taken in line with Regulation 5(3) of the Adoption
Regulations, 2017. The authority would like the children to be placed only with
the stable family and single applicant in a live-in relationship cannot be
considered as stable family.
2.
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
under
the
(h) "couple" means the legally married Indian man and woman above the age
Surrogacy
of 21 years and 18 years, respectively;
(Regulation)
Act,
2021
3.
Couples need to
2. Definitions. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.
be married to avail
(e) "commissioning couple" means an infertile married couple who
assisted
approach an assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted reproductive
reproductive
technology bank for obtaining the services authorised of the said clinic or
technology under
bank;
the
Assisted
Reproductive
Technology
(Regulation) Act,
2021
V. Right to compensation of spouse and children in case of accidental death
S.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
No.
1.
Entitlement to
5. Liability in case of death.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
compensation
the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855) or any other enactment or rule of
under the Carriage
law in force in any part of India, the rules contained in 9[the First Schedule,
by Air Act, 1972
the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule] shall, in all cases to which those
rules apply, determine the liability of a carrier in respect of the death of a
passenger.
(2) The liability shall be enforceable for the benefit of such of the members of
the passengers family as sustained damage by reason of his death.
Explanation.- this sub-section, the expression "member of a family" means
wife or husband, parent, step-parent, grand-parent, brother, sister, half-
brother, half-sister, child, step-child and grandchild:
Provided that in deducing any such relationship as aforesaid any illegitimate
person and any adopted person shall be treated as being, or as having
been, the legitimate child of his mother and reputed father or, as the case
may be, of his adopters.
(3) An action to enforce the liability may be brought by the personal
representative of the passenger or by any person for whose benefit the
liability is under sub section (2) enforceable, but only one action shall be
brought in India in respect of the death of any one passenger, and every
such action by whomsoever brought shall be for the benefit of all such
persons so entitled as aforesaid as either are domiciled in India or not
being domiciled there express a desire to take the benefit of the action.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the amount recovered in any
such action, after deducting any costs not recovered from the defendant,
shall be
divided between the persons entitled in such proportion as the Court may
direct.
2.
Entitlement to
This Hon'ble Court in National Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Pranay Sethi, (2017) 16
compensation
under the Motor
their spouse is entitled to inter alia compensation under the head of loss of
Vehicles Act, 1988
consortium of Rs. 50,000/-. The head of loss of consortium attempts to
compensate for the loss of spouse's affection, comfort, solace, companionship,
society, assistance, protection, care and sexual relations during the future
years.
3.
Entitlement to
1-A. Suit for compensation to the family of a person for loss
compensation
occasioned to it by his death by actionable wrong. Whenever the death
under the Fatal
of a person shall be caused by wrongful act, neglect or default, and the act,
Accidents
Act,
neglect or default is such as would (if death had not ensued) have entitled the
1855
party injured to maintain an action and recover damages in respect thereof,
the party who would have been liable if death had not ensued, shall be liable
to an action on suit for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person
injured, and although the death shall have been caused under such
circumstances as amount in law to felony or other crime.
Every such action or suit shall be for the benefit of the wife, husband, parent
and child, if any, of the person whose death shall have been so caused, and
shall be brought by and in the name of the executor, administrator, or
representative of the person deceased; and in every such action the court
may give such damages as it may think proportioned to the loss resulting
from such death to the parties respectively, for whom and for whose benefit
such action shall be brought; and the amount so recovered, after deducting
all costs and expenses, including the costs not recovered from the
defendant, shall be divided amongst the before-mentioned parties, or any
of them, in such shares as the court by its judgement or decree shall direct.
4.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
compensation
in
subject or context,-
case
of
(6-A) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a deceased insured
employment injury
person, namely:
under
the
(i) a widow, a legitimate or adopted son who has not attained the age of
Employees'
State
twenty-five years, an unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter;
Insurance
Act,
(i-a) a widowed mother;
1948
(ii) If wholly dependant on the earnings of the insured person at the time
of his death, a legitimate or adopted son or daughter who has attained the
age of twenty-five years and is infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependant on the earnings of the insured person at
the time of his death,-
(a) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(b) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter
legitimate or adopted or illegitimate if married and a minor or if widowed
and a minor,
(c) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(d) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is
alive, or
(g) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the insured person is alive;
46. Benefits.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the insured
persons their dependants or the persons hereinafter mentioned, as the case
may be, shall be entitled to the following benefits, namely-
(a) periodical payments to any insured person in case of his sickness certified
by a duly appointed medical practitioner or by any other person possessing
such qualifications and experience as the Corporation may, by regulations,
specify in this behalf] (hereinafter referred to as sickness benefit);
(b) periodical payments to an insured woman in case of confinement or
miscarriage or sickness arising out of pregnancy, confinement, premature
birth of child or miscarriage, such woman being certified to be eligible for
such payments by an authority specified in this behalf by the regulations
(hereinafter referred to as maternity benefit);
(c) periodical payments to an insured person suffering from disablement as a
result of an employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act
and certified to be eligible for such payments by an authority specified in
this behalf by the regulations (hereinafter referred to as disablement
benefit);
(d) periodical payments to such dependants of an insured person who dies as
a result of an employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act,
as are entitled to compensation under this Act (hereinafter referred to as
dependants' benefit);
(e) medical treatment for and attendance on insured persons (hereinafter
referred to as medical benefit); and
(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the family of an insured person
who has died, towards the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased
insured person, or, where the insured person did not have a
family or was not living with his family at the time of his death, to the
person who actually incurs the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased
insured person (to be known as [funeral expenses):
Provided that the amount of such payment shall not exceed such amount
as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the claim for such
payment shall be made within three months of the death of the insured
person or within such extended period as the Corporation or any officer or
authority authorised by it in this behalf may allow.
52. Dependant's benefit.- (1) If an insured person dies as a result of an
employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act (whether or not
he was in receipt of any periodical payment for temporary disablement in
respect of the injury) dependants' benefit shall be payable at such rates and
for such period and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the
Central Government to his dependants specified in sub-clause (i), sub-clause
(i-a) and sub-clause (ii) of clause (6-A) of Section 2.
(2) In case the insured person dies without leaving behind him the
dependants as aforesaid, the dependants' benefit shall be paid to the other
dependants of the deceased at such rates and for such period and subject to
such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
VI. Right to compensation of spouse and children in case of death, under various labour laws
S.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
No.
1.
Entitlement to
2. Definitions.- In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, -
Death
Gratuity
(h) "family", in relation to an employee, shall be deemed to consist of-
under the Payment
(i) in the case of a male employee, himself, his wife, his children, whether
of Gratuity Act,
married or unmarried, his dependent parents and the dependent parents of
1972
his wife and the widow and children of his predeceased son, if any,
(ii) in the case of a female employee, herself, her husband, her children,
whether married or unmarried, her dependent parents and the dependent
parents of her husband and the widow and children of her predeceased son, if
any:
Explanation.-Where the personal law of an employee permits the adoption
by him of a child, any child lawfully adopted by him shall be deemed to be
included in his family, and where a child of an employee has been adopted by
another person and such adoption is, under the personal law of the person
making such adoption, lawful, such child shall be deemed to be excluded from
the family of the employee;
4. Payment of gratuity.- (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on
the termination of his employment after he has rendered continuous service
for not less than five years,-
(a) on his superannuation, or
(b) on his retirement or resignation, or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease:
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be
necessary where the termination of the employment of any employee is due to
death or disablement:
Provided further that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable
to him shall be paid to his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his
heirs, and where any such nominees or heirs is a minor, the share of such
minor, shall be deposited with the controlling authority who shall invest the
same for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution,
as may be prescribed, until such minor attains majority.
6. Nomination.- (1) Each employee, who has completed one year of
service, shall make, within such time, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed, nomination for the purpose of the second proviso to sub-
section (1) of Section 4.
(2) An employee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity
payable to him under this Act amongst more than one nominee.
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the
nomination shall be made in favour of one or more members of his family,
and any nomination made by such employee in favour of a person who is
not a member of his family, shall be void.
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the employee has no family, the
nomination may be made in favour of any person or persons but if the
employee subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith
become invalid and the employee shall make,
within such time as may be prescribed, a fresh nomination in favour of one
or more members of his family.
2.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions. In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires-
compensation
(g) "family" means-
under
the
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether married or
Employees
unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's widow and children:
Provident
Fund
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the
Scheme, 1952
personal law governing him or the customary law of the community to which
the spouses belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be
deemed to be a part of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme,
unless the Member subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to the
Commissioner that she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children, whether
married or unmarried, her dependant parents, her husband's dependant
parents and her deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner
expresses her desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and
his dependant parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of the
member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member
subsequently cancels in writing any such notice;
Explanation. In either of the above two cases, if the child of a Member or,
as the case may be, the child of a deceased son of the Member has been
adopted by another person and if, under the personal law of the adopter,
adoption is legally recognised such a child shall be considered as excluded
from the family of the Member;
61. Nomination. Each member shall make in his declaration in Form
2, a nomination conferring the right to receive the amount that may stand to
his credit in the Fund in the event of his death before the amount standing to
his credit has become payable, or where the amount has become payable
before payment has been made.
(2) A member may in his nomination distribute the amount that may stand
to his credit in the Fund amongst his nominees at his own discretion.
(3) If a member has a family at the time of making a nomination, the
nomination shall be in favour of one or more persons belonging to his
family. Any nomination made by such member in favour of a person not
belonging to his family shall be invalid:
Provided that a fresh nomination shall be made by the member on his
marriage and any nomination made before such marriage shall be deemed to
be invalid.
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the member has no family, the
nomination may be in favour of any person or persons but if the member
subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith be deemed
to be invalid and the member shall make a fresh nomination in favour of
one or more persons belonging to his family.
(4-A) Where the nomination is wholly or partly in favour of a minor, the
member may, for the purposes of this Scheme, appoint a major person of his
family, as defined in clause (g) of Paragraph 2, to be the guardian of the
minor nominee in the event of the member predeceasing the nominee and the
guardian so appointed:
Provided that where there is no major person in his family, the member
may, at his discretion, appoint any other person to be a guardian of the minor
nominee.
(5) A nomination made under sub-paragraph (1) may at any time be modified
by a member after giving a written notice of his intention of doing so in
Form annexed hereto. If the nominee predeceases the member, the
interest of the nominee shall revert to the member who may make a fresh
nomination in respect of such interest.
(6) A nomination or its modification shall take effect to the extent that it is
valid on the date on which it is received by the Commissioner.
70. Accumulations of a deceased member-To whom payable.-On
the death of a member before the amount standing to his credit has become
payable or where the amount has become payable before payment has been
made-
(i) if a nomination made by the member in accordance with Paragraph 61
subsists, the amount standing to his credit in the Fund or that part thereof to
which the nomination relates, shall become payable to his nominee or
nominees in accordance with such nomination; or
(ii) if no nomination subsists or if the nomination relates only to a part of
the amount standing to his credit in the Fund, the whole amount or the part
thereof to
which the nomination does not relate, as the case may be, shall become
payable to the members of his family in equal shares:
Provided that no share shall be payable to-
(a) sons who have attained majority;
(b) sons of a deceased son who have attained majority;
(c) married daughters whose husbands are alive;
(d) married daughters of a deceased son whose husbands are alive;
if there is any member of the family other than those specified in clauses
(a), (b), (c) and (d):
Provided further that the widow or widows, and the child or children of a
deceased son shall receive between them in equal parts only the share which
that son would have received if he had survived the member and had not
attained the age of majority at the time of the member's death.
(iii) in any case, to which the provisions of clauses (i) and (ii) do not apply
the whole amount shall be payable to the person legally entitled to it.
Explanation.-For the purpose of this paragraph a member's posthumous
child, if born alive, shall be treated in the same way as a surviving child born
before the member's death.
3.
Entitlement
to
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the
compensation
subject or context-
under
the
(d) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a deceased
Employees
employee, namely-
Compensation Act,
(1) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried legitimate or
1923
adopted daughter, or a widowed mother; and
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of his
death, a son or a daughter who has attained the age of 18 years and who is
infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the employee at the
time of his death-
(a) a widower,
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter
legitimate or illegitimate or adopted if married and a minor or if widowed
and a minor,
(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child is
alive, or
(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the employee is alive;
Explanation.- the purposes of sub-clause (ii) and items (f) and (g) of
sub-clause (iii), references to a son, daughter or child include an adopted son,
daughter or child respectively;
8. Distribution of compensation.- (1) No payment of compensation in
respect of a employee whose injury has resulted in death, and no payment of
a lump sum as compensation to a woman or a person under a legal disability,
shall be made otherwise than by deposit with the Commissioner, and no such
payment made directly by an employer shall be deemed to be a payment of
compensation:
Provided that, in the case of a deceased employee, an employer may make
to any dependant advances on account of compensation of an amount equal to
three months' wages of such employee and so much of such amount as does
not exceed the compensation payable to that dependant shall be deducted by
the Commissioner from such compensation and repaid to the employer.
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than ten rupees which is payable as
compensation may be deposited with the Commissioner on behalf of the
person entitled thereto.
(3) The receipt of the Commissioner shall be a sufficient discharge in respect
of any compensation deposited with him.
(4) On the deposit of any money under sub-section (1), as compensation in
respect of a deceased employee the Commissioner shall, if he thinks
necessary, cause notice to be published or to be served on each dependant
in such manner as he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants to appear
before him on such date as he may fix for determining the distribution of
the compensation. If the Commissioner is satisfied after any inquiry which
he may deem necessary, that no dependant exists, he shall repay the
balance of the money to the employer by whom it was paid. The
Commissioner shall, on application by the employer, furnish a statement
showing in detail all disbursements made.
(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a deceased employee shall, subject
to any deduction made under sub-section (4), be apportioned among the
dependants of the deceased employee or any of them in such proportion as
the Commissioner thinks fit, or may, in the discretion of the Commissioner,
be allotted to any one dependant.
(6) Where any compensation deposited with the Commissioner is payable to
any person, the Commissioner shall, if the person to whom the
compensation is payable is not a woman or a person under a legal
disability, and may, in other cases, pay the money to the person entitled
thereto.
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is payable to a
woman or a person under a legal disability, such sum may be invested,
applied or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of the woman, or of such
person during his disability, in such manner as the Commissioner may
direct; and where a half-monthly payment is payable to any person under a
legal disability, the Commissioner may, of his own motion or on an
application made to him in this behalf, order that the payment be made
during the disability to any dependant of the employee or to any other
person, whom the Commissioner thinks best fitted to provide for the
welfare of the employee.
(8) Where, an application made to him in this behalf or otherwise, the
Commissioner is satisfied that, on account of neglect of children on the part
of a parent or on account of the variation of the circumstances of any
dependant or for any other sufficient cause, an order of the Commissioner
as to the distribution of any sum paid as compensation or as to the manner
in which any sum payable to any such dependant is to be invested, applied
or otherwise dealt with, ought to be varied, the Commissioner may make
such orders for the variation of the former order as he thinks just in the
circumstances of case:
Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be made unless
such person has been given an opportunity of showing cause why the order
should not be made, or shall be made in any case in which it would involve
the repayment by a dependant of any sum already paid to him.
(9) Where the Commissioner varies any order under sub-section (8) by reason
of the fact that payment of compensation to any person has been obtained
by fraud, impersonation or other improper means, any amount so paid to or
on behalf of such person may be recovered in the manner hereinafter
provided in Section 31.
4.
Entitlement for
9. Benefits to the family on death of an eligible subscriber.-
pension
upon
the receipt of pension, if an eligible subscriber dies, his spouse shall be only
death of spouse
entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension received by such eligible
under the Pradhan
subscriber, as family pension and such family pension shall be applicable only
Mantri Shram Yogi
to the spouse.
Maan-dhan Yojana,
2019,
5.
Entitlement for
16.A. Family Pension and Gratuity: Where a Judge dies before retirement
pension to Judges
his/her family shall be only entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension
under
Supreme
received by such eligible subscriber, as family pension and such family
Court
Judges
pension shall be applicable only to the family members.
(Salaries
and
Condition
of
Service) Act, 1958
6.
Entitlement for
Rule 50: Family Pension: During the receipt of pension, if the Government
pension
by
the
servant dies, his widow, children, dependant parents and dependant
Ministry
of
siblings shall be only entitled to receive fifty per cent. of the pension
Personnel,
Public
received by such eligible subscriber, as family pension and such family
Grievances
and
pension shall be applicable only to the widow, children, dependant parents
Pensions
under
and dependant siblings.
CCA(CCS) Rules
2021
6.
Entitlement to
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936
the
amounts
25-A Payment of undisbursed wages in cases of death of employed
standing in credit
person.- (1) Subject to the other provisions of the Act, all amounts
upon
an
payable to an employed person as wages shall, if such amounts could not
employee's death
or cannot be paid on account of his death before payment or on account of
under the Payment
his whereabouts not being known, be paid to the person nominated by
of
Wages
Act,
him in this behalf in accordance with the rules made under this Act; or
1936
where no such nomination has been made or where for any reasons such
amounts cannot be paid to the person so nominated, be deposited with the
prescribed authority who shall deal with the amounts so deposited in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1), all amounts
payable to an employed person as wages- are paid by the employer to the
person nominated by the employed person; or are deposited by the
employer with the prescribed authority, the employer shall be discharged of
his liability to pay those wages.
The Payment of Wages (Nomination) Rules, 2009
2. Definitions.- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -
"family" means all or any of the following relatives of an employed person,
namely:
(i) a spouse;
(ii) a minor child dependant upon the employed person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependant on the earnings of the employed
person and who is receiving
education, till he or she attains the age of twenty-one years;
(iv) an unmarried daughter;
(v) a son or daughter who is inform by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury and is wholly dependant on the earnings of the
employed person, so long as the infirmity continues;
3. Procedure for nomination.-( (1) Every employed person shall make a
declaration in Form-1, nominating a person conferring the right to receive the
amount that may stand in his credit at the event of his death before that
amount standing to his credit has become payable or where the amount has
become payable, before payment has been made.
(2) If an employed person has a family at the time of making nomination,
the nomination shall be in favour of the spouse or the spouse in preference
followed by one more members of his family:
Provided that nominated made by an employed person having a family in
favour of a person other than member of his family shall be invalid:
Provided further that a fresh nomination towards his/her spouse shall be
made by the employed person on his marriage and any nomination made
before such marriage shall be deemed to be invalid.
VII. Extension of medical benefits to spouse and/or children under various labour laws
S.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
No.
1.
Entitlement to
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
extend
medical
subject or context,-
benefits to spouse
) "family" means all or any of the following relatives of an insured person,
under
the
namely:-
Employees'
State
(i) a spouse;
Insurance
Act,
(ii) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the insured
1948
person;
(iii) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person
and who is-
(a) receiving education, till he or she attains the age of twenty-one years,
(b) an unmarried daughter;
(iv) a child who is infirm by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or
injury and is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person, so long
as the infirmity continues;
(v) dependant parents, whose income from all sources does not exceed
such income as may be prescribed by the Central Government; (VI) in case
the insured person is unmarried and his or her parents are not alive, a minor
brother or sister wholly dependant upon the earnings of the insured person;
56. Medical benefit.- (1) An insured person or (where such medical
benefit is extended to his family) a member of his family whose condition
requires medical treatment and attendance shall be entitled to receive medical
benefit.
(2) Such medical benefit may be given either in the form of outpatient
treatment and attendance in a hospital or dispensary, clinic or other
institution or by visits to the home of the insured person or treatment as
inpatient in a hospital or other institution.
(3) A person shall be entitled to medical benefit during any period for which
contributions are payable in respect of him or in which he is qualified to
claim sickness benefit or maternity benefit or is in receipt of such
disablement benefit as does not disentitle him to medical benefit under the
regulations:
Provided that a person in respect of whom contribution ceases to be
payable under this Act may be allowed medical benefit for such period and of
such nature as may be provided under the regulations:
Provided further that an insured person who ceases to be in insurable
employment on account of permanent disablement shall continue, subject to
payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be prescribed by
the Central Government, to receive medical benefit till the date on which he
would have vacated the employment on attaining the age of superannuation
had he not sustained such permanent disablement:
Provided also that an insured person who has attained the age of
superannuation, a person who retires under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme or
takes premature retirement, and his spouse shall be eligible to receive
medical benefits subject to payment of contribution and such other conditions
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Explanation.- In this section, "superannuation", in relation to an insured
person, means the attainment by that person of such age as is fixed in the
contract or conditions of service as the age on the attainment of which he
shall vacate the insurable employment or the
age of sixty years where no such age is fixed and the person is no more in
the insurable employment.
2.
Entitlement to
2. Definitions In this Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires-
withdraw
non-
(g) "family" means-
refundable
(i) in the case of a male member, his wife, his children, whether married or
advances
from
unmarried, his dependant parents and his deceased son's widow and children:
Provident Fund
for
Provided that if a Member proves that his wife has ceased, under the
treatment
of
personal law governing him or the customary law of the community to which
spouse under the
the spouses belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be
Employees
deemed to be a part of the member's family for the purpose of this Scheme,
Provident
Fund
unless the Member subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to the
Scheme, 1952
Commissioner that she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of a female member, her husband, her children, whether
married or unmarried, her dependant parents, her husband's dependant
parents and her deceased son's widow and children
Provided that if a Member by notice in writing to the Commissioner
expresses her desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and
his dependant parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of the
member's family for the purpose of this Scheme, unless the Member
subsequently cancels in writing any such notice;
Explanation. In either of the above two cases, if the child of a Member or,
as the case may be, the child of a deceased son of the Member has been
adopted by another person and if, under the personal law of the adopter,
adoption is legally recognised such a child shall be considered as excluded
from the family of the Member:
68-J. Advance from the Fund for illness in certain cases.- A
member may be allowed non-refundable advance from his account in the Fund
in cases of- hospitalisation lasting for one month or more, or major surgical
operation in a hospital, or
suffering from T.B., leprosy, paralysis, cancer, mental derangement or heart
ailment and having been granted leave by his employer for treatment of the
said illness.
(3) A member may be allowed non-refundable advance from his account in the
fund for the treatment of a member of his family who has been hospitalised, or
requires hospitalisation, for one month or more-
for a major surgical operation, or
for the treatment of T.B., leprosy, paralysis, cancer, mental derangement or
heart ailment:
(4) The amount advanced under this paragraph shall not exceed the
member's basic wages and dearness allowance for six months or his own
share of contribution with interest in the Fund, whichever is less.
(6) No advance shall be granted to the member under sub-paragraph (1) or
sub-paragraph (3) unless he produces a self-declaration to that effect.
VIII. Miscellaneous Benefits
S.No.
BENEFIT
APPLICABLE LAW
1.
Privilege
122. Communications during marriage. - No person who is or has been
accorded
to
married, shall be compelled to disclose any communication made to him
communications
during marriage by any person to whom he is or has been married; non shall
during marriage
he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person who
under the Indian
made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between
Evidence
Act,
married persons, or proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted
1872
for any crime committed against the other.
2.
Right to receive
9. Restrictions on removal and transplantation of human organs or
bodily organs or
tissues or both.- (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), no
tissues or both
human organ or tissue or both] removed from the body of a donor before his
under
the
death shall be transplanted into a recipient unless the donor is a near relative
Transplantation of
of the recipient.
Human Organs
and Tissues Act,
1994
3.
Tax benefits in
80-C. Deduction in respect of life insurance premia, deferred
case of payments
annuity, contributions to provident fund, subscription to certain
made on behalf of
equity shares on debentures, etc.- (1) In computing the total income of an
spouse or child for
assessee, being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, there shall be
annuity, provident
deducted, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, the
fund, savings, etc.
whole of the amount paid or deposited in the previous year, being the
under the Income
aggregate of the sums referred to in sub-section (2), as does not exceed one
Tax Act, 1961
hundred and fifty thousand rupees.
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be any sums paid or
deposited in the previous year by the assessee-(i) to effect or to keep in force
an insurance on the life of persons specified in sub-section (4); (ii) to effect or
to keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity, not being an annuity plan
referred to the clause (xii), on the life of persons specified in sub-section (4);
Provided that such contract does not contain a provision for the exercise
by the insured of an option to cash payment in lieu of the payment of the
annuity;
(iii) by way of deduction from the salary payable by on on behalf of the
Government to any individual being a sum deducted in accordance with the
conditions of his service, for the purpose of securing to him a deferred annuity
or making provision for his spouse or children, in so far as the sum so
deducted does not exceed one-fifth of the salary;
(v) as contribution to any provident fund set up by the Central Government
and notified by it in this behalf in the Official Gazette, where such contribution
is to an account standing in the name of any person specified in sub-section
(4)
(viii) as subscription, in the name of any person specified in sub-section
(4), to] any such security of the Central Government or any such deposit
scheme as that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify in this behalf;
(x) as a contribution, in the name of any person specified in sub-section
(4), for participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan, 1971 (hereafter in this
section referred to as the Unit-linked Insurance Plan) specified in Schedule 11
of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58
of 2002);
(xi) as a contribution in the name of any person specified in sub-section (4)
for participation in any such unit-linked insurance plan of the LIC Mutual Fund
referred to in clause (23-D) of Section 10, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(xvii) as tuition fees (excluding any payment towards any development
fees or donation or payment of similar nature), whether at the time of
admission or thereafter,-
(a) to any university, college, school or other educational institution situated
within India;
(b) for the purpose of full-time education of any of the persons specified in
sub-section (4);
(4) The persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be the following,
namely:
(a) for the purposes of clauses (1) (v), (x) and (xi) of that sub-section,-
(i) in the case of an individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any
child of such individual, and
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, any member thereof;
(b) for the purposes of clause (ii) of that sub section, in the case of an
individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any child of such
individual;
(ba) for the purposes of clause (viii) of that subsection, in the case of an
individual, the individual or any girl child of that individual, or any girl child
for whom such person is the legal guardian, if the scheme so specifies;
(c) for the purposes of clause (xvii) of that sub section, in the case of an
individual, any two children of such individual.
4.
Pension
1
ANNEXURE 2- TABLE ON INDICATIVE CHANGES MADE TO PERSONAL LAWS, CIVIL UNIFORM MARITAL
LAWS, AND CUSTOMS THROUGH LEGISLATIONS AND PRECEDENTS
DATE
PARTICULARS
4
December,
Bengal Sati Regulation- Abolition of Sati in India
1829
1846
Indian Penal Code- Made sexual intercourse between the husband and a wife, who is
below 10 years, an offence.
26 July, 1856
Hindu Widows' Remarriage Act, 1856- Legalized the remarriage of Hindu widows
throughout India.
1866
The Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866- provided for the dissolution of a marriage
if one party changed his or her faith and the other did not.
1870
Female Infanticide Prevention Act, 1870.
1872
Special Marriages Act, 1872- Set the minimum age of 14 years for marriage of girls.
Repealed by the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
24
February,
Married Women's Property Act, 1874- Females had unrivalled powers of disposition over
1874
her separate property. But Hindu women were outside its purview, making it a futile
change.
1891
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1891- The age of consent to sexual intercourse was
raised from 10 years to 12 years.
28 September,
The Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916 - To allow transfer of property in the favour
1916
of persons not existing at the time of such transfer.
28 September,
The Child Marriage Restraint Act of 1929 (Sarda Act)- To eradicate child marriage. Set
1929
the age for girls at 14 years and boys at 18 years.
25 July, 1930.
The Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930- It ruled that a Hindu's earnings from a learned
profession for which he had been trained at the expense of joint family funds were not
family property.
14 April, 1937
The Hindu Women Rights to Property Act, 1937- Conferred rights of succession on
widows. (only life estate)
1937
Arya Marriages Validation Act 1937 was passed to ensure that marriages performed in
the manner of the Arya Samaj community which simplified ceremonies would also be
considered as a valid marriage. This Act permitted inter-caste marriages categorized as
anuloma and patriloma depending on whether the woman or man was of a higher caste.
This permitted class of inter-caste marriages were under the auspices of the Arya Samaj.
8 April, 1938
Hindu Women's Rights to Property (Amendment) Act, 1938-Amended to exclude a
widow's interest in any agricultural land.
1946
Hindu Marriage Removal of Disabilities Act, 1946 - validated inter- sub-caste
marriages
1949
Article 17, Constitution of India - Removal of Untouchability.
1949
Hindu Marriage Validity Act, 1949 permitted performance of both forms of inter-castes
marriage, i.e., rituals of both castes.
1955
Hindu Marriage Act (changes made to customs)-
Removed the necessity that marriage had to be performed within the same caste.
Monogamy was made a rule.
Divorce provisions were created
1956
S. 14 of Hindu Succession Act - Removed the disability of women to hold property. It
converted the limited estate of a female owner to an absolute estate.
1956
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act - woman was eligible to claim one-third of the
joint income of her husband and herself in case of divorce.
1956
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act-
gave mother guardianship rights if the father neglected the child.
mother was also granted the right to be the lawful guardian of illegitimate children.
1961
Dowry Prohibition Act 1961.
27 May, 1976
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976- Brought about an array of changes to HMA
including divorce by mutual consent which departed from the irreversible nature of a
Hindu marriage and demolished the notion that the marriage was a sacrament that could
not be dissolved. These amendments also included the ability of a divorcee to immediately
marry, as opposed to the one year waiting period in place prior to this.
1978
Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act- Age limit for both girls and boys were
raised to 18 and 21 years respectively. The Act penalized an adult male for marrying a
minor girl. (S.4).
11 September,
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
1989
1983
Criminal Law (second amendment) Act of 1983- S. 113A in Indian Evidence Act which
brought in a presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman. This was
introduced because there was an increase in the number of dowry deaths, a matter of
serious concern.
1985
One of the most significant reforms came in 1985, when the Supreme Court delivered
its judgement in Mohd. Ahmed Khan V. Shah Bano Begum AIR 1985 SC 945. A five-judge
Bench led by Justice YV Chandrachud directed Mohd. Ahmad Khan to provide maintenance
to his divorced wife, despite this not being required by Muslim personal law.
19 November,
Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act of 1986- Led to addition of Sections 113B and
1986
304B to IPC.
1999
progressively interpreted Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 to
recognize the right of a Hindu mother as a natural guardian of her minor son/unmarried
daughter.
2002
was concerned with the issue of whether only Brahmins could be ordained as priests in
certain temples in Kerala. Longstanding usage and custom were cited in support of this
claim. The court negatived the plea and held that customs are subject to constitutional
rights.
2005
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005- Section 3 of the Act
specifically incorporates all forms of harassment, injury and harm inflicted to coerce a
woman to meet an unlawful demand for dowry.
2005
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act amended Section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act,
to provide for equal rights of daughters in the coparcenary property of a Hindu Undivided
Family.
2006
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006-
Repealed the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.
The Act made the child marriage voidable at the option of the contracting party to the
marriage, who was a child. (S.3)
Allows for maintenance and residence for the girl till her remarriage from the male
contracting party or his parents. (S.4)
2006
customary intervention can be permitted to prevent the right to choice of marital partner,
irrespective of caste of the partner. The decision stated that: "The caste system is a curse
on the nation and the sooner it is destroyed the better. In fact, it is dividing the nation at
a
time when we have to be united to face the challenges before the nation unitedly.
Hence, inter-caste marriages are in fact in the national interest as they will result in
destroying the caste system"
2017
the custom of a Muslim man uttering the word "talaq" three times to divorce his wife as
unconstitutional in 2017.
2018
interest litigation concerned with honor killings of relationships of love and marriage that
defied customs in Haryana,
Punjab and Western UP. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that customs that violate the
constitutional right to dignity and choice cannot be upheld.
21
February,
The Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019 - Leprosy is no more a ground for divorce,
2019
as it is curable now. Changes made to Divorce Act, 1869; Dissolution of Muslim Marriages
Act, 1939; Special Marriage Act, 1954; Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Hindu Adoptions
and Maintenance Act, 1956.
2019
Supreme Court has held that since custom, usages and personal law have a significant
impact on the civil status of individuals, they cannot be granted constitutional immunity
merely because they may have some associational features with religion.
2019
High Court interpreted the word "bride" to include a transgender person.
2020
2005 Amendment to the Hindu Succession Act is retroactive in nature and the right of
daughters in the coparcenary property is a birth right, equal to that of sons and inheres
equally in daughters born before the Amendment as well.
2021
held that family or community sanction was not necessary once two adult individuals
consent to a wedlock.
2022
X. V. Principal Secretary Health and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of NCT Delhi,
Termination of Pregnancy Rules to include within its ambit unmarried women.
2022
recognized that family units may manifest in atypical ways and has upheld the need to
legally recognize these non-traditional manifestations of familial relationships.
ANNEXURE 3- LIST OF NEWS REPORTS & OTHER SOURCES DEPICTING MARRIAGE & JOINT SUICIDES
AMONGST SAME-SEX COUPLES
Instances of Same-Sex Marriages amongst Indian non-English speaking, low-income household persons
1. 1987 Leela Namdeo and Urmila Srivastava, married by Hindu rites, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh. Urmila's family
accepted the marriage. Manjeet Singh, 'Urmila weds Leela, both get sacked' Sunday Observer, February 1988. 1.i.A.
and 2.ii in affidavit. The words 'husband' and 'bride' are used. Described and discussed in Ruth Vanita, Love's Rite:
Same-Sex Marriages in Modern India, pp. 2, 67, 177-78, 180.
2. 1993. Vinoda Adkewar and Rekha Chaudhary. Shishir Joshi, 'The bold, the beautiful and the damned, Indian
Express, 18 April 1993. This is an important case because they presented themselves as a 21-year-old groom and an
18-yer-old bride at the office of the Registrar of Marriages. 2.i in affidavit 2.i. and discussed in Love's Rite, 64, 78.
3. 1993 Meenu Sharma and Neeru Sharma, got married by Hindu rites, Faridabad, Haryana ('Do Ladkiyon ki
Dilchasp Shadi (The Interesting Wedding of Two Girls), Madhur Kathayen 49, October 1993. They are referred to as
var (groom) and vadhu (bride) and are described taking pheras. Described and discussed in Love's Rite, 31, 50-51,
79.
4. 1998 Sweta and Simmi, married by Hindu rites, Patna, Bihar and notarized court affidavit ('Two girls tie the
nuptial knot,' Times of India, April 20, 1998). 2.iii in affidavit.
5. 1999 Roinathy and Thingring, Bodo tribals married by Hindu rites in 1999 in Assam (Samir Purkayastha, 'Not
Roads or Water: This Couple wants a Marriage' Times of India, 6 April 2006; Syed Zarin Hussain, 'Assam's first lesbian
couple happily married for 10 years,' July 12, 2009). Discussed in Love's Rite (updated edition 2021), p. xix.
6. 2001 Jaya Verma and Tanuja Chouhan, nurses, married by Hindu rites, Ambikapur, Bihar (Suchandana Gupta,
'Husband at Home, in Sari at Work,' The Telegraph, Calcutta, May 29, 2001). Described in Love's Rite, 30-31, 87-88.
7. 2004 Raju and Mala from Amritsar, married by Hindu rites ('Even Death Can't Do Us Apart, by Dharmendra
Rataul, Indian Express, December 11, 2004; Kuldeep Mann, 'It was love at first sight for lesbian couple, December
13, 2004). Married in Hindu temple. One is Sikh, the other Dalit.
8. 2004 Pooja and Sarita, married by Hindu rites, forced to separate, Patna, Bihar ('Police Picks Up Lesbian Couple,
The Tribune, Patna, December 15, 2004, and three other reports). Married in a temple in Jhansi.
9. 2005 Nitima Biruwa and Laxmi Bari, married by tribal rites, Bharbaria village, Jharkhand. Nityanand Shukla,
Tribal Girls Tie Knot in Jharkhand' 28 July 2005
https://gaudiyadiscussions.gaudiya.com/topic_3878.html; Jharkhand Family Blesses Lesbian Wedding,'
IANS, Hindustan Times, Ranchi, July 27, 2005
They are called 'bride' and 'groom' and 'daughter-in-law.' 2.iv. in affidavit.
10.
2006 Bateka and Maleka, married by tribal rites, Dandabadi village,
Orissa
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/322874.cms Satyanarayan Pattnaik, 'Two Orissa girls defy norms, get
married', Times of India, 5 November 2006). Groom's family gave dowry to bride's parents.
11. 2006 Seeta and Vandana, married by Hindu rites, Meerut ('Meerut Lash on Lesbian Couple, Telegraph,
Lucknow, January 12, 2006). Followed by suicide attempt.
12. 2007 Baljit and Rajwinder, married by Hindu rites, Hassanpura Kalan and Hassanpur Khurd villages, Punjab
('Punjab has its first Sikh lesbian marriage, Punjab Newsline Network, 19 June 2007; Dharmendra Ratual, 'Another
lesbian couple ties knot in Amritsar,' Indian Express, Amritsar, June 20, 2007)
13. 2007 Geeta and Babli, married by Hindu rites, Delhi ('Same-Sex marriage in Delhi shocks families,' Times of
India, 12 July 2007).
14. 2007 Kumari and Varalakshmi (Christians), exchanged Bibles and then married by Hindu rites, Sabbavaram,
Andhra Pradesh (Lesbian wedding stuns Vizag, Deccan Chronicle, 30 October 2007).
15. 2008 Kamlesh and Lakshmi, married and then driven to commit joint suicide, Panna, Madhya Pradesh
http://www.indiaenews.com/india/20080310/103286.htm 10 March 2008)
16. 2008 Rinku and Tanusree, married, Shibtala, West Bengal (Pinaki Das, 'Happy union for Howrah Same-Sex
Couple, Times of India, 9 October 2008)
17. 2009 Surekha and Neeru, married by Hindu rites, Chandigarh, Punjab (Vikram Choudhary, 'Gay Couple, Happy
Together but Home Alone, 4 August 2009, http://www.ndtv.com/india-news/gay-couple-happy-together-but-home-
alone-399207)
18. 2009 Two unnamed girls, married and eloped, Sillewara village, Maharashtra (Soumittra S. Bose, "Married"
girls ready to die but not part,' Times News Network, Sillewara, 12 June 2009).
19. 2009 Wahengbam and Karam (men), married in private ceremony on November 25, 2009, Manipur (Iboyaima
Laithangbam, 'Same-Sex Marriage in Public in Manipur,' The Hindu, March 27, 2010).
20. 2010 Sandip and Nikhil, exchanged rings in public ceremony, forced to separate, Manipur (Iboyaima
Laithangbam, 'Same-Sex Marriage in Public in Manipur,' The Hindu, March 27, 2010; Iboyaima Laithangbam, 'Same-
Sex couple "separate" a day after marriage, The Hindu, March 28, 2010). 2.v. in affidavit. They were dressed as bride
and groom and there is a photo of this.
21. 2011 Meenu and partner, married, sought police protection, Delhi ('Lesbian couple gets police protection in
Delhi, NDTV.com, 18 January 2011, http://www.ndtv.com/delhi-news/lesbian-couple-gets-police-protection-in-delhi-
445322
22. 2011 Savita and Veena, married, granted police protection, Gurgaon, Haryana. Veena's family accepted the
marriage (Tuhin Dutta, '2 women marry in Gurgaon court, invite village's wrath' Indian Express, Gurgaon, 24 July
2011; Dipak Kumar Dash and Sanjay Yadav, 'In a first, Gurgaon court recognizes lesbian marriage, TNN, 29 July
2011).
23. 2011 Raju and Poonam, eloped from Amritsar to Himachal Pradesh and married by Hindu rites (Yudhvir Rana
and Najish Randhawa, 'Amritsar's Lesbian Couple Land in Trouble, Times of India, February 25, 2011
24. 2012 Poonam and Neha, married by Hindu rites, Ambala, Haryana (Vishal Joshi, 'Lesbian couple claims threat
from families,' Hindustan Times, Chandigarh, May 15, 2012).
25. 2006 Wetka and Melka, married by tribal rites, Dandabadi village, Orissa (Sanjaya Jena, 'Tribe in India blesses
lesbian "marriage," BBC News, 6 December 2006).
26. 2015 Two girls (unnamed in newspaper report) eloped and married, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh ('Two girls from
Kanpur elope, 'marry' each other in Delhi, PTI Kanpur, Deccan Herald, September 18, 2015).
27. 2019 Deepshikha and Abhilasha divorced their husbands and married by garlanding each other and signing a
contract, Hamirpur, UP. Their video is on https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F8awHvlOYzl ('UP: In love for 7 years,
two women divorce husbands to marry each other,' India Today, Lucknow, January 1, 2019)
28. 2019 Two girls, unnamed in reports, married at Rohaniya temple, Varanasi. ('Lesbian couple marries in temple
in Varanasi against all odds, The Statesman, July 4, 2019).
29. 2018 An unnamed Brahmin girl and Dalit girl married at a mass Dalit wedding ceremony in Agra ('Breaking
caste-gender barriers: Dalit and Brahmin girls tie the knot in Agra, leave police baffled, DNAIndia, April 22, 2018).
30. 2021 Two unnamed women from villages in Ludhiana, Punjab, married. The brother of one performed the
kanyadan (Shariq Majeed, 'Ludhiana cousins tie the knot, brother gives away bride, Times News Network, July 21,
2021).
31. 2000-2004 Lakshya Trust facilitated 15 weddings. No. 4 in Affidavit. Discussed as a case of customary weddings
within a community in Love's Rite, 303-304.
Instances of same-sex couples who committed joint suicide
1. 1980 Mallika and Lalithambika, attempted joint suicide by drowning, Kerala. (Victor
Lenous, "Girlfriends' in Suicide Pact," Blitz, July 11, 1980, page 7). Discussed in Love's Rite, pp. 8-9, 50, 128,
132, 179-80.
2. 1980 Jyotsna and Jayashree, committed joint suicide by standing in front of a train, Gujarat (The Tribune,
December 1, 1980).
3. 1988 Gita Darji and Kishori Shah, nurses, hanged themselves together, village in Gujarat ("Macabre Suicide,"
India Today, October 15, 1988).
4. 1993 Two men (who were married by Hindu rites in 1991 and were living "as husband and wife" in Thrissur),
committed joint suicide, Kerala (May 27, 1993 News Today, "Gay couple stab each other.")
5. 1996 Two peasant girls, joint suicide by hanging, Vypeen, near Cochin, Kerala (Sameeksha, Malayalam
fortnightly, June 28-July 11, 1998)
6. 1996 Two college students, joint suicide by jumping in front of a train, Calicut, Kerala (Sameeksha, Malayalam
fortnightly June 28-July 11, 1998)
7. 1996 Two women labourers attempted joint suicide, one survived, Kottayam, Kerala (Sameeksha, June 28-July
11, 1998)
8. 1998 Mamata and Monalisa, registered a life partnership deed, attempted joint suicide, Orissa For People Like Us
(New Delhi: Aids Bhedbhav Virodhi Andolan, 1999). Described in Love's Rite, 131-32, 138.
9. 1998 A tutor and her female student committed joint suicide, Alleppey, Kerala ("Same-
Sex (female) lovers commit suicide", by K. C. Sebastian. Sameeksha [Malayalam fortnightly], June 28 - July 11,
1998)
10. 1999 Suresh and Krishnakumar, tailor and workshop worker, committed joint suicide by taking poison,
Shoranur, Kerala. (Mathrubhumi July 8, 1999 Malayalam, Trichur edition)
11. 1999 Bindu and Geeta, a tailoring teacher and her student, committed joint suicide, Cheruvayoor. ("Lesbian
Suicides Continue. by K. C. Sebastian, Sameeksha [Malayalam fortnightly] Kerala June 1-15, 1999)
12. 1999 Suja and Sindhu, factory workers, joint suicide, Malappuram, Kerala. ("Young Women Run Over by Train"
Matrubhoomi [Malayalam daily, Trichur Edition], March 27, 1999, p.10)
13. 1999 Mini, a Dalit student, forcibly separated from girlfriend, drowned herself, Trissur, Kerala.
14. 1999 Sudha and Savitha, students of tailoring and beautician course respectively, committed joint suicide by
taking poison, Malappuram, Kerala (Sameeksha June 1-15, 1999).
15. 2000 Bindu and Rajni, performed wedding by Hindu rites privately, committed suicide, Ernakulam, Kerala
Sameeksha [Malayalam fortnightly] January 1-15, 2000).
16. 2002 Sumathi and Geethalakshmi, committed joint suicide, Tamil Nadu (Dina Thanthi Bangalore edition,
October 4, 2002, page 10. Translated from Tamil by Sangama)
17. 2004 Suchita Lonare and Seema Balanti, took poison together, Mandar village, Maharashtra (Lokmat, February
4, 2004).
18. 2004: Bina Wankhede and Nandita Gaekwad, threw themselves in front of a train, Maharashtra. Asked to be
cremated together (V. Radhika, "Why Can't Women Love Women?" www.indianest.com/wfs/wfs070.htm)
19. 2005 Ranu Mishra and Neetu Singh, high school teacher and college student, married by putting sindoon in
Ranu's hair-parting, attempted joint suicide by poisoning, Neetu died, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh (Alka Rastogi, "Kanpur
lesbians marry, attempt suicide", Hindustan Times, Lucknow, May 11, 2005).
20. 2007 Jayanta Ghosh and Swapan Manna, a hairdresser and a farmer, took poison together, Dihibagnan village,
West Bengal (Anandabazar Patrika, Friday, July 28, 2007, Translation By Anindya Hajra)
21. 2008 Sivanarayanan and Deepak, a barber and student, burnt themselves to death, Kochi, Kerala
(Mathrubhumi, 27th June 2008)
22. 2008 Kamlesh and Lakshmi, jumped from a building to their death, Panna, Madhya Pradesh
(http://www.indiaenews.com/india/20080310/103286.htm) March 10, 2008
23. 2008 Rukmani and Christi Jayanti Malar, burnt themselves to death, Chennai, Tamil Nadu (Times of India,
Chennai, May 18, 2008)
24. 2008 Asha and Gansehia, burnt themselves to death, Durg, Raipur, Chhattisgarh. Report by Amitabh Tiwari,
Times
of
India,
11
June
008.http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/India/Women_in_same-
sex_relationship_kill_selves/articleshow/3118688.cms
25. 2009 Shailesh Raval and Ashok Valmik, labourers, hanged themselves, Gandhinagar, Ahmedabad, Gujarat.
Times of India, Ahmedabad, 11 October 2009
26. 2011 Swapna and Sucheta took poison together, Sonachura village, Nandigram, West Bengal. Telegraph, 22
February, 2011.
27. 2018 Asha Thakor and Bhavna Thakor, drowned themselves in Sabarmati river, Ahmedabad, Gujarat. Times of
India, 12 June 2018; Ahmedabad Mirror Hindustan Times.
28. 2020 Brajen Thakuria and Ankur Das committed joint suicide, Assam. The Sentinel, Guwahati, 1 August 2020.
The Sentinel, 1 August 2020.
ANNEXURE 4- TABLE ON THE PROPOSED WORKABILITY OF THE SPECIAL MARRI AGE ACT, 1954
S. No
SECTION
COMMENT ON WORKABILITY
1.
2 (b) "degrees of prohibited
- Workable-prohibited degrees can be maintained
relationship"-a man and any of the
in same- sex relationships. For instance, in a
persons mentioned in Part I of the First
marriage between two men, both men should not
Schedule and a woman and any of the
be within degrees of relationship mentioned in Part
persons mentioned in Part 11 of the said
11.
Schedule are within the degrees of
- Gender Neutral
prohibited relationship.
2.
4(c) the male has completed the age
-
Workable-only prescribes minimum age for
of twenty-one years and the female the
each. As long as the minimum age is met by
age of eighteen years
the spouses, section is unaffected.
3.
12(2) The marriage may be solemnized
Workable. Section in its present form can be
in any form which the parties may choose
made applicable to same-sex couples.
to adopt: Provided that it shall not be
complete and binding on the parties unless
each party says to the other in the
presence of the Marriage Officer and the
three witnesses and in any language
understood by the parties, - "I, (A), take
the (B),
to be my lawful wife (or husband)"
4.
15(a) ceremony of marriage has been
Workable - "as husband and wife" can be
performed between the parties and they
read to mean "as spouses". This is not
have .been living together as husband
repugnant to the context.
and wife ever since
5.
22. Restitution of conjugal rights.
Workable - "either the husband or the
When either the husband or the wife
wife" can be read to mean "either spouse".
has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn
This is not repugnant to the context.
from the society of the other, the
aggrieved party may apply by petition to
the district court for restitution of conjugal
rights, and the court, on being satisfied of
the truth of the statements made in such
petition, and that there is no legal ground
why the application should not be granted,
may decree restitution of conjugal rights
accordingly.
6.
23. Judicial separation.- (1) A
- Workable - "either by the husband or the
petition for judicial separation may be
wife" can be read to mean "by either of the
presented to the district court either by
spouses."
the husband or the wife
This is not repugnant to the context.
7.
27. Divorce. - [(1)] Subject to the
Workable - "either by the husband or the
provisions of this Act and to the rules
wife" can be read to mean "by either of the
made thereunder, a petition for divorce
spouses." This is not repugnant to the
may be presented to the district court
context.
either by the husband on the wife
8.
27(1A) A wife may also present a
- Workable. Can be retained as it is only to apply to
petition for divorce to the district court on
different -sex couples.
the ground,- (i) that her husband has,
- Provision would also be applicable against a trans
since the solemnization of the marriage,
husband.
been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality
9.
31. Court to which petition should
- Workable. This additional protection granted to
be made.-2 [(1) Every petition under
women remains unaffected. In a situation
Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be presented
where simultaneously two jurisdictions are
to the district court within the local limits
invoked by a same-sex couple, it can be
of whose original civil jurisdiction-
resolved on a case-to-case basis.
(iiia) in case the wife is the
petitioner, where she is residing on the
date of presentation of the petition; or
10.
Sections 36, 37-Alimony pendente
Workable. Gendered provisions in favor of wives
lite,
Permanent
Alimony
and
in heterosexual provision may be maintained,
maintenance
and may be read in a gender-neutral manner
in case of a LGBT couple.
11.
Second Schedule uses "widow" and
- Workable. Can be made available to same-sex
"widower"
couples by amending forms to provide for
both entries to read "widow (er)".
12.
Third and Fourth Schedules use
- Workable. Can be made available to same-sex
"bride" and "bridegroom"
couples by amending declarations to provide
for "bride (groom)"
ANNEXURE 5- TABLE ON LEGAL STATUS OF SAME-SEX UNIONS ACROSS THE WORLD
[NOTE: Data updated till 04.04.2023]
MARRIAGE
COLOUR CODE
Blue: Recognition of same- sex marriage in certain parts of the nation
Green: Nationwide recognition of same -sex marriage
COUNTRY
NOTES
SL. NO.
DATE
OF
LEGALIZATION
1.
Netherlands
1 April 2001
First country in the world to legalize same-sex
marriage. Not legal in the associated states of Aruba,
Bonaire, Curacao and St. Maarten.
2.
Belgium
1 June 2003
-
3.
Spain
3 July 2005
4.
Canada
20 July 2005
Legal in some provinces and territories since 2003,
on account of court rulings.
5.
South Africa
30 November 2006
The Constitutional Court of South Africa, in Minister
of Home Affairs V. Fourie, Case CCT 60/04, held that
same-sex couples have a constitutional right to marry
at par with entitlements and responsibilities enjoyed
by heterosexual couples. The Court gave the
Parliament one year to rectify the inequality in the
marriage statutes. Consequently, the Civil Union Act,
2006 came into force, allowing two people regardless
of gender to enter into marriage or civil partnership.
6.
Norway
1 January 2009
First Scandinavian country to legalize same-sex
marriage.
7.
Sweden
1 May 2009
-
8.
Portugal
5 June 2010
-
9.
Iceland
27 June 2010
-
10.
Argentina
22 July 2010
First South-American country to legalize same-sex
marriage.
11.
Denmark
15 June 2012
Legalized in associated states of Greenland in 2016
and Faroe Islands in 2017.
12.
Brazil
16 May 2013
-
13.
France
18 May 2013
-
14.
Uruguay
5 August 2013
-
15.
New Zealand
19 August 2013
First country in Asia-Pacific region to legalize same-
sex marriage. Except in the territory of Tokelau,
associated states of Niue and the Cooks Island.
16.
Luxembourg
1 January 2015
17.
United States
26 June 2015
Except in some Caribbean territories and American
of America
Samoa
In Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015), the US
Supreme Court struck down all state bans on same-sex
marriage, legalized it in all fifty states, and required
states to honour out-of-state same-sex marriage.
Respect for Marriage Act was signed into law on 13
December 2022, requiring the US Federal Government
and all US states and territories to recognize the validity
of same-sex and interracial marriages in the United
States.
18.
Ireland
16 November 2015
19.
Colombia
28 April 2016
Constitutional Court of Colombia in Decision SU-
214/2016 ruled that same-sex marriage is a legitimate
and valid way to materialize constitutional principles and
values. The decision took immediate effect, legalizing
same-sex marriage in the country.
20.
Finland
1 March 2017
21.
Malta
1 September 2017
22.
Germany
1 October 2017
First European country to legalize same-sex marriage.
23.
Australia
9 December 2017
24.
Austria
1 January 2019
Decision of the Constitutional Court in G-258-259 of
2017, holding that there can be no distinction in law
between opposite-sex couples and same-sex couples;
decision took effect on 01 January 2019.
25.
Taiwan
24 May 2019
Decision of the Constitutional Court in Judicial Yuan
Interpretation no. 748/2017, holding that current
provisions of the Marriage Chapter that do not allow for
same-sex couples to create permanent relationships are
incompatible with the Constitution.
26.
Ecuador
8 July 2019
Decision of the Constitutional Court in 10-18-CN/19
upholding the right of same-sex couples of marry;
decision took effect upon publication on 08 July 2019.
27.
United
13 January 2020
Except in Bermuda, Anguilla, Cayman Islands,
Kingdom
Montserrat, Turks and Caicos.
28.
Costa Rica
26 May 2020
First country in Central America to recognize and perform
same-sex marriage. 2018 ruling of the Supreme Court of
Justice holding that ban/ exclusion of same-sex marriage
is unconstitutional. This was followed by Advisory
Opinion of Inter-American Court of Human Rights (OC-
24/17) stating that signatories of the American
Convention of Human Rights are obliged to make same-
sex marriage legal.
29.
Switzerland
01 July 2022
30.
Slovenia
09 July 2022
First post-communist country to legalize same-sex
marriage. On 08.07.2022, the Constitutional Court of
Slovenia (6:3) (Decision No. U-1-486/20, Up-572/18)
legalized same-sex marriage and adoption by same-
sex couples. Parliament was given 06 months to pass
appropriate legislation. Parliament thereafter made
necessary amendments to the Family Code.
31.
Mexico
2015 ruling of the Supreme Court of Justice held that
ban on same-se marriage violates the Constitution of
Mexico. As of December 2022, all 32 states of Mexico
have passed individual legislations to legalize same-sex
marriage.
CIVIL UNIONS AND REGISTERED PARTNERSHIPS
COLOUR CODE
Yellow: Recognition of unregistered cohabitation.
Pink: Recognition of civil union and registered partnership.
Purple: Judicial decisions recognizing civil union.
Orange: Limited recognition/ protections for same-sex couples.
Brown: [applicable to EU countries only] bound by CJEU decision in Case C-673/16 - Relu Adrian
Coman V. Inspectoratul General pentru Imigrari, to grant full residency rights and freedom of movement to spouses
in a same-sex marriage, where at least one partner is an EU citizen.
SL. NO.
COUNTRY
DATE
OF
NOTES
LEGALIZATION
1.
Israel
1994
Unregistered cohabitation since 1994,
making it the first Asian country to
recognize same-sex unions; Same-sex
marriages performed outside of Israel
recognized since 2006.
2.
Czech Republic
1 July 2006
Bill for legalization of same-sex marriage is
presently pending in the Parliament.
3.
Hungary
2009
-
4.
Liechtenstein
2011
-
5.
Croatia
2014
Unregistered cohabitation since 2003,
Life Partnership Act passed in 2014.
6.
Andorra
2 June 2014
-
7.
Greece
2015
-
8.
Chile
22 October 2015
-
9.
Cyprus
December 2015
-
10.
Estonia
1 January 2016
-
11.
Italy
May 2016
Decision of the ECtHR in Oliari V. Italy,
2015 ECHR 176, held that Italy violated
the European Convention on Human
Rights by not recognizing same-sex
couples' right to family life.
12.
Aruba (Netherlands)
October 2016
-
13.
Slovenia
24th February 2017
-
14.
India
06 September 2018
Ruling of the Supreme Court in Navtej
decriminalizing homosexuality. Since then,
High Courts across the country have
stepped in to provide protection to
same-sex couples.
15.
San Marino
11 th February 2019
16.
Bolivia
09 December 2020
2020 ruling of the Constitutional Court
directing Civil Registry to register same-
sex couples as "free unions".
Bolivia is signatory to the American
Convention on Human Rights. Hence, it is
bound by Advisory Opinion of Inter-
American Court of Human Rights (OC-
24/17) to legalize same-sex marriage.
17.
Veracruz
22 May 2020
18.
Monaco
27 June 2020
Law allowed for both same-sex and
opposite-sex couples to enter into
"cohabitation agreements".
19.
Cayman Islands (UK)
4th
September
2020
20.
Japan
No formal recognition of same-sex
marriage or civil unions. However,
municipalities
issue
"partnership
certificates" for limited purposes such as
hospital visits, renting of apartments, etc.
In November 2022, Tokyo, the largest
municipality in Japan, began issuing
partnership certificates.
21.
Montenegro
15 July 2021
22.
Republic of South Korea
A recent court ruling for the first time
recognized same-sex unions to hold that
the government health insurance scheme
should offer spousal coverage to same-sex
couples.
23.
Latvia
June 2022
2020 ruling of the Constitutional Court
of Latvia holding that the state is required
to protect same-sex couples at par with
married opposite-sex couples. As of June
2022, same-sex relationships can be
registered with the Administrative District
Court.
24.
Poland
-
-
25.
Slovakia
-
-
26.
Romania
-
-
ANNEXURE 6 - A STUDY TITLED 'THE ANTICIPATED IMPACT OF LGBTQIA+ MARRIAGE EQUALITY
LEGISLATION ON INDIAN SOCIETY AND MENTAL HEALTH'
The Anticipated impact of LGBTQIA+ Marriage Equality Legislation on Indian Society and Mental Health
Sanjana Mishra1, Soumya Jagatdeb1, Priyanka Mittal2, Thwisha Bajpai1, Megha Sharda3, Priyanka Padhy4
1Children First Mental Health Institute Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India
2Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, India
3Atom, India (atomei.app), Gurgaon, India
4Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi, India
Author Note
We have no known conflict of interests to disclose.
All correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sanjana Mishra, Children
First Mental Health Institute Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India
Email: sanjana.mishra284@gmail.com
Abstract
The present study aimed at understanding the anticipated impact of legalising marriage equality for LGBTQIA+
individuals on societal and mental health outcomes in India. A mixed-methods approach to inquiry was used, with
quantitative and qualitative data collected through convenience sampling in an online survey. A total of 5825
individuals from different geographical regions across India participated in the study. The age group of respondents
ranged from less than 18 to more than 60 years of age.
Quantitative analysis of survey questions revealed that more than 85% of participants agreed that the
decriminalisation of homosexuality via Section 377 improved mental health outcomes for LGBTQIA+ people, that
legalisation of marriage will improve mental health outcomes in LGBTQIA youth and families, and that legalisation
would reduce mental health related distress in youth. Thematic analysis of qualitative data highlighted changes at
both individual and social levels. Improvement in mental health difficulties due to reduced stigma and discrimination,
and increase in acceptance and freedome of expression, legal safety and equal rights were discussed, with direct
implications on improved mental health and an anticipated decrease in anxiety, depression, and death by suicide
suggested.
This is the first study, in our awareness, from India to incorporate the perspectives of such a large population of
individuals in the discourse on LGBTQIA+ supportive legislations and its reciprocal impact on the health of the state,
society and individual. The study has implications on legal policy centering LGBTQIA+ couples' experiences to further
mental health outcomes and facilitate changes in attitudes around same sex relationships in India. Keywords:
marriage equality, same-sex marriage, LGBTQIA+, mental health, Indian legalisation, policy,
Introduction
Much like the Matryoshka dolls, human beings have been described as developing within nested structures - layers
of the environment that interact with and influence each other. This interrelationship between organisms and their
proximal as well as distal environments continually and importantly shapes development. As Bronfenbrennen (1979)
puts it, the developmental process is 'affected by relations within and between immediate settings, as well as the
larger social contexts, both formal and informal, in which the settings are embedded. Therefore, a consideration of
laws for the society needs to be informed by the impact that may be potentiated by any change across systemic layers
- starting from the microsystems of family, neighbourhood, schools and going onto community, society and nation.
When it comes to minority groups like LGBTQIA+ individuals in India, it becomes pertinent to look deeply within these
several layers to understand the impact of existing societal attitudes and law on their lives.
Despite the historic landmark decision in the Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of India (2018) where the Supreme Court
of India decriminalised homosexuality via Section 377, and outlined "responsible mental health care and advocacy" for
LGBTQIA+ people as a follow up, the journey of LGBTQIA+ individuals cannot be equated to normative heterosexual
couples, for they face challenges far more unique and diverse. Heterosexual relationships come with an unspoken or
unacknowledged "affirmation of togetherness, never having to hide their relationship, being acknowledged as a
husband-wife couple at all times, having extensive support systems in the form of relatives and friends, having access
to multiple material benefits and resources" (Ranade & Chakravarty, 2013) that people in same-sex relationships do
not experience.
Multiple stressors for LGBTQIA+ individuals have been identified over time in both Indian and non-Indian studies.
Stigma and Discrimination
LGBTQIA+ individuals in India can often face different forms of discrimination and violence due to stigma, such as
family enacted violence, forced marriage or pressure to marry, discrimination at schools or workplaces as well as
housing and healthcare services, stopping of education, separation from partner and more (Ranade & Chakravarty,
2013; Bowling et. al, 2016 Tomori et al, 2016; Ganju et al, 2017). Meyer's (2003) Minority Stress Model is one
theoretical framework that has been used to understand the impact of stigma, prejudice, and discrimination on LGBTQ
communities. Dentato (2012) utilises this theory in explaining the role of homophobia and treatment of minority
groups in the society in contributing to individual stress and health consequences.
It has been noted that the decriminalisation of homosexuality and NALSA judgement an debate with respect to the
Trans Rights Bill in 2018 have brought about multiple conversations in the fields of psychiatry and psychology with
respect to the mental health of LGBTQIA+ individuals in India (Wandrekar & Nigudkar, 2020). A systematic review of
qualitative research (Wilson & Cariola, 2019) which aimed to better understand the challenges faced by LGBTQIA+
youth noted five core themes emerging in the literature, including "isolation, rejection, phobia, need for support";
"marginalisation"; "depression, self-harm and suicidality"; "policy and environment"; and "connectedness".
I impact on mental health care
Status of Pathologization of same sex relationships within the field of mental health service
Homosexuality was classed as a "sociopathic personality disturbance" in the first Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM) (1952), with it being removed from the seventh edition of the DSM-11 in 1973 after research
and advocacy on the same (Drescher, 2015). The Indian Psychiatric Society took out a statement in 2018 stating that
homosexuality is not a disorder and condemning "treatments" for it.
Access to quality care
The impact of stigma extends into issues of access to healthcare, especially mental health care services. The
dangers of stigma on mental health were highlighted by Kottai (2022) in his commentary on the lack of initiatives by
government-run mental health institutes to create an inclusive environment for LGBTQIA+ individuals, with problems
continuing to be addressed at an individual level without policy and social changes. Activism across various countries
for same sex marriages have focussed on building and sustaining campaigns for eradicating stigma revolving around
LGBTQIA+ identity in order to reduce violence and enhance access to basic rights such as education, health and
employment. (Winter et al., 2018).
Stigma also leads to invisibilization, which can lead to a sense of isolation, loss of support and lack of awareness of
or access to resources. Ross et al (2012) identified the importance of creating visibility of minority communities for the
purpose of improving mental health care, especially in the context of bisexual women during perinatal periods. They
indicated that invisibility has led to a lack of knowledge of their unique experiences, thereby creating a gap
in service provision. Invisibility in policy tends to get mirrored in research as well that can amount to inadequate
physical health and mental health care (Gutekunst & Liang, 2023). Visibility of minority communities at a systemic
level, thereby, tends to create a ripple effect by way of opening avenues for members of the community to access
support from the society as well as contribute to it as well as helping the society to equip itself better to cater to the
needs of the members of the community.
Influence of law and policy on wellbeing of LGBTQIA+ individuals
Impact on societal attitudes
Laws play an essential role in shaping societal attitudes (Aksoy et al, 2020). Changing laws can help reduce
prejudice and discrimination, and promote equality and acceptance of marginalised groups (Kenny & Patel, 2017).
For example, the legalisation of same-sex marriage in the United States was associated with increased acceptance
of LGBTQIA+ individuals and reduced prejudice against them (Tankard and Paluck, 2017). The passing of laws can
also signal societal approval and support for marginalised groups. For example, in a study of hate crime laws in the
United States, Smith and Shin (2015) found that states with hate crime laws had lower rates of hate crimes against
LGBTQIA+ individuals, racial minorities, and religious minorities compared to states without such laws. Cummings
(2013) shows how law can be seen as an instrument to advance causes through litigation and other legal strategies
while in terms of an output, law is also often a result of mobilisation, enforced by judicial and legislative actions.
Laws can, therefore, also help create a culture of inclusion and acceptance. For example, laws that protect the rights of
individuals with disabilities can help promote their inclusion in society and reduce stigma and discrimination against
them. Policies may inspire backlash (worsening attitudes towards a specific group), legitimacy (increasing acceptance
of the group),
or polarisation (widening the differences between supporters and opponents) (Flores and Barclay, 2016).
Published findings support the legitimacy framework and demonstrate the ability of policies to change societal
attitudes about minority groups.
impact on social and economic progress
Policies and laws that promote equality and diversity can also contribute to social development, with laws that
prohibit discrimination often leading to greater social cohesion, reduced conflict, and an overall improvement in
social development; and policies that create or reinforce social, economic, or political divides often leading to
greater inequality, exclusion, and marginalisation of certain groups, increased social conflict and inhibited social
development. The theory of social exclusion indicates that individuals and groups which experience marginalisation
and exclusion may encounter feelings of 'alienation', 'othering' or lack of social belongingness, perpetuating a
bilateral cyclic relationship between decreased mental health and decreased access to resources (Krishnan, 2015).
A report by USAID and The Williams Institute states that LGBTQIA- inclusion and economic development are mutually
reinforcing. When minorities are denied full participation and human rights in society, the exclusions and violations in
turn are likely to have an adverse impact on a country's level of economic development. Social exclusion can lead to
significant costs to the economy including lost labour time, lost productivity, underinvestment in human capital, and
the inefficient allocation of human resources through discrimination in education and hiring practices (Badgett et al.,
2014).
Methodology
Study Design
Data was collected through a cross-sectional online survey (on Google forms). distributed via Whatsapp, email
and SMS (https://forms.gle/8UJYb9n8ckS5wopk7), over a period of 13 days (March 25th- April 6th 2023). The
survey was conducted in English. This time period was selected to examine public opinion leading up to the court
hearings for legalisation of marriage of two adults regardless of gender or sexual orientation, in India. Participation
was voluntary and anonymous.
The survey consisted of 3 sections:
i) 3 questions on participant demographics (age, LGBTQIA+ identity, location (added in a later phase),
ii) 4 questions to assess participants' opinions on legalising marriage/ marriage equality for two adults regardless
of gender or sexual orientation, agreement on a 5-point Likert scale (1- Not at all to 5- Yes, most definitely). The
questions assessed opinions on past legislation (reading down of section 377 (to decriminalise homosexuality) in
2018, anticipated opinions on marriage equality and its impact on mental health, family dynamics and overall
wellbeing of LGBTQIA+ people.
iii) An optional third section allowed participants to provide more detailed responses to 4 open-ended but related
questions on legalising marriage/ marriage equality for two adults regardless of gender or sexual orientation.
A list of the survey questions can be found in Appendix A.
Data analysis
Statistics
Descriptive statistics were performed for the demographic variables of the participants as well as the responses to the
Likert-scale questions. Chi-square tests were conducted to examine the relationship between the Likert-scale
questions and demographic variables. The demographic variables included age and LGBTQIA+ identity. Data analysis
and visualisation was performed in R (R Core Team, 2022).
Thematic content analysis
The qualitative data (section 3) collected from the survey was analysed thematically to identify public opinions and
attitudes in support of and against marriage equality using a procedure outlined by Braun and Clarke (2006). This
involved a rigorous process of reading, identifying, analysing, and reporting themes that emerged from the data. An
initial reading of the entire data corpus was done by all authors to obtain a general understanding of the content.
Next, the data was free coded by all authors to identify recurring key words and common themes, both for and against
marriage equality, impact of past legislations as well as overall impact of legislation on mental health and wellbeing.
The researchers then met to discuss the themes they had identified and to develop a coding framework. The coding
framework consisted of themes such as impact on mental health, impact on overall wellbeing, impact on family
dynamics, impact on societal attitudes, impact on national progress as well as opinions against homosexuality or
marriage equality. These data items were then re-coded and categorised thematically based on the main arguments
presented. The themes were refined by merging some arguments into broaden ones, and each theme was named to
capture its essence.
Linguistic Frequency Analysis
Relevant extracts for each argument were gathered, and a word frequency analysis of merged codes was done to
identify importance of each theme and related linguistic tokens. The linguistic frequency analysis involved using the
quanteda package in R (Benoit et al, 2018) to analyse the frequency of specific words and phrases used by
participants in their responses to the survey questions. Specific words related to positive and negative emotions and
experiences, related to LGBTQIA+ supportive legislation as well as opinions and attitudes on the same were examined.
The findings from the content analysis and linguistic frequency analysis were integrated to provide a comprehensive
understanding of the experiences and perspectives of people on marriage equality and impact of law and policy on
society. The themes identified through the content analysis were used to contextualise the linguistic frequency
analysis findings and provide deeper insights into the language used by participants.
Results
Participant Profile
A total of 5825 individuals responded to the survey, of which about 37% (n=2149) self-identified as LGBTQIA+
(Figure 1). The age group of respondents was broad, ranging from less than 18 to more than 60 years of age. More
than 65% (n= 3788) respondents were below the age of 40 and more than 36% were below the age of 30 (Figure 2).
The proportion of older individuals (above the age of 40) who identify as LGBTQIA+ was significantly lower than those
who were below 30 years (X2 (5, N = 5825) = 390.80, p < .00001))
Geographical data of respondents was collected in a later phase of the survey (1 Apr 2023 onwards). As a result,
location demographics were only available from 432 respondents. Analysis showed that respondents belonged to
various parts of the country, spanning 27 different states (Figure 3).
Survey Sample (n=5825)
4000
3676
3000
2149
Group
2000
63%
non-LGBTQIA+
LGBTQIA+
37%
1000
0
non- LGBTQIA+
LGBTQIA+
Figure 1. Distribution of participants who took part in the survey, based on their self-reported LGBTQIA +
identity.
Survey Sample (n=5825)
2097
2000
1691
1500
Age
18-29 yrs
30-39 yrs
36%
40-49 yrs
1000
50-59 yrs
886
> 60 yrs
< 18 yrs
29%
761
500
15%
13%
327
6%
0
18-29 yrs
30-39 yrs
40-49 yrs
50-59 yrs
> 60 yrs
< 18 yrs
Figure 2. Distribution of participants who took part in the survey, based on age.
Geographical Distribution of Respondents
Number of respondents
1
86
States with most respondents
Kerala
Goa
Uttar Pradesh
Maharashtra
West Bengal
Haryana
Tamil Nadu
Maharashtra
Delhi
Karnataka
o
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 3. Geographical distribution of survey respondents
Analysis of opinions on perceived and anticipated impact of LGBTQIA+ legislations Impact of
decriminalising homosexuality via section 377 on Mental Health
87% (n=5068) respondents agreed ("Yes, most definitely," "moderately") that decriminalising homosexuality
improved mental health outcomes for LGBTQIA+ people (based on a single question on a 5-point Likert scale). This
number was higher in those identifying as LGBTQIA+ (91%) vs those who did not identify as such (85%) (X2 (4, N =
5825) = 55.58, p .00001), Figure 4).
Do you believe that the decriminalisation of homosexuality
via Section 377 in 2018 had a positive impact on the
mental health of LGBTQIA+ individuals that you know.
Yes. most definitely
3962
87%
Moderately
1106
Unsure
436
7%
Slightly
106
6%
Not at all
215
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Number of respondents
Figure 4. Distribution of participants based on responses to the survey question on impact of decriminalising
homosexuality (via section 377) on mental health
Opinion on Marriage Equality Legislation
95% respondents (n = 5526) said they would welcome ("Yes, most definitely," "moderately") legalisation of
marriage for LGBTQIA+ people (based on a single question on a 5-point Likert scale). This number was higher in
those identifying as LGBTQIA+ (98%) vs those who did not identify as such (93%) (X2 (4, N = 5825) = 136.26, p
< .00001), Figure 5).
Would you welcome the legalizing of LGBTQIA+ marriages in India?
Yes, most definitely
4999
95%
Moderately
527
Unsure
131
2%
Slightly
38
3%
Not at all
130
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Number of respondents
Figure 5. Distribution of participants based on responses to the survey question on perceptions about the
proposed marriage equality legislation
Anticipated impact of marriage equality legislation on mental health
93% (n = 5405) respondents believed ("Yes, most definitely," "moderately") that legalisation of marriage will
improve mental health outcomes in LGBTQIA youth and families (based on a single question on a 5-point Likert scale).
This number was higher in those identifying as LGBTQIA+ (95%) vs those who did not identify as such (91.5%) (X2
(4, N = 5825) = 57.15, p< .00001), Figure 6).
Additionally, 91% (n=5302 ) believed ("Yes, most definitely," "moderately") that legalisation would reduce mental
health related distress (such as anxiety, depression, suicidal
thoughts) in youth (based on a single question on a 5-point Likert scale). This number was higher in those
identifying as LGBTQIA+ (93%) vs those who did not identify as such (90%) (X2 (4, N = 5825) = 36.9, p
< .00001), Figure 7).
Do you think legalising LGBTQIA+ marriages would
improve mental health outcomes in LGBTQIA+ youth and families?
Yes, most definitely
4589
93%
Moderately
816
Unsure
240
4%
Slightly
76
3%
Not at all
104
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Number of respondents
Figure 6. Distribution of participants based on responses to the survey question on anticipated impact of
marriage equality legislation on mental health outcomes in LGBTQIA+ youth and families.
Do you think the legalization of LGBTQIA+ marriages could
contribute in any way to reducing the mental health difficulties
related to minority stress, discrimination, suicidality, low self-esteem, depression
Yes, most definitely
4301
91%
Moderately
1001
Unsure
285
5%
Slightly
96
4%
Not at all
142
0
2000
4000
6000
Number of respondents
Figure 7. Distribution of participants based on responses to the survey question on anticipated impact of
marriage equality legislation on reducing mental health difficulties.
Thematic and linguistic analysis
The third part of the survey asked respondents to provide their detailed opinions on 4 questions related to
LGBTQIA+ centred legislations, and their impact on family dynamics and mental health among youth to understand
public opinion.
Since this section was optional, out of 5825 people who responded to the survey, only 38% (n=2204) respondents
provided detailed comments and opinions. The distribution of LGBTQIA+ identifying members in this subgroup was
45%, The content analysis of the qualitative survey data revealed several key themes related to the experiences and
perspectives of
participants irrespective of whether they identified as a member of the LGBTQIA+ community or not. These
themes included feelings of isolation, discrimination, mental distress and the impact of stigma and exclusion.
Participants also talked about the importance of acceptance, belonging and social support on overall wellbeing and
mental health and anticipated reduction in mental health related issues such as anxiety, depressiona nd suicidal
thoughts. Finally, a small proportion of participants expressed opposition towards same-sex marriage due to it
being against cultural and religious beliefs or against the "order of nature".
In addition to content analysis, the linguistic frequency analysis using the quanteda package in R provided insights
into the language used by participants to describe their perceptions, experiences and opinions. The analysis revealed
that participants used a variety of words and phrases related to mental distress, "depressed," "sad," "anxious," and
"suicide". Words related to systemic oppression such as "violence", "stigma", "equality". And words of hope related to
anticipated positive experiences such as "acceptance", "love", "stability", "confidence", "belonging". Detailed analysis
of themes is provided below.
Integrating the thematic content analysis and linguistic frequency analysis revealed 3 key themes, 1) Increase in
wellbeing and social connectedness (Figure 8), 2) Reduction in mental health difficulties (Figure 9), 3) Reduction in
systemic oppression (Figure 10).
increase in wellbeing and social connectedness
Perceived increase in social support for LGBTQ+ individuals was highlighted by participants post the
decriminalisation of homosexuality via Section 377, with one participant sharing their lived experiences with
acceptance,
"...I
came out to my parents in a small city like Varanasi with love and acceptance, i could attribute
decriminalisation of sec 377 as one reason which backed me up. Another respondent noted that, "Gay kids rarely
have support. | know growing up, the online space was most of the support I had. I wanted to die. I'm being very
frank here, but I was very suicidal when I first realised I was gay. Who was going to listen to me?
This
legalisation will give a kid like me so much hope. Back then, decriminalisation changed my life. This might change
someone else's."
Participants also spoke of a sense of belonging and better mental health that might follow increased social
support, with participants noting that
"legalisation of LGBTQIA+ marriage could also help to reduce social isolation for LGBTQIA+ individuals within
their families. This could lead to stronger support networks and increased feelings of belonging, and It [legalising
marriage] can help them feel safe, experience greater confidence, increase self esteem, their sense of
belongingness- and increase the systematic opportunities available to them- thereby affecting their standard of
living and safety positive- impacting their mental health in many many positive ways."
A positive impact on wellbeing by way of enhanced self-acceptance was also suggested as an outcome by
respondents, with one participant stating that it
"Gives mental peace knowing that you can be yourself and it's nothing wrong or no crime".
The social importance of rights like inheritance, employment and family and the role that marriage plays in
accessing those rights, was acknowledged in participant voices.
"
everyone have to understand that a marriage is a social construction without marriage it is very difficult to get
stability in life. when I think about a safe future I think about giving my partner the safety and security of house,
economical stability and also health related stability like health insurance, LIC etc
"
Linguistic frequency analysis showed that the most commonly used words in this theme included "acceptance",
(better) mental health", "(better) rights" and "support" (Figure 8).
Improved Wellbeing
71%
1500
1000
36%
1568
22%
500
20%
797
13%
13%
485
447
9%
290
289
6%
207
5%
4%
125
111
86
0
AcceptanceMental Health
Rights
Support
Equality
Freedom
Expression Confidence Belonging
Stability
Content themes
Figure 8. Linguistic frequency analysis for the theme of "Improved wellbeing"
Reduction in mental health difficulties
The survey responses suggest that marriage equality legislation for LGBTQIA+ individuals will contribute to the
overall individual and collective mental health. Several participant responses bring to light the hope of reduction in
mental health difficulties and feeling safer 'coming out', noting that
"LGBTQIA+ People will definitely feel safe to "come out " with their family and friends. It will release a lot of
stress on them and take away the stigma that they are "different" from normal people and highlighting the impact
of visibility by sharing To be formally
and socially able to come out society as a legitimate couple and family unit will provide immense impetus to self
esteem, lowering of anxiety and depression for the gay community. They have right as everyone else to be with
whom they love, have children, cohabitation, own assets together and more"
Some responses highlight the the impact of this safety to translate into decrease in anxiety and depression,
highlighting that
"This, in turn, has contributed to the positive mental health outcomes for young people in the community by
increasing self-esteem, freely expressing themselves, improving a sense of belonging, providing social support, and
reducing levels of anxiety and depression".
Two other participants shared that
Common mental health conditions like anxiety and depression will be better managed. When such regressive
and oppressive systems are removed, we ensure removal of so many contextual factors which lead to mental health
problems like stress, depression, high suicide rate, grief, relationship strains, etc."
Potential decrease in prevalence of deaths by suicide was highlighted in the survey. A participant shared that,
"The increment in the suicide cases of homosexuals is creating an alarming situation that screams to us that this
is the time to pay attention to the needs of the LGBT community.
Each life that is lost is a reminder for us that discrimination exists in society. " and "legalisation of marriage
between LGBTQ individuals will cause suicide rates to decrease, and people must be educated regarding queen
people for this to happen"
Linguistic frequency analysis showed that the most commonly used words in this theme included "(less)
depression", "(less) anxiety", (fewer) suicides" and "(reduced) stress" (Figure 9).
Reduced Mental Distress
12%
263
200
6%
131
5%
100
118
5%
108
0
Stress
Anxiety
Depression
Suicide
Content themes
Figure 9. Linguistic frequency analysis for the theme of "Reduced Mental Distress" Reduction in systemic
oppression, stigma and discrimination
As noted by participants, the decriminalisation of homosexuality via Section 377 allowed LGBTQIA+ individuals to
feel more accepted in society and enhanced a sense of belonging.
This was suggested to lead to a decrease in mental health issues like depression and anxiety, which have been
associated with stigma and discrimination. One participant wrote about how
the decriminalisation of section 377 helped to break down the societal taboos and prejudices around
LGBTQIA+ issues, promoting greater acceptance and understanding of diverse sexual orientations and gender
identities. This can help reduce the stress and mental health burden that comes with being part of a stigmatized
minority."
Other participants highlighted that violence on a familial level, including forced marriage and hiding from family
members as well as violence on a social and institutional level, such as through the police or other regulatory
bodies, had reduced with the decriminalisation of homosexuality and led to an increased sense of safety for
LGBTQIA+ community members.
Participants presented with nuanced views on the impact of legalisation of same sex marriages on social stigma.
One participant noted that,
"legalisation of LGBTQIA+ marriage could also decrease the stigma and discrimination faced by LGBTQIA+
individuals, particularly within their families Improved understanding: ..it could lead to improved understanding
and education around LGBTQIA+ issues among family members. Reduction in social isolation: legalisation of
LGBTQIA+ marriage could also help to reduce social isolation for LGBTQIA+ individuals within their families. This
could lead to stronger support networks and increased feelings of belonging."
And as one participant highlighted in their response to whether legalisation of same-sex marriage would improve
mental health outcomes for LGBTQIA+ individuals,
"Just the legalisation is the first step. These issues are like the "canary in the mine" that make visible a very
deep inability of people to engage with differences in meaningful ways. Unless this inner shift happens difference
will mean danger and attract violence." Linguistic frequency analysis showed that the most commonly used words
in this theme included (less) stigma", (less) discrimination", (fewer) forced marriages", "(less) hate" and
(reduced) violence" (Figure 9).
Reduced Systemic Oppression
18%
400
300
200
9%
388
100
190
3%
2%
59
1%
1%
48
32
31
1%
19
0
Stigma
Discrimination
Harrassment
Hate
Forced Marriages
Trauma
Violence
Content themes
Figure 10. Linguistic frequency analysis for the theme of "Reduced Systemic Oppression"
Most common reasons against inclusive legislation
A small number of participants also gave reasons against the legalisation of same-sex marriage, citing aspects
such as nature and reproduction, with statements like "their condition, issues def can be dealt with compassion and
help but bringing laws out so this is in the open is unacceptable. Human wants and needs are unending where does
one stop if everyone starts demanding rights for their queerness ? We all know that by law of the nature it's ying
and Yang ! It's un natural to have two male as parents or women, where are we heading as a society ? If it's ok
then why not make our society null and void so anyone can do anything !!! and procreation is not possible and
hence this is unnatural. Now that it is decriminalised it is good enough. Rearing offspring requires both mother and
father. Why something unnatural for them." Ideas around religion and culture not being accepting of same-sex
marriages were also brought to light in responses, with some participants mentioning how homosexuality is a
Western concept" , how certain religions may be more accepting than others while others highlighted how marriage
is
about religion and same-sex marriages should be civil unions instead, with one person noting that
"There is a long way for families to accept this and in culture like India it will take time." In the vein of culture
and tradition, respondents also brought out how decriminalisation was welcome and felt important but legalisation
of same-sex marriage would not be helpful. One person spoke of how,
'Decriminalisation made it safe. Same sex people could have a legal union/contract as opposed to marriage,
"
Some respondents also highlighted their beliefs about homosexuality being a "delusion" or "disorder", with
mentions of
"if it were up to me, I'd rather have these people mentally examined and councelled against their mental illness"
and "With regard to the LGBTQ community, It fostered and fueled their existing delusion. But for the other rational
and straight folk, it brought a sense of insecurity. And this persistent demand to legalise this delusion makes me
wonder if in the future being straight would be a crime."
Some also spoke outright about how "not all youth are LGBTQ+ and not wanting to "encourage such behaviour",
while still others spoke of how legalisation would not decrease stigma.
Others cited concerns including,
"Marriage is a socio religious act. It is not encouraged by many religions, will cause dis harmony in society and
will open a Pandora's box for marriage between other groups of individuals with varied sexual preferences which are
not yet fashionable today but do exist."
Discussion
The study examined the perceived impact of legalising marriage equality for LGBTQIA+ individuals on Indian
society and the mental health outcomes of youth in India. Participants in the study were distributed across all ages
and diverse geographical locations across India and a significant
portion (37%) of the participants in the study self-identified as members of the LGBTQIA+ community. Analysis
of the data reflected that the majority of the participants across different age groups, sexual and gender identities
felt that young people in India would welcome the marriage equality legislation in India as it would contribute to
positive and improved social, legal and mental health outcomes for LGBTQIA+ youth and families. Participants,
especially members of the LGBTQIA+ community, shared that the decriminalisation of homosexuality via Section
377 led to improved mental health outcomes for the community, and put forward the hope that legalising marriage
equality would continue to have an impact on the individual and collective mental health of LGBTQIA+ people,
youth and families in India.
Detailed findings in the study indicated that legislation centering the LGBTQIA+ community could lead to increase
in wellbeing and social connectedness, and have the potential to reduce mental health difficulties. Furthermore, they
also hold the potential to reduce two key forms of social and systemic oppression, which are stigma and discrimination
against the community. Some participant responses also highlighted reasons against the legalisation of same-sex
marriage, citing reasoning built around ideas of culture, religion, tradition and nature. This is the first study, in our
awareness, from India to incorporate the perspectives of such a larger population of individuals in the discourse on
LGBTQIA+ supportive legislations and its reciprocal impact on the health of the state, society and individual.
Collective and individual mental health and wellbeing
The findings highlighted the possible reduction in depression, anxiety, stress and suicide rates that could be
possible in the context of increased feelings of social and familial support, belonging (social acceptance) and
acceptance of one's own identity (self-acceptance) for
LGBTQIA+ people among young people in India as possible outcomes of marriage equality legislation. Often, the
fear and discomfort in reporting psychologically difficult situations may compound on mental health difficulties like
anxiety and depression. Kealy-Bateman et al. (2015) reviewed a number of studies that looked at marriage equality
as a mental health issue. Their findings revealed that individuals from the LGBTQIA+ community face negative
mental health outcomes as a result of the stress that comes with being part of a stigmatised minority group, with
evidence also pointing at marriage equality as being related to better mental health outcomes, as is also theorised
in the Minority Stress Model for the LGBTQIA+ community (Meyer, 2003). Survey responses from this study also
highlighted how the absence of marriage laws and legal protection could lead to anxiety of being reported for
LGBTQIA+ individuals. Some added that societal pressure to conform to cis-heterosexual marriages could also lead
to anxiety and depression. A study conducted by Padula et al. (2016) found similarly that LGBTQIA+ individuals
have higher than expected rates of psychiatric disorders and once their rights and equality are recognised these
rates start to drop.
Could legalisation lead to social change?
A significant theme revealed that the reading down of Section 377 helped members of the LGBTQIA+ community
perceive a safer and more accepting environment to freely express their choices. It helped some of the youth
population come out safely to their loved ones. India's ace sprinter, Dutee Chand made the bold move of coming out
publicly in 2019 and detailed how she negotiated coming out with her family (Ninan, 2021). In doing so, like many of
the survey participants, she reiterated that change in familial beliefs and views was a slow process, and that
acceptance was hard won.
There is an overall sense of increased social support for LGBTQIA+ individuals post decriminalisation of
homosexuality, and an idea that marriage equality legislation could further a safer and accepting environment for
individuals. A recent example of such a process could be witnessed in the subsequent impact of the The Transgender
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. Following this, the state of Tamil Nadu was the first to set up a monthly
pension for transgender individuals as well as set up a transgender welfare board, with a gradual change in social
perception towards them being perceived (Rajasekaran, 2022). The legal recognition played a vital role in recognition
and protection against discrimination, sexual and physical violence as well as the number of deaths due to gender
identities (Kothari, 2018). Furthermore, Guha (2023) wrote about how 'marriage being legalised will give the same-
sex couple's relationship more legitimacy in the eyes of the family members, prompting them to feel more
comfortable, thus leading to increased support due to changes in perceived social norms'. He spoke specifically about
how legalising same-sex marriages is likely to have a profound "bottom-up effect" in the social structure, starting from
the individual level and couple level, followed by the family, community, and finally at the level of society. There would
be both direct (making supportive comments to the couple, attending marriage ceremonies) and indirect (same-sex
spouses being incorporated into the family network) increases in the social inclusion of sexual minorities at the
community level. At the societal level, there would be a significant reduction in anti-LGBTQIA+ attitudes. There would
be greater support for the rights of sexual minorities and possible future expansion of rights and protections.
Voices of the participants also reflected on the potential for an increased sense of emotional, physical and financial
safety for LGBTQIA+ individuals. For example, legalisation could protect married LGBTQIA+ individuals from possible
harm and conviction, while also providing greater opportunities for a better quality of life (adoption rights, inheritance,
financial security etc. ) that is
otherwise possible for cis-heterosexual married couples. Findings from the study indicate that - consistent with
a legitimacy model (Flores & Barclay, 2016) - people believe that laws significantly improve attitudes toward
sexual minorities.
Potential to address systemic oppression related factors
Findings brought out the idea that an increase in aspects like safety, legal acknowledgement, and perceived
equality would lead to increased confidence and better mental health outcomes particularly as a result of reduced
stigma and discrimination. According to Meyer's (2003) Minority Stress Model, the LGBTQIA+ community may
experience numerous forms of marginalisation, such as racism, sexism, poverty or other factors -
alongside
homophobia and transphobia that negatively impacts their mental health (Collins et al. 2015). LGBTQ+ individuals in
India particularly can often face different forms of discrimination and violence due to stigma, such as family enacted
violence, forced marriage or pressure to marry, discrimination at schools or workplaces as well as housing and
healthcare services, stopping of education, separation from partner and more (Ranade & Chakravarty, 2013; Tomori et
al, 2016; Ganju et al, 2017; Mal, 2018).
"Unnatural", "Disorder", Where does one stop": Concerns around same-sex marriage
Longitudinal research in countries that have granted equal marriage rights have suggested no known evidence to
show negative outcomes in terms of mental or psychological wellbeing or growth amongst children raised by same-
sex couples (Crouch et al, 2014; Biblarz & Stacey, 2010; Farr, 2017; Goldberg & Smith, 2014; Lavner et al., 2014;
Anderssen et al, 2002). Some international studies have suggested that there may be greater positive outcomes for
children raised by same-sex parents, identifying unique and distinct characteristics among LGBTQ+ adoptive
parents that could benefit their children, such as "positive parental wellbeing", "sharing
the duties of parenthood in an equal fashion" and "greater couple relationship adjustment and perceived
parenting competence" (Farm & Patterson, 2013; Golombok et al, 2014, Bos et al, 2003; Bos et al, 2007; Golombok
et al, 2003).
Findings indicated concerns around marriage equality being against Indian culture, traditions or religion. On the
contrary, Vanita & Kidwai (2021) have documented multiple Indian and non-Indian examples of loving unions that
set the precedent for marriage being legalised today. Indian history and culture has documented instances of same
sex marriage across time, from the 14th century (e.g. the birth of Bhagiratha to two women) to the 1980s (e.g. the
marriage by Hindu rites of two policewomen in 1987) to the 2000s (e.g. in Dec 2004, local magistrate Sanjeev Joshi
ruled in favour of two women who eloped, citing their constitutional rights). Some participants also highlighted the
idea that homsexuality is a "disorder" or "delusion" to be treated with psychotherapy. Considerable evidence across
countries indicates that this is not the case (Indian Psychiatric Society, 2018; 2023; American Psychiatric
Association, 1973; Baughey-Gill, 2011; Drescher, 2015; Wandrekar & Nigudkar, 2019).
Is legalisation enough? Possible future directions
The results we present suggest that attitudes inform legal change and that policymakers can shift public opinion
about beliefs through legal reform. The study also highlighted that legislation was not a "magic potion" that would
lead to sweeping societal change, but rather "one step" in a series of social and legal changes that would lead to an
improvement in mental health outcomes for LGBTQ+ people in India, as well as contribute to the economic and social
development of India as a nation. One study to understand the impact of decriminalisation of homosexuality via
section 377 on members of the LGBTQIA+ community residing in Delhi (Joshi, Madan, et al., 2022) identified that
stigma and lack of social acceptance continues to function as a barrier for the participants to come out to their family
for the fear of losing financial support and freedom.
Findings recognise that legalisation of LGBTQIA+ marriage equality does not guarantee societal acceptance,
normalisation or an increased understanding of gender and sexuality due to the existing deep rooted nature of
social stigma, but does take away the vulnerability that comes with lack of rights. It can also provide resources to
the LGBTQIA+ community in India to battle existing social stigma and non-acceptance by ways of creating support
networks, securing essential rights, and becoming financially secure. At the same time, it also requires the creation
of open conversations and awareness programs as mechanisms to gradually reduce stigma across families and
cultures throughout the country.
Conclusions and implications
The discourse around the importance of mental health in India is growing (Murthy, 2017) with an increasing focus
on the larger implications this can have for the socio-cultural growth of a nation. An integral aspect lies in addressing
the mental health of unique and diverse individuals and communities that constitute the social fabric of India. Among
these diverse communities, there are groups which are vulnerable in their access to fundamental rights, resources and
opportunities as a result of social and systemic exclusion. These may consequently have an effect on mental health
outcomes. Meyer's (2003) Minority Stress Model theorises on the impact of prejudice, stigma and discrimination on the
mental health of individuals from the LGBTQ+ community, and a variety of studies from India and across the world
(Wandrekar & Nigudkar, 2019; Ranade & Chakravarty, 2013; Tomori et al, 2016; Smith & Shin, 2015) highlight the
different ways in which legal frameworks like the decriminalisation of homosexuality and the legalisation of same-sex
marriage (in non-Indian countries) have had an impact on the social and personal wellbeing of the LGBTQIA+
community. However, with scarcity in Indian literature in
the above-mentioned areas, there is a growing need to explore the impact of legal policies centering same-sex
individuals, especially in the area of mental health which constitutes a significant aspect of wellbeing.
In order to explore the perceived impact of one such legislation legalising same-sex marriage - on the mental
health outcomes of youth in India, an online survey was conducted to collect data. Convenience sampling was used to
collect responses, with four questions across a 5 point Likert Scale, with four optional qualitative questions for the
participants. A total of 5825 individuals from different geographical regions across India participated in the study.
37% (n=2149) of the participants self-identified as LGBTQIA+ The age group of respondents ranged from less than
18 to more than 60 years of age. More than 65% (n=3788) respondents were below the age of 40 years and more
than 36% were below the age of 30 years. The proportion of older individuals (above the age of 40) who identify as
LGBTQIA+ was significantly lower than those who were below 30 years. A significant number of participants agreed
that decriminalising homosexuality via Section 377 improved mental health outcomes for LGBTQIA+ people, said they
would welcome the legalisation of same sex marriage, believed that legalisation of marriage would improve mental
health and wellbeing outcomes in LGBTQIA youth and families and that legalisation would reduce mental health
related distress (such as anxiety, depression, suicidal thoughts) in youth. These proportions did not differ by group
identity or age.
A total of 38% (n=2204) respondents provided detailed comments and opinions in the survey which were subjected
to thematic analysis. Reduction of stigma and improved societal living conditions in the form of increased acceptance,
safety and access to fundamental citizenship rights were viewed as important reasons in support for same sex
marriages. Improved mental health outcomes in terms of reduced anxiety, depression, suicide prevalence were
identified by the participants. Increase in emotional wellbeing, self acceptance, and reduced shame were also
quoted. Further, in support of same sex marriages, respondents suggested that legalisation would increase
awareness and possible support from families of members from the LGBTQIA+ community. Themes around
preservation of tradition and Indian culture and saving the sanctity of religious beliefs emerged as voices of
opposition to same sex marriages.
Improvement in mental health difficulties due to reduced stigma and increase in social support, acceptance and
sense of belonging, legal safety and accessing legal rights were discussed, with direct implications on improved
mental health and an anticipated decrease in anxiety, depression, and death by suicide suggested. The study has
implications on legal policy centering same-sex couples' experiences to further mental health outcomes and facilitate
changes in attitudes around same sex relationships in India.
The study displays its limitations in collection of geographical location as data in the survey. Though analysis
showed that respondents belonged to various parts of the country, spanning 27 different states, geographical data of
respondents was collected in a later phase of the survey. As a result, location demographics were only available from
432 respondents. Additionally, the data collection was limited to participants who had access to social media and the
internet. The survey was conducted in the English language, which limits responses from individuals who are
conversant in vernacular languages. The study holds its relevance in influencing policy development on safeguarding
citizenship and human rights of members belonging to minority LGBTQIA+ group. The study also highlights
importance of activism towards inclusion, reduction of stigma and attitude change in the society. Lastly, our findings
add to the existing body of knowledge around mental health of LGBTQIA+ community within India.
References
Aksoy, C. G., Carpenter, C. S., De Haas, R., & Tran, K. D. (2020). Do laws shape attitudes?
Evidence from same-sex relationship recognition policies in Europe. European Economic
Review, 124, 103399.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2020.103399 Badgett, M. V. L., Nezhad, S., Waaldijk, K.,
& Rodgers, Y. van den M. (2014). The Relationship
between LGBT Inclusion and Economic Development: An Analysis of Emerging
Economies. Benoit K, Watanabe K, Wang H, Nulty P, Obeng A, Mllen S, Matsuo A (2018). "quanteda: An
R package for the quantitative analysis of textual data." Journal of Open Source Software,
3(30), 774. doi: 10.21105/joss. Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
Research in
Psychology, 3(2), 77-101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of
human development: Experiments by nature and
design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Bowling, J., Dodge, B., Banik, S., Rodriguez, I., Mengele, S. R.,
Herbenick, D., Guerra-Reyes,
L., Sanders, S., Dange, A., & Anand, V. (2016). Perceived health concerns among sexual
minority women in Mumbai, India: An exploratory qualitative study. Culture, Health &
Sexuality, 18(7), 826-840. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2015.1134812 Cummings, S. (2013 ). Empirical
Studies of Law and Social Change: What is the Field? What
are the Questions? Wisconsin Law Review .
Dentato, M. P. (2012). The minority stress perspective. American Psychological Association, Psychology & AIDS
Exchange.
Drescher, J. (2015). Out of DSM: Depathologizing Homosexuality. Behavioral Sciences, 5(4),
565-575. https://doi.org/10.3390/bs5040565, Flores, A. R., & Barclay, S. (2016). Backlash, Consensus, Legitimacy, or
Polarization: The
Effect of Same-Sex Marriage Policy on Mass Attitudes. Political Research Quarterly,
69(1), 43-56. https://doi.org/10.1177/10659129156211750 Ganju, D., & Saggurti, N. (2017). Stigma, violence and
HIV vulnerability among transgender
persons in sex work in Maharashtra, India. Culture, Health & Sexuality, 19(8), 903-917.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2016.127114 Gutekunst, M. H. C., & Liang, C. T. H. (2023). From Invisibility to
Bivisibility: Identity Abuse
and Mental Health Outcomes among Bisexual Individuals. Journal of Bisexuality, 1-25.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15299716.2023.2191591 Indian Psychiatric Society. (2008). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders. BN
Publishing. Kealy-Bateman, W., & Pryor, L. (2015). Marriage equality is a mental health issue. Australasian
Psychiatry, 23(5), 540-543. https://doi.org/10.1177/1039856215592318 Kenny, C., & Patel, D. (2017). Norms and
Reform: legalising Homosexuality Improves
Attitudes. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3062911 Kothari, J. (2018 ). The Supreme Court
trans-formed. Retrieved from The Hindu.
Kottai S. R. (2022). LGBTQIA+ rights, mental health systems, and curative violence in India.
Indian journal of medical ethics, VII(2), 127-133.
https://doi.org/10.20529/IJME.2021.090 Krishnan, L. (2015). Social Exclusion, Mental Health, Disadvantage and
Injustice. Psychology & Developing Societies.
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual
populations: Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 129(5),
674-697. .https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674 Murthy, R. S. (2017). National Mental Health Survey of India
2015-2016. Indian Journal of
Psychiatry, 59(1), 21. https://doi.org/10.4103/psychiatry.indianjpsychiatry_102_17 Ninan, S. (2021). "Love is a
human right": India sprinter Dutee Chand tells her coming out story.
ESPN Sports Media Ltd.
https://www.espn.in/olympics/story/_/id/32303155/india-sprinter-dutee-chand-tells-com
ng-story Ranade, K., & Chakravarty, S. (2016) 'Coming Out' of the Comfort Zone: Challenging
Heteronormativity Through Affirmative Counselling Practice with Lesbian and Gay
Clients. In P. Bhola & A. Raguram (Eds.), Ethical Issues in Counselling and
Psychotherapy Practice (pp. 141-154). Springer Singapore.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-1808-4_9 Ross, L. E., Siegel, A., Dobinson, C., Epstein, R., & Steele, L. S.
(2012). "I Don't Want to Turn
Totally Invisible": Mental Health, Stressors, and Supports among Bisexual Women
during the Perinatal Period. Journal of GLBT Family Studies, 8(2), 137-154.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1550428X.2012.660791 Smith, L. C., & Shin, R. Q. (2015). Negotiating the Intersection of
Racial Oppression and
Heteronormativity. Journal of Homosexuality, 62(11), 1459-1484.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2015.1073029
Tankard, M. E., & Paluck, E. L. (2017). The Effect of a Supreme Court Decision Regarding Gay
Marriage on Social Norms and Personal Attitudes. Psychological Science, 28(9),
1334-1344. https://doi.org/10.1177/09567976177095941 Tomori, C., McFall, A. M., Srikrishnan, A. K., Mehta, S. H.,
Nimmagadda, N., Anand, S.,
Vasudevan, C. K., Solomon, S., Solomon, S. S., & Celentano, D. D. (2016). The
prevalence and impact of childhood sexual abuse on HIV-risk behaviors among men who
have sex with men (MSM) in India. BMC Public Health, 16(1), 784.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3446-6 Vanita, R., & Kidwai, S. (2021). Same-Sex Love in India: A Literary
History. Penguin Books, an
imprint of Penguin Random House. Verma, S. (2018). Navtej Singh Johar and Ors. Vs. Union of India.
https://privacylibrary.ccgnlud.org/case/navtej-singh-johar-and-ors-vs-union-of-india-uoi-a
nd-ors Wandrekar, J. R., & Nigudkar, A. S. (2020). What Do We Know About LGBTQIA+ Mental
Health in India? A Review of Research From 2009 to 2019. Journal of Psychosexual
Health, 2(1), 26-36. https://doi.org/10.1177/2631831820918129 Winter, B., Forest, M., & Snac, R. (Eds.). (2018).
Global Perspectives on Same-Sex Marriage:
A Neo-Institutional Approach. Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-62764-9
Appendix A
A. Survey Questions
1. Please provide your age.
2. Where are you from? Please name the village/town/city or the district/state.
3. Do you identify as a member of the LGBTQIA+ community?
4. Do you believe that the decriminalisation of Section 377 in 2018 had a positive impact on the mental health of
LGBTQIA+ individuals that you know.
5. Would you welcome the legalising of LGBTQIA+ marriages in India?
6. Do you think legalising LGBTQIA+ marriages would improve mental health outcomes in LGBTQIA+ youth and
families?
7. Do you think the legalisation of LGBTQIA+ marriages could contribute in any way to reducing the mental health
difficulties related to minority stress, discrimination, suicidality, low self-esteem, depression, anxiety etc.?
8. In what ways do you think the decriminalisation of section 377 in 2018 made an impact on the mental health of
young people in India?
9. In what ways do you feel youth in India today might respond to the legalisation of marriage amongst LGBTQIA+
people?
10. Do you think legalisation may have an impact on the family environment for LGBTQIA+ people? For example :
feeling safe to "come out" to their loved ones, decrease in parental worries about the social stigma currently
attached to having a child who identifies as LGBTQIA, or any other stressors ?
11. In what ways might the legalisation of marriage between LGBTQIA+ individuals contribute to positive mental
health outcomes among young people in India?
Aditi Anand V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
Extra Ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction
In The Matter of:
Aditi Anand & Anr.
Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Along With
In the Matter of:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty & Anr. Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
AND IN THE MATTER OF:
Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights. Applicant/Intervenor
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1011 of 2022
REJOINDER SUBMISSIONS WITH RESPECT TO ADOPTION & PARENTING BY SAME-SEX COUPLES
[By Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, Senior Advocate]
Introduction
1. These submissions are in specific regard to adoption and in response to the unfortunate assumptions made by
the
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights ('NCPCR') about children who are parented by same-sex
couples in its submissions before this Hon'ble Court. These arguments in rejoinder reflect data, studies, and case law
from other Constitutional Courts. They also reflect the conclusions and findings of qualified professionals including the
Indian Psychiatric Society as well an expert statutory body such the Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights
('DCPCR'), which is an intervenor in these proceedings.
2. The Indian Psychiatric Society (IPS') consists of 7000 psychiatrists/specialists. The IPS currently represents the
largest society of mental health professionals in India and works on health advocacy, policy formulation & medical
research in the field of mental health. The IPS supported decriminalization of homosexuality in 2018 and has in their
position statement dated 03.04.2023 stated the following in relation to LGBTQ individuals:
These Individuals be treated like all citizens of the country, and once a citizen can enjoy all civil rights like
education, employment, housing, income, government or military service, access to health care, property rights,
marriage, adoption, survivorship benefits to name a few. There is no evidence to indicate that individuals on the
LGBTQA spectrum cannot partake any of the above. On the contrary discrimination which prevents the above, amy
lead to mental health issues.
The Indian Psychiatric Society is very cognizant that a child adopted into a same gendered family may face
challenges, stigma and/or discrimination along the way. It is imperative that, once legalized, such parents of the
LGBTQA spectrum bring up the children in a gender neutral, unbiased environment. It is also of utmost importance,
that the family, community, school and society in general are sensitized to protect and promote the development of
such a child, and prevent stigma and discrimination at any cost."
Position Statements of the Indian Psychiatric Society regarding LGBTQ dated 03.04.2023, 11.06.2020 and 2018 are
annexed to the accompanying Compilation as 'ANNEXURE-1' (Pgs. 1-3)
3. The DCPCR is a statutory body established under Section 17 of the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act,
2005. The DCPCR has been statutorily entrusted with the protection of child rights and it is the statutory authority of
the Government of NCT of Delhi on matters of child rights.
4. In the present submissions, the following issues will be dealt with:
a. Concerns around the psychological impact upon children being brought up in same sex households.
b. The importance of the recognition of same-sex marriage upon the ability of children to grow up in a non-
discriminatory environment in general.
C. The jurisprudence of other constitutional courts.
d. Possible guidelines that this Hon'ble Court may consider issuing.
A. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPACT UPON CHILDREN BEING BROUGHT UP IN SAME-SEX HOUSEHOLDS
5. Over 50 countries44 across the world allow same-sex couples to adopt. According to DCPCR, there is no evidence
or empirical data to show that same-sex couples are unfit to be parents or that psychosocial development of children
being brought up by same-sex couples is compromised relative to that of offspring being raised by heterosexual
parents.
A List of Countries across the world where same-sex couples are allowed to adopt is annexed to the accompanying
Compilation as 'ANNEXURE-2' (Pgs. 4-7)
6. In fact, a study on same-sex parents and their children titled "Lesbian & Gay Parenting" by the American
Psychological Association concluded that home environments provided by same-sex parents are no different from
those provided by heterosexual parents, in terms of supporting and enabling children's psychosocial growth.
The research paper titled 'Lesbian & Gay Parenting' by the American Psychological Association is annexed to the
accompanying Compilation as 'ANNEXURE-3' (Pgs. 8-90)
7. Brazil is a close example of a nation that has a similar multi-ethnic, multi-religious population, which
encompasses diverse regions and cultures to that of India. Homosexuality was decriminalised in Brazil way back in
1830 itself and same-sex marriages were legalised in 2013. Adoption by same-sex couples in Brazil started much
earlier in 1995 itself. However, in 2011, adoption by same sex couples was legalised when the Brazilian Supreme
Court affirmed the constitutional legitimacy of same sex marriage in terms of the "family unit", a legal category that
carries with it access to rights in Brazilian civil and family law. In a recent 2022 study, it has been found by
researchers that due to prior adoptions of children by one individual in same-sex couples, the delay in legal recognition
of same-sex marriage became a weakness of such families when it came to issues of health, education and other
responsibilities towards the children as till 2011, only one parent had legal rights over the children. The lack of legal
recognition of same-sex marriage in Brazil also created problems during separation of such couples such as the non-
legally recognized caregiver/parent not having the right to guardianship and/or visitation.
The research paper titled "Same-sex parenting in Brazil and Portugal : An integrative review" is annexed to the
accompanying Compilation as 'ANNEXURE-4' (Pgs. 91-111)
8. Same-sex couples do not have any advantage or disadvantage with respect to being good or poor at parenting
when compared to heterosexual couples. A 2021 Australian study presented at the University of Queensland was
conducted by analysing the administrative data from several population registers from the Netherlands from 2006-
2018. The unique feature of the sample data was that it included complete population coverage, reliable identification
of same-sex-parented families, a large number of children in same-sex-parented families, a large number of children
in same-sex-parented families, multiple objective and verifiable educational outcomes, and detailed measures of
family dynamics over children's entire life courses. It was found that:
a. In socio-political environments characterised by high levels of legislative or public support; children raised by
same-sex couples achieved at least as well as children in heterosexual parents.
b. Children living in same-sex-parented families experienced no educational disadvantage relative to children living
in different sex-parented families.
The study titled "Academic Achievement of Children in Same-and Different-Sex-Parented Families : A Population-
Level Analysis of Linked Administrative Data from the Netherlands" is annexed to the accompanying Compilation as
'ANNEXURE-5' (Pgs. 112-137)
9. Another recent study in 2020 published in the American Sociological Review, analysed the academic outcomes of
children raised by same-sex parents based on data derived from Netherlands, where same-sex marriages were
formalised in the year 2001 itself, and found that:
a. The academic results of children indicated that children raised by same-sex parents from birth outperformed
children with heterosexual parents by 0.139 standard deviations on the academic tests.
b. Children raised by same sex parents from birth are 4.8 percentage points more likely to graduate than children
with different-sex parents.
C. Support for the hypothesis that given the time-consuming and costly procedures for same-sex couples to obtain
children, same-sex parents typically have higher socioeconomic status, resulting in better academic outcomes.
10. Hence, the data indicates these multi-country data/studies/research papers indicate that children
adopted/children of same-sex couples are in no way adversely affected. If anything, it proves the old adage that loving
families will yield well adjusted children.
B. IMPACT ON CHILDREN IN GENERAL
11. It is established that sexual orientation develops at least as early as adolescence; even though age of consent
remains 18 and age of marriage at 18 and 21; A meta-analysis of 30 studies on sexual orientation and identify
development, titled "Sexual Orientation Identity Development Milestones Among Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Queen
People : A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" published in the Journal titled "Frontiers in Psychology-444 concluded
that sexual orientation develops around the age of 13.
12. In a socio-legal environment where individuals having homosexual orientations do not enjoy basic legal rights
at par with their heterosexual counterparts, adolescents who develop homosexual orientations may develop adverse
psychological complexes and low self-esteem and suffer from other mental health issues.
13. Further, unless equal rights are accorded to homosexuals, their acceptance, assimilation and legitimacy will
remain under troubled waters. This again is bound to have its bearing upon adolescents. Research on psychological
impact upon LGBT population in the US State of Ohio, titled "The Impact of Stigma and Discrimination against LGBT
People in Ohio" undertaken by Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law445 showed how homosexual adolescents were
twice as likely to face bullying and harassment at school than their heterosexual counterparts. It is noteworthy that
same-sex marriages are legal throughout the United States by virtue of the U.S. Supreme Court's judgement in
Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015). However, the State of Ohio has refrained from enacting anti-discrimination
laws.
14. Furthermore, non-recognition of same-sex marriages holds certain repercussions for the child of a homosexual
person. The said person shall be the only de jure parent and guardian of his on her child. While the child may actually
be under joint custody and maintenance of two persons forming a same-sex couple performing equal duties, only one
of the persons would have de jure authority and rights. This could have psychological and emotional consequences not
only for the affected de facto guardian but also for the child who may be left with reduced choice in case of a rift or
separation between his de facto guardians. By depriving the legal status to homosexual marriages, the State is thus
denying the legal security of dual parenthood and guardianship to the child. The child would thus be deprived of a
legally recognized family. The same would also have consequences for intestate succession.
C. JUDGMENTS BY OTHER CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS IN SUPPORT OF EQUAL PARENTING RIGHTS FOR SAME-SEX COUPLES
15. It is respectfully submitted that constitutional courts around the world have had the occasion to consider the
issue of adoption, as a right that flows from the right to same-sex marriages. Constitutional courts have agreed that
there exists no good ground to deny adoption rights on grounds of sexual orientation, and that to do so would
constitute unlawful discrimination.
16. In National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality V. Minister of Home Affairs, (2000) 1 BCLR 39, the
Constitutional Court of South Africa observed that:
"[50] nothing prevents a gay couple or a lesbian couple, one of whom has SO adopted a child, from treating
such child in all ways, other than strictly legally, as their child. They can certainly love, care and provide for the
child as though it was their joint child.
[51] From a legal and constitutional point of view procreative potential is not a defining characteristic of conjugal
relationships. Such a view would be deeply demeaning to couples (whether married or not) who, for whatever
reason, are incapable of procreating when they commence such relationship or become SO at any time thereafter. It
is likewise demeaning to couples who commence such a relationship at an age when they no longer have the desire
for sexual relations. It is demeaning to adoptive parents to suggest that their family is any less a family and any
less entitled to respect and concern than a family with procreated children. / would even hold it to be demeaning of
a couple who voluntarily decide not to have children or sexual relations with one another; this being a decision
entirely within their protected sphere of freedom and privacy. [56] In the second place there is no rational
connection between the exclusion of same-sex life partners from the benefits under Section 25(5) and the
government interest sought to be achieved thereby, namely the protection of families and the family life of
heterosexual spouses. No conceivable way was suggested, non can / think of any, whereby the appropriate
extension of the Section 25(5) benefits to same-sex life partners could negatively effect such protection. A similar
argument has been roundly rejected by the Canadian Supreme Court, which Court has also stressed, correctly in my
view, that concern for the protection of same-sex partnerships in no ways implies a disparagement of the traditional
institution of marriage."
(@ Pgs. 188, 189 & 192)
The above decision in National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality (Supra) is annexed to the accompanying
Compilation as 'ANNEXURE-6' (Pgs. 138-227)
17. This principle was echoed subsequently by the Constitutional Court of South Africa in Du Toit V. Minister of
Welfare and Population Department, (2002) 10 BCLR 1006, where the Constitutional Court stressed on the right to
adopt for same sex couples as a means of guaranteeing social and familial stability. The said decision forms a part of
'Compilation IV Judicial Precedents, Volume IV-Foreign/International Judgements' filed on behalf of the Petitioners at
Pgs. 565-596/573-604 (PDF).
18. In Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 US 644 (2015), the landmark United States judgment that legalised same-sex
marriage, the Supreme Court of the United States observed that:
"As all parties agree, many same-sex couples provide loving and nurturing homes to their children, whether
biological or adopted. And hundreds of thousands of children are presently being raised by such couples Most
States have allowed gays and lesbians to adopt, either as individuals or as couples, and many adopted and foster
children have same-sex parents This provides powerful confirmation from the law itself that gays and lesbians
can create loving, supportive families."
The said decision forms a part of 'Compilation IV : Judicial Precedents, Volume IV-Foreign/International
Judgements' filed on behalf of the Petitioners at Pgs. 2399-2501/2407-2509 (PDF).
19. Further various U.S. State Courts have reached similar conclusions. In Florida Department V. Adoption of
X.X.G., 45 So. 3d 79, the constitutionality of the denial of adoption rights to a same-sex couple was squarely at issue
before the Florida Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal affirmed the judgement of the district court and held that the
denial of the right to adoption on grounds of sexual orientation was illegal. The Court examined, at some length, the
State's argument that It was In the best interests of the child to restrict adoption to heterosexual couples. It observed
that:
"The quality and breadth of research available, as well as the results of the studies performed about gay
parenting and children of gay parents, is robust and has provided the basis for a consensus in the field. Many well
renowned, regarded and respected professionals have [produced] methodologically sound longitudinal and cross-
sectional studies into hundreds of reports. Some of the longitudinal studies have tracked children for six, ten and
fourteen years. The starting ages of the children in the longitudinal studies has varied from birth, six to ten years
old and followed them throughout childhood, adolescence and into adulthood. The studies and reports are published
in many well respected peer reviewed journals including the Journal of Child Development, the Journal of Family
Psychology, the Journal of Child Psychology, and the Journal of Child Psychiatry. Each of the studies and hundreds
of reports also withstood the rigorous peer review process and were tested statistically, rationally and
methodologically by seasoned professionals prior to publication. In addition to the volume, the body of research is
broad; comparing children raised by lesbian couples to children raised by married heterosexual couples; children
raised by lesbian parents from birth to children raised by heterosexual married couples from birth; children raised
by single homosexuals to children raised by single heterosexuals; and children adopted by homosexual parents to
those raised by homosexual 31 biological parents, to name a few. These reports and studies find that there are no
differences in the parenting of homosexuals or the adjustment of their children. These conclusions have been
accepted, adopted and ratified by the American Psychological Association, the American Psychiatry Association, the
American Pediatric Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the Child Welfare League of America and the
National Association of Social Workers. As a result, based on the robust nature of the evidence available in the field,
this Court is satisfied that the issue is SO far beyond dispute that it would be irrational to hold otherwise; the best
interests of children are not preserved by prohibiting homosexual adoption."
(@ Pgs. 238-239)
The above decision in Florida Department (Supra) is annexed to the accompanying Compilation as 'ANNEXURE-
7' (Pgs. 228-258).
20. In Salguiero Da Silva Mouta V. Portugal (Application No. 33290/96), the European Court of Human Rights held
that the denial of parental responsibility to a divorced father on the basis that he was homosexual violated the right to
family life. The Court rejected, in particular, the Portuguese court's finding that "the child should live in a traditional
Portuguese family", and that "children should not grow up in the shadow of abnormal situations." The ECHR found
these observations to be in breach of the European Charter's non-discrimination guarantee.
The above decision in Salguiero Da Silva Mouta (Supra) is annexed to the accompanying Compilation as
'ANNEXURE-8' (Pgs. 259-279).
21. In the specific context of adoption, in E.B. V. France (Application No. 43546/02), the Grand Chamber of the 32
European Court of Human Rights reversed its own prior jurisprudence on the issue, and held that the denial adoption
on grounds of sexual orientation was unlawful and discriminatory:
Where sexual orientation is in issue, there is a need for particularly convincing and weighty reasons to justify a
difference in treatment regarding rights falling within Article 8" [i.e., the right to family life].
The said decision forms a part of 'Compilation IV : Judicial Precedents, Volume IV-Foreign/International
Judgements' filed on behalf of the Petitioners at Pgs. 597-642/605-650 (PDF).
22. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights, in Advisory Opinion No. OC-24/17 specifically held that the
concept of a "family" was a capacious one and did not exclude individuals on grounds of sexual orientation. Including
adoption within the gamut of family relations, the Court observed that:
there is no doubt that - for example - a single-parent family must be protected in the same way that the
grandparents who assume the role of parents of a grandchild. Likewise, adoption is unquestionably a social
institution that, in certain circumstances, allows two or more persons who do not know each other to become a
family. Also, pursuant to the considerations set out in Chapter VII of this Opinion, a family may also consist of
persons with different gender identities and/or sexual orientations. All these models require protection by society
and the State because, as mentioned previously (supra para. 174), the Convention does not protect a single or
a
specific model of a family."
The said decision forms a part of 'Compilation IV : Judicial Precedents, Volume IV-Foreign/International
Judgements' filed on behalf of the Petitioners at Pgs. 1393-1522/1401-1530 (PDF).
23. The IACtHR's judgement followed that of the Mexican Supreme Court in 2010, which had held that the
definition of "family" was not restricted to one formed by a man and a woman. The Court also noted that same-sex
couples ought to have equal rights to adopt, as heterosexual couples and single parents, in compliance with the
constitutional principles of equality and non-discrimination, and that the "best interest" of the child lay in having a
loving family, regardless of the sexes of the parents.
24. It can therefore be seen that in judgments across countries, continents, and legal systems, Courts have
progressively held that there are no good grounds to discriminate with respect to adoption rights, when it comes to
same-sex parents. Arguments that that the best interest of the child requires a heterosexual couple have been firmly
rejected and debunked, and the overwhelming consensus is that once society has progressed to a plane where it is no
longer permissible to discriminate on grounds of sexual orientation in the context of relationships and marriage, it
follows that adoption rights ought also to be extended to same-sex couples on the same terms.
D. POSSIBLE GUIDELINES THIS HON'BLE COURT MAY CONSIDER ISSUING
25. It is respectfully submitted that on certain issues, society sometimes lags behind the law. The legalisation of
same-sex marriages, and consequently, the granting of adoption rights and the existence of same-sex family units,
may require additional safeguards to ensure children do not face any kind of social discrimination in spaces such as
schools.
26. The duty to respect, protect, promote, and fulfil fundamental rights includes the duty to anticipate breaches,
and to proactively work to address them. It is noted that this was what was done by this Hon'ble Court in National
observed that "the Centre and State Governments should take steps to create public awareness SO that TGs will feel
that they are also part and parcel of the social life and be not treated as untouchables." Indeed, this observation was
27. In light of the said precedent, therefore, it is respectfully submitted that this Hon'ble Court may consider
adopting the following guidelines by DCPCR, when passing its final order (Please refer to DCPCR's Intervention
Application, I.A. No. 71983/2023 in W.P. (C) No. 1011/2022 at Pgs. 34-36):
a.
Directions to the central and state government to take steps to create public awareness that same-sex
family units are as "normal" as heterosexual family units, and - specifically - that children belonging to
the former are not "incomplete" in any way.
b.
Directions, specifically, to school boards and educational institutions that this normalisation be proactively
undertaken specifically in classroom contexts where issues touching upon same-sex family units are
brought up.
C.
Directions to National and State Council for Education Research and Training (N/SCERT) to check - and
eliminate - homophobic content in school textbooks.
d.
Directions to National and State Council for Education Research and Training (N/SCERT) to rewrite or re-
envisage the passages, caricatures, diagrams and references to family to include more diverse
understanding of family and to homosexual couples as examples within the meaning of the family.
e.
Directions to the relevant authorities to create dedicated helplines for children facing stigma or bullying
by virtue of belonging to a same-sex family unit.
f.
Directions to the relevant authorities to set aside resources and create infrastructure for counselling and
psychological assistance to children suffering from bullying or victimisation on account of belonging to
same-sex family units.
CONCLUSION
28. This Hon'ble Court has been the North Star and has consistently pushed the envelope in its appreciation of
constitutional guarantees and the ever-evolving nature of the rights of communities historically discriminated. It has
evolved guidelines and standards through its jurisprudence for instance in the constitutionally rich area
of
Reservations. This Constitutional Court has been this guiding light not only for the World's largest Constitutional
democracy but has also inspired and continues to invigorate the development of constitutional law in other
jurisdictions. On 09.05.2023, the Supreme Court of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka held that a Bill i.e.,
"Penal Code (Amendment) Bill" seeking to decriminalize homosexuality, was not inconsistent with its Constitution. The
said decision was pronounced in K. Athula V. Hon. Attorney General (SC SD No. 13/2023), wherein a challenge was
made to a legislator's Private Member's Bill that sought to amend Sri Lanka's penal code and decriminalise
homosexuality. In doing so, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka relied heavily on our decision in Navtej Johan (Supra).
There would have been a time when Courts would have relied on perhaps the decision of the Supreme Court of the
United States in Lawrence V. Texas (2003) or other Courts of the Global North. Today, this Hon'ble Court is seen as
that shining star of constitutional interpretation whereby the rights of those traditionally disenfranchised are
recognised and expanded.
Parth Phiroze Mehrotra V. Union of India
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
In the Matters of:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1020 of 2022
Parth Phiroze Mehrotra and Another
Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
And
Transferred Case (Civil) No. 13 of 2023
Udit Sood and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1020 of 2022 and Transferred Case (Civil) No. 13 of 2023
SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON BEHALF OF MR. SAURABH KIRPAL, LD. SENIOR ADVOCATE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. EXTRACTS OF RELEVANT JUDGMENTS
D. ROMER, GOVERNOR OF COLORADO V. EVANS, 517 U.S. 620 (1996)
11. NOTE ON ECONOMIC COST TO THE COUNTRY
FILED BY:
KARANJAWALA & COMPANY
ADVOCATE FOR PETITIONERS
PART
EXTRACTS OF RELEVANT JUDGMENTS
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 185, Running Page No. 173]
27. Adopting the proportionality analysis not only provides a formal structure through which abstract rights
litigations can be analysed, but it also (when applied properly) has the potential to improve the quality of judicial
reasoning while protecting individual rights. As noted in Aadhaar (5 J.) [K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-5 J.) V. Union of
best held accountable for its violation of fundamental rights. Justice Albie Sachs, a Judge of the Constitutional Court
of South Africa, in his memoir The Strange Alchemy of Life and Law [Albie Sachs, The Strange Alchemy of Life and
Law (Oxford University Press, 2009).]. also described this shift from a culture of authority to a culture of
justification in South Africa with the introduction of their Constitution:
"The negotiated revolution which saw South Africa move from being an authoritarian, racist State to becoming
a constitutional democracy led Professor Etienne Mureinik to make a memorable statement as far as the
character of legal adjudication was concerned. He pointed out that we were crossing a bridge from a culture
of
authority to a culture of justification.. The implications for the judicial function turned out to be enormous. And it
was our Court that was made responsible for guiding the legal community to embrace and internalise the
necessary changes. Much more was involved than simply making a technical shift from what the lawyers call a
literalist to a purposive approach to interpretation. The Constitution brought about a sea change in the very
nature of the judicial function [It] necessitated moving beyond an approach based on the application of
purportedly inexorable rules towards accepting the duty in most matters for the Judges to exercise
constitutionally-controlled discretion. The transformation involved a journey from preoccupation with
classification and strict adherence to formal rules to focussing on principled modes of weighing up the competing
interests as triggered by the facts of the case and assessed in the light of the values of an open and democratic
society..."
(emphasis supplied)
Therefore, this Court must unhesitatingly use the proportionality analysis while assessing the violation of the
appellant's rights under Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 209, Running Page No. 197]
also undertook an integrated proportionality analysis to determine the proportionality of the State's interference in
the rights to privacy, dignity, choice and access to basic entitlements [K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-5 J.) V. Union of
limitation on each of the rights is common and affects them in a similar way. In the present case, the limitation
[i.e. Clause 2(iii) of the 2020 MTT Guidelines] is what affects the appellant's rights under Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and
21. Further, the appellant has submitted that the limitation is arbitrary, not a reasonable restriction and violative of
his
liberty because RBI has, without application of mind, linked the prohibition on import/export of a product to the
prohibition of MTTs in relation to that product. It is thus clear that the appellant's submissions for challenging the
constitutionality of Clause 2(iii) rest on similar grounds, and hence an integrated proportionality analysis can be
adopted. However, this Court must issue a note of caution - while an integrated proportionality analysis has been
adopted for assessing the limitation on rights [under Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21] in this case, it may not be true
for all cases where such limitations occur because the alleged violation of rights may be characteristically different
or the alleged limitation may affect the rights in different ways.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 211, Running Page No. 199]
31. The appellant has submitted that the precedents of this Court indicate that once the citizen can demonstrate
that the restriction directly or proximately interferes with the exercise of their freedom of trade or to carry on a
business, it is the State's burden to demonstrate the reasonableness of the restriction and that it is in the interest
impugned notification is not in challenge. Additionally, the legitimacy of the aim - of ensuring adequate domestic
supplies of PPE products - is also not in challenge. The appellant assails the suitability of the measure restricting
MTTs in ensuring domestic supplies and for being overbroad in its ambit, since an Indian entity acting as an
intermediary in an MTT between two different countries does not impact the availability of PPE products in India.
Thus, this Court will be relying on the justification furnished by RBI in determining the proportionality of the
impugned measure [Clause 2(iii) of the 2020 MTT Guidelines]. This analysis will be structured along with the
following questions:
(i) Is the measure in furtherance of a legitimate aim?
(ii) Is the measure suitable for achieving such an aim?
(iii) Is the measure necessary for achieving the aim? and
(iv) Is the measure adequately balanced with the right of the individual?
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 212, Running Page No. 200]
C.1 Legitimacy
32. This prong of the test entails an evaluation of the legitimacy of an aim that purportedly violates a
fundamental right. The measure must be designated for a proper purpose i.e. a legitimate goal. Five of the Judges
in the nine-Judge Bench decision in K.S. Puttaswamy (9 J.) [K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 J.) V. Union of India,
proportionality. This State interest must also be of sufficient importance to override a constitutional right or freedom
exports, imports and MTTs of PPE products is to ensure the availability of adequate domestic supplies during a
global health pandemic. Adequate stocks of PPE products are critical for the healthcare system to combat the Covid-
19 Pandemic. The State's aim of ensuring supplies is in furtherance of the right to life under Article 21 and the
Directive Principles of State Policy mandating the State's improvement of public health as a primary duty under
Article 47. The appellant has not challenged the legitimacy of this aim of ensuring adequate PPE in India. RBI, at
the time of filing its affidavit on 30-1-2021, had elaborated on the state of the pandemic in the country and the
necessity of ensuring adequate stock of PPE products. The executive's aim to ensure sufficient availability of PPE
products, considering the ongoing pandemic, is legitimate. Accordingly, we hold that the impugned measure is
enacted in furtherance of a legitimate aim that is of sufficient importance to override a constitutional right of
freedom to conduct business.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 212, Running Page No. 200]
C.2. Suitability
33. In examining the aim of ensuring adequate supplies in India, we will now evaluate the suitability of the
prohibition of MTTs in relation to PPE products. This would entail an analysis of whether the proposed measure can
further the stated objective. To understand whether the prohibition of MTTs in relation to PPE products was suitable,
we must first analyse the framework under which RBI regulates MTTs in India.
[REF Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 213, Running Page No. 201]
C.3. The necessity of the measure
50. The prong evaluating necessity is often conflated with the prong evaluating the suitability of a measure. The
analysis of necessity is an extension of evaluating the suitability of a restriction, coupled with an analysis of whether
the proposed measure is the least restrictive manner of arriving at the intended legitimate State interest. This
prong has traces of the "narrowly tailored" State interest [K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-5. V. Union of India, (2019)
fundamental rights under Part 111.
[REF Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 219, Running Page No. 207]
C.4. Balancing fundamental rights with State aims
53. The fourth and final prong of the proportionality analysis involves the crucial task of conducting a balancing
exercise. The Court is called upon to legitimise the "social importance of the limitation on a constitutional
to justify its existence on this prong is considered to have a disproportionate impact on the right-holder [K.S.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 220, Running Page No. 208]
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 6403, Running Page No. 6391]
56. And this brings us to the question as to when petitions have been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of
India, is it permissible for us to state that we will not decide an alleged breach of a fundamental right, but will send
the matter back to the legislature to remedy such a wrong.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 6471, Running Page No. 6459]
57. In Prem Chand Garg V. Excise Commr. [Prem Chand Garg V. Excise Commr., 1963 Supp (1) SCR 885 AIR
1963 SC 996], this Court held : (SCR p. 888 AIR pp. 998-99, para 2)
"2. Article 32(1) provides that the right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the
enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed, and clause (4) lays down that this right shall not
be suspended except as otherwise provided for by this Constitution. There is no doubt that the right to move this
Court conferred on the citizens of this country by Article 32 is itself a guaranteed right and it holds the same
place of pride in the Constitution as do the other provisions in respect of the citizens fundamental rights. The
fundamental rights guaranteed by Part 111 which have been made justiciable, form the most outstanding and
distinguishing feature of the Indian Constitution. It is true that the said rights are not absolute and they have to
be adjusted in relation to the interests of the general public. But as the scheme of Article 19 illustrates, the
difficult task of determining the propriety or the validity of adjustments made either legislatively or by executive
action between the fundamental rights and the demands of socio-economic welfare has been ultimately left in
charge of the High Courts and the Supreme Court by the Constitution. It is in the light of this position that the
Constitution-makers thought it advisable to treat the citizen's right to move this Court for the enforcement of
their fundamental rights as being a fundamental right by itself. The fundamental right to move this Court can,
therefore, be appropriately described as the cornerstone of the democratic edifice raised by the Constitution. That
is why it is natural that this Court should, in the words of Patanjali Sastri, J., regard itself "as the protector and
guarantor of fundamental rights", and should declare that 'it cannot, consistently with the responsibility laid
upon it, refuse to entertain applications seeking protection against infringements of such rights'. (Vide Romesh
Thappar V. State of Madras [Romesh Thappar V. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 594 AIR 1950 SC 124 : (1950) 51
Cri LJ 1514], SCR at p. 697 : AIR p. 126, para 5). In discharging the duties assigned to it, this Court has to play
the role "of a sentinel on the qui vive" (vide State of Madras V. V.G. Row [State of Madras V. V.G. Row, (1952) 1
must always regard it as its solemn duty to protect the said fundamental rights zealously and vigilantly (vide
Daryao V. State of U.P. [Daryao V. State of U.P., (1962) 1 SCR 574 AIR 1961 SC 1457], AIR p. 1461, para 8
SCR at p. 582).
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 6472, Running Page No. 6460]
58. We are heartened to note that in a recent US Supreme Court decision the same thing has been said with
respect to knocking at the doors of the US Supreme Court in order to vindicate a basic right. In Obergefell V.
"The dynamic of our constitutional system is that individuals need not await legislative action before asserting
a fundamental right. The Nation's courts are open to injured individuals who come to them to vindicate their own
direct, personal stake in our basic charter. An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection when
he
or she is harmed, even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act. The idea of the
Constitution 'was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them
beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be applied by the courts'.
West Virginia State Board of Education V. Barnette [West Virginia State Board of Education V. Barnette, 1943
is
why 'fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote; they depend on the outcome of no elections'."
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 6472, Running Page No. 6460]
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1311, Running Page No. 1299]
:
(1994) 28 ATC 259] in general
10. This Court has a constitutional duty to protect the fundamental rights of Indian citizens. Whenever this Court
found that the socio-economic rights of citizens required to be enforced, but there was a vacuum on account of the
absence of any law to protect and enforce such rights, this Court has invariably stepped in and evolved new
mechanisms to protect and enforce such rights, to do complete justice. This has been done by re-fashioning
remedies beyond those traditionally available under writ jurisdiction by issuing appropriate directions or guidelines
to protect the fundamental rights and make them meaningful.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1323, Running Page No. 1311]
"27. The judiciary has therefore a socio-economic destination and a creative function. It has to use the
words of Glanville Austin, to become an arm of the socio-economic revolution and perform an active role
calculated to bring social justice within the reach of the common man. It cannot remain content to act merely as
an umpire but it must be functionally involved in the goal of socioeconomic justice."
Referring to the British concept of judging, that is, a Judge is only a neutral and passive umpire, who merely
27. Now this approach to the judicial function may be alright for a stable and static society but not for a
society pulsating with urges of gender justice, worker justice, minorities justice, Dalit justice and equal justice,
between chronic unequals. Where the contest is between those who are socially or economically unequal, the
judicial process may prove disastrous from the point of view of social justice, if the Judge adopts a merely
passive or negative role and does not adopt a positive and creative approach. The judiciary cannot remain a mere
bystander or spectator but it must become an active participant in the judicial process ready to use law in the
service of social justice through a proactive goal-oriented approach.
What is necessary is to have Judges who are prepared to fashion new tools, forge new methods, innovate new
strategies and evolve a new jurisprudence, who are judicial statesmen with a social vision and a creative faculty
and who have, above all, a deep sense of commitment to the Constitution with an activist approach and
obligation for accountability, not to any party in power non to the opposition non to the classes which are
vociferous but to the half-hungry millions of India who are continually denied their basic human rights. We need
Judges who are alive to the socio-economic realities of Indian life, who are anxious to wipe every tear from every
eye, who have faith in the constitutional values and who are ready to use law as an instrument for achieving the
constitutional objectives."
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1323, Running Page No. 1311]
13. But the question then arises as to what is the power which may be exercised by the Supreme Court when
it is moved by an "appropriate" proceeding for enforcement of a fundamental right. It is
not
only
the
high
prerogative writs of mandamus, habeas corpus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari which can be issued by
the Supreme Court but also writs in the nature (emphasis in original) of these high prerogative writs and
therefore even if the conditions for issue of any of these high prerogative writs are not fulfilled, the Supreme
Court would not be constrained to fold its hands in despair and plead its inability to help the citizen who has
come before it for judicial redress, but would have power to issue any direction, order or writ including a writ in
the nature of any high prerogative writ. This provision conferring on the Supreme Court power to enforce the
fundamental rights in the widest possible terms shows the anxiety of the Constitution-makers not to allow any
procedural technicalities to stand in the way of enforcement of fundamental rights. The Constitution makers
clearly intended that the Supreme Court should have the amplest power to issue whatever direction, order or writ
may be appropriate in a given case for enforcement of a fundamental right.
(emphasis supplied)
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1324, Running Page No. 1312]
obligation under Article 32 to provide for the enforcement of fundamental rights in areas with legislative vacuum.
"16. In view of the above, and the absence of enacted law to provide for the effective enforcement of the basic
human right of gender equality and guarantee against sexual harassment and abuse, more particularly against
sexual harassment at workplaces, we lay down the guidelines and norms specified hereinafter for due observance
at all workplaces or other institutions, until a legislation is enacted for the purpose. This is done in exercise of the
power available under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of the fundamental rights and it is further
emphasised that this would be treated as the law declared by this Court under Article 141 of the Constitution."
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1324, Running Page No. 1312]
that in exercise of the powers under Article 32 read with Article 142, guidelines and directions had been issued in a
large number of cases; and that issue of such guidelines and directions is a well-settled practice which has taken
firm roots in our constitutional jurisprudence and that such exercise was essential to fill the void in the absence of
suitable legislation to cover the field. Consequently this Court issued various directions with the following
the vacuum by executive orders because its field is coterminous with that of the legislature, and where there is
inaction even by the executive, for whatever reason, the judiciary must step in, in exercise of its constitutional
obligations under the aforesaid provisions to provide a solution till such time as the legislature acts to perform its
role by enacting proper legislation to cover the field.
53. On this basis, we now proceed to give the directions enumerated hereafter for rigid compliance till such
time as the legislature steps in to substitute them by proper legislation. These directions made under Article 32
read with Article 142 to implement the rule of law wherein the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14 is
embedded, have the force of law under Article 141 and, by virtue of Article 144, it is the duty of all authorities,
civil and judicial, in the territory of to act in aid of this Court."
(emphasis supplied)
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1324, Running Page No. 1312]
:
"33. Article 142 is an important constitutional power granted to this Court to protect the citizens. In a given
situation when laws are found to be inadequate for the purpose of grant of relief, the court can exercise its
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution."
This Court reiterated that directions issued by this Court under Article 142 form the law of the land in the
absence of any substantive law covering the field and such directions "fill the vacuum" until the legislature enacts
substantive law. This Court has issued guidelines and directions in several cases for safeguarding, implementing
and promoting the fundamental rights, in the absence of legislative enactments. By way of illustrations, we may
child labour).
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, Page No. 1325, Running Page No. 1313]
:
"48.
Indeed this Court is not a court of restricted jurisdiction of only dispute-settling. It is well recognised
and established that this Court has always been a lawmaker and its role travels beyond merely dispute-settling.
It is a 'problem-solver in the nebulous provisions dealing with the subject-matter of a given case cannot be
altogether ignored by this Court, while making an order under Article 142. Indeed, these constitutional powers
cannot, in any way, be controlled [Ed.: The words "controlled" and "may come directly in conflict" are
emphasised in original also.] by any statutory provisions but at the same time these powers are not meant to be
exercised when their exercise may come directly in conflict with what has been expressly provided for in a
statute dealing expressly with the subject."
(emphasis supplied)
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1325, Running Page No. 1313]
towards furtherance of the constitutional rights of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes. As the rights in favour of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are a part of legitimate and constitutionally accepted affirmative action,
the directions given by this Court to ensure that only genuine members of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled
Tribes were afforded or extended the benefits, are necessarily inherent to the enforcement of fundamental rights. In
giving such directions, this Court neither rewrote the Constitution non resorted to "judicial legislation". The judicial
power was exercised to interpret the Constitution as a "living document" and enforce fundamental rights in an area
where the will of the elected legislatures have not expressed themselves.
[REF : Compilation IV, Volume 11, PDF Page No. 1326, Running Page No. 1314]
D. ROMER, GOVERNOR OF COLORADO, et al. V. EVANS et al, 517 U.S. 620 (1996)
The amendment reads:
"No Protected Status Based on Homosexual, Lesbian or Bisexual Orientation. Neither the State of Colorado,
through any of its branches or departments, nor any of its agencies, political subdivisions, municipalities or
school districts, shall enact, adopt or enforce any statute, regulation, ordinance or policy whereby homosexual,
lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct, practices or relationships shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of or
entitle any person or class of persons to have or claim any minority status, quota preferences, protected status or
claim of discrimination. This Section of the Constitution shall be in all respects self-executing." Ibid
[REF : Internal Pg. No. 624]
Homosexuals, by state decree, are put in a solitary class with respect to transactions and relations in both the
private and governmental spheres. The amendment withdraws from homosexuals, but no others, specific legal
protection from the injuries caused by discrimination, and it forbids reinstatement of these laws and policies.
[REF : Internal Pg. No. 627]
A second and related point is that laws of the kind now before us raise the inevitable inference that the
disadvantage imposed is born of animosity toward the class of persons affected. "[I]f the constitutional conception
of 'equal protection of the laws' means anything, it must at the very least mean that a bare
desire to harm a
politically unpopular group cannot constitute a legitimate governmental interest." Department of Agriculture V.
Moreno, 413 U.S. 528, 534 (1973). Even laws enacted for broad and ambitious purposes often can be explained by
reference to legitimate public policies which justify the incidental disadvantages they impose on certain persons.
Amendment 2, however, in making a general announcement that gays and lesbians shall not have any particular
protections from the law, inflicts on them immediate, continuing, and real injuries that outrun and belie any
legitimate justifications that may be claimed for it. We conclude that, in addition to the far-reaching deficiencies of
Amendment 2 that we have noted, the principles it offends, in another sense, are conventional and venerable; a law
must bear a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental purpose, Kadrmas V. Dickinson Public Schools, 487
U.S. 450, 462 (1988), and Amendment 2 does not.
[REF : Internal Pg. No. 634]
We must conclude that Amendment 2 classifies homosexuals not to further a proper legislative end but to make
them unequal to everyone else. This Colorado cannot do. A State cannot so deem a class of persons a stranger to its
laws. Amendment 2 violates the Equal Protection Clause, and the judgment of the Supreme Court of Colorado is
affirmed. It is SO ordered.
[REF : Internal Pg. No. 635]
PART 11
NOTE ON ECONOMIC COST TO THE COUNTRY
While the LGBTQ+ community bears the brunt of the burden of social exclusion, the country as a whole, faces
substantial economic costs too.
A. A 2014 World Bank study estimated that India could be losing up to 1.7% of its GDP annually only from
reduced working hours and higher mortality among the LGBTQ+ community due to HIV, depression and suicide,
and reduced productivity when we do participate in the workforce.
[REF: Badgett, M.L., Waaldijk, K. and van der Meulen Rodgers, Y., 2019. The relationship between LGBT
inclusion and economic development : Macro-level evidence. World Development, 120, pp. 1-14 [Compilation
11, Vol 11, PDF Pg 1900 @ 1910, Running Pg 1889 @ 1899]
B. LGBTQ+ exclusion lowers productivity of other workers since they do not benefit from interactions with diverse
colleagues. Several studies have found systematically positive links between LGBTQ+ friendly policies and stock
prices, asset returns, per-worker output, employee innovation, level of entrepreneurship, overall well-being, and per
-capita GDP.
[REF : (i) Shan, L., Fu, S. and Zheng, L., 2017. Corporate sexual equality and firm performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 38(9), pp. 1812-1826, [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 2019 @ 2019, 2039, Running
Pg 2008 @ 2008, 2028]
(ii) Li, F. and Nagar, V., 2013. Diversity and performance. Management Science, 59(3), pp.529-544
[Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 1795 @ 1808, Running Pg 1784 @ 1797]
(iii) Gao, H. and Zhang, W., 2017. Employment non-discrimination acts and corporate innovation.
Management Science, 63(9), pp.2982-2999 [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 1715 @ 1716, 1740, Running
Pg 1704 @ 1705, 1729]
(iv) LGBTQ Equality at the Fortune 500 https://www.hrc.org/resources/lgbt-equality-atthefortune-500
[Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 2086 @ 2086, Running Pg 2075 @ 2075]
(v) Florida, R., 2014. The global map of homophobia. Citylab. https://www.citylab.com/equity/2014/02/global
-map-homophobia/8309/, [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 1699 @ 1701, Running Pg 1688 @ 1690]
C. Exclusion leads to what the academic literature calls "Sexual Migration", where sexual orientation is the prime
motivating factor for migration, of which the petitioners are a part. The extent of this migration from India is not
quantifiable, but in a survey in Hong Kong, where similarly homosexuality is legal, but marriages are only
heterosexual, 52.5% of respondents had considered leaving because of their sexuality, of whom over 90% cited the
lack of marriage equality as a reason.
[REF : (i) Carrillo, H., 2004. Sexual migration, cross-cultural sexual encounters, and sexual health. Sexuality
Research & Social Policy, 1(3), pp.58-70 [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 1637-1649, Running Pg 1626-
1638]
(ii) Smith, G., 2012. Sexuality, space and migration : South Asian gay men in Australia. New Zealand
Geographer, 68(2), pp.92-100; and Baas, M., 2019 [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 2077 @ 2082-2083,
Running Pg 2066 @ 2071-2072]
(iii) Queen temporalities : The past, present and future of 'gay' migrants from India in Singapore. Current
Sociology, 67(2), pp. 206-224 [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 1914-1932, Running Pg 1903-1921]
(iv) Suen, Y.T. and Chan, R.C., 2020. "Gay Brain Drain" : Hong Kong Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual People's
Consideration of Emigration Because of Non-inclusive Social Policies. Sexuality Research and Social Policy, pp. 1-
14 [Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 2136 @ 2144, Running Pg 2125 @ 2134]
D. Exclusion deters foreign investment in India. Research shows that more inclusive cities with high
concentrations of LGBTQ+ populations also receive more FDI and are home to more successful businesses.
[REF : Noland, M., 2005. Popular attitudes, globalization and risk. International Finance, 8(2), pp. 199-229
[Compilation 11, Vol. 11, PDF Pg 1949 @ 1954, Running Pg 1938 @ 1943]
Udit Sood V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Udit Sood and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Another Respondents.
Transferred Case (Civil) No. 13 of 2023
Decided on May 11, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Rejoinder Submissions on Behalf of Mr. Saurabh Kirpal, Ld. Senior Advocate
I. The Petitioners have established that they are entitled to relief
11. The Union's "(un) workability" defense is debunked on first principles
111. The Union wrongly assumes that the Hon'ble Supreme Court must, in this case, resolve every conceivable
question relating to non-heterosexual marriages
IV. The Union's attempts to immunize the Act from judicial interference are unavailing
a. This Hon'ble Court is empowered to expand a statute to confer benefits on a class that the statute
unconstitutionally excluded
b. The Act is not personal law, non inexorably intertwined with personal law, in a manner that would evade
judicial review
V. The Union's other arguments confirm that this Hon'ble Court has a Constitutional duty to act
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE A Proposed relief.
ANNEXURE B Table suggesting Constitution-compliant interpretations for SMA.
ANNEXURE C1 Comment on Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas ("Brown I"), 347 U.S. 483 (1954);
and Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas ("Brown 349 U.S. 294 (1955).
ANNEXURE C2 : Brown I
ANNEXURE C3 Brown 11
ANNEXURE C4 Appellee's Brief in Brown I.
FILED BY
KARANJAWALA & CO.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
DATED : 11.05.2023
L. The Petitioners have established that they are entitled to relief.
1. The Petitioners' legal injury stands established. It is clear that the Petitioners are not here asking the Hon'ble
Court to legislate into existence a new right, but rather to avail an existing fundamental right. Specifically, "[t]he right
to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution," Shafin Jahan V. Asokan K.M., (2018) 16
terms, without regard to sex. See also Written Submissions, at 2-7 (collecting authorities). 446
2. The Petitioners have further proved that the Union is unconstitutionally taxing their "integral" fundamental right
because of the Petitioners' sex. In particular, the Union is requiring that the Petitioners engage in dishonesty with
themselves (and possibly others) in order to exercise this right. Having failed to meet its burden to prove why this
approach is beneficial, i.e., a legitimate state interest, the Union attempts to reframe the dispute. The Union asserts
that, while "sexual orientation and choosing a partner is a fundamental right," "there is no fundamental right to seek
recognition of that relationship as a marriage or in any other name." (27-Apr-2023 Tr., 49 : 1-3.) In other words, the
Petitioners may cohabitate, and maintain a sustained emotional, social, and physical relationship, but the Union has no
obligation to acknowledge this association. Non-heterosexual couples must be allowed to remain invisible.
3. This Hon'ble Constitutional Bench ought to reject this inequitable position because the Union's arguments do not
survive scrutiny. The Union primarily asserts that marriage is a complex "jigsaw puzzle"- "spider's web"-such that
manipulating one part will have a cascading/ripple effect on everything else. Therefore, according to the Union, this
Hon'ble Court cannot issue any relief here without unconstitutionally intruding upon the exclusive domain of the
legislature. The Union's theory fails for at least six reasons.
4. First, the Union's predictions of chaos are exaggerated. Certainly, questions may arise about how particular
circumstances should be governed, but as detailed below, reasonable solutions will readily be available to the
legislature, the executive-and assuming there remain unresolved disputes-the judiciary. Likewise, the Union's
apprehensions that judicial interference now would birth divergent interpretations of marriage statutes-one meaning
applicable to heterosexual couples and another to (non-heterosexuals-are misplaced. In fact, as shown below, there is
no "unworkability" problem in Petitioners' case. The Hon'ble Supreme Court can award declaratory, injunctive, and
other equitable/discretionary relief identified in ANNEXURE A without overstepping its jurisdiction or causing anarchy.
Indeed, in 2019, the Hon'ble Madras High Court already ruled that the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, should "obviously"
be expansively construed to recognize marriage involving transgender individuals, Arunkumar V. Inspector General of
Registration, AIR 2019 Mad 265, and the Union has presented no evidence that havoc has ensued.
5. Second, the Union's alleged puzzle is missing a critical piece-namely, the Union's own obligation to undertake a
"good faith implementation" of this Hon'ble Court's constitutional pronouncements. Of course, constitutional courts'
ability to craft equitable relief is not unlimited. Nonetheless, jurisprudential experience in the context of abortion,
education, privacy, marriage equality, and other constitutional rights demonstrates unambiguously that, over time,
laws and procedures become Constitution-compliant. A smooth transition is in the Union's own hands, and therefore,
as illustrated below, constitutional courts do not shy away from properly interpreting their constitutions even when
they apprehend an inability to do complete justice. Instead, the courts properly adjudicate the right first, and then
assess how far their jurisdiction allows them to go in fashioning remedy-relying at all times on litigants' good faith
implementation of constitutional declarations.
6. Third, the Union's legislative jigsaw cannot operate as a shield against judicial review. This Hon'ble Court has
never previously accepted that enacting sufficiently numerous statutory provisions codifying a viewpoint (i.e., creating
a "spider's web") is a pathway to evade judicial interference. The Constitution of India recognizes no "legislative
entrenchment" loophole to fundamental rights, and this Hon'ble Court ought not countenance one now. Doing so
would render toothless this Hon'ble Court's guarantees of dignity in Navtej Singh Johan V. Union of India, (2018) 10
Union's position would mean that queen Indians are entitled to "the same human, fundamental constitutional rights as
other citizens, except those rights that matter most." Id., at 140 (Para. 255) (underlined text added).
7. Fourth, the Union's efforts to colour the Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("Act") as inexorably intertwined with faith
are unavailing. Indeed, in attempting to persuade the Hon'ble Court to leave the Act alone, the Union has provided
dispositive evidence why judicial interference is critical. Specifically, the Union has proved that the Act was designed
to discriminate, and that the Parliament, while enacting it, viewed homosexuality as a "vice"-a "problem" to be
"faced" "courageously." This animus-motivated legislative choice to classify between heterosexuals and non-
heterosexuals is contrary to the very soul of this Hon'ble Court's mandatory precedent in Navtej Singh Johar V. Union
in society as human beings ..."). It is inconceivable that the Constitution of India could today tolerate this
discrimination.
8. Fifth, the Respondents' arguments of "under-inclusion" are misguided. While it is open to the Parliament to
define limits of benefits conferred, it cannot be guided in that endeavor by animus or arbitrariness-as is the case
here. Under this Hon'ble Court's precedent on Articles 14 and 15, naked assertions of queen individuals and
heterosexuals being "different" are insufficient as a matter of law to defend the sex-based classification the Act
admittedly adopts. Cf. 9-May-2023 Tr., 48 15-18 (summarily arguing that "[a]s under [Articles] 14 and 15,
opposite sex marriages and same-sex marriages represent two different classes. This is based on historical evolution of
marriage as a social institution, and unique dynamics between the partners. The Act, is therefore not in violation of 14
and 15."). Here, the Respondents fail to identify any legitimate state interest that are promoted through the Act's
classification based on alleged "differences" between heterosexuals and queen individuals, and the Respondents are
incorrect to assume that the Petitioners being permitted to marry would somehow dissuade heterosexual couples to
reproduce or otherwise lead them to alter their conduct. Cf. 9-May-2023 Tr., 17 4-17 ("Marriage has the core
purpose to bring about a unity of man and woman My Lord, for a social purpose. Because society needs to
perpetuate itself. The race needs to perpetuate itself."). Here, the evidence has shown that the Act excluded the
Petitioners not because there are legitimate state interests at stake-with exclusion of queen relationships providing
the least restrictive method of preserving those interests-but rather, because the Parliament at the time viewed
homosexuality as a "vice." This necessarily fails the guarantees of Article 14.
9. Sixth, the Act can indeed be judicially molded into a Constitution-compliant law. Both the text and purpose of
the Act readily accommodate expansive interpretation, and in fact, it is the Respondents who forget why the Act
exists. See 3-May-2023 Tr., 56 16-18 You strike down. We have no problem, heterosexuals will have no problem
if it is struck down. Our marriages do not rest on any of these laws.") The Act's purpose was to provide adults
desirous of marrying despite societal disapproval a means to nonetheless marry. The Act need not be seen as
establishing heterosexuality as the 'gold standard' of relationships, and the Respondents' protestations against
interference sound in social morality-not Constitutional morality. This is transparent from the Respondents' claim that
societal acceptance is a necessary requirement for marriage. See, e.g., 9-May-2023 Tr., 37 : 21-38 : 10, 41 29-
42 9 (asserting that recognition "within" and "without" (i.e., by society) are both "essential" for marriage, that there
are "concentric circles" of acceptance, and that "[t]hus far, [social recognition has] applied to only heterosexual
couples" and "has gained acceptability over centuries."). However, this theory of marriage is inconsistent with our
Constitution, which categorically rejects the notion that societal acceptance is a necessary ingredient for marriage.
See, e.g., Shafin Jahan (supra), at 405-06 (Para. 84, 86) The choice of a partner whether within or outside marriage
lies within the exclusive domain of each individual... Our choices are respected because they are ours. Social approval
for intimate personal decisions is not the basis for recognising them. Indeed, the Constitution protects personal liberty
from disapproving audiences.").
10. Thus, the Petitioners are entitled to relief. The Hon'ble Court ought to allow this Petition because the Petitioners
have nowhere else to go, and "[t]his Court has no more important function than to preserve the inviolable
fundamental rights of the people." Smt Ujjam Bai V. State of U.P, 1963 (1) SCR 778, at Para 101. Furthermore, in
redressing the Petitioners' injury, the Hon'ble Court ought not erect any new walls by, for example, guaranteeing the
Petitioners something less than or different from a "marriage." These walls would usher in a dark and regrettable era in
India of "separate-but-equal," while rendering meaningless queer Indians' hard-fought and overdue acknowledgement
from this Hon'ble Court that they are entitled to "the same" rights as other citizens. Navtej Singh Johar (supra), at
140 (Para 255).
11. At a very minimum, this Hon'ble Court ought to grant the following three remedies, each of which is plainly
within this Court's jurisdiction to issue:
a) A declaration that the Constitution of India guarantees to all persons, without regard to sex, the fundamental
right to marry a person of one's choice.
b)
A declaration that (a) in Section 4 of the Act, any provisions construed as preconditioning solemnization of
marriage on cis-genderism and heterosexuality are unconstitutional, and must, moving forward, be construed as
neutral to gender and sexual orientation; and (b) the words "my lawful spouse" constitute sufficient compliance
with the requirement in Section 12 of the Act that the parties say "my lawful wife (or husband)" at the time of
solemnization. 447
c) A direction to every "Marriage Officer" and "Registrar General" under the Act to solemnize marriages consistent
with the aforesaid declarations, when the preconditions under Section 4 of the Act are otherwise satisfied.
11. The Union's (un) workability" defense is debunked on first principles.
12. Whether the Constitution of India guarantees all persons, without regard to sex, a fundamental right to marry a
person of one's choice, and how this Hon'ble Supreme Court may safeguard such a right for Petitioners, are two
distinct questions.
13. The RIGHTS question precedes the REMEDY question. If there is no right, there is no need to consider
remedies. Conversely, it is impractical to consider remedies before the "right" that needs restoration (or, the injury
that must be remedied) is understood.
14. Here, as Petitioners have argued (see Written Submissions, at 2), the initial question depends on three sub-
parts (i) Whether the Constitution of India guarantees a fundamental right to marry an individual of one's choice?,
(ii) If it does, whether the Constitution guarantees this fundamental right to every person or, as the Union contends,
only to cis-gendered heterosexuals?, and (iii) If the Constitution guarantees this fundamental right to every person,
but the Act denies each Petitioner their right to marry an individual of their choice, whether there are any
constitutionally valid justifications for such denial?
15. Should this Hon'ble Court find an unconstitutionally infringed fundamental right, then the Court will assess
what it may, within its jurisdiction, do to protect the aggrieved Petitioners. As shown in the Petitioners' Written
Submissions, the Union practically concedes the threshold "rights" inquiry (see Written Submissions, at 2-18).
16. The Union focuses on "workability," emphasizing that it is impossible for this Hon'ble Supreme Court to resolve
every conceivable dispute that may arise in the future (e.g., whether certain statutory provisions would apply in
certain hypothetical situations). Because marriage laws are a "jigsaw puzzle", the Union argues that the Hon'ble
Supreme Court should not recognize a constitutional right.
17. The Union's approach is illogical and puts the cart before the horse. Furthermore, as has already been
addressed, preservation of a "statutory framework" in itself cannot constitute a legitimate state interest (see Written
Submissions, at 14-15).
18. The "unworkability" argument also fails on first principles. If the Hon'ble Supreme Court declares that India's
secular marriage laws cannot discriminate between queer couples and heterosexual couples, "[a]]] provisions of
federal, state, or local law requiring or permitting such discrimination must yield to this principle." Brown V. Board of
Education of Topeka, Kansas ("Brown 11"), 349 U.S. 294, 298 (1955). In this regard, the U.S. Supreme Court's
approach in Brown 11 and Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas ("Brown I"), 347 U.S. 483 (1954), is
instructive. Annexed hereto as ANNEXURE C is a comment on these cases, including the court's opinions. To
summarize briefly:
a) In Brown I and 11, the plaintiffs argued that the fundamental right to education "is a right which must be made
available to all on equal terms." 347 U.S. at 493.
b) The respondents strenuously argued that the U.S. Supreme Court should not disrupt a practice so ingrained in
the nation's laws, regulations, and practices, and rightly left to the legislature. (See, e.g., ANNEXURE C (infra),
at
pp. 20-23 (segregated education involves "policy determinations within the exclusive province
of
the
legislature"). Of particular relevance, was the "workability" question, as the court was mindful of a potential
domino effect of its ruling. For example, recognition of an equal right to education would mean that courts would
have to "consider problems related to administration, arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the
school transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areas into compact units to
achieve a system of determining admission to the public schools on a nonracial basis, and revision of local laws
and regulations... Brown 11, at 301-02 (emphases added).
c) Nonetheless, the magnitude of the impact did not dissuade the United States Supreme Court from fairly
interpreting the American Constitution. Instead, the court recognized the "importance of education to
democratic society," and found that education "is a right which must be made available to all on equal terms."
347 U.S. at 493.
d) Then, after this initial determination, the court questioned how far it could go to fashion a remedy. Rightly
concluding that "the consideration of appropriate relief [is] necessarily subordinated to the primary question,
the court appreciated that "because of the wide applicability of this decision, and because of the great variety of
local conditions, the formulation of decrees in these cases presents problems of considerable complexity." Id., at
495. The court then ordered additional briefing and argument on the question of relief.
448
e)
Finally, the court in Brown 11 reasoned that, having declared "the fundamental principle that racial
discrimination in public education is unconstitutional," "[a]]] provisions of federal, state, or local law requiring or
permitting such discrimination must yield to this principle." Id., at 298. Recognizing its inability to resolve, in
one sitting, all conceivable issues, the court relied on the states' "good faith implementation" and the
competence of courts to resolve disputes as they arise, while providing general guidance to those courts.
Id.,
at
299.
19. In India, the Hon'ble Court cannot issue a mandamus or a direction to the legislature to enact a law. Non do the
Petitioners dispute that the Hon'ble Court has limited discretionary powers under Article 142, or that in framing
equitable relief, the Hon'ble Court must remain mindful of the separation of powers between the judiciary and the
legislature. However, one principle that informs this balancing act is the nature of the right involved, and when Part III
fundamental rights are at issue, the Hon'ble Supreme Court retains broad discretion. For example, in Ashwani Kumar
legislation against custodial torture, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed:
However, this is not to state that the courts would not step in, when required. to protect fundamental
rights. It is indisputable that the right to life and the right to liberty are of foremost importance in a democratic
state Indeed, the courts have been at the forefront in protecting and safeguarding individual rights. In [prior
cases]
this Court issued the guidelines to safeguard the rights of arrested persons including female prisoners to
afford them protection in police lock-ups from possible torture or ill-treatment. A person detained in a prison is
entitled to live with human dignity and his detention in prison should be regulated by a procedure established by
law which must be reasonable, fair and just. This can be done by applying, elucidating and even creatively
expanding existing laws and principles on case-to-case basis. Judiciary while exercising its jurisdiction in this
manner is not enacting or legislating but applying the Constitution and protecting fundamental rights under Article
21 of the Constitution. (Para. 37 (citations omitted; emphasis added).)
20. The Petitioners humbly submit that the challenge confronting the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this case is not
novel. Indeed, the Court has since its inception been called upon to exercise its Constitutional duty to protect
fundamental rights, even when doing so involves undertaking a "delicate" and "difficult" balancing task. For example,
the Hon'ble Constitution Bench in Smt Ujjam Bai V. State of U.P, 1963 (1) SCR 778, observed:
But a mere declaration [in the Constitution] of the fundamental rights would not be enough, and it
was necessary to evolve a machinery to enforce them. So our Constitution, entrusted the duty of enforcing
them to the Supreme Court, the highest judicial authority in the country. This Court has no more important function
than to preserve the inviolable fundamental rights of the people; for, the fathers of the Constitution, in their fullest
confidence, have entrusted them to the care of this Court and given to it all the institutional conditions necessary to
exercise its jurisdiction in that regard without fear of favour. The task is delicate and sometimes difficult; but
this Court has to discharged it to the best of its ability and not to abdicate it on the fallacious ground of
inability on inconvenience. (Para. 101, (emphasis added).)
21. The above principles lead to the following conclusions:
a) Any limitation on this Hon'ble Supreme Court's powers to fashion relief to remedy the Petitioners' injury is
unrelated to the threshold question of whether the Petitioners have a right/injury. Here, the Hon'ble Court should
reject the Union's erroneous contention that alleged difficulties in remedying the injustice the Petitioners face
means that the court must reverse its precedent to hold that our Constitution only selectively guarantees the
The right to marry a person of one's choice is integral to Article 21 of the Constitution."); Navtej Singh Johan
(supra), at 140 (Para 255) (the Petitioners are entitled to "the same human, fundamental constitutional rights
as other citizens."). Instead, the Hon'ble Court ought to uphold its precedent.
b) The Union's argument that the Petitioners' position is "unworkable" is in effect an assertion that the Union will
not in good faith abide by a declaration of the Petitioners' fundamental rights. Indeed, disputes would be
minimized unless the Union attempts to nickel and dime the declaration at every turn. By contrast, by predicting
voluminous litigation, the Union predicts its own failure to anticipate properly the changes necessary for
implementation of the Court's declaration. The Hon'ble Court ought to reject this defense along with the Union's
predictions of "havoc," which only seek to undermine the Court's ability to rely on a "good faith implementation
of the governing constitutional principles."
c) The Petitioners are entitled, under Article 13(2) and Article 32(2), to a finding that the Act is unconstitutional
and void. Alternatively, the Petitioners are entitled under those Articles to the remedies in law identified in
Section I, Para. 11 above. The Petitioners respectfully advocate for this alternative relief, as striking down the Act
would indefinitely and needlessly place both heterosexuals and non-heterosexuals at the mercy of the Parliament
to enact a Constitution-compliant statute to replace the secular SMA.
d) Over and above the aforesaid remedies, the Hon'ble Court has discretion to invoke its powers of equity under
Article 142 and do full justice. Given the foundational nature of the fundamental right at issue here, the Hon'ble
Court ought to grant discretionary relief here, as detailed in ANNEXURE A.
111. The Union wrongly assumes that the Hon'ble Supreme Court must, in this case, resolve every
conceivable question relating to non-heterosexual marriages.
22. The Union's "(un) workability" argument erroneously seeks to impose on the Petitioners the burden of offering
solutions, in this case, to every conceivable question that may arise in the future relating to non-heterosexual
marriages. The argument assumes that, if any questions are left unaddressed, that means that the Petitioners'
position is "unworkable."
23. However, neither the Petitioners non this Hon'ble Court need predict and resolve every hypothetical question
bearing on non-heterosexual marriages. No petitioner before this Hon'ble Court is claiming non-severance from
personal laws under Section 21A; non is any petitioner seeking divorce on grounds of bestiality, etc. under Section 27
(1A); non is any petitioner alleging domestic violence; nor is any petitioner demanding inheritance under the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956. Moreover, as already discussed, the threshold question of whether the "right to marry a person
of one's choice" must be made available to all, on equal terms and without regard to sex, is certainly not dependent on
the Hon'ble Court's ability (or inability) to fashion relief that prevents all future disputes.
24. Notably, longstanding principles of judicial economy foreclose the Union's arguments. As the U.S. Supreme
Court explained over a century ago, in California V. San Pablo C. Railroad, 149 U.S. 308 (1893):
The duty of this court, as of every judicial tribunal, is limited to determining rights of persons or of
property, which are actually controverted in the particular case before it. When, in determining such rights,
it becomes necessary to give an opinion upon a question of law, that opinion may have weight as a precedent for
future decisions. But the court is not empowered to decide moot questions or abstract propositions, or to
declare, for the government of future cases, principles or rules of law which cannot affect the result as to
the thing in issue in the case before it. No stipulation of parties or counsel, whether in the case before the court
or in any other case, can enlarge the power, or affect the duty, of the court in this regard.
(emphases added.)
25. This Hon'ble Supreme Court recognizes similar principles. For example, in Central Bank of India V. Workmen,
(1960) 1 SCR 200, the Hon'ble Court explained:
We do not think that the other two questions, (3) and (4), require any decision at this stage On our
findings
the dispute as to bonus referred to the Industrial Tribunal in 1952 has come to an end. The reference is no longer
pending and in the view which we have expressed as respects the interpretation of unamended section 10 of the
Banking Act no claim for bonus can be adjudicated on for the past relevant years. It is. therefore, not necessary
for us to decide hypothetical questions which may arise in any future reference that may be made under
the amended section In the exercise of its appellate powers this Court does not give speculative
opinions on hypothetical questions. It would be, contrary to principle, inconvenient and inexpedient that
opinion should be given on such questions. If and when they arise, they must arise in concrete cases and
to use the words of the Earl of Halsbury, L. C., in Attorney General of Ontario V. Hamilton Street Railway (1):
'It would be extremely unwise for any judicial Tribunal to attempt beforehand to exhaust all
possible cases and facts which might occur to qualify, cut down, and override the operation of the
particular words when the concrete case is not before it.'
[The] general question is now disposed of on the findings which we have already given. We are aware that if
and when a future reference as to an industrial dispute relating to bonus is made by the appropriate Government
and the amended section falls for consideration, questions (3) and (4) may fall for decision. It would be time
enough to decide those questions when they actually arise in concrete cases and we consider that it
is
not only unwise but inexpedient that we should forestall questions which may arise in future cases
and decide them more or less in vacuum and in the absence of necessary materials for the decision of those
questions[.]
(emphases added.)
26. Therefore, the Union's two-step argument that, to grant the Petitioners relief, (i) this Hon'ble Court must
answer every conceivable question relating to non-heterosexual marriages; and (ii) if the Hon'ble Court answers every
question, it will be legislating, is fatally flawed. Each prong of this theory is untenable.
IV. The Union's attempts to immunize the Act from judicial interference are unavailing.
27. The Union advances two main arguments to try and immunize the Act from judicial interference in this case.
First, the Union argues that the Hon'ble Court lacks jurisdiction to expand a statute to confer benefits to classes the
legislature sought to omit. Second, the Union tries to colour the Act as a non-secular law, one that is interwoven with
religion and custom, to suggest that the Hon'ble Court would be interfering with personal law. Neither holds water, as
discussed below.
a. This Hon'ble Court is empowered to expand a statute to confer benefits on a class that the statute unconstitutionally
excluded.
28. A statute once considered constitutional, may become unconstitutional over passage of time, see, e.g., Malpe
32). The Petitioners submit that, with the change in legal position following Navtej Singh Johar (supra), where this
Hon'ble Court unequivocally held that members of the LGBTQ+ community have the "same human, fundamental and
constitutional rights as other citizens" (Para 255), the SMA's exclusion of individuals who are not cis-heterosexuals
renders the SMA unconstitutional.
29. This Hon'ble Court routinely interprets statutes to preserve or restore constitutionality, see, e.g., Gita Hariharan
V.
must be interpreted in a manner consistent with Part 111 of the Constitution, i.e., as neutral to gender identity and
sexual orientation.
30. A statute that appears to be, or to have become, unconstitutional for wrongly excluding a class may be voided
or read expansively to preserve constitutionality. In particular, this Hon'ble Court is empowered to enlarge the ambit
of an unconstitutionally restricted legislation that imposes discriminatory pre-conditions to deny a class
this Hon'ble Court expanded the class of persons to whom a beneficial legislation (concerning a liberalised pension
scheme) was to be applied, observing:
While examining the case under Article 14, the approach is not: "either take it or leave it", the approach is
removal of arbitrariness and if that can be brought about by severing the mischievous portion the court
ought to remove the discriminatory part retaining the beneficial portion. The pensioners do not challenge
the liberalised pension scheme. They seek the benefit of it. Their grievance is of the denial to them of the same by
arbitrary introduction of words of limitation and we find no difficulty in severing and quashing the same
In reading down the memoranda, is this Court legislating? Of course "not". When we delete basis of classification
as violative of Article 14, we merely set at naught the unconstitutional portion retaining the constitutional portion
Said the learned Attorney-General that principle of severability cannot be applied to augment the class and to
adopt his words "severance always cuts down the scope, never enlarges it". We are not sure whether there is any
principle which inhibits the court from striking down an unconstitutional part of a legislative action which may have
the tendency to enlarge the width and coverage of the measure. Whenever classification is held to be
impermissible and the measure can be retained by removing the unconstitutional portion of
classification, by striking down words of limitation, the resultant effect may be of enlarging the class.
such a situation, the court can strike down the words of limitation in an enactment. That is what is
called reading down the measure. We know of no principle that "severance" limits the scope of legislation and
constitutional measure has been well recognised
(Paras. 50-60 (emphases added).)
31. The principles in D.S. Nakara (supra) were reiterated more recently in Mahatama Gandhi Mission V. Bhartiya
If a law (whether primary or subordinate legislation) is found to be untenable on the touchstone of Article 14 by
the constitutional court, one clear option for a constitutional court is that it can declare such law to be
unconstitutional and strike down the law. But, striking down a law, which confers some benefit on a class of
people ignoring others who are otherwise similarly situated in our opinion is not to be done as a matter
of course. If the benefit sought to be conferred by such a law is not repugnant to the directive principles of the
State policy, striking down the same would virtually amount to throwing away the baby with bath water
When Mathew, J. declared that Article 14 interdicts the State from creating inequalities, he was stressing the
obvious. Further, he articulated the remedial measures the State has been enjoined to take recourse to : eliminate
the existing inequalities through positive-affirmative action, rather than passive neutrality
What is the remedy open to the citizen and the corresponding obligation of the judiciary to deal with
such a situation, where the inequalities are created either by the legislation or executive action?
Traditionally, this Court and the High Courts have been declaring any law, which created inequalities to be
Court realised that such a course of action would not meet with the obligations emanating from a combined reading
of the directive principles and Article 14. Therefore, this Court emphatically laid down in Nakara case [D.S. Nakara
relief by eliminating the factors, which creates the artificial classification leading to a discriminatory
application of law
In a comparable situation, American courts did exercise jurisdiction by granting appropriate injunctive orders
compelling the State to comply with the constitutional mandate by ignoring the legislative command and
extending the benefit provided under a legislation to a certain class of people who were expressly
excluded from receiving that benefit provided by the legislation,
(Paras. 82-90 (emphases added).)
32. This Hon'ble Court again applied the same principles in the case of Vasant Ganpat Padave V. Anant Mahadev
33. Thus, to preserve the constitutionality of the Act, the Petitioners humbly submit that this Hon'ble Court ought
to read down any sex-based preconditions for solemnization of marriage (i.e., requirements of heterosexuality and cis-
genderism) contained in the Act. The Petitioners submit that it is well within the powers of this Hon'ble Court to do so.
b. The Act is not personal law, nor inexorably intertwined with personal law, in a manner that would evade judicial
review.
34. The Union alleges that Sections 19-21A are a "wormhole" through which faith re-enters the Act. This is
incorrect, as discussed below. Moreover, the Union's efforts to colour the Act as a personal law contradicts the explicit
statement in the Act's Statement of Objects and Reasons that the Act seeks to "provide a special form of marriage
which can be taken advantage of by any person in India and by all Indian nationals in foreign countries irrespective of
[their] faith." Indeed, even accepting the Union's counterfactual premise that the Act is personal law, the Act would
still not be totally immune to judicial interference on account of Part 111 of the Constitution. See, e.g., Mohd. Ahmed
35. Besides, the Union misreads Sections 19-21A. These sections generally require a severance between the SMA-
registered couples and their faith. Section 21A, the focus of the Union's arguments, only provides that, for some
couples, severance is not mandatory. In other words, Section 21A is a beneficial protection available a subset of
individuals availing of the Act.
36. This selectively-conferred protection does not convert the Act into a codified custom or a personal law, nor can
it stand in the way of queer couples being permitted to marry under the Act. At worst, queer couples will not receive
the benefit of Section 21A. Or, perhaps two Hindu males will marry under the Act, and their respective families will
agree to honor the spirit of Section 21A in the event one spouse dies. Should that not occur and there be a contest, a
court may be called upon to decide whether or not severance necessarily occurred at the time of solemnization.
37. However, none of these hypothetical scenarios warrant denying relief now. The Act already presents to some
couples the choice of severing religious ties in exchange for solemnization of marriage under the Act-granting the
Petitioners relief here would merely make the same choice, with the same trade-offs, available to queer couples. The
fact that queer individuals would need to make this election (like many others) is no reason to altogether deny queen
individuals this choice in the first place.
38. Ultimately, personal autonomy is a cornerstone of this case. Eliminating unconstitutional, animus-based barriers
the SMA currently imposes on queer individuals will not force queer couples (or heterosexual couples) to do anything.
Rather, it will only make available to queen couples the option to accept the trade-offs imposed in the SMA and
exercise a foundational human right. It is therefore disappointing that Respondents repeatedly insinuated that the
Hon'ble Court granting relief here would do more harm than good to queen people. See, e.g., 18-Apr-2023 Tr., 43
1518-1519 you will actually be hurting that very community and that's very dangerous. I am all for it personally
but not in this fashion." This Hon'ble Court ought to reject the Respondents' patronizing line of reasoning that the
Petitioners cannot intelligently choose what is best for themselves.
V. The Union's other arguments confirm that this Hon'ble Court has a Constitutional duty to act.
39. The Union contends that the Petitioners are "an unidentifiable class." Citing a blog post that enumerates 72
shades of genders, the Union claims that the Petitioners represent an unbounded class. This is facially wrong as
anyone who is not a cis-gendered heterosexual (i.e., "queer") falls within the class at issue. Indeed, the Union's
assertion is contradictory to its own position that the Parliament has long been aware of persons excluded from the
Act, and that it was the intention of the Parliament to exclude people like the Petitioners from that statute. Everybody
understands who this judgment will impact, and the fact that there is diversity among queer people (e.g., 72
purported shades of gender) does not mean that the group lacks definition-it only means that the group is internally
diverse. Every individual within this group will benefit from a declaration that the Constitution of India guarantees to
all persons, without regard to sex, the fundamental right to marry a person of one's choice.
40. The Union relies on Dobbs and the Obergefell dissent. Dobbs did not merely concern abortion. Indeed, if that
were true, there would be no reason for the court to hint that Obergefell was wrongly decided. Instead, Dobbs
addressed (and undermined) substantive due process and individual autonomy. There are reasonable theories that
explain why highly regarded American jurists view the American Constitution as static in time, stuck in 1787, when it
was written. By contrast, there is broad consensus that the Indian constitution is not static, but rather it evolves over
time. Unlike in the U.S., where the present United States Supreme Court, in a highly political environment, has indeed
undermined the due process considerations that led to landmark progressive judgments (like Roe, Obergefell, and
others), in India, our Constitution clearly protects individual autonomy. For the same reasons that Dobbs could never
be the law in India, the Dobbs' criticisms of Obergefell (or the Obergefell dissent) can never be accepted in India. It is
extraordinary that, despite this Hon'ble Court's voluminous precedent recognizing substantive due process, the Union
cites Dobbs and emphasizes that "any substantive due process decision is 'demonstrably erroneous'." (Union's Note
1 Written Submissions, at p. 27.)
41. The Union relies on SMA Parliamentary Debates. However, these debates provide additional compelling reasons
for this Hon'ble Court to grant the Petitioners relief. For example, the Union quoted the observations of members of
Parliament in relation to divorce (as it applies to both HMA and SMA), as to the word "homosexuality"/"sodomy". One
member said: There is no reason to believe that sodomy is only a masculine vice. / have not time, non is this occasion,
otherwise, / could have quoted chapter and verses to show that homosexuality amongst women is also today on the
increase, that it is on the rising scale."
a) The Union has proven that, when the Parliament conditioned solemnization of marriage under the Act on
heterosexuality, it viewed homosexuality as a "vice." Indeed, besides the "masculine vice" of homosexuality, as
the Union established, the Parliament referred to "the feminine vice of lesbianism," fearing that "homosexuality
and lesbianism [are] on the rise," and that agreeing that if homosexuality becomes a "problem" it would need to
be "faced" "courageously."
b) The legislative animus, as it existed at the time, is clear to see. It is inconceivable that the Constitution of India
would today tolerate a law that makes classifications between heterosexuals and homosexuals on the basis that
homosexuality is a "vice."
42. The Union emphasizes the significant consequences of the Hon'ble Court allowing this Petition. The right to
marry, according to the Union, is too momentous for this Hon'ble Court to make available to all, without regard to sex,
when the Parliament has decided to condition that right on cis-genderism and heterosexuality. However, this Hon'ble
Constitutional Bench ruled that the Petitioners "are entitled, as all other citizens, to the full range of constitutional
rights including the liberties protected by the Constitution." (Hon'ble Justice D.Y. Chandrachud, at 290 (Para.
618.2)). The foundational nature of this right is precisely why the Hon'ble Supreme Court ought to intervene. The
Union's "jigsaw puzzle" analogy for marriage laws is not far-fetched, but perhaps there are pieces of this puzzle that
must go for its picture of India to reflect our Constitution with greater integrity.
43. The Union's arguments that, globally, constitutional courts have protected queen individuals' fundamental rights
only when the legislature has contemporaneously signaled support for such rights are unavailing. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India does not rely on legislative hints in deciding whether the Constitution of India guarantees a
right. Indeed, contrary to the Union's lengthy submissions (Union's Note 1 Written Submissions, at Pg. 28-46),
internationally, courts have protected queen rights without taking cues from the legislature about the electorate's
palatability for such rights. Moreover, this argument is incompatible with this Hon'ble Court's precedent that the
fundamental rights of even one individual ought to be protected as against an overwhelming majority. Therefore, this
Hon'ble Court should rely on the constitutional analysis in Obergefell and other landmark international cases upholding
marriage equality, while dismissing the Union's suggestions that those opinions factored in local political sentiments.
44. The Respondents' arguments about "biological males"/"biological females" and genitals are not persuasive.
They argue that various laws rely on human anatomy, and therefore provisions of the SMA cannot be interpreted as
gender neutral. See, e.g., 18-Apr-2023 Tr., 36 : 1268-38 : 1326 ("I may have genital of a man but if / am
otherwise a female as possibly trying to be suggested then My Lord how would / be treated under the criminal
procedure code? As a woman, can / be called for 160 statement after a particular / may say that this is only
a
notion. / may have a biological genitals of a man, but now / am a woman. There are several issues My lord which have
to be gone into."). However, this is a non-sequitur.
a) First, there is no reason why this Hon'ble Court's pronouncements regarding a civil law would automatically
impact the scope of a criminal law. Indeed, this Hon'ble Court can explicitly state that no laws based on human
anatomy/genitals (e.g., rape) are affected by this ruling, and that they continue to apply as before. This would
include offenses, which should be construed consistent with general principles of statutory interpretation that
apply to penal statutes.
b)
Second, the Respondents' arguments conflate laws based on human anatomy (illustrated above) and human
autonomy (e.g., solemnization of a marriage). This case concerns the latter, and this Hon'ble Court plainly has
the jurisdiction to issue a declaration that all secular laws based on human autonomy should, to the extent
possible, be applied by courts of equity to queer married couples as they would apply to heterosexual married
couples.
In conclusion, the Petitioners respectfully pray that the Hon'ble Court issue the relief proposed in ANNEXURE A.
Additionally, although the Petitioners do not believe that a clause-by-clause interpretative adjudication is necessary
or proper in this case, ANNEXURE B includes a table with resolutions to hypothetical interpretative questions that
may arise with respect to the Act. As shown, the interpretations proposed do not lead to divergent application for
heterosexual couples and non-heterosexual couples; instead, through modest use of judicial interpretative tools, the
Act can be made Constitution-compliant.
FILED BY:
KARANJAWALA & CO.
ADVOCATES FOR THE PETITIONERS
ANNEXURE A
Proposed Relief
45. As basic legal relief, under Articles 13(2) and 32(2), the Hon'ble Supreme Court ought to issue:
a) A declaration that the Constitution of India guarantees to all persons, without regard to sex, the fundamental
right to marry a person of one's choice.
b) A declaration that (i) in Section 4 of the Act, any provisions construed as preconditioning solemnization of
marriage on cis-genderism and heterosexuality are unconstitutional, and must, prospectively, be construed as
neutral to gender and sexual orientation; and (ii) the words "my lawful spouse" constitute sufficient compliance
with the requirement in Section 12 of the Act that the parties say "my lawful wife (or husband)" at the time of
solemnization.
c)
A direction to every "Marriage Officer" and "Registrar General" under the SMA to solemnize marriages consistent
with the aforesaid declarations, when the preconditions under Section 4 of the SMA are otherwise satisfied.
46. In addition, the Hon'ble Court should invoke its Article 142 discretionary powers here. Although the Hon'ble
Court certainly has discretion to award to the Petitioners only the legal remedies enumerated above without any
additional equitable relief, the Petitioners respectfully submit that this overly constrained exercise of judicial power
would fail to do complete justice to queen individuals in India, who remain a marginalized group. The Hon'ble Court
therefore ought to issue the following holdings as well, which would provide useful guidance to lower courts
encountering future disputes involving non-heterosexual marriage:
a) A declaration to reiterate the Navtej finding that the State cannot discriminate against any queen couple on
grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity, and that such a couple is entitled to equal protection of the laws
as well as all the rights, powers, privileges and entitlements afforded under secular law to a heterosexual couple.
b) A declaration that all secular laws based on human autonomy (e.g., solemnization of a marriage) should, to the
extent possible, be applied by courts of equity to queen couples as they would apply to heterosexual couples.
c) Guidance that no laws based on human anatomy/genitals (e.g., rape) are affected by this ruling, and that they
continue to apply as before. This includes offenses, which should be construed consistent with general principles
of statutory interpretation that apply to penal statutes.
d) Guidance that any legal provisions designed to afford special protection to a narrow class (e.g., women, or
transgender individuals), if they cannot be extended logically in the context of same sex couples, are not affected
by this ruling, and continue to apply to those classes as before.
e) Guidance that any legal provisions that codify custom on religion are not affected by this ruling, and that, in any
future cases involving such laws, courts should apply the usual judicial process (including any general legal
principles pronounced in this case) to determine whether any relief is warranted.
f) To the extent that there is a cassus omissus in matters ancillary to marriage, it is hoped that Parliament will
expediently enact a comprehensive secular code to regulate the same in a non-discriminatory manner.
47. The Petitioners believe that the approach suggested above, fairly balances the considerations in this case,
providing necessary protection to queer couples and basic guidance to lower courts for adjudication of any future
disputes. Critically, none of the remedies identified in Para. 1 or 2 above constitute "legislation" by this Hon'ble Court.
48. While the Petitioners do not believe that a clause-by-clause interpretative adjudication is necessary or proper in
this case, ANNEXURE B includes a table with resolutions to hypothetical interpretative questions that may arise with
respect to the SMA.
ANNEXURE B
Table Suggesting Constitution-Compliant Interpretations For SMA
SMA Section
Text
Interpretation
2(b), 4(c)
man/male
non-female
22, 23(1), 25(iii) (Second
husband/wife/bridegroom/bride
Spouse
Proviso (b)), 27(1), 4th
Schedule
25(iii) (Second Proviso
his/her
Their
(b))
35
he/she
They
7(1A), 31 (1) (iiia), 31 (2),
(the/a) wife/bride
a female spouse
36, 37, 1st Schedule, 3rd
Schedule
27(1A),
36,
37,
1st
(the/a) husband/bridegroom
non-female spouse
Schedule, 3rd Schedule
2(b), Explanations
ancestor/husbands
biological male ancestor
2(b), Explanations
ancestress/wife/wives
biological female ancestor
2(b), Explanations
Father
biological father
2(b), Explanations
Mother
biological mother
1st
Schedule
2nd
Widower
deceased non-female spouse
Schedule, 3rd Schedule
1st
Schedule,
2nd
Widow
deceased female spouse
Schedule, 3rd Schedule
The Hon'ble Court, if so inclined, may additionally issue the following clarifications to reaffirm that provisions codifying
custom/religion are not affected by this ruling:
1. Section 4(c) : The exemption from prohibited degrees applies only where there is a custom. If there is no
custom, there is no exemption. Nothing needs to change here.
2. Section 15 (and 5th Schedule) : These allow the registration of marriages celebrated in other forms (e.g.,
marriages solemnized according to personal law, or not registered at all). Again, assuming that non-heterosexual
marriages are not being recognized under personal law, no change is required here.
3. Section 21A : Assuming that a non-heterosexual marriage is not recognized under personal law, the logical
consequences of that as to Section 21A will follow.
4.
Section 44 : This provision concerns bigamy. Because Section 44 is a penal provision, as with all other criminal
laws concerning marital relations, the scope of the offense shall remain unaffected. To the extent the lack of
protections conferred by these penal statutes causes hardship to queen couples, it is hoped that the Parliament
will enact necessary laws.
ANNEXURE C1
Comment on Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas ("Brown I"), 347 U.S. 483 (1954); and Brown V. Board of
Education of Topeka, Kansas ("Brown 11"), 349 U.S. 294 (1955)
50. Brown | and Brown 11 are instructive as to what a court of equity should do when confronted with systemic
entrenchment of a practice that denies an important fundamental right. Brown I and II are attached hereto as
ANNEXURE C2, and C3, respectively. The appellee's brief in Brown | is attached hereto as ANNEXURE C4.
49. As detailed below, first, the court should recognize that any limitation on its powers in terms of fashioning relief
is unrelated to the threshold question of whether there is a right. Second, the court should exercise its powers in
equity, to the extent constitutionally defensible, to protect that fundamental right, while relying on the state for a
"good faith implementation" of the governing constitutional principles.
50. In Brown I, the plaintiffs argued that the fundamental right to education "is a right which must be made
available to all on equal terms." Brown I, at 493. Specifically,
minors of the Negro race, through their legal representatives, [sought] the aid of the courts in obtaining
admission to the public schools of their community on a nonsegregated basis. In each instance, they [had] been
denied admission to schools attended by white children under laws requiring or permitting segregation according to
race.
Id., at 487-88.
51. Education in the U.S. was (and largely remains) governed not at the State level, but rather the municipality
level. In large parts of the nation, there was vehement opposition to allowing "minors of the Negro race" to attend
public schools attended by Caucasian children. At stake were not only statutes and regulations based on such
segregation, i.e., an extensive 'statutory framework, but even physical obstacles (e.g., small classrooms) that would
need removal, if the United States Supreme Court agreed that the fundamental right to education "must be made
available to all on equal terms." Brown I, at 493.
52. The respondents strenuously argued that the Supreme Court should not disrupt a practice so ingrained in the
nation's laws, regulations, and practices, and rightly left to the legislature. Some excerpts from the respondents' briefs
are reproduced below. The similarities to the Union's position in this case are impossible to miss.
I PRELIMINARY STATEMENT
At the outset, counsel for the appellees desire to state that by appearing herein they do not propose to
advocate the policy of segregation of any racial group within the public school system. We contend only that policy
determinations are matters within the exclusive province of the legislature..
So far, then, as a conflict with the 14th Amendment is concerned, the case reduces itself to the question of
whether the statute is a reasonable regulation. and with respect to this, there must necessarily be a large
discretion on the part of the legislature. In determining the question of reasonableness, it is at liberty to act with
reference to the established usages, customs and traditions of the people, and with a view to the promotion of their
comfort, and the preservation of the public peace and good order.
Therefore, we deem it proper to pause briefly to examine the origins and attitudes of the people of the State of
Kansas
The early legislatures were faced with the task of reconciling the divergent attitudes of the settlers from such
varied cultural backgrounds.
The Wyandotte Constitution, under which the State of Kansas was admitted to the Union, provided for a system
of public education specifically requiring the legislature to "encourage the promotion of intellectual, moral, scientific
and agricultural improvement, by establishing a uniform system of common schools and schools of a higher grade,
embracing normal, preparatory, collegiate and university departments." (Const., Art. 6, Sec. 1.) It is significant that
an effort was made in the Wyandotte convention to obtain a constitutional requirement for the separate education
of Negro children. The proposal was defeated, not because of objection to the intrinsic policy of segregation, but
because the dominant faction in the constitutional convention believed that the power to govern the public schools
and to classify students therein should rest with the legislature.
The object of the [Fourteenth] Amendment was undoubtedly to enforce the absolute equality of the two races
before the law, but in the nature of things it could not have been intended to abolish distinctions based upon color,
or to enforce social, as distinguished from political equality, or a commingling of the two races upon terms
unsatisfactory to either. Laws permitting and even requiring their separation in places where they are liable to be
brought into contact do not necessarily imply the inferiority of either race to the other, and have been generally, if
not universally, recognized as within the competency of the state legislatures in the exercise of their police power.
The most common instance of this is connected with the establishment of separate schools for white and colored
children which has been held to be a valid exercise of the legislative power even by courts of States where the
political rights of the colored race have been longest and most earnestly enforced.
'One of the great virtues of our constitutional system is that, while the federal government protects the
fundamental rights of the individual, it leaves to the several states the solution of local problems. In a country with
a
great expanse of territory with peoples of widely differing customs and ideas, local self government in local
matters is essential to the peace and happiness of the people in the several communities as well as to the strength
and unity of the country as a whole. It is universally held, therefore, that each state shall determine for itself,
subject to the observance of the fundamental rights and liberties guaranteed by the federal Constitution, how it
shall exercise the police. power, i.e., the power to legislate with respect to the safety, morals, health and general
welfare. And in no field is this right of the several states more clearly recognized than in that of public education.
Justice Holmes has expressed the following view: must add one general consideration. There is nothing that /
more deprecate than the use of the Fourteenth Amendment beyond the absolute compulsion of its words to prevent
the making of social experiments that an important part of the community desires, in the insulated chambers
afforded by the several states, even though the experiments may seem futile or even noxious to me and to those
whose judgment / most respect."
ANNEXURE C4, at 2-12 (emphases added).
53. Of particular relevance, was the "workability" question, as the court well understood there would be a potential
domino effect of its ruling. For example, the court was cognizant that recognition of an equal right to education would
mean that courts would have to:
consider problems related to administration, arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the school
transportationsystem, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areasinto compact units to achieve a
system of determining admission to the public schools on a nonracial basis, and revision of local laws and
regulations.
Brown 11, at 301-02 (emphases added).
54. Nonetheless, the magnitude of the impact did not dissuade the Supreme Court from fairly interpreting the
American Constitution. The court recognized the "importance of education to our democratic society," and found that
education:
is required in the performance of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is
the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values,
in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. In these
days, it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an
education. Such an opportunity, where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made
available to all on equal terms.
Brown I, at 493 (emphasis added).
55. Then, after this initial determination, the court questioned how far it could go to fashion a remedy.
It
specifically ordered additional briefing and argument on the question of relief. The court observed:
Because these are class actions, because of the wide applicability of this decision, and because of the great
variety of local conditions, the formulation of decrees in these cases presents problems of considerable complexity.
On reargument, the consideration of appropriate relief was necessarily subordinated to the primary question-the
constitutionality of segregation in public education. We have now announced that such segregation is a denial of the
equal protection of the laws. In order that we may have the full assistance of the parties in formulating decrees, the
cases will be restored to the docket, and the parties are requested to present further argument on Questions 4 and
5 previously propounded by the Court for the reargument this Term. The Attorney General of the United States is
again invited to participate. The Attorneys General of the states requiring or permitting segregation in public
education will also be permitted to appear as amici curiae upon request to do so by September 15, 1954, and
submission of briefs by October 1, 1954.
Brown I, at 495 (emphasis added).
56. The questions the court framed for adjudication in the next phase, i.e., Brown 11, are noteworthy as they are
rightly couched in terms of the court's POWERS OF EQUITY:
4. Assuming it is decided that segregation in public schools violates the Fourteenth Amendment:
(a) would a decree necessarily follow providing that, within the limits set by normal geographic school districting,
Negro children should forthwith be admitted to schools of their choice, or
(b) may this Court. in the exercise of its equity powers, permit an effective gradual adjustment to be brought
about from existing segregated systems to a system not based on color distinctions?
5. On the assumption on which questions 4(a) and (b) are based, and assuming further that this Court will
exercise its equity powers to the end described in question 4(b),
(a) should this Court formulate detailed decrees in these cases;
(b) if so, what specific issues should the decrees reach;
(c) should this Court appoint a special master to hear evidence with a view to recommending specific terms for
such decrees;
(d) should this Court remand to the courts of first instance with directions to frame decrees in these cases, and if
so what general directions should the decrees of this Court include and what procedures should the courts of
first instance follow in arriving at the specific terms of more detailed decrees?
Brown 11, at 298, n.2 (emphasis added).
57. The court in Brown 11 rightly reasoned that, having declared "the fundamental principle that racial
discrimination in public education is unconstitutional," [a]II provisions of federal, state, or local law requiring or
permitting such discrimination must yield to this principle." Id., at 298.
58. Notably, the court did not, daunted by judicial constraints in terms of fashioning equitable relief, decided
against recognizing an inherent constitutional right. Instead, the court properly recognized that the two issues are
distinct, observing that: the consideration of appropriate relief [is] necessarily subordinated to the primary question-
the constitutionality of segregation in public education." Brown I, at 495.
59. Furthermore, the court recognized its inability to resolve, in one sitting, all conceivable issues. Instead, the
court relied on the government's "good faith implementation" and the competence of courts to resolve disputes as
they arise. The court observed:
Full implementation of these constitutional principles may require solution of varied local school problems. School
authorities have the primary responsibility for elucidating, assessing, and solving these problems: courts will have
to consider whether the action of school authorities constitutes good faith implementation of the governing
constitutional principles.. In fashioning and effectuating the decrees, the courts will be guided by equitable
principles. Traditionally, equity has been characterized by a practical flexibility in shaping its remedies and by a
facility for adjusting and reconciling public and private needs. These cases call for the exercise of these traditional
attributes of equity power. At stake is the personal interest of the plaintiffs in admission to public schools as soon
as practicable on a nondiscriminatory basis. To effectuate this interest may call for elimination of a variety of
obstacles in making the transition to school systems operated in accordance with the constitutional principles set
forth in our May 17, 1954, decision. Courts of equity may properly take into account the public interest in the
elimination of such obstacles in a systematic and effective manner. But it should go without saying that the vitality
of these constitutional principles cannot be allowed to yield simply because of disagreement with them.
Brown 11, at 299-300 (emphases added).
60. The U.S. Supreme Court relied far more heavily on the principle of "good faith implementation" in Brown I and
11
as compared to Obergefell. Indeed, Brown I and 11 received far more resistance from the American people
relative to Obergefell. This is perhaps unsurprising given that, while Obergefell mostly required the public to tolerate
same-sex married couples living next door, Brown I and 11 forced Caucasian parents to send their Caucasian children
to school alongside "minors of the Negro race." Brown I and 11 additionally forced schools and school districts to
dramatically alter their function, engage new teachers, and even undertake constructions. Although Obergefell also
encountered resistance from some states, it did not spawn voluminous litigation.
61. The Petitioners submit that the right to marry is as foundational to the human experience as the right to
education. Judicial interference is just as appropriate here as it was in Brown | and 11.
ANNEXURE C2
KeyCite Yellow Flag - Negative Treatment
Supplemented by Brown V. Board of Educ. of Topeka, Kan., U.S. Kan., May 31, 1955
74 S.Ct. 686
Supreme Court of the United States
BROWN et al.
V.
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA, SHAWNEE COUNTY, KAN., et al.
BRIGGS et al.
V.
ELLIOTT et al.
DAVIS et al.
V.
COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD OF PRINCE EDWARD COUNTY, VA, et al.
GEBHART et al.
V.
BELTON et al.
Nos. 1, 2, 4, 10.
Reargued Dec. 7, 8, 9, 1953.
Decided May 17, 1954.
Synopsis
62. Class actions originating in the four states of Kansas, South Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware, by which minor
Negro plaintiffs sought to obtain admission to public schools on a nonsegregated basis. On direct appeals by plaintiffs
from adverse decisions in the United States District Courts, District of Kansas, 98 F. Supp. 797, Eastern District of
South Carolina, 103 F. Supp. 920, and Eastern District of Virginia, 103 F. Supp. 337, and on grant of certiorari after
decision favorable to plaintiffs in the Supreme Court of Delaware, 91 A.2d 137, the United States Supreme Court, Mr.
Chief Justice Warren, held that segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the
physical facilities and other tangible factors may be equal, deprives the children of the minority group of equal
educational opportunities, in contravention of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Cases ordered restored to docket for further argument regarding formulation of decrees.
West Headnotes (5)
[1] Constitutional Law Public Elementary and Secondary Education
In resolving question whether segregation of races in public schools constituted a denial of equal protection of
the laws, even though the tangible facilities provided might be equal, court would consider public education in
light of its full development and present status throughout the nation, and not in light of conditions prevailing at
time of adoption of the amendment. U.S.C.A. Const. Amend. 14.
351 Cases that cite this headnote
[2] Constitutional Law Public Elementary and Secondary Education
Education Existence and propriety of segregated system
The opportunity of an education, where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made
available to all on equal terms. U.S.C.A. Const. Amend 14.
385 Cases that cite this headnote
[3] Constitutional Law Assignment and transfer of students
The segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the physical facilities and
other tangible factors may be equal, deprives the children of minority group of equal educational opportunities,
and amounts to a deprivation of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to
the Federal Constitution. U.S.C.A. Const. Amend. 14.
517 Cases that cite this headnote
[4] Constitutional Law Public Elementary and Secondary Education
The doctrine of "separate but equal" has no place in the field of public education, since separate educational
facilities are inherently unequal. U.S.C.A. Const. Amend. 14.
236 Cases that cite this headnote
[5] Federal Courts Constitutional questions
In view of fact that actions raising question of constitutional validity of segregation of races in public schools
were class actions, and because of the wide applicability of decision holding that segregation was denial of equal
protection of laws, and the great variety of local conditions, the formation of decrees presented problems of
considerable complexity, requiring that cases be restored to the docket so that court might have full assistance
of parties in formulating appropriate decrees. U.S.C.A. Const. Amend. 14.
609 Cases that cite this headnote
Attorneys and Law Firms
686 No. 1:
Mr. 484 Robert L. Carter, New York City, for appellants Brown and others.
687 Mr. Paul E. Wilson, Topeka, Kan, for appellees Board of Education of Topeka and others.
Nos. 2, 4:
Messrs. Spottswood Robinson 111, Thurgood Marshall, New York City, for appellants Briggs and Davis and others.
Messrs. John W. Davis, 485 T Justin Moore, J. Lindsay Almond, Jr., Richmond, Va., for appellees Elliott and
County School Board of Prince Edward County and others.
Asst. Atty. Gen. J. Lee Rankin for United States amicus curiae by special leave of Court.
No. 10:
Mr. H. Albert Young, Wilmington, Del., for petitioners Gebhart et al.
Mr. Jack Greenberg, Thurgood Marshall, New York City, for respondents Belton et al.
Opinion
*486 Mr. Chief Justice WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.
These cases come to us from the States of Kansas, South Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware. They are premised on
different facts and different local conditions, but a common legal question justifies their consideration together in
this consolidated opinion1
*688 487 In each of the cases, minors of the Negro race, through their legal representatives, seek the aid of
the courts in obtaining admission to the public schools of their community on a nonsegregated basis. In each
instance, *488 they have been denied admission to schools attended by white children under laws requiring or
permitting segregation according to race. This segregation was alleged to deprive the plaintiffs of the equal
protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment. In each of the cases other than the Delaware case, a three
-judge federal district court denied relief to the plaintiffs on the so-called 'separate but equal doctrine announced
by this Court in Plessy V. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 16 S.Ct. 1138, 41 L.Ed. 256. Under that doctrine, equality of
treatment is accorded when the races are provided substantially equal facilities, even though these facilities be
separate. In the Delaware case, the Supreme Court of Delaware adhered to that doctrine, but ordered that the
plaintiffs be admitted to the white schools because of their superiority to the Negro schools.
The plaintiffs contend that segregated public schools are not 'equal' and cannot be made 'equal,' and that hence
they are deprived of the equal protection of the laws. Because of the obvious importance of the question presented,
2
the
Court
took
jurisdiction. Argument was heard in the 1952 Term, and reargument was heard this Term on certain
questions propounded by the Court. 3
*489 Reargument was largely devoted to the circumstances surrounding the adoption of the Fourteenth
Amendment in 1868. It covered exhaustively consideration of the Amendment in Congress, ratification by the
states, then existing practices in racial segregation, and the views of proponents and opponents of the Amendment.
This discussion and our own investigation convince us that, although these sources cast some light, it **689 is not
enough to resolve the problem with which we are faced. At best, they are inconclusive. The most avid proponents of
the post-War Amendments undoubtedly intended them to remove all legal distinctions among 'all persons born or
naturalized in the United States.' Their opponents, just as certainly, were antagonistic to both the letter and the
spirit of the Amendments and wished them to have the most limited effect. What others in Congress and the state
legislatures had in mind cannot be determined with any degree of certainty.
An additional reason for the inconclusive nature of the Amendment's history, with respect to segregated schools,
is the status of public education at that time. In the South, the movement toward free common schools, supported
*490 by general taxation, had not yet taken hold. Education of white children was largely in the hands of private
groups. Education of Negroes was almost nonexistent, and practically all of the race were illiterate. In fact, any
education of Negroes was forbidden by law in some states. Today, in contrast, many Negroes have achieved
outstanding success in the arts and sciences as well as in the business and professional world. It is true that public
school education at the time of the Amendment had advanced further in the North, but the effect of the
Amendment on Northern States was generally ignored in the congressional debates. Even in the North, the
conditions of public education did not approximate those existing today. The curriculum was usually rudimentary;
ungraded schools were common in rural areas; the school term was but three months a year in many states; and
compulsory school attendance was virtually unknown. As a consequence, it is not surprising that there should be so
little in the history of the Fourteenth Amendment relating to its intended effect on public education.
In the first cases in this Court construing the Fourteenth Amendment, decided shortly after its adoption, the
5
Court interpreted it as proscribing all state-imposed discriminations against the Negro race. The doctrine of *491
"separate but *690 equal" did not make its appearance in this court until 1896 in the case of Plessy V. Ferguson,
6
supra, involving not education but transportation. American courts have since labored with the doctrine for over
half a century. In this Court, there have been six cases involving the 'separate but equal doctrine in the field of
public education. In Cumming V. Board of Education of Richmond County, 175 U.S. 528, 20 S.Ct. 197, 44 L.Ed.
262, and Gong Lum V. Rice, 275 U.S. 78, 48 S.Ct. 91, 72 L.Ed. 172, the validity of the doctrine itself was not
challenged. 8 In more recent cases, all on the graduate school *492 level, inequality was found in that specific
benefits enjoyed by white students were denied to Negro students of the same educational qualifications. State of
Missouri ex rel. Gaines V. Canada, 305 U.S. 337, 59 S.Ct. 232, 83 L.Ed. 208; Sipuel V. Board of Regents of
University of Oklahoma, 332 U.S. 631, 68 S.Ct. 299, 92 L.Ed. 247; Sweatt V. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 70 S.Ct. 848,
94 L.Ed. 1114; McLaurin V. Oklahoma State Regents, 339 U.S. 637, 70 S.Ct. 851, 94 L.Ed. 1149. In none of these
cases was it necessary to re-examine the doctrine to grant relief to the Negro plaintiff. And in Sweatt V. Painter,
supra, the Court expressly reserved decision on the question whether Plessy V. Ferguson should be held inapplicable
to public education.
In the instant cases, that question is directly presented. Here, unlike Sweatt V. Painter, there are findings below
that the Negro and white schools involved have been equalized, or are being equalized, with respect to buildings,
curricula, qualifications and salaries of teachers, and other 'tangible' factors. Our decision, therefore, cannot turn
on merely a comparison of these tangible factors 691 in the Negro and white schools involved in each of the
cases. We must look instead to the effect of segregation itself on public education.
[1] In approaching this problem, we cannot turn the clock back to 1868 when the Amendment was adopted, or
even to 1896 when Plessy V. Ferguson was written. We must consider public education in the light of its full
development and its present place in American life throughout *493 the Nation. Only in this way can it be
determined if segregation in public schools deprives these plaintiffs of the equal protection of the laws.
[2] Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local governments. Compulsory school
attendance laws and the great expenditures for education both demonstrate our recognition of the importance of
education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most basic public responsibilities,
even service in the armed forces. It is the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument
in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to
adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be expected to
succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an education. Such an opportunity, where the state has
undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made available to all on equal terms.
[3] We come then to the question presented : Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of
race, even though the physical facilities and other 'tangible' factors may be equal, deprive the children of the
minority group of equal educational opportunities? We believe that it does.
In Sweatt V. Painter, supra (339 U.S. 629, 70 S.Ct. 850), in finding that a segregated law school for Negroes
could not provide them equal educational opportunities, this Court relied in large part on 'those qualities which are
incapable of objective measurement but which make for greatness in a law school." In McLaurin V. Oklahoma State
Regents, supra (339 U.S. 637, 70 S.Ct. 853), the Court, in requiring that a Negro admitted to a white graduate
school be treated like all other students, again resorted to intangible considerations: his ability to study, to
engage in discussions and exchange views with other students, and, in general, to learn his profession" 494 Such
considerations apply with added force to children in grade and high schools. To separate them from others of similar
age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the
community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone. The effect of this separation
on their educational opportunities was well stated by a finding in the Kansas case by a court which nevertheless felt
compelled to rule against the Negro plaintiffs:
'Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect upon the colored children.
The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law; for the policy of separating the races is usually
interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the negro group. A sense of inferiority affects the motivation of a child
to learn. Segregation with the sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to (retard) the educational and mental
development of Negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would receive in a racial(ly)
integrated school system. ,10
692 Whatever may have been the extent of psychological knowledge at the time of Plessy V. Ferguson, this
11
finding is amply supported by modern authority. Any language *495 in Plessy V. Ferguson contrary to this
finding is rejected.
[4] We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of 'separate but equal has no place. Separate
educational facilities are inherently unequal. Therefore, we hold that the plaintiffs and others similarly situated
for whom the actions have been brought are, by reason of the segregation complained of, deprived of the equal
protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. This disposition makes unnecessary any
12
discussion whether such segregation also violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
[5] Because these are class actions, because of the wide applicability of this decision, and because of the great
variety of local conditions, the formulation of decrees in these cases presents problems of considerable
complexity. On reargument, the consideration of appropriate relief was necessarily subordinated to the primary
question-the constitutionality of segregation in public education. We have now announced that such segregation
is a denial of the equal protection of the laws. In order that we may have the full assistance of the parties in
formulating decrees, the cases will be restored to the docket, and the parties are requested to present further
argument on Questions 4 and 5 previously propounded by the Court for the reargument this Term. The
13
Attorney General *496 of the United States is again invited to participate. The Attorneys General of the states
requiring or permitting segregation in public education will also be permitted to appear as amici curiae upon
14
request to do so by September 15, 1954, and submission of briefs by October 1, 1954.
It is so ordered.
693 Cases ordered restored to docket for further argument on question of appropriate decrees.
All Citations
347 U.S. 483, 74 S.Ct. 686, 98 L.Ed. 873, 38 A.L.R.2d 1180, 53 O.O. 326
Footnotes
64. In the Kansas case, Brown V. Board of Education, the plaintiffs are Negro children of elementary school age
residing in Topeka. They brought this action in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas to enjoin
enforcement of a Kansas statute which permits, but does not require, cities of more than 15,000 population to
maintain separate school facilities for Negro and white students. Kan. Gen. Stat. 1949, S 72- 1724. Pursuant to that
authority, the Topeka Board of Education elected to establish segregated elementary schools. Other public schools in
the community, however, are operated on a nonsegregated basis. The three-judge District Court, convened unden 28
U.S.C. SS 2281 and 2284, 28 U.S.C.A. SS 2281, 2284, found that segregation in public education has a detrimental
effect upon Negro children, but denied relief on the ground that the Negro and white schools were substantially equal
with respect to buildings, transportation, curricula, and educational qualifications of teachers. 98 F. Supp. 797. The
case is here on direct appeal under 28 U.S.C. S 1253, 28 U.S.C.A. S 1253.
65. In the South Carolina case, Briggs V. Elliott, the plaintiffs are Negro children of both elementary and high school
age residing in Clarendon County. They brought this action in the United States District Court for the Eastern District
of South Carolina to enjoin enforcement of provisions in the state constitution and statutory code which require the
segregation of Negroes and whites in public schools. S.C. Const. Art. XI, S 7; S.C. Code 1942, S 5377. The three-judge
District Court, convened under 28 U.S.C. SS 2281 and 2284, 28 U.S.C.A. SS 2281, 2284, denied the requested relief.
The court found that the Negro schools were inferior to the white schools and ordered the defendants to begin
immediately to equalize the facilities. But the court sustained the validity of the contested provisions and denied the
plaintiffs admission to the white schools during the equalization program. 98 F. Supp. 529. This Court vacated the
District Court's judgment and remanded the case for the purpose of obtaining the court's views on a report filed by the
defendants concerning the progress made in the equalization program. 342 U.S. 350, 72 S.Ct. 327, 96 L.Ed. 392. On
remand, the District Court found that substantial equality had been achieved except for buildings and that the
defendants were proceeding to rectify this inequality as well. 103 F. Supp. 920. The case is again here on direct appeal
under 28 U.S.C. S 1253, 28 U.S.C.A. S 1253.
66. In the Virginia case, Davis V. County School Board, the plaintiffs are Negro children of high school age residing
in Prince Edward County. They brought this action in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia
to enjoin enforcement of provisions in the state constitution and statutory code which require the segregation of
Negroes and whites in public schools. Va. Const. is 140; Va. Code 1950, S 22Va. Code 1950, Si 22-221. The three-
judge District Court, convened under 28 U.S.C. SS 2281 and 2284, 28 U.S.C.A. SS 2281. 2284, denied the requested
relief. The court found the Negro school inferior in physical plant, curricula, and transportation, and ordered the
defendants forthwith to provide substantially equal curricula and transportation and to 'proceed with all reasonable
diligence and dispatch to remove the inequality in physical plant. But, as in the South Carolina case, the court
sustained the validity of the contested provisions and denied the plaintiffs admission to the white schools during the
equalization program. 103 F. Supp. 337.
67. The case is here on direct appeal under 28 U.S.C. S 1253, 28 U.S.C.A. S 1253.
68. In the Delaware case, Gebhart V. Belton, the plaintiffs are Negro children of both elementary and high school
age residing in New Castle County. They brought this action in the Delaware Court of Chancery to enjoin enforcement
of provisions in the state constitution and statutory code which require the segregation of Negroes and whites in public
schools. Del Const. Art. X,s2; Del. Rev. Code, 1935,s2631, 14 Del.C.s 141. The Chancellor gave judgment for the
plaintiffs and ordered their immediate admission to schools previosly attended only by white children, on the ground
that the Negro schools were inferior with respect to teacher training, pupil-teacher ratio, extracurricular activities,
physical plant, and time and distance involved in travel. Del.Ch., 87 The Chancellor also found that
segregation itself results in an inferior education for Negro children (see note 10, infra), but did not rest his decision
on
that ground. at page 865. The Chancellor's decree was affirmed by the Supreme Court of Delaware, which
intimated, however, that the defendants might be able to obtain a modification of the decree after equalization of the
Negro and white schools had been accomplished. 91 A.2d 137, 152. The defendants, contending only that the
Delaware courts had erred in ordering the immediate admission of the Negro plaintiffs to the white schools, applied to
this Court for certiorari. The writ was granted, U.S. 891, 73 S.Ct. 213, 97 L.Ed. 689. The plaintiffs, who were
successful below, did not submit a cross-petition.
69. 344 U.S. 1, 73 S.Ct. 1, 97 L.Ed. 3, Id., 344 U.S. 141, 73 S.Ct. 124, 97 L.Ed. 152, Gebhart V. Belton, 344 U.S.
891, 73 S.Ct. 213, 97 L.Ed. 689.
70. 345 U.S. 972, 73 S.Ct. 1118, 97 L.Ed. 1388. The Attorney General of the United States participated both Terms
as amicus curiae.
71. For a general study of the development of public education prior to the Amendment, see Butts and Cremin, A
History of Education in American Culture (1953), Pts. I, 11 : Cubberley, Public Education in the United States (1934
ed.), CC. II-XII. School practices current at the time of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment are described in
Butts and Cremin, supra, at 269-275; Cubberley, supra, at 288-339, 408-431; Knight, Public Education in the
South (1922) CC. VIII, IX. See also H. Ex. Doc. No. 315, 41st Cong., 2d Sess. (1871). Although the demand for free
public schools followed substantially the same pattern in both the North and the South, the development in the South
did not begin to gain momentum until about 1850, some twenty years after that in the North. The reasons for the
somewhat slower development in the South (e.g., the rural character of the South and the different regional attitudes
toward state assistance) are well explained in Cubberley, supra, at 408-423. In the country as a whole, but
particularly in the South, the War virtually stopped all progress in public education. Id., at 427-428. The low status of
Negro education in all sections of the country, both before and immediately after the War, is described in Beale, A
History of Freedom of Teaching in American Schools (1941), 112-132, 175-195. Compulsory school attendance laws
were not generally adopted until after the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment, and it was not until 1918 that
such laws were in force in all the states. Cubberley, supra. at 563-565.
72. In re Slaughter-House Cases, 1873, 16 Wall. 36, 67-72, 21 L.Ed. 394; Strauder V. West Virginia, 1880, 100
U.S. 303, 307-308, 25 L.Ed. 664.
'It ordains that no State shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law, or deny
to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. What is this but declaring that the law in the
States shall be the same for the black as for the white; that all persons, whether colored or white, shall stand equal
before the laws of the States, and, in regard to the colored race, for whose protection the amendment was primarily
designed, that no discrimination shall be made against them by law because of their color? The words of the
amendment, it is true, are prohibitory, but they contain a necessary implication of a positive immunity, or right,
most valuable to the colored race,-th right to exemption from unfriendly legislation against them distinctively as
colored,-exemption from legal discriminations, implying inferiority in civil society, lessening the security of their
enjoyment of the rights which others enjoy, and discriminations which are steps towards reducing them to the
condition of a subject race.
See also State of Virginia V. Rives, 1879, 100 U.S. 313, 318, 25 L.Ed. 667; Ex parte Virginia, 1879, 100 U.S.
339, 344-345, 25 L.Ed. 676.
73. The doctrine apparently originated in Roberts V. City of Boston, 1850, 5 Cush. 198, 59 Mass. 198, 206,
upholding school segregation against attack as being violative of a state constitutional guarantee of equality.
Segregation in Boston public schools was eliminated in 1855. Mass. Acts 1855, C. 256. But elsewhere in the North
segregation in public education has persisted in some communities until recent years. It is apparent that such
segregation has long been a nationwide problem, not merely one of sectional concern.
74. See also Berea College V. Kentucky, 1908, 211 U.S. 45, 29 S.Ct. 33, 53 L.Ed. 81.
75. In the Cumming case, Negro taxpayers sought an injunction requiring the defendant school board to
discontinue the operation of a high school for white children until the board resumed operation of a high school for
Negro children. Similarly, in the Gong Lum case, the plaintiff, a child of Chinese descent, contended only that state
authorities had misapplied the doctrine by classifying him with Negro children and requiring him to attend a Negro
school.
76. In the Kansas case, the court below found substantial equality as to all such factors. 98 F. Supp. 797, 798. In
the South Carolina case, the court below found that the defendants were proceeding 'promptly and in good faith to
comply with the court's decree.' 103 F. Supp. 920, 921. In the Virginia case, the court below noted that the
equalization program was already 'afoot and progressing," 103 F Supp. 337, 341; since then, we have been advised,
in the Virginia Attorney General's brief on reargument, that the program has now been completed. In the Delaware
case, the court below similarly noted that the state's equalization program was well under way. 91 A.2d 137, 139.
77. A similar finding was made in the Delaware case:'| conclude from the testimony that in our Delaware society,
State-imposed segregation in education itself results in the Negro children, as a class, receiving educational
opportunities which are substantially inferior to those available to white children otherwise similarly situated." 87 A.2d
862, 865.
78. K. B. Clark, Effect of Prejudice and Discrimination on Personality Development (Midcentury White House
Conference on Children and Youth, 1950); Witmer and Kotinsky, Personality in the Making (1952), C. VI; Deutscher
and Chein, The Psychological Effects of Enforced Segregation : A Survey of Social Science Opinion, 26 J. Psychol. 259
(1948); Chein, What are the Psychological Effects of Segregation Under Conditions of Equal Facilities?, 3 Int. J.
Opinion and Attitude Res. 229 (1949); Brameld, Educational Costs, in Discrimination and National Welfare (Maclver,
ed., 1949), 44-48; Frazier, The Negro in the United States (1949), 674-681. And see generally Myrdal, An American
Dilemma (1944).
79. See Bolling V. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497, 74 S.Ct. 693, concerning the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
80. '4. Assuming it is decided that segregation in public schools violates the Fourteenth Amendment
'(a) would a decree necessarily follow providing that, within the limits set by normal geographic school districting,
Negro children should forthwith be admitted to schools of their choice, or
(b) may this Court, in the exercise of its equity powers, permit an effective gradual adjustment to be brought
about from existing segregated systems to a system not based on color distinctions?
'5. On the assumption on which questions 4(a) and (b) are based, and assuming further that this Court will
exercise its equity powers to the end described in question 4(b),
(a) should this Court formulate detailed decrees in these cases;
(b) if so, what specific issues should the decrees reach;
(c) should this Court appoint a special master to hear evidence with a view to recommending specific terms for
such decrees;
(d) should this Court remand to the courts of first instance with directions to frame decrees in these cases, and if
so what general directions should the decrees of this Court include and what procedures should the courts of first
instance follow in arriving at the specific terms of more detailed decrees?'
81. See Rule 42, Revised Rules of this Court, effective July 1, 1954, 28 U.S.C.A.
ANNEXURE C3
KeyCite Yellow Flag - Negative Treatment
Distinguished by Deal V. Cincinnati Bd. of Ed., 6th Cir. (Ohio), December 9, 1969
75 S.Ct. 753
Supreme Court of the United States
Oliver BROWN, et al., Appellants,
V.
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA,
Shawnee County, KANSAS, et al.
Harry BRIGGS, Jr., et al., Appellants,
V.
W. ELLIOTT, et al.
Dorothy E. DAVIS, et al., Appellants,
V.
COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD OF PRINCE EDWARD COUNTY, VIRGINIA, et al.
Spottswood Thomas BOLLING, et al., Petitioners,
V.
C. Melvin SHARPE, et al.
Francis B. GEBHART, et al., Petitioners,
V.
Ethel Louise BELTON, et al.
Nos. 1 to 5.
Argued April 11, 12, 13 and 14, 1955.
Decided May 31, 1955.
Synopsis
82. Class actions by which minor plaintiffs sought to obtain admission to public schools on a nonsegregated basis.
On direct appeals by plaintiffs from adverse decisions in United States District Courts, District of Kansas, 98 F. Supp.
797, Eastern District of South Carolina, 103 F. Supp. 920, and Eastern District of Virginia, 103 F. Supp. 337, on
certiorari before judgment on appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia from adverse
decision in United States District Court for the District of Columbia, and on certiorari from decision favorable to
plaintiffs in the Supreme Court of Delaware, 91 A.2d 137, the Supreme Court, 347 U.S. 483, 74 S.Ct. 686, 98 L.Ed.
873, and 347 U.S. 497, 74 S.Ct. 693, 98 L.Ed. 884, held that racial discrimination in public education was
unconstitutional and restored cases to docket for further argument regarding formulation of decrees. On further
argument, the Supreme Court, Mr. Chief Justice Warren, held that in proceedings to implement Supreme Court's
determination, inferior courts might consider problems related to administration, arising from physical condition of
school plant, school transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areas into compact
units to achieve system of determining admission to public schools on a nonracial basis, and revision of local laws and
regulations, and might consider adequacy of any plans school authorities might propose to meet these problems and
to effectuate a transition to racially nondiscriminatory school systems.
83. Judgments, except that in case No. 5, reversed and cases remanded with directions; judgment in case No. 5
affirmed and case remanded with directions.
West Headnotes (9)
[1] Constitutional Law Public Elementary and Secondary Education
Education Existence and propriety of segregated system
All provisions of federal state, or local law requiring or permitting racial discrimination in public education
must yield to principle that such discrimination is unconstitutional. U.S.C.A Const. Amend. 14.
94 Cases that cite this headnote
[2] Education Desegregation and integration and duty to desegregate in general
School authorities have primary responsibility for elucidating, assessing, and solving problems arising from
fact that racial discrimination in public education is unconstitutional.
81 Cases that cite this headnote
[3] Federal Courts Particular cases
Question whether school authorities' actions constitute good faith implementation of principle that racial
discrimination in public education is unconstitutional could best be appraised by courts which originally heard
cases raising question of constitutionality of such discrimination, and it was appropriate to remand cases to such
courts. 28 U.S.C.A.  2281, 2284.
45 Cases that cite this headnote
[4] Equity Nature and source of jurisdiction
Equity Nature and extent of relief in general
Traditionally, equity has been characterized by a practical flexibility in shaping its remedies and by a facility
for adjusting and reconciling public and private needs.
97 Cases that cite this headnote
[5] Education Desegregation plans in general
Courts of equity, in implementing Supreme Court's determination that racial discrimination in public education
is unconstitutional, may properly take into account the public interest in elimination, in a systematic and
effective manner, of obstacles to transition to school systems operated in accordance with constitutional
principles, but constitutional principles cannot be allowed to yield because of disagreement with them.
260 Cases that cite this headnote
[6] Federal Courts Mandate; effect of decision in lower court; proceedings on remand
On remand from Supreme Court after determination in several cases that racial discrimination in public
education is unconstitutional, inferior courts should, while giving weight to public considerations and private
interest of litigants, require that school authorities make prompt and reasonable start toward full compliance with
ruling.
29 Cases that cite this headnote
[7] Education Time for desegregation
In proceedings to implement Supreme Court's decision that racial discrimination in public education is
unconstitutional, public school authorities have burden of establishing that grant of additional time for transition
is necessary in public interest and is consistent with good faith compliance at earliest practicable date.
92 Cases that cite this headnote
[8] Education Justification for delay or failure
Inferior court's in implementing Supreme Court's determination that racial discrimination in public education
is unconstitutional, may consider problems related to administration, arising from physical condition of school
plant, school transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areas into compact
units to achieve system of determining admission to public schools on a nonracial basis, and revision of local
laws and regulations, and may consider adequacy of any plans school authorities may propose to meet these
problems and to effectuate a transition to racially nondiscriminatory school system.
237 Cases that cite this headnote
[9] Education Review
Inferior courts, on remand from Supreme Court's determination that discrimination in public education is
unconstitutional, were directed to retain jurisdiction of cases during period of transition to nondiscriminatory
school systems.
41 Cases that cite this headnote
Attorneys and Law Firms
*754 * 296 Mr. Robert L. Carter, New York City, for appellants in No. 1.
Mr. Harold R. Fatzer, Topeka, Kan., for appellees in No. 1.
Messrs. Thurgood Marshall, New York City, and Spottswood W. Robinson, 111, Richmond, Va., for appellants in
Nos. 2 and 3.
Messrs. S. E. Rogers, Summerton, S.C., and Robert McC. Figg, Jr., Charleston, S.C., for appellees in No. 2.
755 Messrs. Archibald G. Robertson, Richmond, Va., and J. Lindsay Almond, Jr., Atty. Gen., for appellees in
No. 3.
Messrs. George E. C. Hayes and James M. Nabrit, Jr., Washington, D.C., for petitioners in No. 4.
Mr. Milton D. Korman, Washington, D.C., for respondents in No. 4.
*297 Mr. Joseph Donald Craven, Wilmington, Del., for petitioners in No. 5.
Mr. Louis L. Redding, Wilmington, Del., for respondents in No. 5.
Messrs. Richard W. Ervin and Ralph E. Odum, Tallahassee, Fla., for State of Florida, I. Beverly Lake, Raleigh,
N.C., for State of North Carolina, Thomas J. Gentry, Little Rock, Ark., for State of Arkansas, Mac Q. Williamson,
Oklahoma, City, Okl., for State of Oklahoma, C. Ferdinand Sybert, Ellicott City, Md., for State of Maryland, John
Ben Shepperd and Burnell Waldrep, Austin, Tex., for State of Texas, Sol. Gen. Simon E. Sobeloff, Washington,
D.C., for the United States, amici curiae.
Opinion
298 Mr. Chief Justice WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.
[1] These cases were decided on May 17, 1954. The opinion of that date, 1 declaring the fundamental principle that
racial discrimination in public education is unconstitutional, are incorporated herein by reference. All provisions of
federal, state, or local law requiring or permitting such discrimination must yield to this principle. There remains
for consideration the manner in which relief is to be accorded.
Because these cases arose under different local conditions and their disposition will involve a variety of local
problems, we requested further argument on the question of relief. 2 In view of the nationwide importance of the
decision, we invited the Attorney General of the United *299 States and the Attorneys General of all states
requiring or permitting racial discrimination in public education to present their views on that question. The
parties, the United States, and the States of Florida, North Carolina, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Maryland, and Texas
filed briefs and participated in the oral argument.
These presentations were informative and helpful to the Court in its consideration of the complexities arising
from the transition to a system of public education freed of racial discrimination. The presentations also
demonstrated that substantial steps to eliminate racial discrimination in public schools have already 756 been
taken, not only in some of the communities in which these cases arose, but in some of the states appearing as
amici curiae, and in other states as well. Substantial progress has been made in the District of Columbia and in
the communities in Kansas and Delaware involved in this litigation. The defendants in the cases coming to us
from South Carolina and Virginia are awaiting the decision of this Court concerning relief.
[2] [3] Full implementation of these constitutional principles may require solution of varied local school problems.
School authorities have the primary responsibility for elucidating, assessing, and solving these problems; courts
will have to consider whether the action of school authorities constitutes good faith implementation of the
governing constitutional principles. Because of their proximity to local conditions and the possible need for
further hearings, the courts which originally heard these cases can best perform this judicial appraisal.
3
Accordingly, we believe it appropriate to remand the cases to those courts.
*
300 [4] [5] In fashioning and effectuating the decrees, the courts will be guided by equitable principles.
4
Traditionally, equity has been characterized by a practical flexibility in shaping its remedies and by a
facility
for
adjusting and reconciling public and private needs. These cases call for the exercise of these traditional
attributes of equity power. At stake is the personal interest of the plaintiffs in admission to public schools as soon
as practicable on a nondiscriminatory basis. To effectuate this interest may call for elimination of a variety of
obstacles in making the transition to school systems operated in accordance with the constitutional principles set
forth in our May 17, 1954, decision. Courts of equity may properly take into account the public interest in the
elimination of such obstacles in a systematic and effective manner. But it should go without saying that the
vitality of these constitutional principles cannot be allowed to yield simply because of disagreement with them.
[6] [7] [8] [9] While giving weight to these public and private considerations, the courts will require that the
defendants make a prompt and reasonable start toward full compliance with our May 17, 1954, ruling. Once such
a start has been made, the courts may find that additional time is necessary to carry out the ruling in an
effective manner. The burden rests upon the defendants to establish that such time is necessary in the public
interest and is consistent with good faith compliance at the earliest practicable date. To that end, the courts may
consider problems related to administration, arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the school
transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areas into compact units to achieve
a system of determining admission to the public schools *301 on a nonracial basis, and revision of local laws and
regulations which may be necessary in solving the foregoing problems. They will also consider the adequacy of
any plans the defendants may propose to meet these problems and to effectuate a transition to a racially
nondiscriminatory school system. During this period of transition, the courts will retain jurisdiction of these
cases.
**757 The judgments below, except that in the Delaware case, are accordingly reversed and the cases are
remanded to the District Courts to take such proceedings and enter such orders and decrees consistent with this
opinion as are necessary and proper to admit to public schools on a racially nondiscriminatory basis with all
deliberate speed the parties to these cases. The judgment in the Delaware case- ordering the immediate
admission of the plaintiffs to schools previously attended only by white children-is affirmed on the basis of the
principles stated in our May 17, 1954, opinion, but the case is remanded to the Supreme Court of Delaware for
such further proceedings as that Court may deem necessary in light of this opinion.
It is so ordered.
Judgments, except that in case No. 5, reversed and cases remanded with directions; judgment in case No. 5
affirmed and case remanded with directions.
All Citations
349 U.S. 294, 75 S.Ct. 753, 99 L.Ed. 1083, 71 Ohio Law Abs. 584, 57 O.O. 253
Footnotes
84. 347 U.S. 483, 74 S.Ct. 686, 98 L.Ed. 873, 347 U.S. 497, 74 S.Ct. 693, 98 L.Ed. 884.
85. Further argument was requested on the following questions, 347 U.S. 483, 495-496, note 13, 74 S.Ct. 686,
692, 98 L.Ed. 873, previously propounded by the Court:
4. Assuming it is decided that segregation in public schools violates the Fourteenth Amendment
(a) would a decree necessarily follow providing that, within the limits set by normal geographic school
districting, Negro children should forthwith be admitted to schools of their choice, or
'(b) may this Court, in the exercise of its equity powers, permit an effective gradual adjustment to be brought
about from existing segregated systems to a system not based on color distinctions?
'5. On the assumption on which questions 4(a) and (b) are based, and assuming further that this Court will
exercise its equity powers to the end described in question 4(b),
'(a) should this Court formulate detailed decrees in these cases;
'(b) if so, what specific issues should the decrees reach;
'(c) should this Court appoint a special master to hear evidence with a view to recommending specific terms for
such decrees;
'(d) should this Court remand to the courts of first instance with directions to frame decrees in these cases, and
if so what general directions should the decrees of this Court include and what procedures should the courts of
first instance follow in arriving at the specific terms of more detailed decrees?'
86. The cases coming to us from Kansas, South Carolina, and Virginia were originally heard by three-judge District
Courts convened under 28 U.S.C. SS 2281 and 2284, 28 U.S.C.A. SS 2281, 2284. These cases will accordingly be
remanded to those three-judge courts. See Briggs V. Elliott, 342 U.S. 350, 72 S.Ct. 327, 96 L.Ed. 392.
87. See Alexander V. Hillman, 296 U.S. 222, 239, 56 S.Ct. 204, 209, 80 L.Ed. 192.
88. See Hecht Co. V. Bowles, 321 U.S. 321, 329-330, 64 S.Ct. 587, 591, 592, 88 L.Ed. 754.
ANNEXURE C4
1952 WL 87553 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief)
Supreme Court of the United States.
Oliver BROWN, Mrs. Richard Lawton, Mrs. Sadie Emmanuel, et al., Appellants,
V.
BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA, Shawnee County, Kansas, et al., Appellees.
No. 1.
October Term, 1952.
December 8, 1952.
Appeal from the United States District Court for the District of Kansas
Brief for Appellees
Harold R. Fatzer, Attorney General,
Paul E. Wilson, Asst. Attorney General,
Counsel for the State of Kansas,
State House, Topeka, Kansas,
Peter F. Caldwell, Counsel for the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas.
512 Capitol Federal Bldg., Topeka, Kansas.
*1 TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. PRELIMINARY STATEMENT
11. OPINION BELOW
111. JURISDICTION
IV QUESTIONS PRESENTED
V THE STATUTE
VL STATEMENT OF THE CASE
VII. SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
VIII. ARGUMENT
1. The Statute Is Constitutional:
Background of Segregation in Kansas
The Kansas Decisions
The Controlling Principles
The Prospect
2. Finding of Fact No. VIII Does Not Entitle Appellants to Injunctive Relief
IX. CONCLUSION
TABLE OF CASES
Board of Education V. Tinnon, 26 Kan. 1
Briggs V. Elliott, 98 Fed. Supp. 529
Carr V. Coming, 182 Fed. 2d 14
Cartwright V. Board of Education, 73 Kan. 302, 84 Pac. 382
Davis V. County School Board, 103 Fed. Supp. 337
Gong Lum V. Rice, 275 U S. 78
Graham V. Board of Education, 153 Kan. 840
Knox V. Board of Education, 45 Kan. 152, 25 Pac. 616
Mallinckrodt Chemical Works V. Missouri, ex rel. Jones, 238 U.S. 41, 59 Law Ed. 1192
McCabe V. A.T. & S. F. Ry. Co., 235 U.S. 151, 59 Law Ed. 149
McLaurin V. Oklahoma, 339 U.S. 637
People, ex rel. Cisco V. School Board, 161 N. Y. 598, 56 N.E. 81, 48 L.R.A. 115
Plessy V. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 357
Reynolds V. Board of Education, 66 Kan. 672, 72 Pac. 274
Roberts V. City of Boston, 5 Cush 198
Rowles V. Board of Education, 76 Kan. 361, 91 Pac. 88
*2 Sweatt V. Painter, 339 U.S. 629
Thomas Cusack Co. V. Chicago, 242 U.S. 526, 61 Law Ed. 472
Thurman-Watts V. Board of Education, 115 Kan. 328, 22 Pac. 123
Webb V. School District, 167 Kan. 395, 206 P. 2d 1066
Williams V. Parsons, 79 Kan. 202
Woolridge, et al V. Board of Education, 98 Kan. 397, 157 Pac. 1184
CONSTITUTIONS, STATUTES AND OTHER AUTHORITIES
Title 28, U. S. C. Secs. 1253, 2201b
Kansas G. S. 1949, 72-1724
Article 6. Section 1. Constitution of Kansas
Compiled Laws of 1862, Sec. 18, Art. 4, Chapter 46
Laws of Kansas, 1876, Chapter 122
Laws of Kansas, 1879, Chapter 81
Laws of Kansas, 1905, Chapter 414
People of Kansas, 1936, p. 18
Wyandotte Constitutional Convention, Proceedings and Debates, 1859, pp. 171 to 174
3 I PRELIMINARY STATEMENT
89. The issue presented by this. case is whether the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. of the United
States is violated by a statute which permits boards of education in designated cities to maintain separate elementary
school facilities for the education of white and colored children.
90. At the outset, counsel for the appellees desire to state *4 that by appearing herein they do not propose to
advocate the policy of segregation of any racial group within the public school system. We contend only that policy
determinations are matters within the exclusive province of the legislature. We do not express an opinion as to
whether the practice of having separate schools of equal facility for the white and colored races is economically
expedient or sociologically desirable, or whether it is consistent with sound ethical or religious theory. We do not
understand that these extra-legal questions are now before the Court. The only proposition that we desire to urge is
that the Kansas statute which permits racial segregation in elementary public schools in certain cities of the state does
not violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States as that amendment has been
interpreted and applied by this Court.
11
OPINION BELOW
91. The opinion of the three-judge District Court below : (R-238-244) is reported at 98 Fed. Supp. 797.
*5 III
JURISDICTION
92. The judgment of the court below was entered on August 3, 1951 (R. 247). On October 1, 1951, appellants filed
a petition for appeal (R. 248), and an order allowing the appeal was entered (R. 251). Probable jurisdiction was noted
on June 9, 1952 (R. 254). Jurisdiction of this Court rests on Title 28 U. S. C. Sec. 1253 and 2201 (b).
IV QUESTIONS PRESENTED
93. Does a statute which permits but does not require cities of more than 15,000 population to maintain separate
school facilities for colored and white students, violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United
States in a situation where a court has specifically found that there is no discrimination or distinction in physical
facilities, educational qualifications of teachers, curricula or transportation facilities?
94. Is a general finding of the trial court that segregation is detrimental to colored children and deprives them of
some benefits they would receive in a racial integrated school sufficient to entitle the individual colored plaintiffs to an
injunction prohibiting the maintenance of an existing system of segregated schools, and to require reversal of a
judgment denying such relief?
*6 V
THE STATUTE
95. The statute under attack in the present litigation is section 72-1724, General Statutes of Kansas of 1949, which
is quoted hereafter:
Powers of board; separate schools for white and colored children; manual training. The board of education shall
have power to elect their own officers, make all necessary rules for the government of the schools of such city under
its charge and control and of the board, subject to the provisions of this act and the laws of this state; to organize
and maintain separate schools for the education of white and colored children, including the high schools in Kansas
City, Kansas; no discrimination on account of color shall be made in high schools, except as provided herein; to
exercise the sole control over the public schools and school property of such city; and shall have the power to
establish a high school or high schools in connection with manual training and instruction or otherwise, and to
maintain the same as a part of the public school system of said city."
VI STATEMENT OF THE CASE
96. The appellants here, who are plaintiffs below, are Negro citizens of the United States and the State of Kansas,
who reside in Topeka, Shawnee County, Kansas. The infant plaintiffs are children of common school age. The
defendants *7 below and appellees herein are the duly constituted governing body and certain administrative officers
of the public school system of Topeka, Kansas. The State of Kansas has intervened in the District Court to defend the
constitutionality of the state statute under attack.
97. Acting pursuant to the authority conferred by G. S. 1949, 72-1724, supra, the appellee, Board of Education,
many years ago created within the city of Topeka, which is one school district, eighteen school areas, and now
maintains in each of said areas a kindergarten and elementary school for white children only. (R. 24.) At the same
time the present Board of Education of Topeka and prior boards of education, acting under same statutory authority,
have established and operated in said city four elementary schools in the same grades for Negro children. Negro
children may attend any one of said elementary schools that they or their parents may select. It was stipulated in the
Court below that the Negro schools are located in neighborhoods in which the population is predominantly Negro. (R.
31.) The stipulation also indicates that at the time the action was brought, the enrollment in the eighteen white
schools was 6,019, as compared to 658 students enrolled in the four Negro schools. (R. 37.)
98. The administration of the entire Topeka school system is under the Board of Education, and the same
administrative *8 regulations govern both the white and Negro schools. The Court found specifically that there is no
material difference in the physical facilities in colored and white schools; that the educational qualifications of the
teachers and the quality of instruction in the colored schools are not inferior to, but are comparable with those in the
white schools; and that the courses of study followed in the two groups of schools are identical, being that prescribed
by state law. (R. 245.) Also, it was found that colored students are furnished transportation to the segregated schools
without cost to the children or their parents. No such transportation is furnished to the white children in the
segregated schools. (R. 246.)
VII SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
99. The Kansas statute which permits cities of the first class to maintain separate grade school facilities for colored
and
white students does not per se violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
100. The Court below found facilities provided for Negro children in the city of Topeka to be substantially equal to
those furnished to white children. The appellants, in their specifications of error and in their brief, do not object to that
finding. Under those circumstances and under authority *9 of the decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States,
the inferior federal courts, and the courts of last resort in numerous state jurisdictions, and particularly the decisions of
the Kansas Supreme Court, the appellants herein are not denied equal protection of the laws by virtue of their being
required to attend schools separate from those which white children are required to attend.
101. The decision of the court below should be affirmed.
102. Irrespective of the question of the constitutionality of the Kansas statute, the trial court's findings of fact are
insufficient to establish appellants' right to injunctive relief and to require reversal of the judgment below. The only
finding of fact relied upon by appellants is Finding of Fact No. VIII. That finding is couched in general language and in
effect simply shows that segregation in the public schools has a detrimental effect upon colored children and a
tendency to retain or retard their educational and mental development and to deprive them of some of the benefits
they would receive in a racial integrated school system. The finding does not specifically show that any of the
appellants have actually and personally suffered by reason of segregation in the public schools of Topeka non that the
mental development of any of the appellants in this case has been retarded; and the finding does not even purport to
show discrimination against the appellants and in favor *10 of any other students in the Topeka school system. It no
where discusses the effect of segregation upon children of any race other than colored children. Therefore, the District
Court's Finding of Fact No. VIII fails to show either that the appellants have suffered any personal harm, or that they
are being deprived of benefits or subjected to detriments which do not equally apply to other students in the Topeka
school system. Thus, the appellants have failed to secure findings of fact sufficient to entitle them to injunctive relief
or to a reversal of the judgment below.
*11 VIII
ARGUMENT
1
103. DOES A STATUTE WHICH PERMITS BUT DOES NOT REQUIRE CITIES OF MORE THAN 15,000 POPULATION TO
MAINTAIN SEPARATE SCHOOL FACILITIES FOR COLORED AND WHITE STUDENTS VIOLATE THE FOURTEENTH
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES IN A SITUATION WHERE A COURT HAS SPECIFICALLY
FOUND THAT THERE IS NO DISCRIMINATION OR DISTINCTION IN PHYSICAL FACILITIES, EDUCATIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS OF TEACHERS, CURRICULA OR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES?
104. Appellees contend that only a negative answer to this question is possible.
BACKGROUND OF SEGREGATION IN KANSAS
105. A meaningful examination of any statute must necessarily be made in the light of its context. In Plessy V.
Ferguson, 163 U.S. 357, the Court comments:
"So far, then, as a conflict with the 14th Amendment is concerned, the case reduces itself to the question of
whether the statute is a reasonable regulation, and with respect to this, there must necessarily be a large
discretion on the part of the legislature. In determining the question of reasonableness, it is at liberty to act with
reference to the established usages, customs, and traditions of the people, and with a view to the promotion of *12
their comfort, and the preservation of the public peace and good order."
106. Therefore, we deem it proper to pause briefly to examine the origins and attitudes of the people of the State of
Kansas.
107. The birth of the State of Kansas was an incident of the intersectional struggle that culminated in the war
between the states. Located midway between the north and the south, the territory of Kansas was coveted by both the
proslavery and free-state elements. The Kansas-Nebraska Act which announced the principle of "squatter sovereignty"
formally opened the territory for settlement and resulted in migration of large numbers of people from both the north
and the south. In these early settlers were reflected the diverse attitudes and cultures of the regions from which they
came. While the free-state elements from the north gained political ascendency, there remained in Kansas people who,
in good faith, believed that the welfare of both the colored and the white races required that they live apart from one
another. Migration following the war between the states followed the same pattern. While the greatest number came
from Illinois, Ohio, Indiana and other northern states, a considerable segment of the population had its origin in
Kentucky, Tennessee and Missouri. (Clark & Roberts, People of Kansas, 1936, p. 18.)
*13 The early legislatures were faced with the task of reconciling the divergent attitudes of the settlers from
such varied cultural backgrounds.
108. The Wyandotte Constitution, under which the State of Kansas was admitted to the Union, provided for a
system of public education specifically requiring the legislature to "encourage the promotion of intellectual, moral,
scientific and agricultural improvement, by establishing a uniform system of common schools and schools of a higher
grade, embracing normal, preparatory, collegiate and university departments." (Const. Art. 6, Sec. 1.) It is significant
that an effort was made in the Wyandotte convention to obtain a constitutional requirement for the separate education
of Negro children. The proposal was defeated, not because of objection to the intrinsic policy of segregation, but
because the dominant faction in the constitutional convention believed that the power to govern the public schools and
to classify students therein should rest with the legislature. At no time was doubt expressed that the constitutional
provision adopted at Wyandotte would preclude classification of students on the basis of color (Wyandotte
Constitutional Convention, Proceedings and Debates, 1859, pp. 171 to 174).
109. As early as 1862 the power to classify students was exercised by the enactment of section 18, article 4,
chapter 46, *14 Compiled Laws of 1862, applying to cities of not less than 7,000 inhabitants. That statute provided:
"The city council of any city under this act shall make provisions for the appropriation of all taxes for school
purposes collected from black or mulatto persons, so that the children of such persons shall receive the benefit of all
moneys collected by taxation for school purposes from such persons, in schools separate and apart from the schools
hereby authorized for the children of white persons."
110. Chapter 18, Laws of 1868, entitled "An Act to Incorporate Cities of the First Class" authorized the organization
and maintenance of separate schools for the education of white and colored children in cities of over 15,000
population. In 1876 the laws of the state pertaining to the common schools were codified and embodied in one
comprehensive statute. (Chapter 122.) Article X of this chapter related to the public schools and cities of the first
class, and provided that all cities of more than 15,000 inhabitants shall be governed thereby. The provision of, the law
of 1868 authorizing the maintenance of separate schools for white and colored children was omitted from that section
and was thus deemed to have been repealed by implication. However, in 1879 a statute was passed (Laws of 1879,
Chapter 81) amending the law relating to cities of the first class and specifically authorizing the boards of education
*15 therein to organize and maintain separate elementary schools for the education of white and colored children. The
section was again amended by Laws of 1905, Chapter 414, and now appears without further change in G. S. 1949, 72-
1724, quoted above.
111. Two features of the Kansas statute should be emphasized. In the first place, we invite the court's attention to
the fact that the statute is permissive only and does not, as may be inferred from appellants' brief, require any board
of education to maintain separate schools for colored children.
112. In the second place, it is again pointed out that the statute applies only to cities of the first class. Cities of the
first class in Kansas include those cities having a population of more than 15,000 persons. Presently there are 12 cities
in the state so classified. The special provision affecting only these communities may be accounted for by reference to
the fact that the Negro population of Kansas is largely urban. According to the 1950 census, less than four percent of
the total population of Kansas belongs to the Negro race. However, more than ninety percent of this colored population
lives in cities classified as urban. Sixty percent of the total colored population live in the three largest cities of Kansas
City, Wichita and Topeka, and at least thirty-five percent of this total live in Kansas *16 City alone. Thus, in enacting a
school segregation statute applicable only to cities of the first class the Kansas legislature has simply recognized that
there are situations where Negroes live in sufficient numbers to create special school problems and has sought to
provide a law sufficiently elastic to enable Boards of Education in such communities to handle such problems as they
may, in the exercise of their discretion and best judgment, deem most advantageous to their local school system
under their local conditions.
THE KANSAS DECISIONS
113. The Supreme Court of Kansas has uniformly held that the governing bodies of school districts in the state may
maintain separate schools for colored children only when expressly authorized by statute. (Board of Education V.
Tinnon, 26 Kan. 1 (1881); Knox V. Board of Education, 45 Kan. 152, 25 Pac. 616 (1891); Cartwright V. Board of
Education, 73 Kan. 302, 84 Pac. 382 (1906); Rowles V. Board of Education, 76 Kan. 361, 91 Pac. 88 (1907);
Woolridge, et al V. Board of Education, 98 Kan. 397, 157 Pac. 1184 (1916); Thurman-Watts V. Board of Education, 115
Kan. 328, 22 Pac. 123 (1924); Webb V. School District, 167 Kan. 395, 206 Pac. 2d 1066 (1949).
114. The rationale of each of these cases is expressed in Thurman-Watts V. Board of Education, supra, as follows:
*17 "The power and duty of the school board are derived exclusively from the statutes. The school board has no
greater power than is conferred on it by the statutes."
115. It is significant that in each of the cases cited above, the court expressly recognized or conceded that the
legislature has power to classify students in the public schools on the basis of color. Illustrative of this attitude is the
following statement from Board of Education V. Tinnon, supra, appearing on p. 16 of the reported decision:
"For the purpose of this case we shall assume that the legislature has the power to authorize the board of
education of any city or the officers of any school district to establish separate schools for the education of white
and colored children, and to exclude the colored children from the white schools notwithstanding the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States;"
116. In each of the subsequent cases where the power to segregate was denied by reason of the absence of
statutory authority, the court specifically recognized that the legislature had such authority to confer. (See cases
above cited.)
117. The question of the constitutionality of a statute, antecedent to but substantially like the one here under
attack, was squarely presened to the Supreme Court of Kansas in the case of *18 Reynolds V. Board of Education, 66
Kan. 672, 72 Pac. 274. That was a proceeding in the nature of mandamus brought against the board of education of
the city of Topeka by a colored resident. In the action he sought to compel the board of education to admit his child to
a school maintained for white children only. In an exhaustive opinion the court found that the statute which permitted
the policy of racial segregation to be valid and not in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States. The court relied specifically on the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of
Plessy V. Ferguson, supra, and held that where facilities are equal, the mere fact of separation of races within a school
system does not constitute a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
118. Quoting with approval from the New York case of People, ex rel, Cisco V. School Board, 161 N. Y. 598, 56 N. E.
81, 48 L. R. A. 115, the Court said:
"The most that the constitution requires the legislature to do is to furnish a system of common schools where
each and every child may be educated; not that all must be educated in any one school, but that it shall provide or
furnish a school or schools where each and all may have the advantages guaranteed by that instrument. If the
legislature determined that it was wise for one class of pupils to be educated by themselves, there is nothing in the
constitution *19 to deprive it of the right to so provide. It was the facilities for and the advantages of an education
that it was required to furnish to all the children, and not that it should provide for them any particular class of
associates while such education was being obtained."
119. And the court found merit in the quoted portion of the decision in the Massachusetts case of Roberts V. City of
Boston, 5 Gush. 198:
"It is urged that this maintenance of separate schools tends to deepen and perpetuate the odious distinction of
caste, founded in a deep-rooted prejudice in public opinion. This prejudice, if it exists, is not created by law, and
probably cannot be changed by law. Whether this distinction and prejudice, existing in the opinion and feelings of
the community, would not be as effectually fostered by compelling colored and white children to associate together
in the same schools, may well be doubted; at all events, it is a fair and proper question for the committee to
consider and decide upon, having in view the best interests of both classes of children placed under their
superintendence, and we cannot say, that their decision upon it is not founded on just grounds of reason and
experience, and in the results of a discriminating and honest judgment."
120. Consistent with its finding that the statute did not violate the equal protection guarantee of the Fourteenth
Amendment, the Court said on page 689:
"The design of the common-school system of this state is to instruct the citizen, and where for this *20 purpose
they have placed within his reach equal means of acquiring an education with other persons, they have discharged
their duty to him, and he has received all that he is entitled to ask of the government with respect to such
privileges."
121. Finally on page 292 the court holds:
"The act of the legislature of 1879 providing for the education of white and colored children in separate schools in
cities of the first class except in the high school is, therefore, in all respects constitutional and valid."
122. At the same time the Kansas court has always insisted that facilities must be equal for all groups. Particularly
significant is the case of Williams V. Parsons, 79 Kan. 202, decided in 1908. There objection was made that the school
provided for colored children was located in such close proximity to the railroad tracks that such location produced an
undue hazard to the children attending the school. The court stated, at page 209:
"Having power to maintain separate schools in cities of the first class, the duty rests upon the board of education
therein to give equal educational facilities to both white and colored children in such schools. This requirement must
have a practical interpretation so that it may be reasonably applied to varying circumstances Where the
location
of a school is such as to substantially deprive some of the children of the district of any educational facilities, it is
manifest that this equality is not maintained and the refusal to furnish such *21 privileges, where it is practicable
to do so, is an abuse of discretion for which the courts will afford a remedy."
123. A later expression of the Supreme Court of Kansas is found in Graham V. Board of Education, 153 Kan. 840,
decided in 1941. There the court said on page 842:
"The authorities are clear that separate schools may be maintained for the white and colored races if the
educational facilities provided for each are equal, unless such separation is in contravention of a specific state law."
124. Again on p. 846 the court comments with reference to the rule expressed in Reynolds V. Board of Education,
supra:
"The defendants cite the case of Reynolds V. Board of Education, 66 Kan. 672, 72 Pac. 274. The rules of law set
out in that case are sound and are applied in this case."
125. These cases demonstrate that the Supreme Court of Kansas has never doubted that G. S. 1949, 72-1724, and
its antecedent statutes is without the scope of the prohibitions imposed on the legislature by the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
*22 THE CONTROLLING PRINCIPLES
126. The position taken by the Supreme Court of Kansas in the cases cited, supra, is sustained by the weight of the
decisions of this Court in Plessy V. Ferguson, supra, and Gong Lum V. Rice, 275 U.S. 78; and in numerous decisions of
the inferior federal courts and the appellate courts in other states.
127. Appellants suggest that the Plessy case is not applicable to the situation before us. Admittedly, the question
presented in the Plessy case arose out of segregation of white and colored races in railroad cars and not segregation in
the public schools. However, the decision of the Court rises above the specific facts in issue and announces a doctrine
applicable to any social situation wherein the two races are brought into contact. In commenting upon the purpose
and the limitations of the Fourteenth Amendment the Court makes the following statement:
"The object of the Amendment was undoubtedly to enforce the absolute equality of the two races before the law,
but in the nature of things it could not have been intended to abolish distinctions based upon color, or to enforce
social, as distinguished from political equality, or a commingling of the two races upon terms unsatisfactory to
either. Laws permitting and even requiring their separation in places where they are liable to be brought into
contact do not necessarily imply the inferiority of either race to the other, and have been generally, *23 if not
universally, recognized as within the competency of the state legislatures in the exercise of their police power. The
most common instance of this is connected with the establishment of separate schools for white and colored
children which has been held to be a valid exercise of the legislative power even by courts of States where the
political rights of the colored race have been longest and most earnestly enforced." (p. 554.)
128. Certainly this language refutes appellants' contention that the Plessy case has no application to these facts.
129. Appellants further state that Gong Lum V. Rice "is irrelevant to the issues in this case." This statement
appears to Justify a brief examination of the facts in the Gong case. Those facts may be summarized as follows:
130. The Constitution and statutes of the State of Mississippi provided for two school systems in each county. One
system was for "white" children and the other system for "colored" children. Plaintiff sought to have his child who was
a citizen of Chinese extraction admitted to the school maintained for white students in the county where she lived. She
was refused admission by the school authorities. The Supreme Court of the United States unanimously affirmed the
decision of the Supreme Court of Mississippi, refusing to grand a Writ of Mandamus to compel the school authorities to
admit the Chinese-American citizen to the white school.
*24 The opinion by Chief Justice Taft includes the following statement (pp. 85-86):
"The question here is whether a Chinese citizen of the United States is denied equal protection of the laws
when he is classed among the colored races and furnished facilities for education equal to that offered to all,
whether white, brown, yellow or black. Were this a new question it would call for very full argument
and
consideration but we think that it is the same question which has been many times decided to be within the
constitutional power of the state legislature to settle without intervention of the federal courts under the Federal
Constitution.
131. To support this proposition the Court cites sixteen cases decided by federal courts and state courts of last
resort, including Plessy V. Ferguson, supra.
132. We do not believe that appellants suggest that the rights of the Negro citizens differ from the rights of the
Mongolian citizen, Martha Lum. If such an idea is advanced herein, this Court should have no more difficulty in
disposing of that contention than it did of that phase of the Gong case where it seemed to be contended that a yellow
child had different rights than a Negro child. The Court simply held that children of all races have equal rights but that
those rights are not infringed upon when the state provides that the different races shall be educated in separate
schools of equal facility.
25 Appellants further contend that whatever force the Plessy and Gong-Lum cases may have had has been
overcome by the recent decisions of Sweatt V. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, and McLaurin V. Oklahoma, 339 U.S. 637.
Appellees concede that if there has been any change in the attitude of this Court as to the constitutionality of the
separate but equal doctrines as it affects segregation, it must be found in these two cases. Thus, we have examined
them carefully. But we find no statement therein that would cause us to believe the Court intended to reverse or
modify its earlier decisions. In the Sweatt case, the Court held that a Negro prospective law student could not be
denied admission to the renowned University of Texas Law School - "one of the nation's ranking law schools" (p.
663), and be compelled to accept instruction in a new school of perhaps questionable worth, inferior as to faculty,
plant and student body. The McLaurin case only found that a Negro graduate student, who had successfully
compelled his admission to the University of Oklahoma to do graduate work in education, was still being denied
equal rights when he was segregated inside the university as to his seat in class, in the library and in the dining
hall. Unquestionably, these cases sustain the position that equal facilities must be provided. However, that point is
not at issue in this case.
*26 We think the Sweatt case has no greater significance than the following expression of the Court's attitude
indicates: "This case and McLaurin V. Oklahoma State Regents present different aspects of this general question :
To what extent does the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment limit the power of a state to
distinguish between students of different races in professional and graduate education in a state university? Broader
issues have been urged for our consideration, but we adhere to the principle of deciding constitutional questions
only in the context of the particular case before the court." (p. 631.)
133. Squarely in point is the following statement:
"We cannot, therefore, agree with respondents that the doctrine of Plessy V. Ferguson, 1896, 163 U.S. 537, 16
S.Ct. 1138, 41 L.Ed. 256, requires affirmance of the judgment below. Non need we reach the petitioner's contention
that Plessy V. Ferguson should be re-examined in the light of contemporary knowledge respecting the purposes of
the Fourteenth Amendment and the effects of racial segregation. See, supra, pg 631." (pp. 635-636.)
134. And in the McLaurin case the significance of the special situation is noted by the Court:
"Our society grows increasingly complex, and our need for trained leaders increases correspondingly. Appellant's
case represents, perhaps, the epitome of *27 that need, for he is attempting to obtain an advanced degree in
education, to become, by definition, a leader and trainer of others. Those who will come under his guidance and
influence must be directly affected by the education he receives. Their own education and development will
necessarily suffer to the extent that his training is unequal to that of his classmates. State-imposed restrictions
which produce such inequalities cannot be sustained.
"It may be argued that appellant will be in no better position when these restrictions are removed, for he may
still be set apart by his fellow students. This we think is irrelevant. There is a vast difference a constitutional
difference between restrictions imposed by the state which prohibit the intellectual commingling of students, and
the refusal of individuals to commingle where the state presents no such bar Appellant having been admitted
to
a
state-supported graduate school, he must receive the same treatment at the hands of the state as students of other
races." (pp. 641, 642.)
135. In the Sweatt and McLaurin cases the Court specifically refused to consider the issue of constitutionality of
racial separation in schools of equal facility in view of contemporary knowledge and held only that where the State did
not furnish equal facilities for one race, the students of that race were being denied equal protection of the laws.
Appellees contend that this refusal by the Court to review the Plessy and Gong-Lum doctrines in its later decisions *28
can only be interpreted to support the view that those cases still stand as expressions of the rule established by the
Supreme Court upon the question of racial segregation within the public schools.
136. Notable among decisions since the Sweatt and McLaurin cases are Carr V. Corning, 182 F.2d 14; Briggs V.
Elliott, 98 F Supp. 529; and Davis V. County School Board, 103 F Supp. 337, the latter two cases now pending before
this Court on appeal. Carr V. Corning involved the public school system of the District of Columbia. There the Court
noted a fact that we deem most significant with respect to the original meaning and intent of the Fourteenth
Amendment. It was pointed out that in the same year that Congress proposed the amendment, federal legislation was
enacted providing for segregation of the races in the public schools in the District of Columbia.
"We are not unmindful of the debates which occurred in Congress relative to the Civil Rights Act of April 9, 1866,
the Fourteenth Amendment, and the Civil Rights Act of March 1, 1875. But the actions of Congress, the discussion
in the Civil Rights Cases, and the fact that in 1862, 1864, 1866 and 1874 Congress, as we shall point out in a
moment, enacted legislation which specifically provided for separation of the races in the schools of the District of
Columbia, conclusively support our view of the Amendment and its effect." (p. 17.)
*29 Here we note the parallel situation in the State of Kansas. There the State, through its Legislature, ratified
the Fourteenth Amendment in 1867, and only one year later legislation providing for separation of the races in the
public schools of first class cities was enacted. (L. 1868, ch 18.)
137. An examination of all the cases in American jurisdictions supporting the appellants' position would become
repetitious and tedious. Thus, we refrain from an exhaustive survey. We believe the comment of Circuit Judge Parker
in Briggs V. Elliott, supra, aptly summarizes the law and its justification:
"One of the great virtues of our constitutional system is that, while the federal government protects the
fundamental rights of the individual, it leaves to the several states the solution of local problems. In a country with
a great expanse of territory with peoples of widely differing customs and ideas, local self government in local
matters is essential to the peace and happiness of the people in the several communities as well as to the strength
and unity of the country as a whole. It is universally held, therefore, that each state shall determine for itself,
subject to the observance of the fundamental rights and liberties guaranteed by the federal Constitution, how it
shall exercise the police. power, i.e., the power to legislate with respect to the safety, morals, health and general
welfare. And in no field is this right of the several states more clearly recognized than in that of public
education." (P. 532.)
30 Justice Holmes has expressed the following view:
"I must add one general consideration. There is nothing that I more deprecate than the use of the Fourteenth
Amendment beyond the absolute compulsion of its words to prevent the making of social experiments that an
important part of the community desires, in the insulated chambers afforded by the several states, even though
the experiments may seem futile or even noxious to me and to those whose judgment | most respect.
(Holmes, J., dissenting opinion, Truax V. Corrigan, 257 U.S. 312, p. 344, 42 S.Ct. 124, 66 L.Ed. 254, 27 A.L.
R. 375.)"
138. It is undoubtedly true that the separate but equal doctrine is susceptible of abuse. In many instances it has
resulted in a separate and unequal rule in practice. However, it is the impossibility of equality under such a doctrine,
and not the difficulty of administering and applying the same with equality, that would make such a doctrine
unconstitutional per se. The situation in Topeka is one where substantial equality has been reached. Such was the
finding of the Court below (R. 245) and such is apparently conceded by the appellants (Appellants' Brief, p. 5). These
facts, under authority of decisions heretofore reviewed, compel an inescapable conclusion : Neither the statute of
Kansas nor the action of the appellee, Board of Education, offends the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution.
*31 THE PROSPECT.
139. At the outset we suggested that the Kansas statute is permissive and that any Board of Education included in
the statute may adopt a policy consistent with local conditions and local attitudes. We believe it is significant that
under this statute by a process of evolution the people in Kansas communities are arriving at their own solutions to
this problem. Under the statute 12 cities are authorized to maintain separate schools for colored students. The files of
the State Superintendent of Public Instruction indicate that at the present time, only nine cities exercise the power
conferred by statute. Wichita, the largest city in the state, has abandoned segregation only recently. The city of
Pittsburg abandoned the policy of segregation only two years ago. Lawrence, seat of the state university, is now in the
process of ending the operation of segregated schools.
140. This account of events not in the record is related to illustrate the wisdom which underlies the Kansas statute.
Only those cities where local conditions produce special problems making segregation desirable need adopt the
expedient of segregation. In the orderly progress of the community, these special problems are either solved or
vanish, and when the need for segregation disappears, its practice may be discontinued. This was the method
provided *32 by the legislature of the State of Kansas to achieve the goal of an integrated school system where
segregation is not needed. We respectfully suggest to the court that this evolutionary process permitting an
autonomous solution in the community is consistent with the purpose and intent of the Fourteenth Amendment.
*33 2
THE DISTRICT COURT'S FINDING OF FACT NO. VIII IS INSUFFICIENT TO ESTABLISH APPELLANTS' RIGHT
TO INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND TO REQUIRE REVERSAL OF THE JUDGMENT BELOW.
(a) Counsel for Appellants have overstated their case.
141. Appellant has raised and preserved this issue by its third Assignment of Error, to wit:
"The District Court erred:
"3. In refusing to enter judgment in favor of plaintiffs, after the court found that plaintiffs suffered serious harm
and detriment in being required to attend segregated elementary schools in the City of Topeka, and were deprived
thereby of benefits they would have received in a racially integrated school system." (R. 250.)
142. And by adopting its Assignment of Errors in its Statement of Points to Be Relied Upon (R. 253).
143. The District Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law appear at pp. 244 to 247 of the Transcript of the
Record.
144. There is no Finding of Fact which literally and specifically corresponds to the finding mentioned in Appellants'
third Assignment of Error.
145. At page 2 of the Brief for Appellants under the heading Questions Presented, appellants state the second
issue, as follows:
*34 "Whether the finding of the court below-that racial segregation in public elementary schools has the
detrimental effect of retarding the mental and educational development of colored children and connotes
governmental acceptance of the conception of racial inferiority---compels the conclusion that appellants here are
deprived of their rights to share equally in educational opportunities in violation of the equal protection clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment."
146. There is no Finding of Fact which literally and specifically corresponds to the finding mentioned in appellants'
statement of the second issue.
147. At page 10 of the Brief for Appellant, counsel state:
"Applying this yardstick, any restrictions or distinction based upon race or color that places the Negro at a
disadvantage in relation to other racial groups in his pursuit of educational opportunities is violative of the equal
protection clause.
"In the instant case, the court found as a fact that appellants were placed at such a disadvantage and were
denied educational opportunities equal to those available to white students.
"Thus, notwithstanding that it had found inequality in educational opportunity as a fact, the court concluded as a
matter of law that such inequality did not constitute a denial of constitutional rights, saying:
148. There is no such finding of fact in the Record in this case.
*35 With all respect due to able counsel for appellants we believe that in their zeal for their cause, they have
overstated their case. The only existing Finding of Fact which is relied upon by appellants and the only one quoted
in their brief is the District Court's Finding of Fact No. VIII, which we quote accurately:
"Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect upon the colored children.
The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law; for the policy of separating the races is usually
interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the Negro group. A sense of inferiority affects the motivation of a child
to learn. Segregation with the sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to retain the educational and mental
development of Negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would receive in a racial
integrated school system."
149. We call attention to the fact that the foregoing Finding is couched only in broad and general language; it
makes no specific or particular reference to any of the appellants, non to the grade schools in Topeka, non to racial
groups other than Negroes, non to inequality of educational opportunities between Negroes and other racial groups.
The substance of the finding can be summarized in the following statement: 'Generally speaking, segregation
is
detrimental to colored children, and deprives them of some *36 benefits they would receive in a racial integrated
school system.'
150. The Finding of Fact No. VIII cannot be stretched, as counsel for appellants apparently would like to stretch it,
into a finding that the appellants in this case have "suffered serious harm in being required to attend segregated
elementary schools in Topeka" and that "appellants were placed at such a disadvantage (in relation to other racial
groups in [their] pursuit of educational opportunities) and were denied educational opportunities equal to those
available to white students."
(b) Elements Necessary to Entitle Appellants to Injunctive Relief and to a Reversal of the Judgment in
This Case.
151. To establish appellants' right to injunctive relief and to reversal of the judgment in this case, the Findings of
Fact No. VIII would have to show:
(1) That the appellants have actually suffered personal harm as the result of attending segregated schools in
Topeka; and,
(2) Either that appellants are being deprived of benefits which other students in the Topeka school system enjoy, or
that appellants are being subjected to detriments to which other students in the Topeka school system are not
being subjected, by reason of maintenance of a segregated school system.
*37 The mere showing that appellants may be members of a class which is being discriminated against by
reason of a statute is not sufficient to entitle them to injunctive relief, unless appellants can also show that they
personally are suffering harm. The Fourteenth Amendment protects only personal and individual rights.
152. The mere showing that appellants can show that they are being deprived of benefits they would receive under
a different system of schools is not sufficient to show that they are being deprived of equal protection of the law,
unless appellants can also show that under the existing segregate school system there are others who are not deprived
of such benefits.
153. And finally, the mere showing that segregation is detrimental to appellants is not sufficient to show that they
are being deprived of equal protection of the laws, unless they also show that segregation is not similarly detrimental
to others in the Topeka school system.
McCabe V. A. T. & S. F. Ry. Co., 235 U.S. 151, 59 Law Ed. 149:
"There is, however, an insuperable obstacle to the granting of the relief sought by this bill. It was filed, as we
have seen, by five persons against five railroad corporations to restrain them from complying with the state
statute. The suit had been brought before the law went into effect, and this *38 amended bill was filed very
shortly after. It contains some general allegations as to discriminations in the supply of facilities and as to the
hardships which will ensue. It states that there will be 'A multiplicity of suits, there being at least 'fifty thousand
persons of the Negro race in the state of Oklahoma' who will be injured and deprived of their civil rights. But we
are dealing here with the case of the complainants, and nothing is shown to entitle them to an injunction. It is
an elementary principle that, in order to justify the granting of this extraordinary relief, the complainant's need
of it, and the absence of an adequate remedy at law, must clearly appear. The complainant cannot succeed
because someone else may be hurt. Non does it make any difference that other persons who may be injured are
persons of the same race or occupation. It is the fact, clearly established, of injury to the complainant---not to
others---which justifies judicial intervention." (p. 162.)
Turpin V. Lemon, 187 U.S. 51, 47 Law Ed. 70:
"This is an effort to test the constitutionality of the law, without showing that the plaintiff had been injured by
its application, and, in this particular, the case falls without ruling in Tyler V. Registration Court Judges, 179 U.S.
405, 45 L.Ed. 252, 21 Sup. Ct. Rep. 206, wherein we held that the plaintiff was bound to show he had personally
suffered an injury before he could institute a bill for relief. In short, the case made by the plaintiff is purely
academic." (pp. 60, 61.)
*39 Thomas Cusack Co. V. Chicago, 242 U.S. 526, 61 Law Ed. 472:
"He who is not injured by the operation of a law or ordinance cannot be said to be deprived by it of either
constitutional right or of property." (p. 530.)
Mallinckrodt Chemical Works V. Missouri ex rel. Jones, 238 U.S. 41, 59 E.Ed. 1192:
"As has been often pointed out, one who seeks to set aside a state statute as repugnant to the Federal
Constitution must show that he is within the class with respect to whom the act is unconstitutional, and that the
alleged unconstitutional feature injures him." (p. 54.)
(c) Finding of Fact No. VIII Fails to Disclose That Any of the Appellants Have Been Actually and Personally
Harmed by Segregation in the Topeka Schools.
154. Finding of Fact No. VIII makes no specific reference to the individual appellants. It expresses only in broad
generalities the effect of segregation in the public schools upon colored children as a class. There is no specific finding
that segregation has had a personal detrimental effect upon any of the appellants. There is no specific finding that any
of the appellants personally has interpreted segregation as denoting inferiority of the Negro group, or that the
motivation to learn of any of the appellants has been affected *40 by a sense of inferiority. There is no finding that the
educational and mental development of any of the appellants has actually been retained or retarded by reason of
segregation in the Topeka schools. In short there is no finding that any of the appellants individually and actually has
been harmed by segregation in the Topeka school system.
(d) Finding of Fact No. VIII Fails to Disclose That Appellants Are Being Deprived of Equal Protection of the
Laws, or That They Are Being Discriminated Against by Segregation in the Topeka Schools.
155. Denial of equal protection of the laws, or discrimination, logically and necessarily involves at least two persons
who are being treated differently. Denial of equal protection must mean denial of protection or opportunity equal to
that afforded to someone else. There can be no such thing as "unilateral discrimination."
156. Since the Finding of Fact No. VIII is limited solely to a statement of the effect of segregation on colored
children as a group, and nowhere mentions the effect of segregation upon any other race or group, it cannot
reasonably or logically show discrimination or a denial of equal protection of the laws.
157. Nowhere in the finding has the court disclosed any facts upon which it can be claimed to show discrimination
in *41 favor of white children over colored in segregated schools.
158. It is idle on this appeal to speculate upon what the trial court might have found had it been requested to
make additional findings. No request for additional findings was made in the trial court. We therefore refrain from
speculating as to whether the court would also have found that segregation was detrimental to white children and
impaired their educational and mental development.
(e) The District Court Did Not Intend Nor Consider / its Finding of Fact No. VIII To Be a Finding of
Discrimination Against Appellants.
159. The last sentence in Finding of Fact No. VIII summarizes the entire finding. We quote:
"Segregation with the sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to retain the educational and mental
development of Negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would receive in a racial integrated
school system."
160. We believe the court intended the finding to mean simply that colored children would be better off in
integrated schools than they are in segregated schools. Conceding that that is the meaning of the finding, it does not
amount to a finding of actual discrimination against colored children and in favor of white children upon the facts in
this case. White children are not permitted to attend integrated *42 schools in Topeka. The mere fact, if it be a fact,
that the Topeka school system could be improved so far as education of colored children is concerned, does not prove
discrimination against them.
161. In the opinion of the District Court (R. 238 to 244). 98 F Supp. 797. no mention is made of Finding of Fact No.
VIII. It is clear the District Court did not consider or intend to attach to that finding the same significance which
appellants seek to place upon it.
162. We do not question that if the Finding of Fact No. VII means everything appellants claim it means, they would
be entitled to an injunction and reversal of the judgment, if this court should overrule the "separate but equal
doctrine." However, it is clear that the District Court did not intend or consider the finding to mean all the things
appellants claim for it. As stated in the Decree of the District Court:
"The Court has heretofore filed its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law together with an opinion and has held
as a matter of law that the plaintiffs have failed to prove they are entitled to the relief demanded."
43 IX
CONCLUSION
1 In view of the authorities heretofore cited, appellees respectfully submit that the judgment of the court below
should be affirmed.
Rituparna Borah V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Rituparna Borah and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 260 of 2023
Decided on April 26, 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Vrinda Grover Advocate
NDEX
Sr. No.
Particulars
1.
Additional Note by Ms. Vrinda Grover in response to query posed by the Hon'ble Justices during oral
submissions
2.
"Transgender India: Understanding Third Gender Identities and Experiences", Douglas A. Vakoch, 2022
Springer. The relevant Chapter 12, extracted: " "Families We Choose": Kinship Patterns among Migrant
Transmen in Bangalore, India", Agaja Puthan Purayil
3.
"With Respect to Sex: Negotiating Hijra Identity in South India," Gayatri Reddy, 2005, University of
Chicago Press. The relevant Chapter 7 extracted: " Our People": Kinship, Marriage and the Family"
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 260 OF 2023
In the Matter of:
Rituparna Borah & Ors
Petitioners
V.
Union of India Respondent
Additional Note by Ms. Vrinda Grover in response to query posed by the Hon'ble Justices during oral
submissions
1. That on 25.04.2023, during the course of oral submissions before the Constitution Bench, a query was posed to
the counsel by HMJ SR Bhat, regarding documentation of forms of marriage of transgender persons. It was directed by
the Hon'ble Justices that the same may be responded to by filing a short note on the point.
2. That in pursuance of the aforesaid direction, the present additional note is hereby filed, along with two
documents for the purpose of illustration, regarding documentation of forms of conjugal and non conjugal intimacies of
transgender persons, including marriage. For the sake of brevity, only the relevant chapter(s) has been extracted from
the books, and is filed herewith along with the present additional note.
3. The first document being filed is a chapter from the book titled, Transgender India: Understanding Third Gender
Identities and Experiences", Douglas A. Vakoch, 2022 Springer. The relevant chapter being Chapter 12, titled,
"Families We Choose": Kinship Patterns among Migrant Transmen in Bangalore, India", Agaja Puthan Purayil, at Pages
183 to 193 of the book. The same is at Page 3-14 in the present additional note.
4. The second document being filed is a chapter from the book titled, "With Respect to Sex: Negotiating Hijra
Identity in South India", Gayatri Reddy, 2005, University of Chicago Press. The relevant chapter being Chapter 7 titled,
""Our People": Kinship, Marriage and the Family", at Pages 142 to 185 of the book. The same is at Page 15-37 in
the present additional note.
5. The aforesaid documents illustrate that it is well documented that queen and trans people have relied on conjugal
as well as non conjugal social formations and intimacies to provide for caregiving, companionship and inter-
dependency, all elements of life ordinarily and customarily identified with family. The lived realities documented in this
literature demonstrates that kinship bonds between unrelated persons could be experienced as equivalent of biological
or legal ties, especially in the context of queer and trans lives.
6. That this additional note is filed to assist the Hon'ble Bench on the specific query stated above.
3
Douglas A. Vakoch Editor
Transgender
India
Understanding Third Gender Identities
and Experiences
Springer
Chapter 12
Families We Choose" Kinship Patterns among Migrant Transmen in Bangalore, India
Agaja Puthan Purayil
12.1 Transmen: The Invisible Population
7. Transmen or FTMs (Female to Male transgender individuals), terms I will use interchangeably in this chapter, are
people who are assigned female gender at birth, but who disidentify with this assigned gender and desire to live
instead as men. Jaison Cromwell (1999) discusses four levels of marginalization and invisibility faced by transmen and
FTMs. The first level comes from discourses like anthropology, psychology, and history, where the discourses
purposefully invisibilize transmen by maintaining that these individuals are actually women, as the truth of their
genden identity lies with their female bodies. The second level comes from medical and popular discourses. In
Cromwell's view, these discourses articulate transmen and FTMs as pathological women. Third, many FTMs chose to be
invisible by living as men. Hence they are invisible as transgender people, but visible as men. Fourth, if society finds
out that a particular person is a transman, he will be treated as less than fully real. This may contribute to the loss
of
partners, friends, and employment opportunities. Hence there is always a danger associated with their trans identity.
8. As Tanupriya points out in Chap. 11, female masculinities have received inadequate attention in both Indian and
Western academia. Transmen are highly invisible in India. Scholarship on transgender people in India discusses
extensively the lived experiences of transwomen or hijras (e.g., Reddy 2005 and Nanda 1999). Transmen are invisible
in all these writings. Being born female, leaving their biological families, and forming groups akin to the groups formed
by hijras have been relatively difficult for transmen. Hence, they have remained invisible.
9. This chapter explores the experiences of transmen who migrated from their birthplaces in villages or towns to
Bangalore, the capital of the Karnataka state in India. They built solidarities between themselves. They supported each
other, cared for each other, and slowly built a home in the city. Their family consists of transmen brothers and their
female partners, providing them with their strongest support system in the city. Some of them call it a family, while
others avoid calling it a family for fear of going back to the same system that rejected them. This chapter thus
examines the dynamics of kinship patterns among migrant transmen in Bangalore, drawing on field data from
transmen who have moved from towns and villages of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, and rural areas of Karnataka
state.
10. While having a conversation with one of my respondents, he suddenly told me that whenever he reads any
research on trans persons, he always finds that the writers argue that transgender persons are suffering. He then
suggested to me, "Why don't you say to your readers that we are trying to find meaning and happiness in this city,
despite difficulties and challenges in life." This was the starting point for thinking about the concept of Bangalore as a
home for its trans migrants. Other chapters in this volume articulate the multiple levels of discrimination transgender
persons encounter in their everyday lives. To live a transgender life is difficult in a cisnormative society, as suggested
by all contributors to this volume. This chapter focuses on two key questions. First, how do the dynamics of kinship
patterns formed by transmen serve as the basis for a strong support system in the city? Second, how do migrant
transmen find meaning and happiness despite the marginalization and discrimination they encounter in their day-to-
day lives?
12.2 Marginalization and Discrimination in Natal Homes
11. From villages and towns in South India, a large number of transmen migrate to Bangalore to escape the
violence and discrimination they encountered in their birthplaces. Bangalore is characterized by a large population of
migrants from across the country. This helps transmen build a safe space in the city, where anonymity helps them
avoid frequent questions about their gender and sexual identities, while providing the freedom to express their
identities as they wish. Suresh is a 36-year-old transman. (To protect the identity of respondents, all names used in
this chapter are pseudonyms.) He migrated to Bangalore in 2003, and he recounts his childhood in Kerala.
When we grow up, we recognize the changes in the body. I hated being a girl. But society keeps on reminding
you that you are a girl. They will always demand you not to do this. I hated to obey. My parents were angry with
me. They started harassing me physically and mentally.
12. Starting in childhood, he used to wear boys' clothes at home. But when he reached fourth class, his parents
asked him not to wear boys' clothes anymore. He played cricket at the time and was part of a cricket club, so he tried
to convince his parents that since he played cricket, he preferred to wear boys' clothes. His parents were dissatisfied
with him, and when he did not obey them, they beat him and even mentally tortured him. However, he could never be
happy with his assigned gender. Despite being tortured, he continued to wear the kind of clothes he wanted to wear.
He hated wearing girls' uniforms, which was required as he advanced in school, and ultimately he stopped going to
school. Many transmen have encountered the same problem, and one of the major reasons for the high rate of dropout
among transmen is their inability to conform with expected gender norms.
13. The physical and mental harassment Suresh received from his parents forced him to leave his hometown. He
initially contacted a child helpline for assistance, and the helpline authorities introduced him to a Kerala-based NGO
working with sexual minorities. This NGO had contact with a Bangalore-based NGO that I will refer to by the
pseudonym Saheli. Through Saheli, Suresh migrated to Bangalore in 2003.
14. Saheli was formed in 2001 to ensure the rights of sexual minorities. During the early 2000s, it formulated a
funding program with the help of a foreign donor to help runaway transmen and their partners. When transmen and
their partners came to Bangalore, Saheli provided a variety of support, including food, shelter, protection, legal
support, and employment assistance. The organization is not currently providing shelter for migrant transmen, but
during its initial stages the support provided by Saheli helped transmen build their own space in the city. Those who
came and settled earliest started providing shelter to later migrants, and with Saheli's support they could survive in
the city. Many of them are no longer associated with Saheli, but instead are connected to different NGOs in Bangalore.
However, those who received initial support from Saheli remember its critical role in helping them surviving in the city.
15. My respondent Ebin described a similar experience. He is an adopted son of a hijra mother from Mumbai who
was a sex worker. She used to visit him only during festival times, so he was fostered by her sisters. His mother never
liked him behaving like a boy. She wanted to marry him off and see him grown into an ideal woman. When he
disappointed her, she started beating him continuously to correct his behavior. He says that:
My mother's view was no different from the public. So she knew only three types of gender: hijra, male, and
female. This was new to her. So she never accepted me. She started asking questions to me like: Is that possible?
How will you get a penis? How will you be able to provide for a child? So I fought a lot with my mother. Hence, she
put me under house arrest, and I had to face lots of restrictions. My mother used to gift me pants and shirts on
special occasions. Since I behaved like a man and never showed femininity, she thought that I was behaving like
this since she gifted me pants and shirts to wear. So she burned all my pants and shirts. She gradually reduced my
freedoms, one by one.
16. Since he could not live under such restrictions and harassment, he tried to commit suicide twice. In 2004, he
ran away from his home and moved to Bangalore.
17. As these respondents tell their stories, they always experienced a conflict between their mind and their body.
Heteronormative expectations further accentuate their tensions and conflicts. As Shalini Jayaprakash argues in Chap.
2, transgender bodies defy societal expectations by not conforming to established definitions of gender and sex. Non-
conformity is seen as a threat to the system. This in turn leads to the unleashing of violence against transgender
persons.
18. When transmen choose to run away, they look for anonymity and freedom to escape from the frequent
questions about their gender and sexuality. Transmen who run away with their partners look for a safe and
comfortable space to live. City spaces provide such anonymity and freedom. The existence of a large migratory
population increases the heterogeneity of city spaces. Thus, many transmen choose to migrate from their villages or
towns to metropolitan areas, and in South India, many transmen choose Bangalore for migration. The next section
examines how Bangalore became the migratory destination of transmen in South India.
12.3 Transmen Migration and Bangalore
19. Janaki Nair (2005) has tried to examine the growth and development of Bangalore through a historical lens, as
she studies the growth and evolution of Bangalore from a small town to a metropolitan city. She argues, "Bangalore
has suffered from the general neglect of urban studies in the Social Science disciplines" (17). Nain describes the
history of Bangalore as consisting of eastern and western parts. The western part is five centuries old, while the
eastern part-also known as the cantonment area built by the British army-dates back only two centuries (25). In her
view, the Bangalore region started developing with the invasion of the local chieftain Kempagowda (28). Fortified
settlements developed by him attracted artisans and merchants.
20. In 1949, the Bangalore corporation was formed by bringing together Bangalore and the cantonment under one
roof (77). In Nair's view, it took only a few decades to witness the growth of Bangalore from a small town to a
metropolitan city (79). Bangalore was the home of large-scale public sector industries, and more recently, it has
become the center of information technologies and private electronic industries (81). State-led industrialization during
the post-independence period transformed the economy of Bangalore. Later the city started developing as a center of
computer software and hardware, earning it the moniker of the Silicon Valley of India. Also, it became the center of
skilled labor in the public sector, and simultaneously engineering colleges started mushrooming in the city. All these
led to the city's growth as a center of attraction for Indian and multinational firms. Hence the city slowly became the
IT
hub of India (86). The city grew into a metropolitan city. This invited an increasing rate of migration, and the city
started accommodating people from across the country, which led to the heterogenization of the population in the city.
21. Anand is one of my study participants. He was born and brought up in Bangalore. In his view, Bangalore is a
very heterogeneous space, and that is the one reason for the city can accommodate migrants across the spectrums. As
Anand describes the city,
Bangalore has a history. Bangalore is not a Kannada kind of space. Bangalore was a hill station. It was not
culturally a Kannadiga-dominated space like Mysore. British liked Bangalore very much. British made it the capital
of Karnataka. In the entire Karnataka, the best agricultural land was in Bangalore. However, it was destroyed
because of the development. The city employed multiple kinds of people, including sex workers. You will get the
best anonymity here.
22. The anonymity of the city is a major factor that attracts transmen, who fear that if people find out their trans
identity, they will be questioned and pushed aside. Anonymity will help them to invisibilize their transgender identity
and to live as men. Along with anonymity, the specific queer activism and politics developed in the city have also
helped transmen migrate and settle in Bangalore. Anand says, "Bangalore earlier did not belong to queen people. They
fought and transformed it into a safe space" According to Sunil Mohan, Rumi Harish, and Radhika Raj (2019, 109),
"We are arguing that the few public spaces we access without fear have not existed naturally but have been built,
nurtured and cultivated under great risk, with great compromise and creativity."
12.4 Kinship Patterns among Transmen in Bangalore
23. The migrant transmen could develop strong bond and intimacy between them. Some of them preferred to stay
together as a collective. Later these bonds translated in to loosely developed kinship system. Elizabeth Freeman
(2007) has argued that the most relevant contribution of anthropologists of kinship is that they have started
recognizing that kinship is not a matter of biology, but rather it is a cultural fact. However, the gender and kinship
studies in India have yet to expand to incorporate alternate families (Kumar 2020). In this section, I will discuss how
loosely formed kinship patterns serve as the basis for a strong support system for migrant transmen in Bangalore.
24. According to Kath Weston (1997), "chosen families" are the families that lesbian and gay men choose, in
contrast to their families of origin. Chosen families are created by queen people who are rejected by their blood ties.
Weston explains, "Gay or chosen families might incorporate friends, lovers or children in any combination organized
through ideologies of love, choice, and creation" (27). She has also called this an "alternate family" (35). She argues
that through chosen families, gays and lesbians can create their own families outside of a heterosexual procreative,
reproductive framework.
25. As Weston puts it, family is a contested concept. The traditional model of the family does not accept alternative
desires and sexual orientations. Transmen either chose to migrate or were forced to migrate due to rejection and
violence from their families. However, in the city, transmen cannot live alone; they need a support system. The rate of
survival of migrant transmen in the city depends on their access to resources, and this access is determined by the
specific social locations of the trans-men. As Ken Plummer (2020, 158) suggests, "Human sexualities are grounded in
intersectional inequalities. Always shaped by class, gender, ethnicity, age, nation, and other human differences." As
Andeep, one of my respondents, explains, "There is a loosely formed kinship system among transmen, and it is
stronger amid working class folks." The basis of such a kinship pattern is solidarity and shared politics. The friendship
and bond between them transform into a strong relationship that substitutes for heterosexual families. Unlike hijras,
transmen do not have customs or norms for living with a community. They are scattered here and there in the city.
Those who need support live close to one another, with some calling this kinship arrangement a family. Others are
afraid to call it a family, as they do not want to go back to the same system that abandoned them. Therefore drawing
on Weston, | would argue that Kinship formed by migrant transmen in Bangalore is a chosen family which replaces the
biological ties. However unlike in the West, queer people in India do not have the right to adopt and hence they can
not form families through reproduction technologies or adoption as Weston mentions.
26. Bourdieu (1977) in his groundbreaking work titled Outline of Theory of Practice has differentiated between
official kinship and practical kinship. Official kinship is related to genealogy, and it is the basis of legitimizing the
kinship order. In contrast, practical kinship is based on "utilization of connections" (32) and is "non-offcial" (35). He
further defines practical kinship as being based on the practical interests of individuals. Thus, the basis of practical
kinship according to Bourdieu is not genealogical, rather is practically motivated. His argument comes from his
fieldwork on traditional Arab marriages. However, Bourdieu's practical kinship can be applied to understand queen
kinship, which is formed by individuals for a very practical purpose. Migrant transmen who were abandoned by their
blood families find an alternative family among their close friends and partners. These kinship ties challenge
genealogical assumptions and also serves as the basis of a strong support system for transmen. Thus I would argue
that, chosen families formed by transmen come under Bourdieu's practical kinship.
27. Kinship among the transmen in India is under-explored. There is vast literature on hijra kinship (Reddy 2005;
Nanda 1999). Gayathri Reddy (2005) has examined kinship among the hijras of Hyderabad and Secunderabad,
detailing ways that hijra identity is constructed through kinship based on guru-chela (master-disciple), husband, and
daughter relationships (144). She argues that hijra kinship does not conform with the procreative framework that
operates under the caste system in India (145).
28. Reddy (2005) also points out that hijras' houses include gurus, mothers, and chelas as the crucial kin bonds
through which they constitute a lineage and reckon kinship and descent (150). Hijra rules say that the real hijra is the
one who renounces sexual desire after nirvana (castration). Once they join the hijra community, they are supposed to
break all ties with their natal families. Otherwise, they will not be given due consideration within the hijra family
(147). Chelas are bound to respect their gurus, do all the domestic-household work, and also have to give a part of
their daily earnings to their gurus. In return, gurus are obliged to look after and protect their chelas, provide them
with food and clothes, and train them in the rules and customs of the hijra community (157). If chelas cannot please
their gurus, gurus can disown them and expel them from the hijra family. Nanda (1993) argues that guru-chela
relationships provide a substitute for the family system that hijras have renounced to live with their chosen identities.
29. Once part of the hijra system, it is difficult for a hijra to get out of the system even if she wishes. As the hijra
Aliya who resides in Bangalore told me, "I am stuck under this system. I wanted to run away. But they won't allow
you." I have seen her ruling her chelas, wielding her power as a guru to discipline her chelas. She has also adopted
daughters, who are very obedient to her. But still, she is not happy as she has to obey her own gurus and other elder
gurus in the household. Hijras try to build a family alternative to their blood ties, and even though their hijra family
gives them shelter and protection, it is hierarchical and following every rule is mandatory. The rules are an imitation of
the heterosexual framework, where the younger ones are supposed to obey their elders on every matter, even though
they do not want to. When the younger ones disobey, they are threatened.
30. Since the hijras are male-bodied, leaving their house and forming a community was relatively easier. Hijras also
connect their stories with the culture of India to validate their historical existence. (For more on the presence of hijras
in ancient Indian literature, see Chap. 2 by Jayaprakash and Chap. 5 by Sutradhar.) But being assigned the female
gender at birth, for transmen it is not so easy to leaving their houses, making it difficult to develop a kinship and
family system like that of the hijras.
31. I have also met transmen who are accepted by their families. They migrated to Bangalore in search of
employment. These transmen did not want to stay under the kinship pattern, but they were connected to other
transmen in the city. They invisi-bilized their trans identities to claim the privileges enjoyed by cisgender persons.
Among these groups of transmen, the most privileged ones sought independent life in the city, as their privilege gave
them access in the city, and hence they were not in need of a support system.
32. Some transmen who were initially rejected by their families are now accepted by them. But they do not wish to
go back and rejoin their families. Because they cannot live as their true selves when they are with their blood-related
families, they create a new family with fellow transmen in a kinship structure that not rigid, lacking the mandatory
rules and regulations and the kind of hierarchy practiced by hijras. Suresh describes how this chosen family serves as
a support system for runaway transmen in Bangalore:
At the time when we migrated, the internet or Facebook or WhatsApp was not that widespread. Physical space
was important for us. So we had developed a space where people migrated from different places and formed
collective solidarity. Today also I would say that such a physical space is important. We built such solidarities. I am
having years old connection with Vinu. I have a similar connection with many people here. Even though we stay in
different rented houses, we have a relationship that is beyond friendship. If you ask me that, shall we call it a
family, I am a bit nervous. Because it will bring us back to the same system which denounced us.
33. For Vinu, his family in Bangalore consists of transmen brothers and their partners. Vinu migrated from Kerala to
Bangalore in 2004, and both of his parents have died. His relatives abandoned him due to his decision to transgress
gender norms. Hijras have started adopting transmen as their sons, and Vinu was adopted by a hijra woman named
Nivedita. Vinu's friend Ebin is Nivedita's partner, and Vinu used to visit Nivedita along with Ebin. Slowly Vinu became
close to Nivedita, and she adopted him as her son and he later became a member of the hijra family. His other
transmen friends know about this, and they do not have any problem with him being part of the hijra family. As Vinu
summarizes;
I have felt that Bangalore is a home for me developed out of friendship networks. Another home is that part of
hijra culture. Inside it is part of their family. My father and mother have died. My family consists of my friends. My
partner Bhama was Nivedita's friend. After Bhama's death, | had no space to stay. So I lived with people from
different communities. I became close to Nivedithamma through Ebin. At that time I did not consider her as my
mother. She was a good friend. After that, only she accepted me as her son. Here among friends, | have another
family. Let it be Niranjan or Maya [a transman and his female partner]. | consider Niranjan as my elder brother.
Pointing out Maya, he says, I am considering her as my sister-in-law. | call her nathoon [a Malayalam term for
sister-in-law]. That is another form of relation. Friends are another kind of relationship. Suresh is my friend. For me,
his partner is like a younger sister. | also have relationships beyond the community. Some people call me a bhava.
Bhava in Kannada means sister's husband. Heterosexual people who work for the community call me bhava. But I
have a family in the community. This family consisting of transmen is my favorite.
34. Pranav is a transman who migrated to Bangalore from a village in Tamil Nadu in 2008. Pranav has a different
opinion on this. Pranav says that transmen are limitating hijra kinship. In his view, such solidarities exist only among
working-class trans-men. He believes that privileged transmen do not need such a support system and hence mostly
prefer individual life in the city. Like Pranav says, the transmen who live like a family mostly come from marginalized
social backgrounds. They need support and solidarities to survive in the city as they have access to only limited
resources in the city. Privileged transmen might be connected to these transmen families, but they do not stay under
a family or kinship framework because they do not need a support system like transmen from marginalized
backgrounds. The privileged transmen I met preferred independent life. They could also access the wider networks and
resources in the city. Thus a family out of shared solidarities was not a necessity for them. He emphasizes,
Recently onwards a loosely structured kinship system has developed among the transmen. But you cannot see
such a kinship system among urban privileged transmen. They mostly prefer individual life. There are many
transmen in the city. But those groups of transmen stand together always. Since they are not privileged that kind of
a family unit is very much needed for them.
35. However it is evident from the narratives that traditional kinship system like that of Hijras is absent among
transmen. Pushpesh Kumar (2020) argues that most queen persons in India live a hybrid existence, which means they
are connected to their natal families, while simultaneously secretly sustaining their alternate kin networks. Hijras
persons; he has studied mention about this hybrid existence. They are married to heterosexual women, and they find
it challenging to give up these ties out of fear of losing the honor and dignity of their natal families. However, they
secretly maintain homoerotic relations and follow a 'hybrid' life. Therefore in Kumar's view chosen families advocated
by Weston does not exist in India and even if it exists, it is more prominent among elite queers. His argument is
limited, because his conclusions are drawn from fieldwork conducted among hijras and he has ignored the existence of
transmen. As I emphasized earlier, the kin network found among trans-men has replaced biological families, not
merely supplemented them as Kumar contends for queer Indians more generally. Moreover as demonstrated earlier
most of the transmen who were part of such a kinship, belonged to lower socio-economic locations.
12.5 Bangalore as 'Home'
36. Alison Blunt and Robyn Dowling (2006, 10) differentiate the concepts of house and home. Whereas a house is
just a dwelling, "home is a series of feelings and attachments, some of which, some of the time, and in some places
are connected to a physical structure that provides shelter." While you might live in your house, you may never feel an
attachment with your dwelling, and thus not feel like your house is also a home. The reverse is also possible. A home
does not need to be a house. The sense of belongingness that comes with being at home is not restricted to a specific
physical enclosure. This is necessarily attached with the concept of home.
37. Blunt and Dowling (2006) have identified three defining characteristics of the home. First, it is material and
imaginative. Second, it is related to identity and power. Finally, home is multi-scalar. Home is material and
imaginative because home is an emotional space, with a set of attached feelings. Home does not simply exist; it is
created and re-created continually. Second, home is related to people's sense of self. Identities are produced through
relations of power, so for example, home may be more closely associated with feelings of isolation for women than for
men. Finally, to say that home is multi-scalar means that the home is more than a mere dwelling. As Blunt and
Dowling (2006, 29) describe home, "It can be a suburb, neighborhood, nation or indeed the world." Drawing on Blunt
and Dowling's conceptualization, I argue that Bangalore is a home for the migrant transmen and their female partners
who were forced to migrate to Bangalore from their villages or towns.
38. While a city is a space that accommodates heterogeneity, it is also a space of marginalization and exclusion.
These transmen also have faced issues and confrontations concerning their identities. They find constraints in getting
shelter and jobs due to their gender identity. Even though the anonymity of the city spaces provide freedom, before
transition transmen encounter many difficulties. Suresh shared with me that while he was traveling in an auto before
his transition, the driver quarreled with him and asked him to prove whether he was a man or woman. Similarly, Vinu
told me that during the initial stages of post-migration he had searched for employment at various shops. Shop
owners used to advise him to come by wearing a saree if he wanted the job. After Vinu's transition, he is able to hide
his identity and hence he manages to escape from such humiliation. Transmen in Bangalore also find difficulty in
getting jobs outside of NGOs.
39. Apart from that, the new trans act passed by the government of India poses a major challenge to the entire
transgender community, including transmen. Previously transmen were able to change their name and gender on their
identity cards once they managed to get their psychiatrists to certify that they met the criteria for Gender Identity
Disorder (GID). But the new trans act gives the district magistrate the power to decide the gender of transgender
persons. As Sangeetha Sriraam contends in Chap. 8 of this volume, this is a violation of the 2014 NALSA judgment,
which gave transgender individuals the right to self-identification of gender. As Sriraam reminds us, this change could
lead to the institutionalization of socio-historical mar-ginalization of transgender persons. Transmen face multiple
forms of marginaliza-tion and discrimination in their lives, but they have learned to question it, and they are trying to
find happiness in the face of challenging circumstances.
40. Compared to their natal homes, where transmen were born and brought up, Bangalore has accommodated
them, it has provided shelter for them, and the anonymity of the city has given them the great freedom to live with
their genden and sexuality. Along with it, the language of queen politics in the city has given them a kind of boldness
to question the status quo. The bond between transmen brothers and their partners constitutes a family for them that
replaces their biological families. All my respondents told me that Bangalore is a safe and comfortable space for them.
The anonymity and the specifically migratory nature of the city have helped them to build a home here. None of them
want to go back; they feel that Bangalore is their home. As Blunt and Dowling (2006, 10) argue, home is a feeling of
"being at home."
12.6 City and Politics of 'Hope': Toward a Conclusion
41. Bangalore is a migratory destination for many transmen and their female partners in South India. They leave
their natal homes to escape the violence and harassment from their natal families. Bangalore has helped them to
develop a safe space despite many challenges. Bangalore is a home that they create and re-create continuously.
Bangalore is also a space that marginalizes and excludes many of its inhabitants, where access to resources is a
determining factor. But compared to the places they were born, Bangalore gives transmen the great freedom to live. It
gives them a family based on shared politics. The city of Bangalore has given a 'home' and 'hope' to its transmen
migrants.
References
Blunt, Alison, and Robin Dowling. 2006. Home: Key Ideas in Geography. New York: Routledge. Bourdieu, Pierre.
1977. An Outline of Theory of Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Cromwell, Jaison. 1999. Transmen & FTMs: Identities, Bodies, Genders, and Sexualities.
Champagne, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Freeman, Elizabeth. 2007. Queer Belongings: Kinship Theory and Queen Theory. In A companion to Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender, and Queen Studies, ed. George Haggerty and Molly
McGarry, 295-314. Madden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. Harish, Rumi, Sunil Mohan, and Radhika Raj. 2019. Non-
Normativity and Discrimination in Public Spaces. In Mumbai: Advanced Centre for Women's studies (ACWS). Tata
Institute of Social: Sciences.
Kumar, Pushpesh. 2020. Deterritorializing Heteronormative Family and Kinship: Hybrid Existence and Queen
Intimacies in Contemporary India. In Exploring Sociabilities of Contemporary India: New Perspectives, ed. Sujata
Patel, 170-198. Hyderabad: Orient Blackswan.
Nair, Janaki. 2005. The Promise of the Metropolis: Bangalore's Twentieth Century. New Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
Nanda, Serena. 1999. Neither Man nor Woman: Hijras of India. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishers.
Plummer, Ken. 2020. Critical Sexualities Studies: Moving on. In The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Sociology, ed.
George Ritzen and Wendy W. Murphy, 156-173. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Reddy, Gayathri. 2005. With respect to sex: Negotiating Hijra identity in South India. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Weston, Kath. 1997. Families We Choose: Lesbians, Gays, Kinship. New York: Columbia University Press.
Worlds of Desire: The Chicago Series on Sexuality, Gender, and Culture
Edited by Gilbert Herdt
ALSO
IN THE SERIES: American Gay by No Place Like Home: Relationships and Family Life among Lesbians and
Stephen O. Murray
Gay Men by Christopher Carrington
Out in Force: Sexual Orientation and the Beyond Carnival: Male Homosexuality in Twentieth-Century Brazil by
Military edited by Gregory M. Herek, fared James N. Green
B. Jobe, and Ralph M. Carney
Queen Forster edited by Robert K. Martin A Plague of Paradoxes: AIDS, Culture, and Demography in Northern
and George Piggford
Tanzania by Philip W. Setel
The Cassowary's Revenge: The Life and The Course of Gay and Lesbian Lives: Social and Psychoanalytic
Death of Masculinity in a New Guinea Perspectives by Bertram J. Cohler and Robert M. Galatzer-Levy
Society by Donald Tuzin
Mema's
House,
Mexico
City: On Homosexualities by Stephen O. Murray
Transvestites, Queens, and Machos by The Bedtrick: Tales of Sex and Masquerade by Wendy Doniger
Annick Prieur
Travesti: Sex, Gender, and Culture among Money, Myths, and Change: The Economic Lives of Lesbians and Gay
Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes by Don Men by M. V. Lee Badgett
Kulick
Sambia Sexual Culture: Essays from the The Night Is Young: Sexuality in Mexico in the Time of AIDS by Hector
Field by Gilbert Herdt
Carrillo
Gay
Men's
Friendships:
Invincible The Emerging Lesbian: Female Same-Sex Desire in Modern China by
Communities by Peter M. Nardi
Tze-lan D. Sang
Coyote Nation: Sexuality, Race, and Conquest in Modernizing New
Mexico, 1880-1920 by Pablo Mitchell
With Respect to Sex
NEGOTIATING HIJRA IDENTITY IN SOUTH INDIA
Gayatri Reddy
The University of Chicago Press/Chicago and London
7
Our People"
KINSHIP, MARRIAGE AND THE FAMILY
42. In 1995, when I began my research, Saroja had just one cela (disciple), Madhavi, whom she appeared to be
extremely fond of Madhavi had been with Saroja for at least four or five years and had been an ideal cela in many
respects. She looked after her guru (master) when she was ill, cooked and cleaned for her, bore all the expenses for
her guru's frequent trips to her village, and supported Saroja when the latter did not feel like working. Although
occasionally late in her daily payments to her guru, Madhavi never rebelled against this responsibility and was always
respectful and considerate of her guru's well being. Saroja, on her part appeared to treat her cela with some
consideration, giving her gifts of saris and even gold jewelry on one occasion. For all their power differentials, relations
between the two seemed to be perfect.
43. A little over a year later, however, this situation was dramatically reversed. In December of 1996, Madhavi left
to have her nirvan (emasculation) operation, despite Saroja's objection to this procedure, which had more to do with
Saroja's resistance to relinquishing full control over her cela than with Madhavi's apparent unsuitability for the
operation. When Madhavi got back about five days later, having successfully undergone the operation, she found
herself without a home or support from any of her erstwhile "family" members. Madhavi had been physically thrown
out from under the tank and was ostracized by her guru and all her extended hijra kin. She was extremely weak from
the operation, in terrible pain, had nowhere to go, and none of her hijra kin would help her. Her guru had ordered all
the hijras at the tank to abstain from helping Madhavi in any way, on pain of social ostracism. Nobody disobeyed this
order. Madhavi was alone in her pain and misery, a fitting example of what would happen if a cela defied her guru,
Saroja told me.
44. Thrown out from under the tank, Madhavi set up house on the opposite side of the road, on a little strip of
vacant land overrun with weeds and cacti. Along with her panti-"[he man" or "husband" as she otherwise referred
to him-she cleared a bit of space on this land and constructed a little tent out of cardboard boxes, plastic wrappers,
and whatever scraps of metal they could find. Husband and wife lived a somewhat self-sufficient, if precarious and
dangerous life here, subject to the vagaries of the weather, policemen with eviction orders, and ruffians who wanted
some quick and easy money. In addition to her husband, the only other person Madhavi interacted with on a daily
basis was her (adoptive) hijra mother. Following her eviction from under the tank, Madhavi was adopted as the
daughter of Kamala, another hijra who lived nearby. Kamala was not "related" to the tank hijras any more, although
she used to live there in the past. She had changed her (hijra) house and was now living with her panti, selling illicit
liquor and drugs for a living. Kamala helped Madhavi when she needed help most. To a large extent, as Madhavi
herself acknowledges, Kamala was instrumental in keeping Madhavi alive and well during this trying period in her life.
45. About a month after her eviction from the tank, Madhavi told me gleefully that she had "[gone] and put the rit
in the Sheharwala house. "1 Her new guru was a hijra named Renuka who currently lived in Chandigarh, a north Indian
city. Madhavi's position as Renuka's cela located her three rungs below the senior-most leader or nayak of the house.
As Madhavi recounts her story, she had been a cela of this same nayak before changing houses, from Sheharwala to
Lashkarwala, about five years ago. Now, she was happy to accept a position in this same house, two rungs below that
she had occupied just five years ago.
46. This vignette points to two important issues that I explore in this chapter. First, it references the importance of
kinship, that is, social arrangements that organize the reproduction of material life, and the vital significance of these
bonds for hijra identity". For Madhavi, ft was inconceivable to remain without a kin network. She needed kin, whether
it was her mother or her guru, and not just for material but also for social and symbolic reasons. One almost never
hears of a hijra who lives and works alone. Despite incessant complaining about their burdensome obligations and the
abuse meted out to them by their gurus, none of the hijras I interacted with said they would choose to live alone. Hijra
authenticity and relatedness are evaluated in terms of belonging-having a rit, a guru, and extended hijra kin-factors
that signal not just hijra identity, but also their difference and greater izzat (respect) relative to their fellow kotis.
47. Second, this incident showcases the variety of relationships in a hijra's life-guru, mother, and husband.
2
Contrary to popular constructions of hij-ras as individuals without enduring kin ties, hijras themselves repeatedly
articulate the importance of these relationships in constructing their sense of identity. Their articulations also reveal
the hierarchical arrangement of these relationships, wherein primary legitimacy is obtained through a rit in a hijra
house and the guru-cela bond. Madhavi could have continued living an unencumbered life with her husband and
mother. But such a life was not an "authentic" hijra life. In Madhavi's conceptualization, what legitimized and
authenticated her hijra status-what in effect made her a "real hijra"-were the rit in the Sheharwala house and her
relationship with her guru.
48. Time and time again over the course of my fieldwork, the rit was mentioned as a marker of difference and izzat.
Those who had a rit in a hijra house were perceived to be of higher status than those who did not. The rit not only
denoted membership in the wider community, but also hier archized kotis along this axis of kinship. Those kotis who
3
"had a rit in the house" were official kin, while "bina ritwale," or those without a rit, were, technically, not kin. While
this did not preclude the latter from identifying as kotis, as non-hijras, it placed them lower in the hierarchy of respect
or izzat.
49. Why this privileging of kinship as a criterion of authenticity and status within the community? What is the
meaning of kinship for these individuals, and how does their construction compare with dominant patterns of kinship
in South India? How is kinship used as a status marker both within the koti community and outside of it? In this
chapter, I address these questions using the axis of kinship as a key marker of self-crafting and the means whereby
hijras and other kotis construct their identities and negotiate their izzat.
HIJRA KINSHIP AND FAMILY REDEFINED
50. Analyses of kinship in India have a long and distinguished history, dating at least from the time of Henry Maine
(1822-88) and Lewis Henry Morgan (1818-81). Studies of the family and kinship in this region have ranged from
comparative terminological analyses (Morgan 1970) to structural analyses of marital exchange in relation to governing
"values" (Dumont 1983), the discerning of "indigenous ideas of relatedness"-what Schneider called the "code" and
"substance" of kinship relations (Inden and Nicholas 1977; Ostor, Fruzzetti, and Barnett 1982; Fruzzetti 1990), the
logic of the caste system (Karve 1965; Mayer 1960), the purity of women (Yalman 1963), and the ideology of gift-
giving in relation to kinship (Trautmann 1981; Vatuk 1975; Raheja 1988). In all of these analyses of kinship, marriage
is the central and crucial variable. Problematic as Dumont's assertions might be regarding the ubiquity of the principle
of alliance in South Indian as well as North Indian kinship (see Vatuk 1969, 1982; Madan 1975; Uberoi 1989), most
scholars working on conceptions of the family and kinship in India have focused on marriage or alliance as the fulcrum
of relatedness and the central institution of kinship relations. This is especially true of South India, where "every
conceivable pattern of descent and form of marriage is represented" (Dumont 1983).
51. In fact, as Margaret Trawick notes in her book Notes on Love in a Tamil Family (1990), "[a]ny person trying to
understand South Indian culture must eventually examine and comprehend [their] elegant patterns of kinship
organization" (118). Trawick's ethnography is an elegant, "person-centered account of kinship" in South India, a
cataloguing of the patterns of kinship that highlight the importance and fundamental ambiguity of love. Her book is a
beautifully written account of the feelings of attachment between close kin in a Tamil family and the webs of
signification they weave as they mediate between the texts and contexts of their lives, between an idealized system of
kinship and the nature of desire in which the ideal can never be sustained.
52. Like many other South Indian kinship theorists, however, Trawick has as one of her goals in this book a better
understanding of the logic and aesthetics of that fundamental model or ideal of kinship in South India- the practice of
preferred or prescribed cross-cousin marriage. As she notes, "A key.. feature in the pattern of Dravidian kinship is
marriage." Without this ideal, "the organization of kinship terms and the basis of the system make no sense" (1990,
119). While Trawick, perhaps more than most other South Asian kinship theorists, acknowledges the significance of
variation- "the plurality of wills and desires that make up actual human life"-her ethnography does not really
address the specific kinship arrangements of groups such as hijras that do not explicitly acknowledge marital
obligations and procreative kinship ideologies, are not moderated by the logic of the caste system and its concern with
the "purity" of women (cf. Yalman 1963; Dumont 1983), and are unmediated by the soteriological imperative of the
kanyadana (gift of a virgin) ideal (see Trautmann 1981; Fruzzetti 1990). Given this context, perhaps the most
productive comparisons for purposes of better understanding hijra kinship structures are with those social groups that
are similarly located with respect to the non-centrality of marriage and procreative kinship arrangements, that is,
"subaltern" communities such as devadasis, so-called servants of god or "wives of the god-king" (Marglin 1985) and
tawa'ifs, or courtesans-groups that challenge the "respectability" of marriage, explicitly or implicitly subvert gender
roles, and encode an intricate guru-sisya parampara (teacher-disciple tradition) and household structure.
53. Devadasis, literally "servants of god," are women who are ritually dedicated, often before puberty, to service in
Hindu temples. Prior to the early twentieth century, when it was "outlawed," this institution was far more common,
although it continues to survive today in many parts of India, especially Orissa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Andhra
Pradesh. Devadasis do not marry (mortal) men. Their dedication to temple service constitutes marriage to the deity
Jagannatha, or the ascetic Jamadagni. As Frederique Apfel Marglin notes, "[T]he devadasis" kinship practices were
considered highly unusual among Hindu women, essentially because they do not marry. The devadasis on the other
hand are also considered in some ways to represent the married state par excellence. Being married to [the deity] and
hence never becoming widows, they embody the auspiciousness of the married state" (Marglin 1985, 46; emphasis in
original). They are in effect permanently auspicious, nityasumangali, or ever-auspicious "wife-of-god/woman-with-no-
(human)-husband" (Srinivasan 1984, 179; cf. Kersenboom-Story 1987; Meduri 1996; Allen 1997). At the same time,
however, devadasis are considered impure; an impurity that derives from their engagement with dance and its
association with sex work in nineteenth-century India. Subsequent to their "marriage" to the deity, legal marriage was
proscribed for devadasis, but sex-with a selected patron, often either the king or members of his household, or
temple priests-was not similarly proscribed. It is therefore this tension-between the auspiciousness and the impurity
of devadasis stemming from their engagement both with forms of dance and nonmarital sex-that is particularly
interesting in the context of a comparison with hijras.
54. In precolonial times, devadasis were primarily ritual performers, formally engaged in service to the temple.
They were also temple dancers- trained and associated with Indian classical dance in the context of Hindu temple
worship-an occupation that increasingly defined the understanding and representation of such women from the
nineteenth century onward (Vatsyayan 1968; Gonda 1975; Eschmann, Kulke, and Tripati 1978; Bradford 1983;
Srinivasan 1984, 1988; Marglin 1985; Meduri 1988, 1996). Women chosen for service as devadasis were trained from
childhood in the arts of song and dance, and were renowned for their abilities. 5 Such was their repute, legend has
it
that when Rama, the eponymous hero of the epic Ramayana returned from exile with his wife Sita, his joyous brother
explicitly instructed "all masters of musical instruments, and the ganika [devadasi] in full numbers" to "go out to
behold the moonlike countenance of Rama" and welcome him home (Meyer 1971, 269).
6
55. Historically, the vilification and subsequent decline in status of devadasis stems to a large extent from the
association of dance with promiscuity- from an explicit construction of devadasis as "temple prostitutes" (Srinivasan
1984; Kersenboom-Story 1987; Meduri 1996; Allen 1997). According to the well-known historian A. L. Basham, the
institution of female temple dancers used to be a pan-Indian phenomenon, at least until the turn of the century
(Basham 1959). The origins of what is today referred to as classical South Indian dance stem from just such a temple
dance tradition (Erdman 1996). By the early twentieth century, however, this tradition had survived in only a few
South Indian temples (Bradford 1983; Srinivasan 1984, 1985, 1988; Marglin 1985). It was at this period in Indian
history, in the wake of the anti-nautch campaign and the restrictive prescriptions of (colonial) Victorian morality, that
classical dance became domesticated, reformed, and "secularized"-in effect made "respectable" for middle-class
consumption through its dissociation from (Hindu) temple complexes and, by extension, from the purview of "temple
8
prostitution" and the devadasi community (Meduri 1996; Allen 1997; O'Shea 1998; cf. Reed 1998). As the
anti-
nautch campaign declared, the association between devadasis" dance traditions and their engagement in "immoral"
sex necessitated their denigration and subsequent outlawing.
9
56. In addition to the reduced emphasis on the institution of marriage and the circulation of the dance/sex/stigma
signifiers, the social structure of devadasi communities as well as many of their ritual enactments also resonate
significantly with the rituals and social bonds established within contemporary hijra communities. According to
Marglin, whatever the caste affiliation of devadasis prior to their joining the community, once they are initiated, "they
are classified simply as devadasis who are said to have no rank or caste status" (Marglin 1985, 19), a classification
beyond social boundaries that has obvious parallels with the hijra community. In addition, as several of these scholars
maintain, the specific rituals involved in the pottukattu (initiation) and the sadanku (incorporation) ceremonies that
devadasis undergo not only parallel Brahmin initiation and marriage ceremonies (Srinivasan 1984, 1988; Marglin
1985; Kersenboom-Story 1987), but also bear some resemblance to the various stages of hijra authentication,
including the rit and nirvan ceremonies.
57. Further, the principal bond for devadasis is that with their mother (whether "real" or adopted). This bond is the
key to the devadasi initiate's lineage, her social standing, and her well-being in the community, often determining her
choice of dance guru as well as the basis of her relationship with her guru (Srinivasan 1984; cf. Meduri 1996). Despite
the law of equal inheritance for sons and daughters in India (a rule that often favors sons over daughters in its
"normative" practice), within the devadasi community, it is daughters through whom descent and inheritance are
reckoned, and it is the mother-daughter relationship that forms the principal affective, material, and social bond. In
fact, as Srinivasan (1984) informs us, a "telling Tamil proverb remarks upon seeing a dark and gloomy house or atmo-
sphere: Why the mourning? It is as dark as though a boy has been born in a dasi's house" (193). Marglin notes that
even the unmarried devadasis "along with their brothers and sisters-in-law, [form] a group which has no ties with
patrilineality" (1985, 35). Such marginalization of marriage, "male issue," and patrilineality/patriarchy, the implicit or
often explicit gender subversion apparent within the devadasi community, and the structural patterns of ritual and
social organization among devadasis, make them a more useful comparison group for better understanding hijra social
structures and meanings than affinal groups organized around procreative sexuality.
58. Another useful comparison group in this regard is that of the courtesans, or tawa'ifs, in the Muslim-dominated
kingdoms of precolonial India such as Hyderabad and Awadh. These women were also associated with various forms of
dance and sex work (Lynton and Rajan 1974; Oldenburg 1984, 1992). In one of the few detailed accounts of tawa'ifs
that is both historical commentary and contemporary ethnography, Veena Oldenburg provides us with a glimpse of the
world of tawa'ifs in Lucknow, noting that this world is "as complex and hierarchical as the society of which it was a
part" (1984, 134; cf. Chandra 1973; Ruswa 1982).
59. From the end of the eighteenth century to the mid-nineteenth century, when Lucknow served as the capital of
the kingdom of Awadh, nawabs were generous patrons of the tawa'ifs (or the honorific, baiji) in this city. Well-versed
in the arts of dance, music, and entertainment, these tawa'ifs were "preservers and performers of the high culture of
the court" (Oldenburg 1992, 30) and were highly respected both in the court as well as in society at large. As one
scholar maintains, at the time, "it was said that until a person had associated with courtesans he was not a polished
man" (Sharan 1975, 192), and Oldenburg notes that "young sons of the nobility [were] often sent to the best-known
[tawc'if house holds] for instruction in etiquette, the art of conversation and polite manners, and the appreciation of
Urdu literature" (Oldenburg 1992, 30).
60. There were several tawa 'if households, or kothas, in Lucknow until the establishment of British suzerainty in the
mid-nineteenth century. These households served to entertain-and were sponsored by-different nawabs and even
the king himself. Each of these kothas was run by a chief courtesan, or caudharayan, often an older tawa'if now
engaged in training younger celas or disciples in the arts of dance, music, and gendered nakhre (play or
performance). These celas were often talented daughters (and nieces) of the household-children of the tawa'ifs and
10
their wealthy sponsors-as well as destitute or abused women who sometimes "chose" the freedom of the kotha over
the confinement of their marital lives (Oldenburg 1984, 1992). In addition to this highly trained and prestigious core
group of the caudharayan's celas, the kotha also employed people to maintain this "high culture," including special
chefs and musicians.  It also provided space for women less talented in the "high" aesthetics of pleasure, women
called thakahis and randis, who were of a different class and training than the tawa'ifs and provided "chiefly sexual
services" for the common man (Oldenburg 1992, 31). As Oldenburg emphasizes, these kothas not only provided
refuge for many women abused by their husbands and affinal families, but the worldview, lifestyle, and practices of
the tawa'ifs-primarily their gendered nakhre (performance) and their non-confrontational enactments of capatbazi, or
lesbianism-were "self-consciously elaborated, subtle, and covert forms of resistance against patriarchal
culture" (Oldenburg 1992, 23).
61. Only in the mid-nineteenth century, with the consolidation of British rule in India, did the reputation and
prestige of the tawa'it tradition decline significantly, gradually becoming synonymous with common prostitution. This
decline of their reputation and izzat was as much a response to Victorian morality and the pragmatic need to provide
"healthy specimens" for European soldiers, as a result of a deliberate effort on the part of the British to "denigrate
nawabi culture," according to the tawa'ifs interviewed by Veena Oldenburg (Oldenburg 1992, 33; cf. Ballhatchet
1980). In other words, for tawa'ifs, the golden age of their history preceded the British presence in India; their
tradition, reputation, and izzat in society were tied to the history and patronage of the nobility in Muslim-dominated
kingdoms like Awadh and Hyderabad, a kingdom to which many of them migrated after the exile of the Awadhi king,
Wajid Ali Shah in 1856 (Oldenburg 1992).
62. Much like devadasis and tawa'ifs, hijras also see their "golden age" in the past, when they received the
patronage of the nobility, both Muslim and Hindu, and were respected for their knowledge and performance of the arts
(especially song and dance). Like devadasis and tawa'ifs, hijras predicate their identities on a subversion of
"normative" marriage patterns and gender roles, are associated with a tension between sexual chastity and
"promiscuity," and encode an intricate network of kin within their households. Their "houses" include gurus, mothers,
12
and celas as the crucial kin bonds through which they constitute a lineage and reckon kinship and descent. In
addition, like those of devadasis and tawa'ifs, almost all the primary relationships of belonging and caring in hijras'
lives center within the social and physical unit that constitutes their community.
Several scholars have noted this intricate network of kin within the hijra community (Opler 1960; Shah 1961;
Sinha 1967; Salunkhe 1976; Pimpley and Sharma 1985; Sharma 1989; Nanda 1990, 1994; Cohen 1995b; Jaffrey
1996; Agrawal 1997). In none of these analyses do procreative kinship ideologies centered on the institution of
marriage occupy the primary node of hijra relatedness. While the idea of marriage and marital relations might circulate
as an important symbolic referent for hijras-as the moment of procreative potential that occasions their auspicious
presence in the public domain and as the instantiation of desire that is always in conflict with the hijra ideal-the
institution is clearly not the fulcrum of the hijra kinship structure. Ideally, marriage-to a man or a woman-is
proscribed among hijras, and affinal kin are not significant in their kinship alignments. In fact, senior hijras explicitly
invoke the rhetoric of asexuality and emphasize the renunciation of worldly ties, including especially marital ties and
procreative sexuality. According to hijras in Hyderabad, the status and power of hijras is unequivocally linked to that of
celibate sannyasis (ascetics). As Amir nayak said, "Real hijras are those who should have no mental or physical desire
for men whatsoever. This is what is important." Thus, hijra identity is primarily indexed by asexuality and the absence
of marital relationships with either men or women.
64. In addition, once they join the community, hijras are expected to cut off all ties with their natal families.
Although most hijras were abandoned by their "own" or "blood" relatives (sontham or rakta sambandam) and
remained bitter about this, in some instances hijras themselves, following the ideals of their community, renounced
ties with their natal families. Given that the hallmarks of a sannyasi are celibacy and renunciation of family ties, hijras
invoked their renunciation of natal family as a valued symbol and practice in this regard, in keeping with their
sannyasi self-image.
65. These interdictions appeared to fundamentally structure hijras' conceptions of family and kinship. As they
repeatedly stated, "family" for hijras was defined primarily in terms of other hijras, especially one's guru lineage;
relationships with other hijras (and kotis), rather than natal family or "husbands" and their kin, constituted the most
important
relational bonds for hijras. 13 "These are our people now. It is only hijras who will look after us if anything
happens," was the most commonly stated hijra sentiment. Any questions on my part regarding a hijra's relationship
with her husband and the possibility of that tie being an enduring family bond was openly laughed at and dismissed
outright. "How can they be our family? Family is manollu [our people], and they are the only ones who will take care of
us when we get older," Shanti told me.
66. Central to this understanding of family is a notion of caring, indexed principally through a temporal (and
spatial) dimension of "being there" rather than biogenetic connections (through "blood" and marriage). As with gay
kinship ideologies in the United States, hijra and koti constructions of family appear to invert the association of biology
with permanence, by presenting their "chosen" hijra/koti ties as the "most reliable and enduring of kinship
relations" (Weston 1998, 63; emphasis in original). But while partners are an integral part of the enduring chosen
family for lesbians and gay men in the United States, for hijras and kotis, their pantis or husbands are categorically
not family. By definition, a husband or panti is not a koti and is therefore excluded from "family" categorization or the
broader signifier of "our people."
67. Through such elaborations of belonging, not only do hijras and kotis potentially destabilize our "principles" of
kinship-principles of descent and alliance, consanguinity and affinity that have been a staple of anthropological
inquiry for decades (Radcliffe-Brown and Forde 1950; Levi-Strauss 1969)-they also complicate our cultural
understandings of "choice" in the context of kin relations. While the incorporation of "choice" in the definitions of
family for the gay men and women of Weston's San Francisco "assigned kinship to the realm of free will
inclination" (1991, 31), hijra and koti definitions of family do not appear to encode notions of idiosyncratic choice and
egalitarian potential in quite the same way. In fact, aside from the lack of choice that some kotis articulated in their
constructions of self and belonging, the central and only prescriptive bond in hijra conceptualizations of their family-
the guru-cela bond-was not purely idiosyncratic, being more often assigned rather than chosen, and involved far
more structured obligatory responsibilities than the gay familial relationships described by Kath Weston (1991, 1998).
68. To better understand hijra patterns of relatedness, we need to understand what, specifically, it means to
identify as a hijra or koti in Hyderabad. What are the particular historical and cultural contexts that mediate
constructions of identity and kinship within these communities? And how are these understandings of belonging,
authenticity, and relationality tied to broader constructions of self and the patterns of kinship in India? Understanding
why pantis do not constitute "family," and how relations of "koti-ness" operate through the particular networks of kin
they incorporate is one aim of this chapter. Much like the construction of gay relationships in Weston's United States,
"categories of permanence and transience" do indeed structure kotis' relationships, but such temporality is indelibly
inflected, measured, and refracted through particular, culturally mediated understandings of love, obligation, and
service-that is, caring in the broadest sense of the term (see Borneman 1997; Faubion 1997). If, as Kath Weston and
others note, individuals make their relationships not as they please but rather within given historical and cultural
circumstances, then we need to examine instantiations as well as potential inversions of "hegemonic" kinship
ideologies in terms of such specificities in order to better understand the lived meanings of kinship for these
individuals. For hijras and kotis therefore, we need to study the specific interplay of history, meaning, and practice in
their structures of kinship and belonging-the tensions and fluid relationship between their ideals and experiences, or
what Trawick would describe as the "intentional ambiguity" of love in "Indian culture" (1990, 41)-in order to
understand what it actually means to identify as a koti and the stakes implicit in this process of subjectivation (see
Foucault 1997). It is their affective bonds-of guru and cela, mother and daughter, husband and wife, sister and
gurubhai-in their historical, cultural, and gendered specificity that we must pay attention to in order to appreciate the
webs of significance hijras and kotis weave as they constantly mediate between their longings and ideals of kinship
and their actual lived experiences.
69. In this chapter, I describe the various hijra kinship bonds that most hijras establish, such as the guru-cela
relationship and the mother-daughter relationship, as well as the supposedly prohibited relationships such as the jodi
(bond) with a husband, and the tie to the natal family. The tensions between hijra desires, their structural patternings
and "rules" of kinship, and their lived experiences of these various affective bonds are crucial to understanding the
meanings of kinship and their resonance with normative kinship patterns. On the one hand, despite claiming
nonprocreative sexual identities and defying the perceived centrality of procreative sexuality to the definition of a
family, hijras appear to reinscribe hegemonic rituals and principles. This is evident in their ritualized rearticulation of
the marital bond and their mirroring of the consanguinal mother-child bond (Lewin 1998b). Similarly, by establishing
both obligatory, hierarchical relationships as well as those relatively more egalitarian relationships based on affection,
other self-identified kotis also appear to privilege "normative" familial alignments as significant for their identity and
as a means whereby they can acquire izzat. On the other hand, as Kath Weston cautions us, "ostensibly similar formal
features of kinship can carry conflicting meanings and embed subtle ideological shifts, allowing 'new' family forms to
be read simultaneously as radically innovative and thoroughly assimilationist. In the end, they are intrinsically
neither" (1998, 64). It is therefore through the complexity of hijra/koti instantiations of kinship and family, that we
can understand (and potentially destabilize) the ideal and its often ambiguous relation to lived experience-a goal
the
rest of this chapter strives toward by describing the central affective ties in the lives of hijras and kotis.
LASHKARWALA/SHEHARWALA RISTE: HIJRA HOUSES, THE RIT, AND GURU-CELA RELATIONSHIP
70. Sushmita and I were chatting in the shade of her hut. She had her legs stretched out in front of her and was
reclining against the side of the hut. I was sitting a few feet away, on the same mat. It was quiet, about two in the
afternoon, siesta time at the tank. Most other hijras were either sleeping or had gone for a movie. Suddenly, Yamini
marched up to where we were sitting and started shouting at Sushmita. She was obviously very upset about
something, and from what I understood the issue centered on Yamini's cela, Palamma. Yamini was accusing Sushmita
of negatively influencing Palamma and encouraging her to run away from her guru. That morning, Palamma had
apparently decided that Yamini was too abusive and had left for her natal village in Warangal. According to Yamini,
Sushmita was responsible for Palamma's decision, and she proceeded to abuse Sushmita, using extremely harsh and
crude language. "Was something poking you in your ass, you bhosrivala [vagina-owner], you gandu-berupia? You
14
are an andoli [orphan] koj ja, and you think you can make trouble for us real koj jas! We, me and my sisters are the
real
kojjas, not you. 15 Remember that! We have a guru, unlike you. Yamini screamed at Sushmita. She continued in
this vein for a while. By this time, everyone who was at the tank had woken up and come to see what the noise was all
about. I had moved out of Sushmita's hut, and was standing next to Surekha and Shanti, some distance away. There
were at least eight or nine hijras there, but none of them lifted a finger or said a word to stop Yamini's tirade.
Sushmita, who is not particularly small or meek in other circumstances, was just sitting in a corner taking the abuse
heaped on her with only murmurs of protest that she had nothing to do with Palamma leaving Yamini.
71. What this incident reveals, apart from the latent aggression in hijras' lives, is the importance of kin relatedness,
or more specifically, the rit and guru-cela relationship in symbolizing membership within the hijra community. The
other hijras "could not intervene" they said, because Sushmita was an andoli hijra. This term implies that she does not
have a guru in the hijra community and therefore could be verbally abused by a "real" hijra. Sushmita had acquired a
guru and put the rit in a hijra house as soon as she joined the community, ten years ago. But her guru had died a few
years ago, and Sushmita had not chosen another guru since then. She was illegitimate in some respect-without an
official kin network-and hence had to suffer in silence the shame of being abused by other ritwale, or "real," hijras.
72. As the opening vignette of this chapter and the incident above indicate, the rit is one, if not the most structured
marker of hijra kinship. It is not so much an object as a symbolic act of initiation; it symbolizes a ritual enactment or
"rite of passage," to use Van Gennep's (1960) phrase, which designates a hijra's formal membership within the
community. The rit connotes belonging-to a hijra house specifically and to the community more broadly-and
consequently indexes one of the most important criteria of authenticity and commitment to hijra identity.
73. Two hijra houses are represented in Hyderabad: the Sheharwala and the Lashkarwala houses. Their names
literally denote their territorial domains, or ilakas-the "city" (shehar) and the "army camp" (lashkar), or Hyderabad
and Secunderabad, respectively. The "city" of Hyderabad (what is now referred to as the old city) was the space where
the Qutb Shahi kings and the Nizams ruled, while Secunderabad was the site of the British army encampment. The
territorial domains of the two contemporary hijra houses, Sheharwala and Lashkarwala, are divided along the lines of
this spatial history, with members of each house having the right to "ask" for badhai in Hyderabad and in
Secunderabad, respectively. Thus, Lashkarwala or Sheharwala riste are the most important relationships for any hijra
in Hyderabad and Secunderabad. Almost the first question asked of any hijra is either "Which house do you have the
rit in?" or, "Who is your guru?" "Most important, if there is no guru and no rit with a hijra house, that person does not
have izzat. and is not recognized as a hijra," Munira told me in no uncertain terms.
74. So what is the rit, how does one "put and how does it relate to the process of acquiring a guru and a wider
kinship network? Second, how else is kinship elaborated? Third, what is the wider meaning of "putting the rit" in the
context of the koti community, and how does it work both as a kinship marker and as a means to acquire status?
Finally, what is the relationship between the patterns of kinship articulated within hijra and wider koti communities,
and normative kinship patterning? In the following section, I address each of these questions, starting with a
description of the ritual involved in acquiring membership in the community-putting the rit in a hijra house-before
addressing the more abstract issues of its significance within the community and the importance of the guru-cela
relationship in this kinship network.
The Ritual of the Rit
75. I witnessed the rit ceremony twice during my fieldwork. The first time I witnessed this important hijra rite, I
had dropped in to see Irfan nayak one afternoon in October. I walked straight to her house, passing the larger
Sheharwala house that is situated directly in front of it. Irfan nayak was at home along with her celas, Shahbaz and
Rani, and another hijra I did not recognize. All of them greeted me very amiably, and, following the usual pattern, I
sat down while Shahbaz began to make tea for everyone. After about half an hour of general conversation, during
which I told the new hijra (a visitor from Delhi who was here for a few days) who I was and what I was doing, two
other hijras I had not met earlier walked in. Both of them touched the nayak's feet saying "paon padti hun, and the
"16
older of the two greeted the other hijras present with "salam aleikum, a marked symbol of equality in status. She was
another of Irfan's celas and thereby the other hijras' contemporary, or gurubhai. Her name was Saroja, I later learned.
The other hijra with her was much younger and seemed utterly scared and awed in the presence of the nayak. Both of
them appeared to be expected by Irfan nayak and her celas.
76. After the preliminary greetings, Saroja asked Irfan nayak "Where are the others?" in a fairly impatient tone of
voice. Irfan replied, "They cannot come. Bala nayak has gone out to pay the municipal taxes, and Shafat nayak is not
well. So let us not wait; let us do it now." I had no idea what they were referring to, but decided not to attract
attention for fear that they would ask me to leave, a non-hijra not being privy to such privileged information. So I just
sat quietly and watched.
77. They arranged themselves in a circle, covering their heads with the ends of their saris. In the center of the
circle, they put a steel plate with some paan leaves and betel nut that they covered with a towel. Irfan then said, "We
are meeting here because this hijra wants to put a rit in our house. What do you want your name to be?" she asked
the young initiate, who appeared too scared to reply and just looked at Saroja. Saroja turned to Irfan and said,
"Kaushal." Irfan then continued. "Kaushal, do you want to become the cela of Saroja?" Kaushal nodded. At this point,
Saroja put four rupees and twenty-five paise on the plate, and Irfan said, "Kaushal is the cela of Saroja, who is the
cela of Irfan of the Sheharwala house." All five hijras present, with the exception of Kaushal, then clapped loudly,
17
saying "din, din, din, three times. Kaushal was told to touch the nayak's feet, then the feet of her guru, and then
the feet of each of the other hijras in the room. "You are now a real [asli] hijra with a rit in the Sheharwala house.
Don't forget that. And your guru, Saroja, you should serve her well because she is now everything to you-mother,
father, husband, sister, everything," Rani said, while blessing her. Kaushal had now become a "real" hijra; she
possessed the most important markers of hijra identity for an initiate-she had a guru who served as her immediate
family and through whom she reckoned descent, and she had put the requisite rit in the Sheharwala house and, by
extension, in the hijra community, whose rules she had now publicly acknowledged she would abide by.
78. While there are some differences between the ceremonies enacted here and the ritual as it has been described
in the literature (Sharma 1989; Nanda 1990), the fundamental meaning and structural grammar appears to be the
18
same. Every hijra must have a guru, and initiation into the community-the acquisition or putting of the rit (rit dalna)
-occurs only under the sponsorship of this guru. The guru-cela relationship is the most important bond among hijras
and is necessarily central to hijra conceptions of family. It is a mutually beneficial, reciprocal relationship, entailing
both social and economic obligations and responsibilities for both parties. Further, the rit signifies not only
membership within the community as a whole but, more specifically, affiliation with a given symbolic hijra house,
namely, that to which the guru belongs. Hijras in Hyderabad referred to the formal kinship bond between guru and
cela that resulted from the rit in terms of the relationship associated with their symbolic house, as Lashkarwala or
Sheharwala riste (bonds).
Guru-Cela Relationships
79. The centrality of the guru-cela relationship to hijra identity-its prescriptive quality and its importance for the
initiate's acceptance and advancement in the community ranks-is undeniable. The initiate explicitly acknowledges the
social and economic contractual obligations that are inherent in this acquisition of a new family. Although clearly
hierarchical, with seniority among hijras (as a principle of both social organization and social control) being reckoned
through the unequal power structure of gurus and celas, this relationship is a mutually beneficial, reciprocal one. Celas
are expected to be obedient, respectful, and loyal, and to serve their gurus well by catering to all their domestic
needs. In exchange for their celas' services and earnings, gurus are required to look after their health and well-being,
treat them fairly, provide them with clothes and food, and give them the necessary training and knowledge about hijra
customs and manners to permit their rise in seniority. The relationship between a guru and her cela is often highly
idealized, with the guru being the cela's "mother, father, husband, sister, everything," to quote Rani. Hence the oft-
repeated assertion, "This is our family now. It is only hijras who will look after us if anything happens."
80. As they repeatedly state, hijras consider only other hijras-or in wider social contexts, the koti community-
rather than consanguinal or affinal kin, as their "family." And within this hijra family, it is the guru-cela bond, an
iterative relationship, 19 that serves as the primary axis of kinship and genealogical descent.
81. Celas' responsibilities toward gurus include both economic and social obligations. As part of the initiation, a new
cela has to pay a sum of one hundred and fifty rupees to her guru, to be distributed among the nayaks of that
symbolic house. Although a cela can change her guru and house (Sinha 1967; Sharma 1989; Nanda 1990, 1994),
20
every time this occurs she has to pay twice the amount that she last paid for her rit ceremony. For instance, if a cela
changes gurus and houses twice, she must pay her new guru six hundred rupees. By this process of accumulation, the
amount paid by a hijra can be as much as the eighty thousand rupees recently paid by a hijra in Bombay, resulting in
chronic debt and economic bondage. Why would someone agree to incur this debt and continue to serve as a cela?
When I asked this question, I was greeted with incredulity at my naivete. "It is because we need our gurus, our
people, Gayatri," Madhavi told me patiently, the frequent changes being necessitated, in her opinion, by the abuse
often meted out by gurus. Munira reiterated this when she said, "A hijra has to have a guru and a rit in a hijra house."
Otherwise, as she noted earlier, "that person is not considered a hijra." So, whatever the price, one needs to pay the
fee necessary to acquire a guru and a rit in a hijra house, even if it means paying a large amount because of frequent
(perceived) abuse by multiple gurus.
82. This base amount, however, does not include the fines levied for the infraction of rules within the community.
When I witnessed the rit ceremony the second time, it was when two kandra hijras, Srilakshmi and her guru,
Rajeshwari, had gone to put a rit in the Lashkarwala house. Srilakshmi had recently run away to another city in a fit of
anger and had affiliated with another hijra house in that city. In arguing her case with the nayak, Srilakshmi claimed
that she had only been living with hijras belonging to another house, but had not in fact put the rit in that house. After
a particularly vociferous transaction with the nayak, both Srilakshmi and her guru were asked to pay an amount
totaling five thousand rupees, covering the cost of the rit as well as dands (fines) for the infraction of hijra rules,
namely, not putting a rit quickly enough-"living like a gandu," as it was termed-and the nonchalant changing of
house affiliations. This second act was not exactly an infraction of any rule, but it was frowned upon within the hijra
community. The amount of the fine appeared to be fairly arbitrarily decided by the nayak, although it was subject to
much loud, vituperative negotiation.
83. Celas not only incur a debt by virtue of the rit transaction, but are economically bound to their guru through the
latter's control of their means of livelihood. This is especially true of badhai hijras. Given the nature of their ritual
performances, group membership is absolutely vital to survival among this group. A new cela has to learn the songs
and dances necessary to her trade, a knowledge base that can be imparted only by her seniors in the community.
Further, whenever there is a badhai performance, it is left to the guru's discretion to take whomever she chooses with
her. While the money thus earned is not retained by any one cela, those who are good singers and dancers (or are the
guru's favorites) not only have an easier life in terms of everyday work, but also, as Vanitha informed me, "get more
izzat., and acquire a name for themselves as good badhai hijras."
84. Earning a guru's displeasure can seriously damage a hijra's chances for promotion within the ranks and
acceptance among one's peers, in addition to affecting such mundane but important issues as eating and sleeping
patterns, household chores, discretionary budgets for a cela's other activities, and the amount of free time one can
claim. Many kandra hijras with whom I spoke gave this reason as their justification for why they did not go live in their
nayak's house, even though their presence was required or sometimes demanded: "If you go and live in the chali
[nayak's house], then you don't have izzat there, and they make you do all the household work-cooking, cleaning,
washing clothes, fetching things, pressing all their feet, everything. And then they don't even give you enough food to
eat, because you have to eat whatever is leftover after all the elders have finished eating. You don't have money of
your own to go buy food even! And anyway they will beat you if they know you have done that. I lived there for a few
months, and I don't want to go back there right now. We'll see later," Shanti told me.
85. As mentioned earlier, the different hijra houses each have their own ilaka, or territorial boundary, within which
they have the sole right to perform and earn money. All hijras are bound to their particular kin group and therefore
territory, and any transgressions incur a severe beating and in some instances even death (Sharma 1989; Nanda
1990). Not only is there nowhere to perform as a single hijra, those who try to live and work independently often
suffer social ostracism. Largely on account of this, most hijras did not see this as a viable or sensible option at all and,
despite all the indignities, would rather stay with their gurus than try to live alone.
86. Further, making it on their own is made all the more difficult for celas because gurus have a vested interest in
enlarging their own groups as much as possible. The cela's presence is required not merely to enhance a guru's
prestige but also to defend a house's territorial boundaries, physically and symbolically. Until very recently, the
Lashkarwala hijras in Hyderabad greatly resented their Sheharwala sisters, largely on account of the demarcation of
ilakas, as well as the former's inability to defend their territory, for lack of a large enough pool of hijra members.
Further, aside from their dancing and singing as a troupe, badhai hijras cannot afford to be solitary because they rely
on their numbers to threaten and cajole their patrons into parting with money. "Single hijras I can easily deal with,
but when they come as a group, that is when they are scary," my next-door neighbor told me.
87. While it is most pronounced for badhai hijras, the social and economic dependence of the cela on her guru is
also evident among kandra (sex worker) hijras. For those living under the tank, every cela had to pay her guru a sum
of fifty rupees every single day of the month, irrespective of her earnings for that day. This was greatly resented by
the celas, but as Surekha said, "What can we do? We have to give them that money, otherwise they will throw us out
or kill us." In addition, celas had to do all the household chores for themselves and their gurus: cooking, washing
vessels and clothes, buying vegetables and rations, getting clothes ironed, and fetching odds and ends whenever
required. Often but not always, a guru has two celas, permitting a splitting of the tasks and an easing of their
individual burdens. Nevertheless, a guru can make life extremely trying for her cela. Some gurus are worse than
others. For instance, one of the gurus at the tank, Yamini, can never retain any of her celas for more than a year
because of her constant nagging as well as her physical and verbal abuse of them. In the past, after suffering her for
a
while, these celas have either run away to another city and acquired a new guru, or gone back to their natal village
to live their lives as non-hijra kotis.
88. Celas are at the beck and call of their gurus, and any delay in responding or inclination to be lazy is punished
by either verbal or physical abuse. Further, although less pronounced relative to badhai hijras, kandra gurus also
control the time and place of their cela's "working hours." Among the tank group, whose home was also their
workplace, gurus retained the right to bring their customers back to their huts, while celas had to be content with
performing out in the open or in stray train compartments across the railway tracks. While both gurus and celas
engaged in sex work only during the evening and part of the night, gurus could contract with a customer during the
day as well if they so chose, although this was rare. If a cela did the same however-especially if she had not fulfilled
all her obligations to cook, clean, wash, and fetch-she was beaten by her guru for dereliction of duty. In addition,
gurus control their celas' right to perpetuate the power structure by taking celas of their own. Hence, even though
Shanti and Surekha had proven themselves "real hijras" by having had their nirvan operations and having served their
gurus dutifully for more than five years, they were not permitted to take a cela because, as Munira, Surekha's guru,
confided to me, this would weaken her (Munira's) control and lower her izzat in the eyes of her nati celas (cela's celas)
who would be involved in sex work alongside her.
89. Seniority in the hijra community is measured both by time spent in the community (irrespective of the age of
the hijra) and by the acquisition of celas. Ideally, having undergone the nirvan operation and proven oneself a real
hijra, the next step would be to acquire a cela. The acquisition of a cela serves to signal "adulthood" in the community,
and the ability, or himmat (strength), as Rohini once told me, to support another individual and continue the
genealogical line. In reality however, there is some tension or ambivalence in allowing celas to acquire celas of their
own. By permitting this act, gurus relinquish full control over their celas; they are acknowledging that celas have
sufficient himmat and therefore must be given a certain amount of respect. Gurus, somewhat predictably, are
ambivalent about this step.
90. Nevertheless, despite the apparently skewed nature of the guru-cela relationship, the fact remains that gurus,
too, have a responsibility toward their celas. The guru is obligated to look after her cela in times of ill-health and
misfortune, and to speak on her behalf at official hijra gatherings and ceremonies. She is expected to treat her cela as
one would a daughter, showing affection and coming to her aid in times of difficulty. If ever there is an altercation
involving the cela, the guru is expected to support her publicly, while recognizing that she alone reserves the right to
reprimand her in private and even beat her if the need arises. At festivals and important hijra ceremonies, the guru
is
obligated to provide her cela with new clothes and money. In short, the guru is responsible for the health and
happiness of her cela, and the latter's behavior reflects her upbringing, so to speak, and the izzat of her guru, as well
as that of her house and the wider hijra family.
91. One of the guru's chief responsibilities is overseeing the cela's nirvan operation. Not only must the guru give
permission for this act, she must also care for the cela (at least monetarily) after the operation while she is unable to
work. At the end of the forty-day period of seclusion and rest following the operation, during which time it is often the
hijra's mother, rather than her guru, who looks after her, it is the guru's responsibility to host the dawat (feast) that
announces and celebrates the cela's newly acquired status as a nirvan sultan. This is one of the most important, and
therefore potentially contentious, responsibilities that the guru discharges toward her cela.
92. Becoming a nirvan sultan appears to be a significant prerequisite to acquiring a cela. It is a significant
economic burden, both in itself-because of the fees for the doctor, medicines, and food after the operation-as well as
in terms of the potential loss of income for those days the cela is incapacitated and cannot "work." Although celas are
made to pay back every rupee that is spent on them (at least among kandra hijras under the tank), they usually do so
over a period of time. It is the guru's responsibility to advance the money that may be required in the meantime,
although, judging from the experience of hijras under the tank, this responsibility is almost never met. Often, celas
save up enough money for their expenses, which may be as much as ten to fifteen thousand rupees, before being
permitted even to consider this step. 22 Although celas can and mostly do bear the cost of the nirvan operation on their
own, taking this step without the social sanction of their guru is almost never done and has disastrous consequences,
as the opening vignette indicates.
93. Despite all these hardships, kandra celas living under the tank continued to express ambivalence if not outright
reluctance about going to live in the nayak's house. For the most part, they preferred to live their lives under the tank
where there was more independence, access to money, the (relative) liberty to eat and sleep whenever they chose, as
well as the freedom to satisfy their sexual desires. They chose this lifestyle even while recognizing that it had lower
izzat both in the eyes of their community and the wider society. Under the tank, they had more autonomy and enjoyed
the advantages of belonging to a distinct hijra community; stigmatized, but still acknowledged as a part of the larger
hijra network across the country. For them, their somewhat precarious, violent, and dangerous life under the tank was
preferable both to the constraints of living under the gaze of the nayak and to living as a social outcast without the
support of a community.
94. As evident from the above, the guru-cela relationship is the cornerstone of the hijra kinship network. Ideally, it
is a reciprocal bond that entails responsibilities and obligations as well as rights and benefits on the part of both gurus
and celas. Without a guru, a hijra's very identity is called into question. She is a gandu, or at best, an andoli (an
"orphan" and therefore an illegitimate) hijra, subject to severe abuse and derision. Likewise, without a cela, a hijra
does not have izzat in the community. Acquiring a cela is a way of perpetuating the hijra lineage; in addition, it is a
marker of the particular guru's standing in the community and a means of indicating both izzat and seniority. To quote
Munira again, "without a rit and a guru. that person is not considered a hijra."
95. The guru-cela relationship is a hierarchical obligatory relationship, as evidenced by the nature of the duties and
responsibilities toward one another. In addition, in terms of its structural logic, it may be read as a marital or affinal
bond. However, this is not how hijras themselves read this relationship. This reading is merely speculation on my part,
based on the rituals they engage in and their symbolic meanings outside the hijra community. For instance, on the
death of a guru, her cela is expected to enact the role of a Hindu widow, being referred to with the same label, munda,
as well as being required to wear a white sari and break all her bangles in grief. Further, the laccha, or necklace that is
tied by the guru on the occasion of her cela's official acknowledgment as a nirvan sultan (on the fortieth day after her
operation), is also removed. According to some kandra hijras, the munda is expected to remain within the confines of
her house, isolating herself from the community, although, after the requisite period of mourning, a munda hijra can
become the cela of another hijra.
96. Despite the potential (structural) resonance of these rituals with Hindu rituals of mourning on the part of a
widow, any questions on my part regarding an affinal or sexual relationship between two hijras elicited the most
profound disgust and horror. "Haw, that can never happen! If any hijra did that, it would be disgusting," Surekha told
me in answer to my explicit question. The apparent inappropriateness of this relationship was evident in the following
incident relating to Srilakshmi's "marriage" to her panti.
97. Srilakshmi, a kandra hijra, was about to "get married" to her panti, Vijay-bhaskar. However, for unavoidable
reasons at the last minute, Vijaybhaskar, who lived in a different city, could not make it to Hyderabad on the day of
his "wedding." All of the food and other arrangements had been made already. In addition, this was to have been a
double wedding with another hijra, Savita, who would be marrying her panti, Suresh, at the same time. Since both the
food and this other couple were ready and waiting, the "elders"-Srilakshmi's guru and her gurubhais- decided to go
ahead with the ceremony. After Savita and Suresh had tied the knot, as it were (as the most important marker of this
ceremony, the "husband" ties a mangalsutra [the necklace that serves as the Hindu marker of marriage for a woman]
around the neck of his wife), it was Srilakshmi's turn to get "married." In the absence of her husband, and much to
Srilakshmi's embarrassment, her hijra mother, Munira, tied the mangalsutra. I found it interesting that Srilakshmi's
guru, who was also present, was not the one to do so. I had promised to take photographs for the two "wives," but
when I raised my camera to take one of Munira tying the necklace, Srilakshmi told me that it was completely
inappropriate and that I should not photograph it. Munira, however, enamored with the thought of being
photographed, wanted me to take the shot, stating that, "it is not supposed to be this way; but take my photograph.
I took the photograph. In the frame, Munira had turned her face completely toward the camera, while Srilakshmi had
covered her mouth with her palm in an expression of embarrassment and horror.
98. If Srilakshmi's guru had tied the mangalsutra, would it have been any less inappropriate? The potential
structural similarity between the rit and marriage rituals and relationships in terms of their prescriptive quality, their
binding, obligatory nature, and the possibility (although frowned upon) of their dissolution, are intriguing avenues of
future inquiry. Further, potentially mirroring a "traditional" husband-wife relationship, the cela is ideally proscribed
from seeing her guru for forty days after her nirvan operation (until the puja [ritual or ceremony] to mark her
transition), following which her guru ties the laccha, or necklace, on her cela, rather than her mother, who was the one
who took care of her during this period. In addition, the rhetoric used to describe the operatee also appears to be
significant in this respect. While getting Nagalakshmi ready for her dawat, Rajeshwari told me, "We make her up like a
bride. A new sari, nice make-up, flowers in her hair-she should look just like a bride." After the puja that she
performs, the operatee is taken ceremonially from her mother's house to her guru's, much like the bride who goes
from her natal home to her affinal home. Further, like a kanya (unmarried girl), a hijra who has never put the rit in any
house (kori murat) is more highly valued as a new member than one who has. In addition, it is through her guru that
the cela establishes a lineage and is acknowledged as kin within her hijra house, much as with "hegemonic" patrilocal
affinal relations.
99. Hence, although this "marital" contract between gurus and celas was not explicitly acknowledged by hijras and
in actuality was overtly denied, the structural parallels between "normative" marriage rituals and those employed by
hijras are interesting if not culturally significant.
100. What is the significance of such a rearticulation? Does the fact that hijra kinship alignments potentially mirror
normative familial arrangements necessarily make these relationships merely derivative and therefore devoid of
specific symbolic value? Or, as Judith Butler might argue, does this very fact, and the variety and complexity of these
approximations, "trouble" the ideal of the normative family? By revealing the variety of kin relationships that obtain in
the world, anthropologists and sociologists of kinship have established alternative forms and meanings of kinship
(Schneider 1968; Stack 1974; Collier and Yanagisako 1987; Strathern 1988; Weston 1991; Stacey 1996; Franklin
1998). Such accounts necessarily question structuralist claims regarding the foundational imperative of heterosexual
desire/families, and implicitly highlight the role of such kinship alignments in producing individuated and gendered
subjects (Butler 2000; cf. Levi-Strauss 1969; Lacan, 1978). If the bases of kinship systems (and culture) are not
always or only traceable to (structural) rules such as the incest taboo and the Oedipus complex, what then does this
signify for "compulsory heterosexu-ality" as the defining "structure" of normative kinship? These are questions with no
simple answers. By examining the variety of hijra/koti kin frameworks in their specific contexts of elaboration, we can
begin to generate some answers to such questions and potentially retheorize the analysis of kinship. One such
framework is that of love between (hijra) mothers and daughters-pyan ke riste (relationships/bonds of love), or
Andhra riste as they sometimes refer to these relationships.
FURTHER NOTES ON LOVE
101. While the guru-cela bond is a necessary prerequisite for kinship within the hijra community, it does not
appear to be a sufficient one. In addition to this highly valued bond, hijras forge other relationships-what they refer
to as pyar ke riste, or relationships of love-with members of their community. 23 When asked about these
relationships, many of them differentiated between the necessary guru-cela relationships (Lashkarwala or Sheharwala
riste) and bonds of affection that were not obligatory-what they sometimes referred to as Andhra riste, relations of
pyar, or love. Relationships characterized as Andhra riste were not as binding as those of the Lashkarwala or
Sheharwala riste. They did not entail rigid responsibilities and obligations as the guru-cela bond did, non were they
restricted to members of one's own lineage or hijra house. The most common of such relationships were those
between "sisters" (behen), and that between a "mother" and her "daughter" relationships).
102. The terms dudh behan and dudh beti, literally translated, mean "milk sister" and "milk daughter,"
respectively. 24 These terms are direct references to the nurturing bond between mother and daughter symbolized by
the milk that a nursing mother feeds her daughter-milk that is shared by sisters, as daughters of the same mother.
In addition to evoking images of affection and love, these terms also reference the very enactment of the ritual that
forges dudh or pyar ke riste.
103. As Munira states, "Like a mother's milk that is given to her daughter and shared by all her children, who are
then sisters," the individuals who are to become dudh behans or betis enact this nursing ritual. The dudh ma (mother)
sits cross-legged and pulls up her blouse while holding her beti (daughter) in her lap, as any nursing mother would.
She then pours some milk, using a cup held over her breast, into the mouths of the prospective betis, thereby sealing
this relationship with "her" milk. To further seal the bond thus forged, each of the prospective dudh behans pricks her
finger and lets a few drops of blood flow into the cup of milk, which is then shared by all of them, mother and sisters.
104. When I asked Rajeshwari why they adopted daughters, she told me it was to extend their kin relations, their
sambandam. Daughters would more than likely be celas of other hijras with whom they could then form an alliance,
she explained. Such relationships also serve publicly to strengthen ties between hijras, through a symbolic ritual
enactment. By developing these bonds, each hijra is able to establish relationships with other hijras, thereby not only
widening the kinship network but also cementing ties, as in Pierre Bourdieu's (1977) notion of "practical kinship." For
instance, among kandra hijras, dudh behans would "exchange" celas, making these celas their respective dudh betis.
This made for an extended, interconnected network of relationships between hijras living together. At the tank, for
example, Rajeshwari and Munira were dudh behans, both daughters of Malamma. To further strengthen their bond,
each made the other's cela her dudh beti-a symbolic act reinforcing the existing bonds between these hijras and
serving as a mark of love and respect between the dudh behans.
105. Although not equivalent to the guru-cela bond either in terms of responsibilities or legitimacy, the mother-
daughter bond has an important affective element that is not necessarily evident in the former relationship. The
mother and daughter share a certain affection for each other, and this bond is often spoken of more tenderly than the
obligatory but necessary kinship link between gurus and celas. Although there is some tension between these roles, in
times of conflict, the guru's word is almost always more important and binding than that of a mother. For instance,
Rajeshwari once told her daughter Aliya to accompany her to the market the following day to buy some clothes for an
upcoming festival. That same evening however, Aliya's guru, Munira, told her that she had to go to Chowtuppal
in
order to stock Munira's house there. There was absolutely no question as to which one of them Aliya would obey; she
explained the situation to her mother and postponed the trip to the market.
106. Dudh betis are cared for by hijras like actual daughters. They are taken care of when ill, helped out of crises,
given gifts for festivals, and may even be provided with a kattanam, or dowry, as happened, for instance, when
Munira's daughter had her nirvan operation. The betis in turn are expected to cook, clean, and serve their mothers, but
they are only so obligated if celas are absent. A daughter who did not perform this role would be cursed and derided
for laziness but not penalized as a cela would be. Although daughters do not figure in the direct line of inheritance or
genealogy, as do celas (i.e., they do not inherit property, wealth, or the nayak title), they are accorded respect and
affection for their status as daughters.
107. Mothers often appeared to have greater affection for daughters than for their celas, even though there was no
denying the greater significance and legitimacy of the guru-cela bond over the ma-beti one. For example, Munira's
first daughter, Mary, had left the tank group about six years ago. It was rumored that she had gone back to her natal
village and, having reverted to her "male appearance" (mogarupam) and lifestyle, had married a woman and was now
"living as a panti.
108. In November of 1996, Mary returned to the tank. "She" was wearing pants and a shirt, had grown her beard,
and looked exceedingly unlike a hijra. After the first welcomes, there was a heated discussion as to whether to accept
Mary back into the community. Many of the senior hijras there- Rajeshwari, Vasundara, and Lekha-were against it
because they believed that Mary had married a woman and was thereby no longer acceptable, despite her protests to
the
contrary. 26 Munira was the only hijra present who came to her defense, steadfastly believing in her daughter's
"innocence." "First of all, I don't believe that Mary would have done that. If one supposes she did, if she was my cela
or anyone else's, that would have been a little different, but she didn't have a guru here. She is my daughter, and I
am willing to take on the responsibility of looking after her. Let her stay here if she wants," Munira told them. Mary
was allowed to live at the tank and was there until the day I left Hyderabad. There was an undeniable bond between
the two, which in later conversations Munira would explicitly acknowledge and evaluate differently from the bond with
her celas. This was a rista based not on obligatory responsibilities but on love-a pvar ka rista, as Munira emphasized.
Guru-Cela Family Tree (Lashkarwala Riste)
Munira
Rajeshwari
Yamini
Muthamma
Vasundara
Saroja
Madhavi
Surekcha
Aliya
Srilakshmi
Palamma
Radha
Kajal
Shant
Nagalakshmi
Mother-Daughter Family Tree (Andhra Riste)
Shakuntala
Malamma
Jyuthi
Murtira
Rajeshwari
Yamini
Mulhamma
Lekha
Vasundara
Rasha
Sancia
Srilakshmi
Mary
Nagalakshmi
Aliya
Surekha
Sravanti
Surabhi
Jaya
Savita
Shanti
Bhabhi
Family tree of tank hijras
109. These pyar ke riste, despite being significant components of hijra kinship, have not been noted by many of the
scholars writing on hijras. In the literature, only Sinha (1967) mentions these bonds, and only in passing. The fact
that they exist is significant, not only intrinsically, but also because they highlight the centrality of affective (mother-
child) bonds in hijras' kinship network. The dramatic resonance between the consanguinal mother-child bond-
symbolized by "breast feeding"- and the hijras' nursing ritual makes the parallel apparent. The very fact that these
bonds are distinct from those with one's guru, with the marker of difference being affection, lends further credence to
the potential significance of these relationships as natal or consanguinal ties. As Munira repeatedly informed me, the
mother, not the guru, sometimes gives a kattanam (dowry) to her daughter, much as parents give a dowry to the
bride on the occasion of her marriage. Munira had given Saroja, her daughter, a significant kattanam- "everything she
might need pots, pans, a mattress, a few good saris, some jewelry... just like a new bride," Munira said. Finally, after
the establishment of the kin tie, the kinship terms used to refer to these family members are the same as those used
by mothers for their daughters-bidda/beti and amma/ma, in Telugu and Hindi, respectively. Although | do not want
to argue that these relationships are mere replacements or uncritical reflections of natal bonds, the resonance between
non-hijra consanguinal relationships and hijra mother-daughter bonds is indeed remarkable, an instance of how, at
particular moments, our socially produced worlds sometimes become naturalized into "new" forms of caring.
OTHER RISTE: THE JODI AND HUSBANDS
110. As noted earlier, one of the relational bonds that hijras explicitly did not recognize as characterizing "our
people," yet nevertheless did establish and yearn for, was that between hijras and their pantis, or "husbands." Many of
the hijras I knew in Hyderabad had pantis, especially the kandra hijras. And yet, if I asked them about this
relationship and the possibility of this tie being an enduring familial bond, they would just laugh and dismiss it
outright: "How can they be our family? Family is manollu [our people], 27 and they are the only ones who will take care
of us when we are older," Shanti said echoing other hijras.
111. Almost the first question hijras would ask of me, no matter how well they knew me, was "When are you going
to get married?" Without waiting for a reply, they would then dreamily imagine the scene: It would be a grand
wedding with a big band, | would look very nice, dressed in a silk sari with flowers in my hair, and they would all come
and dance at the wedding. Most important, my husband would be a handsome man who would not drink alcohol or
beat me, who would take care of me and love me throughout my life. These imaginings highlight two issues in the
lives of hijras. First, an idealization of marriage, a yearning for love and acceptance, or what Kakar (1989) refers to as
the "desire for a jodi [bond]"; and, second, an ambivalence in their feelings toward men wherein the ideal of a non-
drinking, kind man are set against the reality of physical abuse and alcoholism among their pantis.
112. Despite claiming nonprocreative sexual identities and defying the centrality of procreative sexuality to the
definition of a family, hijras (especially kandra hijras) idealize marriage and the possibility of a long-term commitment
with their pantis. While most kandra hijras in Hyderabad had pantis, those who did not would speak in longing terms
of their ideal man: someone who would stay with them through thick and thin, someone with a regular job, who did
not mistreat them, bought them gifts, and returned their love.
28
113. A few hijras had been with their pantis for as many as ten or fifteen years. Munira and her panti, Zahid, for
instance, had been "married" for thirteen years she said. She met him soon after she came to Hyderabad. As she
describes it, she was standing in front of the station one evening, waiting for someone. She saw this man look her up
and down, before walking into a sweet shop close by. She had noticed him but didn't follow him or react to his obvious
interest in her.
114. I thought he was a ruffian [goonda] because he was hanging around with these other goondas. But he came
back the next day, and this time he was alone. He asked me to go [sleep] with him, which I did. Like that, slowly,
slowly we fell in love. We got married about one year after we met. I went to meet his family, and his grandmother
[dadi] started saying we don't know if she is a real hijra or what. So, in a fit of anger, | lifted up my sari. | had
become cibri. | was a nirvan sultan by that time, and I showed her. 'Arre, this is a woman's body! This is a real hijra,'
she said, and since then, no one has said anything to me. I go visit them once in two-three' months, say salam
aleikum and come back.
115. About three or four years after they were "married," Zahid married a Muslim woman at the insistence of his
family. But as Munira tells the story, Zahid got remarried only after getting the approval of Munira and letting his
affinal family know that he was "married to a hijra" as well. Zahid supposedly consented to the marriage only after he
was reassured that they would accept his first (hijra) wife, Munira. Munira told this to me very proudly, as "proof" of
her husband's faithfulness and respectability. Her co-wife has two children whom Munira often refers to as her own,
and on whom she seems to lavish much affection and money. Her relations with her co-wife appear to be cordial; they
call each other aapa, or sister, and share Zahid on seemingly unproblematic terms. This is, of course, Munira's version
of the story. Nevertheless, Zahid does visit the tank at least three or four times a week, and appears to genuinely care
for Munira. He brings her gifts on occasion, accompanies her on trips to Delhi and Ajmer, and even accepts verbal
abuse from her without lashing out-a "good man" indeed.
116. Not all "husbands" are as caring or accommodating as Zahid. But many of them at least acknowledge their
bond, and some do share a significant relationship with their hijra wives. Sati's husband came down with her to
Hyderabad from Delhi, openly acknowledging his relationship with his hijra wife, both to the hijra community as well
as to his natal family in Delhi. Similarly, Savita's panti visits almost every day, often bringing gifts for her from the
shop that he owns in the old city. Surekha and her husband Rajesh also share a husband-wife relationship that is
acknowledged by the hijras as well as all his friends. Every time he needs to bathe, have his clothes washed, or
requires food or money, Rajesh comes to his wife Surekha, who gladly serves, cooks, cleans, and funds her husband.
Hijras appear to perform these "wifely" duties gladly, in marked contrast to the way they care for their gurus. Not all of
them live at the tank, as does Rajesh, but they are expected to visit as often as they can. As they approach, their
wives are informed that their "man is here." Immediately, hijras stop what they are doing and, more often than not,
go into their hut to greet their husbands in private.
117. There appear to be marked similarities in the gendered attitudes and responses of a hijra to her panti and the
responses of a woman to her husband in middle-class India, especially with regard to internalized ideals of femininity
and womanhood. Domestic responsibilities such as cooking, cleaning, washing, and sewing are clearly the wife's
duties. A good wife, moreover, is likely to respect her husband, to avoid acting promiscuously in public when he is
around (whatever her occupation or behavior outside of their relationship), and always to look after him and his needs,
especially in times of trouble; in other words, she is expected to be a respectable, self-sacrificing, chaste woman.
While hijras are not docile or submissive, they certainly are self-sacrificing and care deeply about how they are viewed
by society in their capacity as "wives." Munira was extremely upset one day when she found out that Zahid had eaten
at a hotel and slept with his friends on the road that night. She yelled at him when he came to see her the next day
saying, "Don't you have a wife and house here? How will it look that you didn't come here? Won't people say she is
probably not looking after him well?" Invariably, concern over what it will look like in the eyes of other people is the
motive for chastising one's partner. Despite their marginality, concern for their izzat appears to motivate many of their
actions. Surekha explicitly expressed this sentiment when she said, "Having a husband gives you some izzat [in the
eyes of society].
118. While "marriage" or maintaining a jodi appears to be a cherished ideal for hijras, it is clearly not without
ambivalence. Hijras are officially discouraged by senior hijras from maintaining relationships with pantis. According to
the hijra ideal of asexual identity and practice, official "family" does not include husbands or affinal kin. Senior hijras
repeatedly deride "bad" or "false" hijras who openly maintain these relationships. "Real hijras" are those who are
asexual, like ascetics; they look at neither men nor women, according to the nayaks. And yet, almost all hijras-
including the nayaks- maintain such relationships, in their youth if not later in life.
119. Further, neglect, fickleness, and physical abuse on the part of these men toward their "wives" contribute
significantly to hijras' ambivalent feelings toward their pantis, as is evident in the following statements. In response to
a question about their relationships with pantis today, Shanti, a slightly older hijra, said, "It is a different thing. It is
not desire any more. Now it is companionship and the hope that the person will be there for you later." She then
added, "That never happens though. These men are all alike. They stay with you as long as you give them money and
look after them. Then they are gone." Aliya echoed the same sentiments when she said, "Today men are not at all
nice. They only want one thing [and] they take your money and go.
29
120. On one occasion, when a hijra had asked me the question about marriage, Renuka, another hijra who was
sitting close by, said "Why do you want to get married, Gayatri? Husbands only beat you, take your money. You waste
all your strength and energy thinking and worrying about them. Don't get married." I later found out that Renuka had
just broken up with her "husband" two days before we had this exchange. A few days later, however, I saw Renuka
flirting with a man. She appeared very happy and introduced this man as her panti, whom she was going to marry
soon. While this statement could be interpreted at face value, it could also be interpreted through the lens of hijras'
often mocking attitude toward men. They would distance themselves from all pantis, especially their sexual
"customers," and mock their intelligence or sexual perspicacity. "We make ullus [literally, "owls"; colloquially, fools]
30
out of these men," Babu Rao told me proudly. "We say we will do sis kam [real work] and we do kavdi [false] sex.
They are in such a hurry and they don't know anything, so we can easily make ullus of them." Another time, Saroja
said in obvious disparagement, "You just have to say 'ooh, ooh' two or three times, and these people [pantis] think
that it is because of them, and they pay you more." Apparently, hijras distance themselves from pantis and use their
effeminate role to play with and ultimately to mock supposed male knowledge and power.
31
121. And yet, many hijras clearly love their pantis, sometimes to the point of distraction, even attempting suicide
on their account. One hijra, a daughter of Mallamma's who lived in a city some distance from Hyderabad, actually did
kill herself. She threw herself in front of a train because her panti had left her. While this was the only hijra I knew
who had actually killed herself, almost every other hijra, especially among the kandra group, had attempted suicide at
least once, more often than not on account of their pantis. Surekha said she had attempted suicide as many as three
times because of her husband Rajesh's adultery. He was cohabiting with another hijra in Vijaywada. She was so upset
by this development that she "did not see the value of living any longer" and swallowed a bottle of pesticide. She had
to be rushed to the hospital and have her stomach pumped to save her life. Munira too had attempted suicide by
swallowing insecticide at one point, she confided in me. Her husband Zahid had not come to visit her for a few weeks,
and she was sure he was involved with someone else. "But, this was early in our relationship, Gayatri. It was only after
learning how to deal with [this other] prostitute, being beaten by my man, after doing all that, that my man is with
me now," Munira said. Shakuntala had slit her wrists on account of her panti, leaving scars that were visible seven
years after the event. She was reluctant to explain how and why she had attempted suicide, but made it clear that it
was because of her unqualified love for her panti.
122. As with other men and women in India, love or desire in all its intentionally ambiguous forms appears to
animate hijra discourse and practice. "If it is at all legitimate to think of Indian culture' as an organic whole, a system
that can be molded and described as such, then ambiguity must be a key component of that whole, a key feature of
the communicative system by which that whole is maintained," writes Margaret Trawick (1990, 41). Perhaps, with
regard to hijras' worldview too, it is intentional ambiguity that best describes their "paradoxical behavior." As with
Trawick's Tamil family, if such ambiguity or "paradoxical behavior" could be explained at all, it was often in terms of
love or desire (49).
OTHER RISTE: THE MATERNAL BOND
123. Yet another relationship that was ideally prohibited for hijras was the link with their natal families. As self-
identified ascetics, or sannyasis, hijras are expected to cut off all ties with their "blood/own" (sontham/rakta) families
when they elect to join their new hijra family. As many hijras repeatedly stated, it was other hijras (and in some
instances, other kotis), but not their husbands or their natal kin, who were "their people" or "family" now. And yet,
despite their explicit acknowledgment of these proscriptions, a few hijras continued to maintain ties with their natal
families.
124. Some hijras had healthy, ongoing relationships with members of their natal families, most commonly their
mothers. Many of them occasionally visit their mothers, and sometimes, though more rarely, their mothers visit them
in return. As much of the Indian psychoanalytic literature emphasizes, the maternal bond appears to remain the
strongest, and some hijras explicitly acknowledge this (see Kakar 1989; Kurtz 1992; Obeyesekere 1990; Ramanujan
1990). For instance, Munira told me that "as long as my mother is alive, I will go back home to visit and will be
welcomed [there]. But once she is gone, then my brothers. I will never go back. All they care about is money."
32
During the two-year period of my fieldwork, mothers of at least four of the thirty-odd hijras visited them at the tank.
Most of these visits lasted a few days at least, the mothers having traveled a considerable distance in many instances.
While at least one of these mothers appeared to accept her son's decision3 and did not try to talk him into returning
with her to their natal home, others were still upset and extremely emotional regarding this issue. Although they could
and did visit each other, there was an unambiguous (if not explicitly stated) acknowledgment on the part of both
consanguinal mother and hijra child that the connection between them had irrevocably changed. Other hijras
constituted the latter's family now, and while her tie to her mother would never be completely severed, there was no
returning to her earlier life and natal family at this point.
125. Despite the retention of this strong link between natal mother and son in practice, such a relationship went
against the ideal norms of the hijra community. The renunciation of natal kinship ties is a clear marker of hijra
identity, serving to differentiate them from other kotis such as the zenanas, as the latter explicitly stated. "The hijras
leave their mothers-fathers and live together in the haveli [house], but we don't do that," Rafat told me, pointing out
the difference between hijras and zenanas. He also added that doing so required himmat (strength) and was an
irreversible break that he was not willing to undergo at this point. Iqbal, one of the zenana baijis reiterated this
difference. He also told me that it was his ties to his natal family that prevented him from joining hijras. His mother
had recently passed away, he said, and now he was free to join the hijras and "go live in Irfan nayak's haveli [house].'
Despite the fact that an absolute break with the hijra's natal family did not always occur, the ideal and its significance
for hijra conceptualizations of family and kinship remain undisputed (Trawick 1990).
"manollu": koti kinship and the need for "our people"
126. August 10, 1996, a lazy Saturday afternoon. Munira, Sushmita, Surekha, and Babu Rao were whiling away
their time, playing asta-camma (a board game). I was sitting with them, watching the progress of their game and
34
chatting with Munira about everything from her conceptions of family to plans for the weekend. Shakuntala was sitting
a short distance away, drying her just-washed hair. She seemed to be in a particularly foul mood, cursing someone or
something under her breath. Srilakshmi and Kajal were eating their food a little distance away from the bathroom.
Greatly involved in the game, Munira and others failed to notice the approach of two men toward Srilakshmi and Kajal.
These men wore pants and shirts and seemed to approach without too much trepidation. They were standing and
talking to Srilakshmi for a couple of minutes and were clearly intrigued by my presence. From their gestures and body
movements, they were obviously asking Srilakshmi and Kajal who I was and what I was doing there. For some reason,
this really seemed to irk Shakuntala. She started yelling at them, cursing them in the foulest language. She shouted
at them, saying "what do you want here, bhadvas [pimps]? Get out of here; otherwise come and lick my lass!"
Srilakshmi then piped up and said, "Arre Shakuntalanani, these are our people [manollu]. They are kotis
35
from
my
village." Almost immediately, Shakuntala calmed down and, after composing herself, engaged them in a friendly
conversation by asking what they were doing in Hyderabad. I turned quizzically to Munira, who said by way of
36
explanation, "All kotis are our people. We are one lineage [kulam]. But those who have the rit, only those [people]
are the real thing [asli ciz].
127. As the above vignette indicates, aside from the privileging of the rit, hijras adopt a shifting signifier in their
demarcation of an insider/outsider boundary. For the most part, family for hijras refers to other hijras, and yet not all
non-hijras are excluded from consideration: non-hijra kotis are also considered manollu (our people). The use of this
term implies a wider, shared community of actors. It is a contextual signifier, dependent to some degree on the
particular actors present. For hijras, manollu refers to the members of their own in-group-hijras-in the context of
other kotis, but it refers to the entire koti community when the social context includes pantis (or narans). Similarly,
members of the other koti groups, while recognizing kotis of their self-identified subgroup as their family, would
extend this label to other kotis as well, in contexts where the reference group was either their natal families or their
pantis.
128. What, according to its members, is shared by this wider community of actors? For hijras and other kotis, the
"male" genden system is conceptualized in terms of pantis and kotis, with the latter identity being opposed to the
former, both in sexual as well as everyday practice. Kotis are the receptive partners of pantis in sexual intercourse. In
addition, kotis share behavioral norms and moral restrictions, and have their own lexicon, distinct from that of pantis
or non-kotis (Hall 1995, 1997).
129. I was told by my zenana friend Salman, "You have to look at their hands. Kotis can be easily identified by the
way their joints move, especially their wrist joints." The limp hand, seemingly unhinged at the wrist, along with the
"way a man walks, stands, and looks at you," appear to serve as clearly defined koti identifiers. In addition, the use of
what is often constructed in the public domain as "the hijra [hand] clap," is a clear symbol of divergent sex/gender
identity. When used by non-hijra kotis, it serves unambiguously to align them with their more flamboyant, readily
identifiable fellow kotis. Kotis appear to use this gesture to indicate not only their public allegiance to hijras, but also
their knowledge and ultimate use of self-denigratory markers to mock male (heterosexual) power. By employing these
gestures in the Public Garden, kotis acknowledge their deviance in the eyes of the public and, by embracing this
perceived deviance, parody and potentially overturn the power differential.
130. All kotis appear to know and use their special vocabulary (Hall 1997). Whether they speak Telugu or Hindi,
kotis used their vocabulary as an exclusionary device to communicate with fellow kotis and to set themselves apart
from non-kotis. This coded lexicon was employed both to signify membership in the community at large and to
distance themselves from the public and mock male power. For instance, in the garden, the most popular cruising and
meeting spot for many non-hijra kotis, this code was invoked to make fun of the omnipresent plainclothes policemen.
The koti term for these individuals, ghodi (mare), is used pejoratively by kotis to make fun of them and their supposed
masculine power. Kotis use this term and make explicit fun of these ghodis, who appear unaware of this term of
reference or the extent of kotis' disdain for them.
131. On one occasion when I was sitting with a group of zenanas in the garden, a ghodi walked up and sat down a
short distance away, obviously intrigued by my presence in this all-"male" group. As he was approaching, one of the
zenanas, Ahmad, announced to the others, "Hey, a ghodi is coming. Lets have some fun [with him]." He then turned
to the policeman and staring directly at him, raised his eyebrows suggestively, running his tongue seductively over his
lips while he did that. He then got up and walked a short distance away, swinging his hips in an exaggerated manner.
The other zenanas were looking pointedly at the ghodi and laughing at his obvious discomfort. After a couple of
minutes, the policeman got up and walked away. Ahmad made a clicking sound as if to say "Huh, these men!" as he
shook his head in obvious disgust, before turning triumphantly back to the zenanas, who greeted his performance with
whistles of approval.
132. All kotis, it seemed, whether hijras, zenanas, or kada-catla kotis, see themselves in opposition to pantis and
use their perceived difference to signify their membership within the larger koti community as well as to mock the
heterosexual imperative. For them, all kotis are hamare log or manollu (our people), in opposition to pantis who are
"othered," both as objects of desire against whom kotis define themselves as well as subjects who instantiate the
gender norm.
133. Aside from the ideational correlates among the various koti kin ties, there appear to be structural homologies
as well. The kinds of riste, or relationships that zenanas, kada-catla kotis, jogins, and siva-satis develop resonate
remarkably with the kinds of bonds described earlier among hijras. In addition to the rit with hijras (in a hierarchically
lower position than hijra celas), zenanas had their own network of relationships within their own community. Of the
four remaining zenana houses in Hyderabad, each had its own hierarchical structure with a head, or baiji, followed by
his celas, who had celas of their own. Each zenana koti had a separate kinship bond with his respective zenana
house-what they referred to as man-pan. The man-pan ritual was similar to that of the hijra rit ceremony. Much like
the rit, the man-pan established guru-cela relationships among zenanas. The relationship between a zenana guru and
his cela was also reciprocal and involved defined obligations and responsibilities. Given that zenanas did not live in one
place together as a communal group, however, these guru-cela responsibilities were marginally different from those
between a hijra guru and her cela. The performance of everyday domestic chores was not expected on the part of the
cela. Nevertheless, whenever required, a zenana cela was expected to help his guru financially, emotionally, and, if
necessary, physically. In turn, the guru was obligated to support his cela, both in public zenana contexts, as well as in
times of need. Rafat for instance, felt compelled to lend his cela, Yusuf, some money to help out when the latter's wife
fell ill and he needed money. He did so even though he was in no position to help and ended up borrowing money at
an exorbitant rate of interest in order to help his cela. In addition, gurus were expected to pay for all their celas'
functions and contribute gifts on ceremonial occasions. For all the trouble it entailed, having celas was nevertheless a
measure of authenticity and izzat for the guru. It was a concrete kin link that both arranged social relationships within
the community, and embodied seniority. As zenanas themselves noted, it was this aspect of their identity-the kinship
link with hijras and the resonant relationships within the zenana community-that marked their difference from other
kada-catla kotis and berupias and gave them more izzat vis-a-vis these other koti identities.
134. Although kada-catla kotis did not have either a rit or hierarchical ties structured in terms of guru-cela
relationships, and explicitly disparaged the "traditional" ways of hijras and zenanas, there was an indisputable valence
attached to kin that resonated through this community as well. Like pyar ke riste among hijras, kada-catla kotis also
had structured mother-daughter relationships, sealed by a ritual in which both parties publicly declared their wish and
then shared sweets, a practice akin to many non-koti celebrations as well. After announcing the rista, the "daughter"
would feed her "mother," putting part of a sweet in her mouth and eating the other half, before sharing the box with
the other kotis.
135. This ceremony was usually enacted in Gaudipet, a remote area some twelve or thirteen kilometers from
Hyderabad, the koti dawat (celebration/feast) space. It was here, away from the public gaze, that kotis felt most
comfortable meeting publicly and indulging in koti nakhre-joking and teasing each other mercilessly with lascivious
37
speech and exaggerated feminine gestures and movements. Following a particularly lewd comment
by
one
of
the
kotis, I was told half-jokingly by Saroja, my hijra friend who accompanied me the first time I attended a koti dawat: "I
told you, Gayatri. These people really use bad language and even we are embarrassed to listen to them."
136. These koti dawats, usually held on Sundays, would be attended by anywhere from fifty to two hundred kada-
catla kotis, and on occasion, some zenanas and siva-satis. Apart from a chance to meet and catch up on gossip and
news, these dawats also served as the forum to officialize kinship links within the community. On the occasion | was
there with Saroja, the ostensible reason for the dawat was Viji's desire to make Mahesh his daughter. Unfortunately,
we arrived too late to witness the ceremony, but I was told that it was nothing more than a declaration of intent,
followed by a sharing of sweets and an exchanging of gifts, after which mother and daughter hosted a feast for their
koti friends. The food-chicken curry and seasoned rice-was prepared right there with the help of all the kotis, amid
much joking, teasing, and cavorting around. When I left at six in the evening, having been there since eleven in the
morning, there were still at least fifty kotis there, eating, dancing, and gossiping with each other.
137. On the second occasion | attended a koti dawat, it was hosted by Avinash to celebrate his getting a new job.
When I reached Gaudipet, he was sitting in the center of a circle of kotis, with his "mother" Moggu sitting next to
him.
38
They were performing a ceremony to bless Avinash. The following is a description of this ritual from my field
notes:
Moggu had set two steel plates in front of Avinash. One had a sari and material for a blouse, and the other had a
pile of uncooked rice, two halves of a coconut, some turmeric, and kum-kum (vermilion powder). Moggu formally
gave Avinash the clothes and, after putting them aside, took a pile of the rice in cupped hands and poured it onto
the other plate. He then smeared some of the kum-kum and turmeric on Avinash's forehead, invoking a blessing for
his daughter's continued good health and fortune. Avinash touched Moggu's feet as a mark of respect three times,
each time touching his hands to his eyes. He then sat down. One by one, each of the kotis came up to him and
performed the same actions (poured a handful of the rice, put a bindi on Avinash's forehead). He did not touch their
feet though. After all of them had done this, Moggu, who was sitting by his daughter's side all along, asked for
kattanam (dowry). He initiated this stage by waving an envelope of money over Avinash's head, before putting it on
the plate. All the kotis followed suit, with Moggu announcing, as each koti came up, the amount each paid.
Following this show of affection and regard, everyone was asked to sit and eat the food that Moggu, Avinash, and a
few of his friends had prepared earlier in the day.
138. The "mother" is obligated not only to officiate at such ceremonies, but also to contribute both money and
organizational help for such occasions. In turn, daughters are required to show respect, help out in times of trouble,
and be considerate of their mothers' well-being. Deference is to be shown not just to one's mother but to all elders in
the community. For instance, during a bantering conversation, Jayaprada (as one of the kada-catla kotis liked to call
himself, after a popular Telugu film actress) had cursed his "aunt"- his mother's "sister"- calling him a bhadva
39
(pimp). Even though it was obviously meant in jest, Jayaprada was immediately reprimanded by the other elders
and made to apologize to Hanumanth, a koti who was five years younger than he was. He apologized immediately
without protest.
139. Given the centrality of desire to their identities, kada-catla kotis and zenanas (like many hijras), seemed
extremely ambivalent about their husbands, who alternated between being the most important, loved individuals in
their lives and being reviled and mocked for their licentiousness, insen-sitivity, and abuse. Despite incredible stories of
abandonment and neglect, however, kotis continued to yearn for a significant relationship with their pantis, as shown
by Frank's life-history, told in detail in the following chapter. Frank, a middle-aged, Christian man in his mid-forties,
had suffered untold hardships for his pantis. He had sold his blood to a blood bank, and later his kidney, to earn
enough money to satisfy his current panti. He had lost several jobs on account of "his man," been physically abused,
and suffered ill health after the sale of his kidney. Nevertheless, he "loved [his] panti and was willing to do anything
for him." After being beaten by his panti's relatives one day, Frank had this to say to me:
140. I told him these people came and hit me. I said who are these people to hit me? He was completely cold. He
said you are a character who deserves to get a kicking. Then you tell me how I'll feel. I loved him a lot, Gayatri. I still
love him. How can I forget him? Why, I ask god, why is god rude with me? I have not harmed anybody. I have not
disappointed anyone in life, neither my friends nor the men. I loved somebody, and every man that came up to me in
life has played a game. They played with me as much as they wanted to. They enjoyed sex as much as they wanted
to, and then they booted me out. I adore you. I worship you [with reference to his panti]. I walked out of my house
because of you. I left my house because of you, I left my family because of you, I left my friends because of you.
Everybody I left because of you. I'm living alone because of you. My mother's last words were: "Frankie, you will be
alone in this world. You will die alone. Nobody will come for your funeral. Not your friends, not Ravi [his panti]. In the
end, the dogs will sniff you, or the MCH will throw you in the dustbin." My heart bleeds, but I can't cry anymore.
I
!
have no tears left. I used to wait for this man, Gayatri, from seven o'clock right up to one o'clock at night. And he
would come at two and tell me the train was late, my cousin died. I came, you should be happy.
141. Avinash, another kada-catla koti, had a similar story. He too had sold his kidney for his panti, only to be
abandoned after giving him the money. Iqbal, one of the zenana baijis, told me that he knew only one zenana who
had a good relationship with his panti; every other zenana had suffered emotionally and physically on account of his
panti. Other kotis told me stories of the physical and verbal abuse they suffered, about their pan-tis' insatiable
appetite for money and gifts, the humiliation they had to swallow on account of keeping up appearances in public for
their panti's izzat. Yet almost all of them told me that although "pantis would not support you when you need[ed]
them in the same way as koti friends," they still wanted a perfect relationship with their pantis "more than anything
else." Despite this overwhelming desire, pantis were clearly "other" in koti conceptualizations-arguably kin but not
"family." They were the objects of desire but were hardly ever turned to in times of trouble or need. Kotis were acutely
aware of their marginality and pantis' use and abuse of them. But, while they resented pantis for their apparent
domination and lost no opportunity to mock male power, they "couldn't help loving them" and were "willing to do
anything for [their] men."
"ALL KOTIS HAVE PANTIS" THEORIZING A NEED FOR KINSHIP?
142. Given the ubiquity of abuse, violence, and abandonment, as well as hijra/kotis' ambivalence toward men in
general, why this strong desire for a social jodi (bond)? Why do kotis have such an overwhelming need for a loving
husband? Scholars from various schools of thought have attempted to answer this question of relationality, or the
structures of desire, in the context of broader processes of self-crafting in India, with psychoanalysts and psychological
anthropologists providing perhaps the most elaborated theories.
143. The psychoanalytic literature in India attempts to answer this question in terms of the general "desire for
fusion" and the subsequent modal resolution of the oedipal complex in India. In psychoanalytic understandings, this
cultural theme of fusion manifests itself as "the unconscious fantasy of maintaining an idealized relationship with the
maternal body" (Kakar 1989, 125). Although South Asian scholars differ in their characterizations of what constitutes
the "maternal body" (Kakar 1981, 1989; Kurtz 1992), they appear to agree that the individual's goal is "integration,
and not individuation" (Kurtz 1992, 30). In India, an individual's sense of self, they argue, is fundamentally connected
to a desire for incorporation, for fusion with the (maternal) world, rather than a greater differentiation of self from
others. According to these (male) authors, integration, in this context, more often than not implies the desire for an
idealized relationship with one's mother (Kakar 1989).
144. Sudhir Kakar posits a "formidable consensus. for both men and women" regarding the ideals of womanhood
(1981, 63; cf. Raheja and Gold 1994 for a valid critique of this position). This ideal is personified in the image of Sita-
the pure, chaste, faithful heroine of the Ramayana, Kakar contends. The internalization of this ideal by all Indian
women and their subsequent inability to challenge it and demand intimacy and recognition as women from their
husbands, results in "aggressive, destructive impulses" directed toward the son. This results in ambivalent feelings
toward the mother on the part of the son-she is both "nurturing benefactress and threatening seductress" (1989, 93).
The modal resolution of this conflict is achieved through "lasting identification with the mother, which involves
sacrificing one's masculinity" (1981, 102). Sudhir Kakar therefore claims that (for men) desexualization emerges as
"the favored defensive mode in Indian fantasy" (1989, 144).
145. Gananath Obeyesekere (1990) makes a similar argument in his characterization of the unique resolution of the
"Indian oedipal complex." Echoing A. K. Ramanujan (1983), he argues that the representation and consequent
resolution of the oedipal complex in India follows from the particular cultural configuration of family relationships in
this culture. The significance of the "erotic-nurturant bond that binds mother and son... and the pa-tripotestal
authority of the father" (Obeyesekere 1990, 81) results in the dominant Hindu form of the oedipal complex, which the
son can resolve only though "submitting to the father's will and in effect castrating himself" (Goldman 1978, 363).
146. Since the "hegemonic narrative of Hindu culture as far as male development is concerned is that of the Devi,
the great goddess, especially in her manifold expressions as mother in the inner world of the Hindu son" (Kakar 1989,
131), this form of oedipal resolution clearly allows for its realization. Hence, "if phallic desire was the violent and
tumultuous 'way of the fathers,' genital abstinence, its surrender, provides the tranquil peaceful path back to the
mother" (124). Given that "Indian myths constitute a cultural idiom that aids the individual in the construction and
integration of his innen world" (135), the myth of Goddess Parvati and her two sons, Ganesha and Skanda, clearly
reflects this "hegemonic narrative" and its opposing wishes:
147. A mango was floating down the stream, and Parvati the mother said that whoever rides around the universe
first, will get the mango. Skanda impulsively got on his golden peacock and went around the universe. But Ganesha,
who rode the rat, had more wisdom. He thought: "What could my mother have meant by this?" He then
circumambulated his mother, worshipped her, and said, "I have gone around my universe." Since Ganesha was right,
his mother gave him the mango. Skanda was furious when he arrived and demanded the mango. But before he could
get it, Ganesha bit the mango and broke one of his tusks. (136)
148. Ganesha seeks surrender and fusion with his mother at the cost of his masculinity (symbolized by the broken
tusk), while his brother Skanda yields to the pull of individuation, which results in independence but exile from his
mother's presence. As Kakar states, "that Ganesha's lot is considered superior to Skanda's is perhaps an indication of
Indian man's cultural preference in the dilemma of separation-individuation" (1989,137; cf. Kakar 1981; Obeyesekere
1984, 1990; Roland 1979; Kurtz 1992; Trawick 1990).
149. In this psychoanalytic formulation, it is integration with the mother (and subsequent emasculation) rather
than individuation that constructs male desire and kinship relations. In a further elaboration of this "consensus,"
Sudhir Kakar (1989) accounts for gendered differences in the structure of fantasy by arguing that while "desire for
fusion with the mother" is what constructs male fantasy, for women in India, it is the yearning for a jodi (bond) with
the husband. Insofar as one can essentialize this interpretation of "Indian" relationality, therefore, hijras (and to some
extent, kotis) would appear to have internalized and enacted both fantasies-male and female- in their desire for
integration and in their subsequent bonds of kinship. 40
150. In addition to this psychoanalytic interpretation and the ubiquity of the "desire for fusion" or "category
mediation," as Margaret Trawick (1990) refers to a similar cultural theme, kotis' desire for kin bonds could reflect a
culturally specific construction of self and other, a form of relatedness wherein Indian men and women primarily craft
their identities within a relational/social context (Marriott 1976; Shweden and Bourne 1984; Rama-nujan 1990;
Trawick 1990; Shweder, Mahapatra, and Miller 1990).
41
151. Every time I went to see the hijras, especially in the first few weeks of my acquaintance with them, I was
questioned not so much about what I was attempting to accomplish and why, but who I was in terms of what my
parents were doing, where they lived, how many siblings I had, whether I was married or not, and whether my
siblings were married or not, among other questions. As most South Asian scholars or even casual visitors to India
have noted in the past, the aspects of oneself that elicit most interest and commentary are not individual
accomplishments but relational networks of hierarchy and exchange. Social relationships and the nature of one's
obligations, in many respects, appear to define one's identity and status in India. In India, a person is who they are by
virtue of their kin relations and the social context within which they locate themselves unlike Euro-American notions of
the self or identity, these scholars maintain (Marriott 1976; Mines 1994; Roland 1979; Shweder and Bourne 1984).
152. The well-known anthropologist Clifford Geertz stated many years ago that "the Western conception of the
person as a bounded, unique, more or less integrated motivational and cognitive universe, a dynamic center of
awareness, emotion, judgment, and action organized into a distinctive whole and set contrastively both against other
such wholes and against a social and natural background is, however incorrigible it may seem to us, a rather peculiar
idea within the context of the world's cultures" (1975, 48). As some scholars would argue, the "peculiarity" of this
notion is manifestly apparent in India, a nation where "individualism stirs but faintly and where the subordination of
the individual to the superordinate family interests and relationships is a preeminent value," as Sudhir Kakar (1989)
somewhat dramatically puts it.
153. However stigmatized and marginalized they may be in Indian society, might hijras too be constituted through
and by such an ethic of relatedness? Why was it so inconceivable for hijras to strike out on their own and live
independently? Madhavi was thrown out of her kin group, and, although she could have lived on her own, the thought
of not "belonging" to the community was unthinkable. She was a "pariah" among the Lashkarwala hijras under the
tank, as Rajeshwari told her, which led her to change her house and put the rit in the Sheharwala house, even if it was
in a position lower than that she had held earlier.
154. Likewise, Tushar, a zenana koti, was from North India and did not really know anyone in Hyderabad. He used
to come to the garden to find sexual partners as well as a social group and, after seeing the other zenanas on a few
occasions, he struck up a conversation with them. On subsequent Sundays, when he came to Public Garden, he would
join the zenana group and hang out with them until it was dark enough to look for sexual partners. Although zenanas
did not appear to treat him differently despite his non-kin status, Tushar felt compelled to officially join the
community. He became Rafat's cela in an informal ceremony (not the formal man-pan ceremony in the presence of the
caudhary and baijis) conducted in the garden itself. Why this perceived need for kinship? What motivates kotis to
establish kin ties, when they could often relate to their self-identified community just as well without these ties?
Perhaps, as these scholars maintain, one of the reasons being alone-without a kin network-is so inconceivable in
India is because identity is largely relationally constructed and context-dependent to a greater (and different) degree
than it is in the West (Marriott 1976; Shweder and Bourne 1984; Ramanujan 1990; Shweder, Mahapatra, and Miller
1990).
155. This relational explanatory framework, however, much like the psychoanalytic one, leaves several questions
unanswered. Aside from their problematic cultural and gendered essentialism, neither of these theorizations accounts
for the more interesting patterns of relationship within the hijra and koti communities. Although the "desire for fusion"
or "the cultural preference for integration" rather than individuation does address, to some extent, kotis' desire for
kinship and perhaps the existence of certain significant bonds, it does not really explain why they adopt the specific
kin and the rituals or practices they do, nor does it satisfactorily explain the power differentials evident in other
relationships within the community. Likewise, the relational argument potentially accounts for the ubiquitous need for
"our people," but it reveals nothing significant about the specific structures of caring and the particular constructions
of kinship that I have described among hijras and kotis.
156. While it is difficult and to some extent pointless to account for kotis' need for kinship (or, for that matter, to
account for such desires among non-kotis), the elaborations of relatedness within the community and the explicit
statements highlighting the significance of such bonds confirm that kinship and elaborations of familial ties are central
axes of hijra and koti identity. In a recent publication, Kira Hall notes that "the family is, after all, what distinguishes
the hijra from most other members of Indian society, who are intimately involved in the extended families so
instrumental to social organization" (1997, 444). This statement ignores the existence of the specific elaborations of
hijra and koti kinship, the patterns of caring and relatedness within the community, and their fundamental resonance
with broader mainstream societal patterns, structures, and sentiments. Joining the koti community obviously does not
preclude the possibility of having an extended "family" and a social network much like "most other members of Indian
society." The existence of the various koti relationships, patterned as they are on familial/affinal bonds, and the
broader need for kinship that they express, appear to emulate rather than oppose or deny those of mainstream Indian
society, while simultaneously throwing them into relief and challenging their very definitions of "normativity."
157. And yet, while there are clearly elements of mainstream ideologies and structures in hijra's articulation of
kinship, it is perhaps too easy to analyze these patterns as either the workings of "power" or the apparent reactions to
the contrary as "resistant" discourses/actions (see Foucault 1980; Anderson 1983; Williams 1989; Hobsbawm and
Ranger 1992; Ginsberg and Rapp 1995). Seeing hijra and koti families as either necessarily counterhegemonic or
necessarily assimilationist appears to be not just simplistic but uninteresting and counterproductive. Such
understandings set hijra defiance of procreative and hegemonic definitions of "family" against their incorporation of
such terminologies, rituals, and symbols. Instead, I would argue, understanding these options not as dichotomous
ideological oppositions but as subtle tensions reflected through the various polysemic, affective bonds of hijras and
other kotis is imperative. Ultimately, as Margaret Trawick notes, "The need to love is as important a force in human
society as is the will to power. Power wants to destroy or consume or drive away the other, the one who is different,
whose will is different. Love wants the other to remain, always nearby, but always itself, always other" (1990, 242).
Hence, rather than understanding hijra and koti structures of caring and kinship, of self and other, through the
framework of power and archetypes of resistance, as simple reflections of mythical mainstream patterns, it is more
productive to see these kinship patterns as a complex web of significations, a web of emotional tensions between real
people, fraught with ambiguous meanings-an "architecture of conflicting desires" as Trawick notes (152)- that
fundamentally constitutes hijra/koti identity. If desire or love plays a central role in the lives of hijras and kotis, it is
through the various, ambiguous, and conflicting patterns of kinship-the affective bonds of guru and cela, "milk"
mother and daughter, sister and gurubhai, mother and son, husband and wife-that this love is made manifest. Only
through understanding the relations between the idealized systems of kinship that hijras and kotis hold to, and the
nature of desire and lived experience in which these ideals are often not sustained, can we begin to comprehend the
"local pleasures and afflictions" and the cultural patternings of their lives (Nuckolls 1996). With this goal in mind, the
next chapter allows hijras and kotis to speak for themselves and allows us to glimpse "what it means to make sexual
difference matter" (Cohen 1995b, 277), revealing the multiplicity of ideals and the fundamental complexity of lived
experiences.
Rituparna Borah V. Union of India
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
In the Matter of:
Rituparna Borah and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India Respondent.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 260 of 2023 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
REBUTTAL SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS BY MS. VRINDA GROVER ADVOCATE
1. The batch of petitions tagged with Supriyo Chakraborty V. Union of India [WP(C) 1011/2022] seek inter-alia legal
recognition of queer and transgender intimacies in the form of marriage, as a right guaranteed by the Constitution of
India.
2. A denial of the fundamental right to marriage and found a family will be met with consequences of heightened
stigma, discrimination and violence by natal families, the police and other third parties as a moral judgment on the
inherent dignity of queen and trans persons. During these proceedings, queer and trans persons across the country
have continued to flee their natal families to seek protection from psychological trauma, forced marriages and
corrective rape.
3. In addition to the aforesaid, the following declaratory relief and consequential directions are pressed, listed as
prayers (v-vii) in the captioned petition, Rituparna Borah V. Union of India, WP (C) No. 260/2023 (Compilation
Written Submissions, PG No. 901, PDF No. 904), which are not opposed in written or oral submissions on behalf of the
Respondents:
V. recognition of the constitutional right to have a "chosen family", for queen and trans persons, as an intrinsic
part of the right to relational equality under Articles 14 and 15 and the right to privacy, associational autonomy and
dignified life under Article 21, which includes at its core the preservation of personal intimacies, the sanctity of
family life including the choice to form atypical families, marriage, procreation, the home, sexual orientation and
SC 1088 at para. 26; X V. Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 2022
vi. unmarried persons be permitted nominate 'any person(s)' to act as their nominee or next of kin, irrespective
of whether such person is a 'guardian, close relative or family member', with respect to assigning any legal right,
interest, title, claim or benefit accrued to the person;
vii. protection from violence for queer and trans persons in a protocol based on the preventive, remedial and
Hon'ble High Court of Madras on establishment of Garima Greh-like safe houses as directed in S. Sushma V.
Commissioner of Police, WP (C) No. 7284/2021, in order to ensure that such safe houses operate to facilitate the
agency of at-risk LGBT persons (Compilation Written Submissions, PG No. 823-824, PDF No. 826-827).
The interpretation of SMA need not be frozen in time, but must gain nourishment from the doctrine that
statutes must be treated as "always speaking"
viii. SMA can be interpreted to recognize LGBT couples' right to marriage and found a family on basis of the ratio
that statutes must be treated as "always speaking" in Dharani Sugars & Chemicals Ltd. V. Union of India, (2019) 5
4.1 The fundamental right to marriage and found a family could never have been in consideration by legislators
in 1954 due to the dominant pathological and criminological lens through which LGBT individuals were treated,
therefore, there can be no a priori assumption that SMA cannot apply to the Petitioners in 2023.
4.2 It would be unreasonable to confine the intention of the Parliament at the time SMA was enacted in 1954, as
the progressive development of jurisprudence on rights of LGBT persons under Part 111 of the Constitution, as
declared by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA (2014), KS Puttaswamy (2017), Navtej Singh Johar (2018) and others,
warrant a liberal interpretation to the provisions of SMA.
4.3 The concept of marriage under SMA will have the same meaning with the grant of relief today as it did in
1954, even when it includes LGBT families who seek assimilation within the same framework simplictor.
4.4 This Hon'ble Court applied the ratio of Dharani Sugars (2019) to recognize the statutory and constitutional
right of single women to seek abortion under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, despite the
impugned rules being limited in its text to married women (X V. Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare
ix. The declaratory relief under SMA falls squarely within Article 142 as declared in Shilpa Sailesh V. Varun
5.1 The proposition that powers under Article 142 to do complete justice are subject to statutory 'prohibitions'
posed by SMA's interplay with personal law (Sections 19-21A) and other secular laws (Sections 43-44) is
erroneous, as that would convey the idea that statutory provisions override a constitutionally vested extraordinary
discretion. As the question of recognizing the right to marriage and found a family under SMA in the ultimate
analysis turns on the breach of constitutional rights in Part 111, any purported inconsistency of declaratory relief
under SMA with the aforesaid statutory provisions in the current proceedings must not detain this Hon'ble Court, as
the said provisions would get streamlined, applied and interpreted incrementally with the passage of time by the
appropriate authorities.
5.2 This Hon'ble Court has the power to issue declaratory relief under SMA as the fundamental principle of public
policy that governs the statutory framework is the legal recognition of marriages and families which are hitherto
treated as outcastes in society and law, not succession to property, which is only the limited mandate of Chapter IV
of SMA. Therefore, the provisions governing succession to property by/of parties married under SMA are severable
from the statute as a whole.
5.3 This court, while issuing declaratory relief to recognize the right to marriage and found a family under SMA,
can go to the extent of relaxing or exempting the parties from the provisions of SMA relating to interplay with
personal law and other secular laws in the current proceedings.
X. Issues of 'workability' in statutory provisions do not preclude this Hon'ble Court from protecting Part 111
rights:
6.1 This Hon'ble Court issued landmark declarations under Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21 to protect the
fundamental rights of the transgender community under Article 32, inspite of the prevailing inconsistency in
application of S. 377 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 ('IPC') to the most intimate aspect of expression of sexuality of
transgender persons, which was read-down only in 2018 (NALSA (2014), para. 20).
6.2 This Hon'ble Court took cognizance of extant Indian legislations coded in terms of male and female, which
deny equal protection to the transgender community with respect to marriage, adoption, linheritance/succession,
tax and welfare. This context of binary-coded legislations and the resultant inequality, compelled the court to
protect the fundamental rights by reading-in binding international conventions as well as non-binding principles of
international human rights law in Part 111 to protect the rights of the transgender community, instead of
recommending a legislative and/or administrative route to amend suitable laws (NALSA, para. 53).
6.3 The legal recognition of self-determination of gender identity is, in effect, already raising queries on
workability of extant Indian legislations with NALSA (2014) and the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act,
2019 ('TG Act') as documented in Annexure-P9. The mandate of anti-discrimination under Section 3 read with
Section 20 of the TG Act leads to the inescapable conclusion that SMA and other laws must be applied to recognize
the right to marriage and found a family for transgender persons, in order to protect transgender individuals in
marital relationships from discrimination in context of joint ownership of residential property, employment related
spousal benefits, access to support services for survivors of gender based violence, among others.
6.4 As illustration, multiple High Courts have routinely found workable solutions and granted relief to
transgender individuals seeking equal protection of laws, whether with respect to reservation in public employment
(Sangma V. State by its Chief Secretary WP No. 8511/2020), access to social determinants of health (Ashish Kumar
Mishra V. Bharat Sarkar through Sachiv Khadya and Prasanskaram Mantralay, AIR 2015 All 124), remedy for
domestic violence (order dt. 16.03.2023 in Vithal Manik Khatri V. Sagar Sanjay Kamble @ Sakshi Vithal Khatri, WP
(C) No. 4037/2021, para. 11) or other aspects, by a harmonious and purposive interpretation of existing laws with
NALSA (2014) and the Act of 2019.
6.5 Additionally, a complete reading of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Rules, 2020 reveals that
Parliament already recognizes the legal validity of pre-existing marriages where one party might transition to their
self-determined gender identity. This is borne out by Rules 5(3) and 7(3) read with Annexure 1 (Item 12) which
clearly provide that such persons can change their name and gender on the marriage certificate to reflect their self-
determined gender identity.
6.6 Therefore, it is humbly submitted that a declaration simplictor on recognition of the right to marriage and
found a family under SMA or even otherwise will be workable in a manner similar to NALSA (2014) and the Act of
2019's interplay with extant Indian statutes and development of law on a case by case basis.
Directions under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 can be issued to protect rights
xi. Constitutional declaration of rights as the bulwark of socio-legal change
7.1 This Hon'ble Court passed wide-ranging directions under Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21 to recognize self-
determination of gender identity, grant reservation in public education institutions and employment opportunities,
access to trans specific and affirmative healthcare services, framing welfare policies, among others (NALSA (2014),
para. 135).
7.2 In the alternative to a declaration under SMA, this Hon'ble Court may similarly be pleased to issue
declarations under Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution in order to do complete justice to protect social
and economic rights of LGBT families, in a manner similar to NALSA (2014). Such a declaration must mandate that
state and non-state actors must not discriminate against LGBT families (conjugal and non-conjugal) on basis of
marital status in the context of any legal right, interest, title, claim or benefit that otherwise accrues to parties as a
direct incidence of a lawfully solemnized marriage under a statute.
7.3 This Hon'ble Court's declarations must also apply to non-state actors in order to fully respect, protect and
fulfil rights of LGBT families, by recognizing the public function/duty of private bodies, wherever applicable (Binny
imposing duties and liability on non-state actors in ensuring they are not contravened (Dr. Sanghamitra Acharya V.
7.4 The Union of India's suggestion to constitute a committee to recommend measures to protect fundamental
rights of LGBT families ought to be accompanied by a direction of this Hon'ble Court that such an exercise must
translate into legislative amendments in a manner consistent with the declarations issued under Part 111 of the
Constitution, as held in NALSA (2014) at para. 135.1. It is pertinent to note that administrative regulations can
only secure rights of LGBT families (conjugal and non-conjugal) in so far as they are consistent with the conception
of a 'family' under parent statutes, and thus only administrative changes would fail to do complete justice.
7.5 That further, the said committee should also be directed to fulfill its mandate by implementation of its
recommendations and measures within a time-bound period, as was directed by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA
(2014) at para. 136.
xii. Separate framework to recognize and protect fundamental rights of LGBT families, which are unique and do
not subscribe to prevailing notions of family
8.1 This Hon'ble Court ostensibly derives the framework on protecting rights of 'cohabiting' LGBT families from
to meet the test of 'relationships in the nature of marriage" for protection under the law:
Duration of relationship;
Shared household;
Pooling of financial resources;
Domestic arrangements;
Sexual relationship;
Child rearing
Socialization in public;
Intention and conduct of parties.
8.2 However, these standards rest on a stereotypical and myopic notion of heterosexual, marital relationships,
whereas LGBT families might not conform to every standard of such a framework, particularly, cohabitation, raising
children and publicly identifying as an 'atypical family'.
8.3 Instead, a more reliable and inclusive test to recognize and protect LGBT families may focus on caregiving,
economic inter-dependence and/or shared domestic responsibilities - as has been proposed for legal recognition of
chosen families in the non-conjugal context.
9 Judicial retrofitting as an aid to implement transformative constitutional morality
9.1 It was submitted by Ld. Senior Counsel for the Respondents that any exercise by this Hon'ble Court to
interpret terms in the SMA to include queen and trans persons within its fold would amount to 'judicial retrofitting'.
With respect, it is not explained why retrofitting is in itself a bad idea, especially when such interpretation can save
archaic provisions by keeping pace with the transformative constitutional morality, which must infuse all statutory
laws when under judicial review.
Joydeep Sengupta V. Union of India
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3025 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Joydeep Sengupta and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
And
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3007 of 2022
And in the Matter of:
Mellissa Ferrier and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3025 of 2022 and Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3007 of 2022
SUBMISSIONS DATED 26.4.2023
The present submissions are a summary of arguments to be presented by Karuna Nundy, Counsel for the
Petitioners in both matters. Petitioners seek a declaration that includes right of queer, non-heterosexual, and same-
sex people to marry under the secular legislations : Special Marriage Act, 1954 ("SMA"), Foreign Marriage Act, 1969
("FMA") and provisions for OCI card holders under the Citizenship Act, 1955.
Act
Nationality
Location/registration
Summary of Submissions
SMA
Indian/Indian
India
The Union's own Transgender Act of 2019, mandates
non discrimination (s3) against non-binary persons (s2
(k)) persons with intersex variations, genderqueer and
persons having such socio-cultural identities as kinnar,
hijra, aravani and jogta" (s2(k)).
The Union, per Transgender Rules, 2020, Rule 5,
already recognises marriage of trans persons. ID form C
-111, starts p. 3217/pdf.3223, @p. 3224/pdf. 3230]
Indian/Foreign
India
This is pursuant to NALSA: Therefore gender identity
becomes very essential component which is required for
enjoying civil rights by this community. viz. the right
to
vote, the right to own property, the right to marry.. (C
-IV, Vol. I, starts p. 711/pdf. 742 @p. 777/pdf. 808,
para 119)
On workability of SMA:
(i) may include "or third gender spouse" along with of
"husband or wife" which includes trans husband or wife
Foreign/Foreign
India
&
(ii) Asymmetric, protective provisions for women would
remain unchanged; third-gender spouses would be
equally protected because in line with Art 15(2) 15(4),
NALSA requires the Union to provide special provisions
for transgenders and affirmative action as Social and
Economic Backward Classes. (C-IV, Vol. I, starts p.
711/pdf. 742 @p. 761/pdf. 792 para 67 & 68)
FMA
Indian/Indian
Solemnisation
Should this Hon'ble Court only read SMA inclusively,
Abroad Registration
an immediate Article 14 anomaly arises.
India, Abroad
Statement of Objects and reasons makes FMA
explicitly in pari materia to SMA. FMA applies when one
party is an Indian citizen and the marriage is
solemnized outside India.
However, the same Indian-foreign couple may come
to India to marry under the SMA eg Arushi Mehra V.
11 hold that even two foreigners - male & female - can
marry under the SMA because S. 4, uses the terms 'any
Indian/Foreign
Solemnisation
two persons' and not 'citizens'.
Abroad Registration
If the FMA does not follow the SMA, in being read in a
India/Abroad
gender inclusive manner - same-sex, queen &
transgender couples may marry in India (or at a
consulate) but if they are already married on foreign soil
they will not be able to have their marriage registered
by Indian Marriage Officer under FMA u/s. 17
Should S. 4 of SMA be read inclusively, then
corresponding S. 4 of FMA must be read in the same
manner and rest of the FMA including S. 12 & S. 13 of
the FMA will accordingly fall into place.
Citizenship
Indian/Foreign
Solemnisation
Catch-22 situation married OCI persons, with families
Act
OCI/Foreign
Abroad
who choose to live here and those who have deep roots
provisions
Registration
in the country.
dealing
India/Abroad
They cannot marry under SMA due to Third Schedule
with
OCI
Solemnisation
which requires a declaration that one is not married. [C-
status
Abroad
111, SMA starts p.417/pdf.423@p.439/pdf.445]
Registration India
Hon'ble Court had sought a "segregable" provision with
"no prohibition in the enactment" certain things which
can be done straight away without entering other
arenas. In enactments where there is no express
prohibition of the remedies sought"
.S 7A(1)(d) : Registration of Overseas Citizen of
India Cardholder : 7A. Registration of Overseas
Citizen of India Cardholder.-(d spouse of foreign
origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of
an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder registered
under section 7A and whose marriage has been
registered and subsisted for a continuous period of not
less than two years immediately preceding the
presentation of the application under this section.
Provided that for the eligibility for registration as an
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, such spouse shall
be subjected to prior security clearance by a competent
authority in India:
Provided further that no person, who or either of whose
parents or grandparents or great grandparents is or had
been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other
country as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for
registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
under this sub-section."
Ndidi Ezeh V. Uol, 2019 [C-IV, Vol. 111, starts
p.455/pdf.465 @p.455-456/pdf. 465-466, para 2, 4]
Bahareh Bakshi V. Uol, 2021 [C-IV, Vol. 111, starts
p.114/pdf.124 @p.114-116/pdf. 124-126, para 2, 3, 5]
Natalya Mamrenko V. Uol, 2018 [C-IV, Vol. 111,
starts p.395/pdf.405 @p. .395-396/pdf. 405-406, para 5
11-12]
In Yossi Ben-Ari's case, Israeli Supreme Court held :
[C-IV, Vol. IV, starts p.3463/pdf.3471
P.
3489/pdf.3497, para 17, 23]
"17. the registration official is not competent to
determine whether there is a recognized "legal
framework" or merely a "social framework with a
certain legal significance"; the register provides
statistical data with regard to personal events
(such as birth, death, marriage and divorce), not
legal constructions that have passed the
discerning scrutiny of the registration official.
23. We are deciding that within the context of the
status of the population registry as a recorder of
statistics, and in view of the role of the registration
official as a collector of statistical material for the
purpose of managing the registry, the registration
official should register in the population register
what is implied by the public certificate that is
presented to him by the petitioners, according to
which the petitioners are married"
Obergefell's case [C-IV, Vol. IV, starts
p.2399/pdf.2407 @p. 2431/pdf.2439] " The Court, in
this decision, holds same-sex couples may exercise the
fundamental right to marry in all States. It follows that
the Court also must hold-and it now does hold-that
there is no lawful basis for a State to refuse to recognize
a lawful same-sex marriage performed in another State
on the ground of its same-sex character."
Plain words of statute require the doctrine of casus
omissus (in line with inclusive constitutional reading)
Allow me to consecrate my love, to give security,
dignity, physical unity to my family.
Joydeep Sengupta V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
Petition (Civil) No. 3025 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Mr. Joydeep Sengupta and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3007 of 2022
And in the Matter of:
Mellissa Ferrier and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Petition (Civil) No. 3025 of 2022 and Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3007 of 2022
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Karuna Nundy, Counsel for Petitioner (s)
CORRIGENDUM TO ORAL SUBMISSIONS DATED 26.4.2023
1. During oral arguments the figure of the transgender population was stated to be 4,800,000 (4.8 million) per the
2011 census, the actual figure stated in that census is 4,87,803 (~4.8 lakh)4 Written submissions make no mention
of the issue.
2. Academics and statisticians agree, the census number is likely a gross underestimate. For eg. A survey of a large
number of studies in the Indian Journal of Psychiatry says "prejudice and fear prevent disclosure of identity in many
instances". The trait being inherent, Indian populations may be similar to populations encountered in research in
developed countries, especially those with large immigrant populations including from India. When participants are
not in immense fear for being members of the queer or LGBT group', and can report with some level of freedom, then
"3.8% of the population of India may fall within the LGBT group, an estimated 45.4 million people in 2011". This
article extrapolates that about 0.3% of India's population, about 36,32,565 (3.6 million) people were transgender in
2011 i.e., 12 years ago. A recent Gallup poll for the US suggested that among younger Americans, 2.1% now identify
as transgender. Current census figures for queen persons and transgenders as well as more accurate large-scale
surveys that overcome under-reporting due to fear, are urgently required.
3. Our range of constitutional arguments is independent of numbers, and remains unaffected.
Joydeep Sengupta V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3025 of 2022
In the Matter of:
Mr. Joydeep Sengupta and Others Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3007 of 2022
And in the Matter of:
Mellissa Ferrier and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Others Respondents.
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3025 of 2022 and Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 3007 of 2022
SUBMISSIONS OF MS. KARUNA NUNDY IN REJOINDER 10th MAY 2023
Proposition 1: Chapter 111 of the Special Marriage Act, sections 15- 18, require the "Registration of Marriages
Celebrated in Other Forms". These are gender neutral.
Proposition 2: To the extent the phrase "form or marriage" u/s 15 Chapter presupposes extant validity under law, the
common law may be brought to bear to develop the contours of the right through stare decisis.
Proposition 3: Apprehensions of unforeseen consequences are unfounded as some forms of queen marriage already
exist in law. And indeed the common law exists to address unforeseen consequences on a case by case basis.
1. Recognition under Special Marriage Act, 1954 (henceforth SMA)
a) At first instance, marriage may be registered under Chapter 111, specifically section 15 of the SMA. S. 15 states,
15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms.-
Any marriage celebrated, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, other than a marriage
solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872) or under this Act, may be registered under this
Chapter by a Marriage Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are fulfilled,
namely
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties and they have been living together
as husband and wife ever since;
(b) neither party has at the time of registration more than one spouse living;
(c) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of registration;
(d) the parties have completed the age of twenty-one years at the time of registration;
(e) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship : Provided that in the case of
a
marriage celebrated before the commencement of this Act, this condition shall be subject to any law,
custom or usage having the force of law governing each of them which permits of a marriage between the
two; and
(f)
the parties have been residing within the district of the Marriage Officer for a period of not less
than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which the application is made to him for registration
of the marriage.
b) The section pertains therefore not to the solemnisation of marriage under statute but to the registration of
marriage of various communities where the practice is not otherwise codified. The marriage need only have been
"celebrated" in any form. The reference to "parties" is gender neutral, they must have completed 21 years and
not be within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
c) With regard to the requirement that the parties "have been living together as husband and wife" since the
ceremony, it is submitted that Black's Law Dictionary, Fourth Edition, defines 'as' to mean "like, similar to, of the
same kind, in the same manner, in the manner in which; with significance of in degree, to that extent, so far; it
may also have the meaning of because, since, or it being the case that; in the character or under the name of."
This applies to living together in a subsisting relationship of marital character between parties of any gender.
Therefore, for registration of a marriage/union celebrated between a non-heterosexual couple u/s 15, all that
would be required would be that the couple in question had been living like a married couple. Such a proposition
would not require the reading down or indeed the reading of words, into the Statute.
d) S 18 of the SMA states that from the date of registration, the marriage will be deemed to be a marriage
solemnized under the Act with all its attendant consequences. Therefore, the Special Marriage Act, 1954 makes
no distinction between a marriage 'solemnised under S. 4' or simply 'registered under S. 15' to enable the couple
to avail the material benefits of being married.
c) Alternatively this Hon'ble Court may recognise the principles that are in pari materia to the solemnisation of
marriages under Chapter 11 and the law on this may be developed on a case by case basis by courts until the
legislature makes law. This may be done on the following basis (as agreed upon broadly by most of the Petitioner
counsels):
Declare that reference to the word 'person' or 'spouse' under Section 4 of the Special Marriage Act includes a
non-heterosexual person. Accordingly hold that any two non-heterosexual persons are entitled to get their
marriage solemnized under the provisions of the Special Marriage Act.
(a) The term husband/wife in the SMA [or any other allied law] will be read as 'spouse', except where the
context otherwise requires.
OR
(b) To the extent the provisions of the SMA or any other law for the time being in force are enacted for a 'wife'
against a 'husband' in a heterosexual marriage or for a 'woman' against a 'man' in a gender specific
context.
Our table on workability submitted on 26.4.23 details our proposed reading of the SMA provisions [as a man or
third gender person or woman or third-gender person, wherever appropriate.]
With respect to Section 4(c), it will cover same-gender couples and those involving transgender persons. The
words 'male' and 'female' in Section 4(c) to include any two persons who identify in the male gender
(including trans-man) and/or in the female gender (including trans-woman). The word 'transgender person'
refers to a person who does not identify either as 'male' or 'female'. Section 4(c) then reads as:
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years, and the female or the transgender person the age of
eighteen years.
The Court has not ruled on any matter of personal laws, including the issue of justiciability thereof. The
provision of Section 21A will apply, however the consequences of the same on the personal laws will be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
To the extent that there is a casus omissus in matters, inter alia, of succession, non-secular adoption etc. We
have no reason to doubt that Parliament will enact a comprehensive code to regulate the same in a non-
discriminatory manner.
In all other laws, rules and regulations, including the provisions of the Special Marriage Act other than those
mentioned above, the principles laid down in this judgment will apply and their applicability and/or
constitutionality will fall to be considered independently.
11. Marriage as a creature of common law
a) Parsi marriage laws were a creature of common law, prior to their codification. There is no religious source.
During their emigration from Persia, their books were lost, creating a vacuum in law. [Ref : Compilation p.9, pdf.
11 Chapter 3, p. 136, The Limits of English Law, Mitra Sharafi, Law and Identity in Colonial South Asia : Parsi
Legal Culture, 1772-1947 (New York : Cambridge University Press, 2014)]
b) Marriage & divorce between Parsis therefore, was regulated by English Ecclesiastical (or Christian) law as the
"default for Zoroastrians living in presidency towns like Bombay" [Ref : Compilation p.12, pdf. 14, Chapter 3, p.
139, Sharafi (ibid)]
husband objected to the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Court to decide the matrimonial dispute between a Parsi
couple and to apply Christian law. [Ref : Compilation, p.16, pdf. 18]
d) There was, therefore, a legal vacuum and no appropriate law to regulate the marriage of Paris, though they too
PC 6 (1854-57) 6 Moo IA 348, suggested that the Supreme Court of Bombay (as it then was) deal with Parsi
marriages in its civil jurisdiction, and not its 'ecclesiastical' jurisdiction, as the proceedings on the civil side
might be adapted to the circumstances of each case as justice may require.
e) In this context, the Privy Council held, "The Civil Courts in India can bend their administration of justice to the
laws of the various suitors who seek their aid. They can administer Mahomedan law to Mahomedans, Hindoo law
to Hindoos; but the Ecclesiastical law has no such flexibility. Change it in its essential character, and it ceases to
be Ecclesiastical law altogether. For the reasons we have stated, we think that a suit for the restitution of
conjugal rights, strictly an Ecclesiastical proceeding, could not, consistently with the principles and rules of
Ecclesiastical law, be applied to parties who profess the Parsee religion; but we should much regret if there
were no Court and no law whereby a remedy could be administered to the evils which must be
incidental to married life amongst them. We do not pretend to know what may be the duties and
obligations attending upon the matrimonial union between Parsees, nor what remedies may exist for
the violation of them, but we conceive that there must be some laws, or some customs having the
effect of laws, which apply to the married state of persons of this description. It may be that such
laws and customs do not afford what we should deem, as between Christians, an adequate relief; but it
must be recollected that the parties themselves could have contracted for the discharge of no other duties and
obligations than such as, for time out of mind, were incident to their own caste; non could they reasonably have
expected more extensive remedies, if aggrieved, than were customarily afforded by their own usages. Such
remedies we conceive that the Supreme Court on the civil side might administer, or at least remedies
as nearly approaching to them as circumstances would allow. In suits commenced on the civil side, the
peculiar difficulties which belong to the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in some matrimonial cases would
not arise. Proceedings might be conducted on the civil side with such adaptation to the circumstances
of the case as justice might require, though on the Ecclesiastical side such modification would be
wholly irreconcilable with Ecclesiastical law." [Ref : Compilation, p.34-35, pdf. 36-37]
f) No ex ante decision on the specifics of Parsi marriage was made in this case but the implicit assumption that
Parsis had a right to marry was given effect to.
g) The Court held that any vacuum in law was to be adequately addressed by appropriate modifications &
adaptations. [Also ref : Compilation, p.40, pdf.42 Chapter 4, p. 172, Reconfiguring Male Privilege, Mitra Sharafi,
Law and Identity in Colonial South Asia : Parsi Legal Culture, 1772-1947 (New York : Cambridge University
Press, 2014)]
h) Thereafter, the Bombay High Court in Rachel Benjamin V. Benjamin Soloman Benjamin : (1926) Vol.28 Bom.LR
328, by relying on, inter alia, Cursetjee (supra), held that the High Court has jurisdiction to adjudicate over
matrimonial matters concerning Jews, and that the "law of the parties" would be applied in such cases. [Ref
Compilation p.50, pdf. 52]
i)
The Law Commission Report No. 211 titled Laws on Registration of Marriage and Divorce - A Proposal for
Consolidation and Reform, 2008, shows Bahai & Jewish marriages based on uncodified custom are valid when
solemnized by religious officials of the community, which has a system of certification of marriages. There is
however no system among either communities for the transmission of marriage records to any authority under
control of the State. There is no legal requirement, or practice, of registering the Bahai or the Jewish marriages
with the State registry. [Ref : Compilation, p.64, pdf. 66]
j)
One of the recommendations that the Commission makes in this context, is that it should be made mandatory for
the "officiating priest" of every marriage [including Jewish & Bahai religious leaders] to prepare and maintain
proper records of all marriages in a prescribed form. [Ref : Compilation p.66-67, pdf. 68-69]
111. Supreme Court's Powers Under Art. 141 & 142:
a) Once this court recognises the right to marriage of queen persons, the law may develop through common law and
stare decisis and when the legislature acts the statute may occupy the field. This Hon'ble Court in various
judgements has exercised powers under Article 141 and 142 to declare law in the sphere of marriage where the
legislature has not made law. This includes alternate remedies for divorce in Shilpa Sailesh V. Varun Sreenivasan,
states and UTs for maintaining records of marriages.
b)
finding that under Article 142 [para 50] "this Court can depart from the procedure as well as the
substantive laws, as long as the decision is exercised based on considerations of fundamental general
and specific public policy" [Ref : Compilation 5.141-142, pdf. 143-144] held that in proceedings for divorce
under the Hindu Marriage Act, this Hon'ble Court can under Article 142 can waive the period and the procedure
prescribed under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act for mutual divorce, quash and dispose of
other/connected proceedings under the Domestic Violence Act, Section 125 of the Cr. P.C., or criminal
prosecution primarily under Section 498-A and other provisions of the I.P.C. and decree dissolution of marriage
on a finding of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. On powers under Article 142 this court held, [para 14] As
explained in Supreme Court Bar Association (supra), the exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the
Constitution of India being curative in nature, this Court would not ordinarily pass an balanced approach, to hold
that Article 142 being curative in nature and a constitutional power cannot be controlled by any statutory
provision, but this power is not meant to be exercised ignoring the statutory provisions or directly in conflict with
what is expressly provided in the statute. At the same-time, it observes, that this Court will not ordinarily
discard a statutory provision governing the subject, except perhaps to balance the equities between
the conflicting claims of the parties to "iron out the creases" in a 'cause or matter' before it.
[Ref
:
Compilation 120, pdf. 122]
"preventive, remedial and punitive measures" "to meet the challenges of the agonising effect of honor crime". [C
-IV, Vol. I, starts 0.1134/pdf.165 @p.1157/pdf.1188]
us that in the absence of records relating to dates of marriages and parties to the marriage, problems have come
up which have far-reaching consequences. We, therefore, request learned Solicitor General to consider whether
government orders by way of executive instructions can be issued, on the basis of directions of this
Court, to various States and Union Territories to authorise officials specifically to keep record of
marriages SO that they can be placed as evidence in different proceedings if the necessity arises.
Learned Solicitor General submitted that there may be necessity of a suitable legislation in this regard as the
government orders/executive instructions may not suffer. We are of the view that until a suitable legislation
is made, the government orders/executive instructions can be made enforceable in terms of the orders
of this Court. These may be implemented where there is no statutory prescription
for
recording/registering the marriage, and may be done as an additional measure when there is any such
prescription." [Ref Compilation 148-149, pdf. 150-151]
under Article 21, which can be enforced under Article 32 even though the ordinary processes of court can also be
invoked. On the basis of this ratio, constitutional courts across the countries have under the common law
principle of stare decisis directed compensation. [para 10] "In these circumstances, the refusal of this Court
to pass an order of compensation in favour of the petitioner will be doing mere lip-service to his
fundamental right to liberty which the State Government has SO grossly violated." Therefore, where
there is a right, the right must be capable of being exercised. In the instant case, similar to Rudul Shah, such
law may be recognised and developed under common law. [Ref : Compilation .74, pdf. 76]
IV. Apprehensions of Unforeseen Consequences
a) Today, biological men can be married to biological men and biological women can be married to biological women
IV, Vol. 111, starts p.85/pdf.95 @p. 89/pdf. 99, para 16-17] Transgender people who were married prior to a
declaration of their transition and their marriages subsist under the statutory scheme of the The Transgender
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 and Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Rules, 2020.
-country adoptions. This is another sphere of law where there are religious customs and statutes. The Supreme
Court [paras 1-3] acted on a letter petition complaining of questionable practices adopted by agencies which
gave children in inter-country adoptions. The decision noted that there were two legislative attempts at passing
an Adoption Bill which did not fructify; the first was 'The Adoption of Children Bill, 1972' which had been
introduced in the Rajya Sabha but was not passed and the second effort was made in 1980, when the 'Adoption
of Children Bill' was introduced in the Lok Sabha, but which remained pending. [Ref : Compilation p. 76-80, pdf.
78-82]
This court referred to Articles 15(3), 34 and 39 which showed the [para 6] great anxiety of the Constitution
makers to protect and safeguard the interest and welfare of children in the country" This court also stressed
on the right to family of every child and the urgent need for their intervention to ensure that adoptions take
place in a manner that centres the welfare of the child. [para 7,8] "Every child has a right to love and be loved
and to grow up in an atmosphere of love and affection and of moral and material security and this is possible
only
if the child is brought up in a family. But if for any reason it is not possible for the biological parents
or
other near relative to look after the child or the child is abandoned and it is either not possible to trace the
parents or the parents are not willing to take care of the child, the next best alternative would be to find
adoptive parents for the child so that the child can grow up under the loving care and attention of the
adoptive parents. But while supporting inter-country adoption, it is necessary to bear in mind that the
primary object of giving the child in adoption being the welfare of the child, great care has to be
exercised in permitting the child to be given in adoption to foreign parents, lest the child may be
neglected or abandoned by the adoptive parents in the foreign country or the adoptive parents may not be
able to provide to the child a life of moral or material security or the child may be subjected to moral or sexual
abuse or forced labour or experimentation for medical or other research and may be placed in a worse
situation than that in his own country." [Ref : Compilation p. 81-82, pdf. 83-84]
The court considered hindu customs on adoption and noted that there was no statute for other
religions [para 7] The practice of adoption has been prevalent in Hindu society for centuries and it is
recognised by Hindu Law, but in a large number of other countries it is of comparatively recent origin while in
the Muslim countries it is totally unknown. Amongst Hindus, it is not merely ancient Hindu Law which
recognises the practice of adoption but it has also been legislatively recognised in the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956. The adoption of Children Bill, 1972 sought to provide for a uniform law of adoption
applicable to all communities including the Muslims but, as pointed out above, it was dropped owing to the
strong opposition of the Muslim community. The Adoption of Children Bill, 1980 is now pending in Parliament
and if enacted, it will provide a uniform law of adoption applicable to all communities in India excluding the
Muslim community... [Ref : Compilation p. 83-84, pdf. 85-86]
The Court noted that [para 9], prior to this judgment, in the absence of any law on adoption, foreign parents
who desired to adopt an Indian child would make an application under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 to
be appointed as the guardian of the child after which the foreign parents would have the right to take the
child out of the country. To regulate this process, the High Courts of Bombay, Gujarat and Delhi had even put
in place certain procedural rules which this court referred to and approved.
As there were no other statutes, the procedure adopted was based on the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956, [para 9] "Now it would be convenient at this stage to set out the procedure which is
at present being followed for giving a child in adoption to foreign parents. Since there is no statutory
enactment in our country providing for adoption of a child by foreign parents or laying down the procedure
which must be followed in such a case, resort is had to the provisions of the Guardians & Wards Act, 1890 for
the purpose of facilitating such adoption." [Ref : Compilation p.91, pdf. 93]
Thereafter, procedure for adoption was prescribed by the legislature under the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Rules, 2007, Central Adoption Resource Authority - Guidelines Governing Adoption of
Children, 2015 and Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
V. A Declaration of a right to marry while valuable in itself, might remain in a vacuum
a) Lives are passing us by as we speak and non-heterosexual marriages are already happening. Incremental change
has already begun but if there is a declaration it cannot remain inchoate.
b) In Nepal, the directive order to the government by the Supreme Court to make necessary amendments in the
legislation to accommodate same-sex couples was in 2007. [Sunil Babu Pant V. Nepal Government Writ No. 914
of the year 2064 BS (2007 AD) C-IV, Vol. IV, starts p.3200/pdf.3208@p.3224/pdf.3232] The Committee formed
by the Government under the directions of the Supreme Court gave its recommendations on the legal provisions
that need amendment in 2014. The legislative changes contemplated have still not been carried out. [C-IV, Vol.
VII, starts p.35/pdf.36 @p.63/pdf.63]
c) Alongside other constraints, a hurdle Indian courts face when seeking to employ devices other than striking down
are a lack of institutional apparatus to effectuate declared rights. According to "Balanced Constitutionalism :
Courts and Legislatures in India and the United Kingdom" (Oxford University Press, 2017) by Mr. Chintan
Chandrachud:
"In addition to the textual constraints noted above, the Indian Supreme Court's scope to employ devices that
temper the exercise of the power to strike down legislation is also constrained by institutional factors. Even in cases
where the Court has sought to prompt legislative change through some form of 'advice-giving', Parliament has
either failed to respond, or taken an agonizing amount of time to respond, to the Court's advice. In Vishaka V. State
of Rajasthan, a public interest litigation case, the Court issued a list of guidelines for the prevention of sexual
harassment of women in the workplace. The Indian Supreme Court recognized that the primary responsibility of
ensuring the safety of women lay with the legislature and the executive, and stated that its guidelines would
remain in force only until Parliament enacted suitable legislation to plug the existing legislative vacuum. These
seemingly stop-gap (and in hindsight, poorly implemented) guidelines remained in force for over 16 years, until
Parliament finally enacted legislation on the subject.
Another example is State of MP V. Shyam Sunder Trivedi, where the Indian Supreme Court lamented the
frequency of the torture and murder of suspected criminals in police custody, and urged the government and
Parliament to consider implementing a Law Commission recommendation to transfer the evidential burden of proof
on to the defendant police officer once it was established that bodily injury was caused to a person in police
custody. In spite of reminders from the Bench, this recommendation has not been implemented Unlike the
declaration of incompatibility in the UK, informal 'nudges' to the legislature in India lack institutional grounding. A
declaration of incompatibility is not just a freewheeling judicial assertion that primary legislation is inconsistent with
Convention rights- it forms part of an institutional network set up under the HRA." [Ref : Compilation p.151-152,
pdf. 153-154]
In contrast, the Indian Supreme Court's informal advice to change the law lacks the institutional bite given to
the declaration of incompatibility by the Strasbourg Court and the JCHR. There is neither any comparable
international mechanism in India, nor any monitoring body that systematically holds the government accountable
for compliance with informal recommendations of the Indian Supreme Court. Courts are institutionally unequipped
to monitor the government or Parliament's responses to judgments that find primary legislation to be inconsistent
with human rights." [Ref Compilation 153, pdf. 155]
In this context, a declaration recognizing the right of persons in a same sex relationship to marry may not
necessarily translate into the subject matter of legislative exercise by the Parliament. A declaration may
simply remain a recommendation that does not effectuate all the rights and privileges guaranteed to same sex
and trans persons under constitutional precepts.
Kavita Arora V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
In the Matter of:
Dr. Kavita Arora and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Another Respondents.
Transferred Case (Civil) No. 08 of 2023
Decided on April 26, 2023, [Hearing on : 25.04.2023]
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Submitted by Arundhati Katju, Advocate
1. This Court is faced with a question as to how far to interpret the provisions of the SMA and other allied laws
relating to the rights and obligations of marriage.
2. At the outset, Petitioners submit that LGBTQ people must be entitled to all the rights and obligations conferred
upon any other couple who marry under the SMA.
Declaration
3. Petitioners submit that this Hon'ble Court, in the event it decides in favor of the Petitioners, may issue writs of
mandamus and prohibition as under:
(a) It is declared that a marriage solemnized/registered under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the parties to the
said marriage shall be entitled to all rights and obligations conferred on a married couple or a party to such
marriage under any other Central/State laws, notwithstanding the gender identity and sexual orientation of the
parties of such marriage.
(b) It is directed that the State or any authority of the State shall not deny any rights and obligations conferred on
a married couple or a party to such marriage under any Central/State laws to either or both parties to a marriage
solemnized/registered under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 only on the ground that the parties to the marriage
are a same-sex or genden non-conforming couple.
Principles of Statutory Interpretation
4. The interpretation of Sections 2(b), 27 (1-A), 36 and 37, and the prohibited degrees under SMA has already
been placed before this Court. This Court can adopt an expansive reading of the statute to include LGBTQ persons as a
Supreme Court Cases)].
5. Further, this Court can also adopt the principle of updating construction to interpret the statute in light of
subsequent constitutional developments. In this regard, it may be noted that this Court is not strictly originalist in its
interpretation of either the Constitution or of statutes.
6. At the outset of arguments, this Court indicated that it would adopt an incremental approach and thus, the
reference was restricted to civil marriage legislations.
Extent of interpretation of the SMA by this Constitution Bench
7. In the event reliefs sought by the Petitioners are granted, this Court has two questions before it:
(i) Whether S. 21-A SMA, 1954 will apply to LGBTQ couples who marry under the SMA, and
(ii) To what extent civil rights and obligations arising from marriage will apply to an LGBTQ couple married under
the SMA.
8. As a Constitution Bench, this Hon'ble Court is to answer the reference before it and need not reach every
question that may arise from the application of its holding. Just as opposite-sex couples do, LGBTQ couples will have
to raise many substantive and procedural questions before the Courts below as they stake claims and raise disputes.
However, findings by this Hon'ble Court on these two questions and the writs respectfully proposed in this note will go
a long way in giving guidance to the courts below in the interpretation of laws.
A. On applicability of Personal Laws to a marriage registered/solemnized under the SMA
Section 21-A of the SMA, 1954
9. Section 21-A ought to apply to LGBTQ couples who are both Hindu, Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist just as it does to
opposite-sex couples who are both of these faiths.
Statutory interpretation
10. Should this Court read the word "spouse" into the SMA and hence read the statute in a gender-neutral manner,
this reading must be uniform across the statute. No substitution or deletion is contemplated of any other provision of
the SMA and the same ought to apply to Section 21-A.
Legislative history of Section 21-A
11. The SMA, 1872 was introduced as the Brahmo Samajis professed that they were not Hindus and a need was felt
for a marriage law that would apply to them [see Sir HS Gour, Legislative Assembly Debates, 22nd March 1922,
PDF
page 161, Folder "Documents", Volume X] The 1872 Act required that persons marrying under the Act should not
profess any of the enumerated religions. Hence, a person was required to renounce their religion to marry under the
statute.
12. The 1872 Act was amended by Act XXX of 1923. The 1923 Amendment brought within its ambit a second class
of couples, both of whom were either Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina.
13. The 1954 Act did away with these classes by permitting for marriages between "any two persons", (i)
regardless of faith and (ii) without requiring persons marry under the Act to renounce their faith.
14. As the Act was amended and the provisions regarding who could marry under the Act changed successively, the
applicability of personal law also changed accordingly.
15. Prior to the 1872 SMA, the Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850 provided that any law or usage which inflicted
on any person forfeiture of rights or property, or impaired a right of inheritance by reason of renouncing or being
excluded from any religion, or being deprived of caste, would cease to be enforced as law in any court.
16. Hence, while the SMA, 1872 contained no restrictions or disabilities, in effect personal law ceased to apply to
persons marrying under the Act as they had to renounce their religion to marry thereunder. This countered the effect
of the Caste Disabilities Removal Act. The 1872 statute thus contained no restrictions on the application personal
law.
450
17. Subsequently, the 1872 Act was amended by Act XXX of 1923. As the Act now allowed for marriage between
Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, and Jainas, it also introduced restrictions on applicability of personal law under Sections 22-
26 (set out in Table B below).
18. It may be noted that Muslims and Christians were not covered by the statutory text. It may also be noted that
during the colonial period, courts were required to decide questions of whether certain castes and religions were
Hindus and what laws applied to them. 451 For example, Privy Council decisions expanded the definitions of "Hindu" to
include Brahmos and Sikhs. Further, the law was different in British India and the Princely States.
452
19. The SMA 1954 departed from the 1872 Act and the 1923 Amendment to allow for marriage between any two
persons. It did not a require a renunciation of faith, but it retained certain restrictions on applicability of personal law
under Sections 19-21 of the Act.
20. It must be noted also that when the SMA 1954 was passed, inter-caste marriage was prohibited under Hindu
personal laws. Thus, two Hindus of different castes could only marry under the SMA. Inter-caste marriage itself invited
restrictions on personal law and hence Sections 22-26 of the 1923 Amendment were retained in a modified form under
Sections 19-21 of the 1954 Act.
21. With the introduction of the HMA, 1955, Section 5 thereof permitted marriage between any two Hindus
irrespective of caste or gotra. However, the restrictions arising from marriage under the SMA remained in force.
22. In 1976, based on the recommendation in the 59th Law Commission Report (1974), Section 21-A came to be
introduced to remove the restrictions introduced in the 1954 Act. Hindu, Sikhs, Jainas and Buddhists marrying within
these religious communities would continue to be governed by their personal law. By 1956, this personal law had
largely been codified by the introduction of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, and the Hindu Succession Act. No similar provision was introduced qua the personal law of any
other religious community.
TABLE A Legislative history of the coverage of the Act
Special Marriage Act,
Special Marriage Act, 1872 as amended
Special Marriage Act, 1954
1872
under Act XXX of 1923
2. Marriages may be
2. Marriages may be celebrated under this
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of
celebrated under this Act
Act between persons neither of whom
special marriages -Notwithstanding
between persons neither
professes the Christian or the Jewish, or
anything contained in any other law for the
of whom professes the
the Hindu or the Muhammadan, or the
time being in force relating to the
Christian or the Jewish, or
Parsi or the Buddhist, or the Sikh or the
solemnization of marriages, a marriage
the Hindu or the
Jaina religion or between persons each
between any two persons may be
Muhammadan, or the
of whom professes one or other of the
solemnized under this Act, if at the time
Parsi or the Buddhist, or
following religions, that is to say, the
of the marriage the following conditions are
the Sikh or the Jaina
Hindu. Buddhist Sikh or Jaina religion
fulfilled, namely.
religion upon the following
upon the following conditions:
Note : This provision has remained without
conditions:
amendment till date.
TABLE B : Legislative history of application of personal laws
Special Marriage
Special Marriage Act, 1872
Special Marriage Act, 1954
Marriage
Laws
Act, 1872
as amended under Act XXX
(Amendment) Act, 1976
of 1923
Contained
no
22. The marriage under this
19. The marriage solemnized
21A. Special provision in
provisions similar
Act of any member of an
under this Act of any member
certain cases Where the
to Chapter IV of
undivided
family
who
of an undivided family who
marriage is solemnized under
the SMA, 1954
professes the Hindu, Buddhist,
professes the Hindu, Buddhist,
this Act of any person who
that is to say, no
Sikh or Jaina religion shall be
Sikh or Jaina religions shall be
professes the Hindu, Buddhist,
restrictions
on
deemed to effect his severance
deemed to effect his severance
Sikh or Jaina religion with a
disabilities were
from such family.
from such family.
person who professes the
imposed.
23. A person professing the
20. Subject to the provisions
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
of section 19, any person
religion, section 19 and
religion shall have the same
whose marriage is solemnized
section 21 shall not apply and
rights and be subject to the
under this Act shall have the
so much of section 20 as
same disabilities in regards to
same rights and shall be
creates a disability shall also
any right of succession to any
subject to the same
not apply.
property as a person to whom
disabilities in regard to the
the Caste Disability Removal
right of succession to any
Act, 1850, applies : Provided
property as a person to whom
that nothing in this section
the Caste Disabilities Removal
shall confer on any person any
Act, 1850 (21 of 1850),
right to any religious office or
applies.
service, or to the management
21. Notwithstanding any
of any religious or charitable
restrictions contained in the
trust.
Indian Succession Act, 1925
24. Succession to the property
(39 of 1925), with respect to
of any person professing the
its application to members of
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
certain
communities,
religion who marries under
succession to the property or
this Act and to the property of
any person whose marriage is
the issue of such marriage,
solemnized under this Act and
shall be regulated by the
to the property of the issue of
Indian Succession Act, 1865.
such marriage shall be
25. No person professing the
regulated by the provisions of
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
the said Act and for the
religion who marries under
purposes of this Act shall have
this Act shall have the right of
effect as if Chapter 111 of Part
adoption.
V (Special Rules for Parsi
26. When a person professing
Intestates) had been omitted
the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or
therefrom.
Jaina religion marries under
this Act, the father shall, if he
has no other son living have
the right to adopt another
person as a son under the law
to which he is subject.
23. Thus, the genesis of restrictions upon two Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, or Jainas marrying under the civil marriage
legislation is the 1923 Amendment Act. As the 59th Law Commission Report4 and the
453
212
Law Commission
Report 454 reveal, these restrictions were intended to disincentivize such persons from marrying under Act. These
restrictions on the application of Hindu personal law were sought to be removed by Section 21-A giving Hindu, Sikh,
Jaina and Buddhist couples a choice of form of marriage (civil or customary) while keeping them within the fold of the
Hindu Code.
24. Section 21-A of the Act is not under challenge before this Court. It is also not in doubt Section 21-A, since it
applies only to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist and Jaina couples, treats certain kinds of inter-faith couples, and non-Hindu
couples, differently. However, since the principal argument is that the Act should apply equally to same-sex and
gender non-conforming couples in all existing faith combinations as it applies to heterosexual couples, Section 21-A
ought to apply as-is to LGBTQ Hindu couples.
25. In Maneka Gandhi V. Indira Gandhi, AIR 1985 Del 114, a Division Bench of the Delhi HC comprising of Prakash
Narain, CJ, and B.N. Kirpal, J., as they then were, held that Section 21-A was constitutional and did not violate Articles
14, 15, 19 or 44 of the Constitution. They further held that S. 21-A effectively repealed S. 19 and 21 as far as Hindus,
Buddhists, Sikhs or Jainas were concerned. Hence, S. 19 and 21 would have no force in such a case. They further
dismissed the argument that S. 21A took away the vested rights of persons who had chosen to adopt a secular form of
marriage under the SMA.
26. It may be recalled that in Johar, this Court recorded the Petitioners submission that the LGBTQ population
amounts to 7-8 percent of India's population and LGBTQ persons are arguably spread evenly spread across all sections
of society.
27. The consequence of excluding any class of Hindus from personal law, nearly fifty years after the introduction of
Section 21-A, would far exceed the recognition of marriage equality in terms of its consequences for Indian society. It
is humbly submitted that the application of personal law and the choice of whom to marry are both matters of
conscience under Article 25 of the Constitution and there is no conflict between them. In as much as discrete
questions of the application of Hindu Code statutes will arise in the future, these may be decided by courts below in
terms of the proposed declaration by this Hon'ble Court.
B. Rights and obligations flowing from marriage
28. It has already been placed before this Court that Article 21 includes the right to found a family and meaningful
family life (See Arundhati Katju's Written Submissions Paras 16-87). Petitioners submit that what we are terming the
"rights and obligations of marriage", are in fact statutory guarantees that secure a fundamental right to a meaningful
family life under Article 21. These "rights and obligations" cannot be disaggregated from the institution of marriage.
(See positive and negative declaration in para 3 of this note).
29. Social welfare legislation (relating for example to gratuity, pension, etc., under any number of laws) must apply
to LGBTQ couples as they do to opposite-sex couples (Deepika Singh, para 26).
30. Marriage is a gateway in law both to having children through adoption, surrogacy, and assisted reproductive
technology. Each of these statutes also provide adopted children and children born through surrogacy/adoption all
rights at par with biological children (see Adoption Regulation, R. 5(2) and (3) and S. 2(2) JJ Act; Ss. 2(1)(h) and 8 of
the Surrogacy Act, 2021; and Ss. 2(1)(e and 31 of the ART Act, 2021.
31. For a couple to adopt, they should be married. In the absence, not only are the couple legal strangers to each
other, but one parent is rendered a legal stranger to the child.
32. The law does not countenance discrimination based on parentage [see Union of India V. VR Tripathi, (2019) 14
384/Volume 11, Supreme Court Cases)], this Court held that "(t)he confidence and happiness of a child who
is
showered with love and affection by both parents is totally distinct from that of a child who has no parents or has lost
a parent and still worse, is that of a child whose paternity is in question without there being any cogent reason for the
same."
34. It is submitted that without marriage of their parents, children of LGBTQ couples are in the position of a child
whose paternity is being questioned due on constitutionally unsustainable grounds of the sexual orientation or gender
identity of her parents.
Kavita Arora V. Union of India
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA AT NEW DELHI
In the Matter of:
Dr. Kavita Arora and Another Petitioners;
Versus
Union of India and Another Respondents.
Transferred Case (Civil) No. 08 of 2023
Advocates who appeared in this case:
DRAWN BY:
Govind Manoharan, Advocate
Himanshu Suman, Advocate
Dhanurdhar Singh Rana, Advocate
Shristi Borthakur, Advocate
Ritika Meena, Advocate
SETTLED BY:
Arundhati Katju, Advocate
FILED BY
Shally Bhasin Advocate on Record for the Petitioners
SUBMISSIONS IN REJOINDER ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS BY ARUNDHATI KATJU. ADV.
1. In rejoinder, we make the following four propositions:
(a) The fundamental right to marry and various contents of this right are guaranteed by Part 111 of the Constitution.
(b) A declaratory relief from this Court ought to be accompanied by directions to all organs of the State to actualize
the declaration.
(c) Questions of statutory interpretation cannot deter this Court from issuing a declaration under Part 111.
(d) The Court's declaration under SMA, 1954 ought not to exclude the application of Section 21-A.
I. The right to marry and various contents of this right are guaranteed by Part 111
2. This Court's jurisprudence already recognizes the fundamental right to marry as being available to all persons.
This right is located under Articles 14, 15, 19, 21, and 25 in Part 111.
3. The fundamental right to marry has both positive and negative contents:
(a) The right the status of marriage.
(b) The right to cohabitation
(c) The right to be recognized as a family unit
(d) The right to procreate and raise children
(e) The right to exclude others from the marriage
(f) The right to have the marriage gain social acceptance and
(g) The right to build and combine an estate.
4. Petitioners submit that the right to the status of marriage is intrinsically linked to the dignity of a person and
of a couple. The status of being married, independent of the rights, benefits and obligations of marriage, is the first
and primary incident of marriage.
5. The right to cohabitation includes protections against any interference in the actual living together of the
couple, including police protections, various schemes promoting inter-caste marriage, etc., as recognized by various
judgments of this Hon'ble Court and the courts below. It also includes visas, OCI status of a spousal partner, etc.
6. The right to be recognized as a family unit includes the ability to secure socio-economic benefits such as
insurance, joint banking privileges, maternity benefits, survivorship etc.
7. Similarly, the right to procreate and raise children not only includes the right to have biological children but
also the ability to have children through adoption, surrogacy, or ART.
8. The right to exclude others from the marriage encompasses exclusivity conferred to the relationship by bigamy
prohibitions, spousal privilege, matrimonial reliefs such as the restitution of conjugal rights etc.
9. The right to gain social acceptance follows the legal recognition afforded to a married couple. Our courts have
time and again come to the aid and protection of inter-caste/inter-faith couples who were at risk from either their
455
families or communities.
10. Further, marriage has also historically enabled couples to build and combine an estate-by leasing joint
acquisition of property, pooling of resources, tax benefits to couples, economic protection to a spouse in the form of
pension and employment benefits, and inheritance and succession. This estate then enures to the family as a unit.
11. All these facets of the right to marry are protected by various Part 111 rights. It is submitted that this Court's
declaratory relief ought to encompass all these aspects of the right to marry.
11. A declaratory relief from this Court must be accompanied by directions to all organs of the State to
actualize the declaration.
12. The Petitioners' prayer before this Court, at the first instance, in the event they are successful, is to locate the
declarations and the right to marry under the SMA 1954 and FMA 1969.
13. Nevertheless, the general declaration of the right to marry, which is multi-faceted, ought to be accompanied
with directions to the State in order to fully actualize the right to marry. According to the Petitioners, consequential
directions of this Court must speak to each of the facets of the right to marry identified in Section | of this note.
14. In commending this approach, the Petitioners are supported by the course adopted by the NALSA Court. The
declaration and consequent directions given by the Hon'ble Division Bench were as under:
135. We declare that:
135.1. Hijras, Eunuchs, apart from binary gender, be treated as "third gender" for the purpose of safeguarding
their rights under Part 111 of our Constitution and the laws made by the Parliament and the State Legislature.
135.2. Transgender persons' right to decide their self-identified gender is also upheld and the Centre and
State Governments are directed to grant legal recognition of their gender identity such as male, female or as
third gender.
135.3. We direct the Centre and the State Governments to take steps to treat them as socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens and extend all kinds of reservation in cases of admission in educational
institutions and for public appointments.
135.4. Centre and State Governments are directed to operate separate HIV Sero-surveillance Centres since
Hijras/Transgenders face several sexual health issues.
135.5. Centre and State Governments should seriously address the problems being faced by
Hijras/Transgenders such as fear, shame, gender dysphoria, social pressure, depression, suicidal tendencies,
social stigma, etc. and any insistence for SRS for declaring one's gender is immoral and illegal.
135.6. Centre and State Governments should take proper measures to provide medical care to TGs in the
hospitals and also provide them separate public toilets and other facilities.
135.7. Centre and State Governments should also take steps for framing various social welfare schemes for
their betterment.
135.8. Centre and State Governments should take steps to create public awareness so that TGs will feel that
they are also part and parcel of the social life and be not treated as untouchables.
135.9. Centre and the State Governments should also take measures to regain their respect and place in the
society which once they enjoyed in our cultural and social life.
136. We are informed an Expert Committee has already been constituted to make an in-depth study of the
problems faced by the Transgender community and suggest measures that can be taken by the Government to
ameliorate their problems and to submit its report with recommendations within three months of its constitution.
Let the recommendations be examined based on the legal declaration made in this Judgment and implemented
within six months.
15. Hence, the NALSA directions were wide ranging and encompassed specific directions to different bodies of
the State to actualize the declarations of Part 111 rights made by the Hon'ble Division Bench. These directions
included:
a) Directions to recognize transgender persons as a third gender for the purposes of safeguarding their rights under
statutory law made by Parliament and the States - traceable to Articles 14, 15, 19, 21.
b)
Directions to the Central and State Governments to recognize transgender persons in their self-declared gender
identity - traceable to Articles 14, 15, 19, 21.
c) Direction to the Central and State Governments to extend Article 16(4) protections to transgender persons, thus
expanding the constitutional understanding of social and educational backwardness - traceable to Article 16(4).
d) Direction to the Central and State Governments to address health issues of transgender persons, provide
separate toilets etc. - traceable to the Right to Health under Article 21.
e) Direction to the Central and State Government to address problems of fear, shame, gender dysphoria, shame,
etc. - traceable to all Part 111 rights, but crucially, a direction to the State to bring about a social change.
f) Direction to the Central and State Government to frame social welfare schemes - traceable to all Part 111 rights.
16. Coupled with the declaration, these specific directions have ensured both continued debate in the legislature,
resulting in legislative action, and a social conversation which has led to greater acceptance of transgender persons.
17. Thus clear directions to the State by way of an order of this Court provides the base-line guarantees and the
general direction for the State to secure fundamental rights to citizens. Further, experience shows that people bring
their problems to the Courts well before legislatures choose to recognize them. When dealing with individual
challenges seeking protection of the law, our courts do not have the luxury of deferring the lis till such time as the
legislature may choose to address a social issue.
18. Various social and legislative changes were made possible by the declaration coupled with the directions given
by this Hon'ble Court in NALSA The TG Act, 2019457 creating a broad framework of protections to transpersons,
various state legislations securing reservation for transpersons, and amendments to the UP Revenue Code securing
inheritance rights to a "third gender spouse"/"third gender issue"/"third gender brother" etc., amongst others.
19. Illustratively, the 6th Report of the VII State Law Commission (Uttar Pradesh) on Transgender Rights in
Agricultural Land in U.P. relied upon NALSA to find that:
Hon'ble the Apex Court further held that because transgender people were treated as socially and economically
backward class, they will be granted reservation in admission to educational institution and jobs. Central and the
State Governments have been directed to take proper measures to provide medical care to transgender people in
the hospitals and also provide them separate toilets and other facilities. Further, they have been directed to operate
separate HIV Sero-survellance measures for transgender people. The Central and State Governments have also
been asked to take steps to create public awareness so that transgender people will feel that they are also part and
parcel of the social life and not to be treated as untouchables; take measures to regain their respect and place in
society, seriously address the problems such as fear, shame, gender dysphoria, social pressure, depression, suicidal
tendencies and social stigma.
Hon'ble the Apex Court has further held that the fundamental rights are available to the third gender in the same
manner as they are to male and female. Further, non-recognition of third gender in both criminal and civil statutes
such as those relating to marriage, adoption, divorce etc. is discriminatory to the third gender.
In view of decision of Hon'ble the Apex Court, much has to be done by the Parliament as well as State
Legislatures. Although, the Private Member Bill, 2014 is pending before the Parliament and in the meantime, the
Government of India has also introduced the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill, 2018 which has been
passed by the Lok Sabha and it has been sent to Rajya Sabha for consideration.
The Private Member Bill, 2014 as well as the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill, 2016 deals with
identification of transgender person, prohibition of discrimination welfare scheme, reservations, grievance redressal
and penalties but at the same time both these Bills which are pending before the Parliament of India do not deal
with the right of inheritance in the property.
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 as well as the Indian Succession Act, 1925 are Centre Legislation and although
the State Government has power to amend these legislations with the concurrence of Central Government which
has a long procedure. Therefore, this Commission has confined its study to the right of succession in the agricultural
property as well as grant of lease regarding abadi lands in Uttar Pradesh.
It is very surprising that neither the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 had any provision
regarding succession to transgenders nor the U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 contains any provision regarding succession
in the agricultural property.
20. This resulted in amendments to the Uttar Pradesh Revenue Code, relevant provisions of which are reproduced
below:
4. (10) family, in relation to a tenure-holder, means himself or herself and his wife or her husband or third
gender spouse, as the case may be, (other than a judicially separated wife or husband or third gender spouse),
minor sons and minor daughters other than married daughters and third gender minor issue.
Explanation-Third Gender means such a person who is of a gender different from the male or female
gender.
108.(2) The following relatives of the male third gender Bhumidhar, asami or government lessee are heirs
subject to the provisions of sub section (1), namely.
(a) Widow, or third gender spouse, unmarried daughters, third gender issue and the male lineal descendants in
the male line of descent per stripes:
Provided that widow, unmarried daughters, third gender issue and sons howsoever low shall inherit per
stripes the share which would have devolved upon the predeceased son had he been alive.
(b) Mother and father,
(c) Married daughter,
(d) Brother, unmarried sister, third gender sibling being respectively the son and daughter, third gender issue of
the same father as the deceased, and son, unmarried daughter, third gender issue of predeceased brother, the
predeceased brother, having been the son of the same father as the deceased.
(e) Son's daughter and third genden issue;
(f) Father's mother and father's father;
(g) Daughter's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(h) Married sister;
(i) Half sister, being the daughter of the same father as the deceased;
(j) Sister's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(k) Half sister's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter the sister having been the daughter of the same
father as the deceased,
(I) Brother's son's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(m) Father's father's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter;
(n) Father's father's son's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter,
(o) Mother's mother's son, third gender issue and unmarried daughter.
21. We submit that the declaration of the right to marry to LGBTQIA+ couples will have a richer meaning if followed
with directions to actualize the various facets of the right to marry including those set out in Section I of this note.
111. Questions of statutory interpretation cannot deter this Court from issuing a declaration under Part III.
22. The prospect of statutory interpretation, no matter how vast, cannot deter this Hon'ble Court from giving
a
declaration of the Part 111 rights of citizens. Article 32 vests this Court with a constitutional duty and obligation to
"enforce the rights conferred by [Part 111]". It does not lie to the Respondent Union to argue that the prospect of
statutory interpretation by future courts, or even the prospect that the executive and/or the legislature must act to
bring the law per Article 13(2) in line with a declaration of this Court, ought to deter this Hon'ble Court from fulfilling
its Article 32 obligations.
23. With this foundation, it is submitted that the questions of statutory interpretation that will arise before future
courts are not insurmountable nor out of the ordinary from what courts do in the daily process of adjudication.
24. It is submitted that the provisions of the ISA and HSA would apply to males and female intestates as they
currently apply to cis persons, while reading the words "husband", "wife" in a gender neutral manner. Hence the
gender of the intestate controls the question of which section is to apply, while the gender of the spouse is read in a
gender-neutral manner - compliant with the current understanding of the Constitution that Article 15 prohibits
discrimination based on the sex of one's partner.
25. For transgender persons, courts will have to determine on a case to case basis (i) whether the person is
governed by the ISA, HSA or some other customary law and (ii) if the ISA or HSA apply, whether to classify the
person as a male or female or whether, perforce, to choose to apply one or the other.
26. The legal question before this Court arises because of the gender imbalances inherent in our succession law.
Petitioners are aware that the laws of succession are not gender-neutral and may exclude women from various forms
of property or give them lessen shares. Further, these laws do not on their face address transgender persons at all.
27. However, these laws are not presently under challenge before this Court. Petitioners seek their recognition in
the institutions of marriage and family are they currently are, with all their strengths and weaknesses.
28. Further, this Court cannot pre-empt how future courts will interpret laws of succession before it delivers its own
judgment on the validity of LGBTQ marriage, as the statutes will be read in terms of the declaration itself [whether in
favour of the Petitioners or against].
29. Yet Courts are already engaged in these interpretative exercises. Earlier cases have found that a transgender
person is not governed by the HSA but rather by their customary law. [See, Sweety (Eunuch) V. General Public, AIR
2016 HP 148 (PDF pg. 882 of Volume 3 of Precedent Compilation), IIIyas V. Badhshah @ Kamla, AIR 1990 MP 334
(PDF pg. 243 of Volume 3 of Precedent Compilation)]. Given the imperative of NALSA and the TG Act, at some stage
either the courts or the legislature will have to confront the question of the application of the ISA and HSA to
transgender persons who do not identify on a gender binary at all.
30. Hence, Petitioners submit the below interpretations only to show that statutory interpretation of the provisions
is not impossible, as the Ld. Solicitor General sought to argue. However, the interpretation itself should be left to
future courts.
31. For instance, Section 15 HSA mandates that the property of a female Hindu dying intestate devolves in the first
instance only upon her children and husband. By interpreting the word "husband" as spouse, a future court may hold
that the partner of a female Hindu in an LGBT couple will inherit the share intended by the provision to pass to such
female's spouse. A female Hindu in a same-sex marriage, dying intestate, would continue to be governed by Section
15 of the HSA. There is no difficultly presented the statutory interpretation that would deter a future court from
459
answering the question of Section or indeed any other provision of law.
IV. The Court's declaration under SMA, 1954 cannot exclude the application of Section 21-A.
32. At the outset, it is submitted that the present reference was limited to a question of marriage of LGBTQ couples
under the Special Marriage Act, the Foreign Marriage Act, and other laws.
33. By dropping the challenge under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, what the Petitioners forgo is the application of
the HMA and not the application of personal law per se. However, the absence of a challenge to the HMA at this stage,
does not amount to a submission that personal law would not apply to a same-sex couple marrying under the SMA as
it does to an opposite-sex couple.
34. Inasmuch as Petitioners seek equal application of the law, they also seek equal application of the provisions of
the SMA to same-sex couples, including Chapter IV of the SMA. Sections 19 to 21 of the Special Marriage Act only
exclude the personal law of a married couple to a limited extent, i.e., (1) to sever a coparcener from the Hindu
Undivided Family, (2) to remove a person from their personal law of succession and place them under the Indian
Succession Act. Section 21-A has the effect of lifting this exclusion and keeping a Hindu couple marrying under the
SMA within the fold of Hindu personal law.
35. As a constitutional question, both the application of personal law and the right to marry are protected under
Article 25 by the freedom of conscience. These are not competing rights.
36. It is no argument that, because this Hon'ble Court is not considering whether LGBTQ couples can marry under
the HMA, it should exclude the application of Section 21-A to Hindu LGBTQ couples altogether. The application of
Section 21-A is not predicated on the marriage of the Hindu couple being a valid marriage under Section 7 HMA, or
meeting the conditions under Section 4 HMA. The Section only requires that both parties to the marriage be Hindu.
37. Rather, to exclude LGBTQ couples from the ambit of Section 21-A
(a) creates a classification within a classification, which is not the intent of the SMA
(b) creates a classification amongst Hindus which is not the intent of the Hindu Code
(c) discriminates against Hindu LGBTQ Hindu on the grounds of their sexual orientation and gender identity
38. Hence, there is no valid justification to exclude Hindu LGBTQ couples from the operation of Section 21-A SMA.
39. Should this Court hold that Section 21-A applies to LGBTQ Hindu couples, questions of how to interpret the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and the Indian Succession Act, 1925 ought to be left to a future court.
40. This is not because of any impossibility of interpreting these laws to same-sex couples. We are not asking this
court to kick the problem down the road. This submission is made only because this Court cannot preempt, at this
time, the nature and forms of these challenges that may arise in the future - for example with respect to (i) the kinds
of property in question, (ii) the couples who will come before the Courts (iii) the nature of the challenge that is made
to the statutes (iv) the gender identity of the intestate.
Abhijit I yer Mitra V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
(Extra-Ordinary Civil Writ Jurisdiction)
In the Matter of:
ABHIJIT IYER MITRA & ORS. Petitioners;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.
Respondents.
W.P. (C) No. 6371 of 2020 in Writ Petition (C) 1011/2022
Decided on April 26, 2023
BRIEF WRITTEN-SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH:
1. That Writ Petition no. 3671 of 2020 seeks a declaration to the effect that since section 5 of the Hindu Marriage
Act of 1955 refers to any two "Hindus", LGBTQIA people should be allowed to get married as per the provisions of the
same. Written Submissions filed along with arguments (Page 631 to 648 of the compilation) reproduce case law qua
relevant principles of interpretation to urge that any interpretation that excludes LGBTQIA people would be invalid and
would render the provision unconstitutional.
2. That the Written Submissions from pages 648 to 660 deal with instances of set of parents belonging to the same
sex parents in ancient Indian books. Inter alia, the Rig Vedic God Agni is raised by two mothers as well as Prince
Bhagiratha who is the legendary ancestor of Lord Rama.
3. That pages 660 to 664 of the Written Submissions refer to Indian Supreme Court dicta laying down that the due
process clause is a facet of Article 21 and the same is read along with Obergefell et al V. Hodges, Director, Ohio
Department of Health, et al; a judgement of the US Supreme Court to contend that to deny same sex couples the right
to marry would be a violation of Article 21 of the Constitution.
4. That it is submitted that if such a right is granted as per the Hindu Marriage Act it would not be an interference
into religious matters because Section 4 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 excludes religious authorities and customs
qua any matter for which provision is made under the Hindu Marriage Act.
5. That if such marriages are held to be under the Hindu Marriage Act, then there would be no need for any
registrar (As per Section 8 clause 5 of the Act) and hence, couples would escape orthodox social sanction.
Furthermore, Section 7 of the Act as interpreted by the Supreme Court in the case of S. Nagalingam V. Sivagami,
long as the couple professes the Hindu religion.
6. That by excluding the Hindu Marriage Act from the ambit of this lis, we are effectively telling one set of Hindus
that their faith in the rituals is enough and no further registration of their marriage is required. On the other hand, we
are telling LGBTQIA Hindus that their faith is not enough and registration is required under the Hindu Marriage Act. As
Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. It also impinges upon the rights of LGBTQIA Hindus to profess their religion
under Article 25 of the Constitution of India. This view has also been taken by the Madras High Court in the case of
Arun Kumar V. The Inspector General of Registration, AIR 2019 Mad 265 (pp. 688-689 of compilation).
THROUGH:
RAGHAV AWASTHI & MUKESH SHARMA
Counsels for Petitioners
E-17, Masjid Moth, Greater Kailash-III
New Delhi-110048
Phone No.8368465287 & 9873289394
Email : raghav35@gmail.com
advo.mukeshsharma@gmail.com
New Delhi
Date: 26.04.2023
ONE PAGE WRITTEN NOTE FILED BY NAMIT SAXENA, ADVOCATE
1. The issue before the Hon'ble Court deserves to be looked at with a wider lens and not a restrictive approach of
'same sex marriage" as the issue in essence is about a bouquet of rights of non- heterosexual individuals.
2. The recognition of such rights has been argued before the Hon'ble Court by senior colleagues at bar which
I
respectfully adopt. As an extension of the same, it is humbly submitted that recognition of a right involves three
stages -Having a right, Exercise of such a right and Conditions of exercise of such a right.
3. A necessary concomitant of having a right to marry irrespective of sexual orientation is to register the said
marriage.
4. It is here where, attention is drawn of the Hon'ble Court to the decision in Seema V. Ashwani Kumar, [(2006) 2
5. This Hon'ble Court, directed that marriages of all citizens belonging to various religions should be made
compulsorily registrable holding it to be a 'vital statistic'. This Hon'ble Court also directed that as and when the Central
Government enacts a comprehensive statute, the same shall be placed before the Hon'ble Court.
6. It is here where the right to marry gains significance as the essence of exercising this right lies in getting the
same duly registered. The problem arises here. Different States have formulated their own rules for registration of
marriage.
7. For instance, in compliance of the judgment in Seema V. Ashwani, the Delhi Government vide Order No. F.1
(12)/DC/MC/2014/4342 dated 21.04.2014 notified The Delhi (Compulsory Registration of Marriage) Order, 2014', the
Section 2 (a) of the aforesaid orden clearly mentions the marriage solemnized between 'male' and 'female' is
compulsorily registrable. Thus, even if there is a right to marry to non-heterosexual couples, the marriage still remains
unregistrable till this Order restricting the right to register the marriage only to males and females stands. The
abovesaid Order denies individuals with non-heterosexual orientation the right to marry a person of their choice and
register it.
8. It is most humbly submitted that the denial of registration of marriage on the basis of their sex identity or
gender identity is in clear violation of Article 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution.
9. The submission to the proposition for judicial determination thus is that the State cannot discriminate against an
individual on the basis of a characteristic over which an individual has no control and thus an
order/guideline/statute/direction inhibiting the same, also must be evolved to be in consonance with the interpretation
being sought to be given to the provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
(Namit Saxena)
Abhijit I yer Mitra V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
IN THE MATTER OF:
ABHIJIT IYER MITRA & ORS PETITIONERS
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ANR RESPONDENTS
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 06 OF 2023
WRITTEN SUBMISSION FILED BY NAMIT SAXENA, ADVOCATE ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER NO.2/ GOPI SHANKAR M
1. INTRODUCTION
1. The petitioner herein is an intersex person and has been working for the rights of intersex individuals, intersex
infants and gender non-conforming children from the last several years. The petitioner has filed the present litigation
in the form of public interest litigation against the denial of right and registration of marriage to the individuals of non-
heterosexual orientation under Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
2. The denial of registration of marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act to a practicing Hindu only on the basis of
their sex identity is violation of Article 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
3. The present form of Hindu Marriage Law doesn't recognize all diverse forms of Hindu Marriage traditions and
rituals and is only confining itself to the heteronormative structure of our society. The Hindu Dharmic traditions
acknowledges diverse forms of Hindu/Dharmicunion of two persons living together and it elevates the Union of two
jivatma as the sacred union of supreme divinity or God itself.
4. The Hindu community knew about the different indigenous gender variants and diverse sex characteristics, even
before the concept of LGBTQ+ originated. They have existed for more than 2000 years and their philosophy, starting
from the pre-Abrahamic traditions, originated in India. In Vedic times, India had great indigenous culture, ancient
temples, and existence of diverse sex characteristics spiritual figures. Even after Pakistan and Bangladesh separated
from the mainland India as separate countries, India has been a force in culturally influencing the culture of South
Asia including Myanmar, Nepal, and Afghanistan. This is very evident with the Indigenous gender-variant communities
and diverse sex characteristics in South Asia and some parts of South East Asia.
5. In the Hindu tradition, the ancient Tamil Sangam literature uses the word 'Pedi' to refer to people born with the
intersex condition; it also refers to antharlingavashi and diverse indigenous non-binary sex identities. The ancient
Sanskrit term for Intersex is Kleeba and it became root syllable (Mantra) for Devi worship in India, Nepal and Tibet.
The Aravan spiritual tradition in the Koovagam village of Tamil Nadu is a folk tradition of the diverse genden women
who are predominantly assigned as male at birth. The members of the community enact folk stories of indigenous
gender identities during an annual 3-day festival. This is completely different from the sakibeki spiritual tradition of
West Bengal, where Trans women don't have to undergo gender affirming surgery or shave off their facial hair. They
dress in feminine clothes; still retaining their 'masculine' features and sing in praise of Lord Krishna.
6. The social stratification in India has seen major changes in the post-colonial era. The Section 377 of the Indian
Penal code, introduced by the British in its colonies in 1861, criminalized non vaginal sexual acts including same
sexual activities predominantly criminalized not only applied for the larger LGBTQ+ communities but also for Intersex
people too. And it's not only India that was affected by the stringent law; there are 42 other Commonwealth countries
which were under some kind of British rule, like contemporary Pakistan and Bangladesh, that have been influenced by
the same.
7. Though historically the diverse sex and gender identities were accepted and given equal space in the society, the
present laws deny them even the basic civil rights. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 doesn't recognize the civil rights of
the people with non-heterosexual orientation and blatantly violated the Article 14, 15, and 21 of the Constitution. It
needs to read and interpreted by this Hon'ble Court, so as to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality.
8. The rules and acts passed by State Governments regarding registration under Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 also need to be read and interpreted to include people with non-heterosexual identities.
9. Many democracies around the World have recognized the 'same sex marriages' and given the civil rights to the
same sex couples. Recognizing the 'same sex marriage is in itself a discriminatory and a very restrictive concept as it
grants civil rights only to the same sex couple ignoring the diverse gender variants and sex identities.
10. The Petitioner no. 2 being an intersex individual is seeking recognition of civil rights of people with non-
heterosexual identities without restricting the rights to the 'same sex couples'.
11. BRIEF FACTS
1. The Petitioner No. 2- Gopi Shankar is an Indian indigenist, equal rights activist, author and public speaker. Gopi
Shankar is the first intersex person appointed as the Statutory Authority i.e. South Regional Representative to the
National Council for Transgender Persons, appointed by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government
of India. Gopi is the founder of Srishti Madurai LGBTQIA+ Student Volunteer Movement and was one of the core
committee members of Intersex Asia; it is the Asia's first collective forum for Intersex Individuals and organizations.
Gopi coined the regional Tamil terms for Genderqueer people and wrote 'Maraikkappatta Pakkangal' the first book on
LGBTQIA+ Gender-Variant identities in Tamil language: it is widely used as part of syllabus at various universities in
Tamil Nadu and it's the first book on SOGIESC (Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Expressions and Sex
Characteristics) rights indexed in all national public libraries of Singapore.
2. The Intersex people are born with reproductive or sexual anatomy that does not fit the typical definitions of
female or male. Though some think of intersex anatomy as an inborn condition, it doesn't always show up at birth.
Transgender or transsexual people, on the other hand, are born with typical male or female anatomies but their sex
identity does not match with their gender identity or gender expression.
3. The petitioner no. 2 was also praised and appreciated for their work by the Hon'ble High Court of Madras in
Petitioner has inspired the Madras High Court to impose a ban on sex selective surgeries on intersex infants in the
State of Tamil Nadu and Tamil Nadu became the first state in India to impose such ban.
4. The petitioner no. 2 has approached this Hon'ble Court against the discrimination meted out to the people with
non-heterosexual orientation when it comes to solemnization and registration of marriage under the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955.
5. The petitioner no. 2 is conscious and is praying in this petition to used correct terminology while recognizing the
marriage rights beyond the heterosexual identities. Recognizing and legally permitting only the 'same sex marriage' is
also discriminatory as it excludes the intersex individuals and people with diverse gender and sex identities and sexual
orientation. That it is imperative to use inclusive terminology to do away with the discriminatory and unequal
treatment meted out to the people with non-heterosexual orientation.
111. SUBMISSIONS
1. Understanding the difference in Sex, Gender and Sexuality:
Sex is usually determined by birth based on biological characteristics.Humans have 46 chromosomes with 22
pairs of autosomes (44 non sex chromosomes) and 1 pair of sex chromosomes (2 sex chromosomes X or Y). At a
gross level a human with 46 XX will develop into a female and one with 46,XY will develop into a male. Each
chromosome harbors several genes associated with sex development and minor changes in any of them can effect
different metabolic pathways resulting in differences in sex development. For example Intersex is a biological
condition that arises to changes in genetic code or expression of genes during the development of the fetus, infant,
child into adulthood. Intersex people are born with reproductive or sexual anatomy that does not fit the typical
definitions of female or male. An intersex person may be heterosexual, lesbian, bisexual or asexual; and may
identify as female, male, both or neither.
Gender is a socially constructed concept; it refers to the social role played by a person based on his/her sex.
Based on the physical anatomy of a person at birth, he/she is assigned a 'gender' and has to live as per the role
assigned for that particular genden as per the societal norms.
Sexual Orientation, is decided on the basis of whom you are attracted to.
2. Inclusiveness of Hindu traditions and rituals:
Every single form of system or tradition which unites and uplifts the humanity is always integral part of Hindu
Dharma and the Hindu Dharmic traditions and rituals are the only non-static life flow accommodates the union of
persons with diverse sex characteristics, gender identity and expression and sexual orientation. Hindu Dharmic
approaches have space for every conscious & non conscious life/non life and expandable list of identities which are
part of cosmos and beyond. The present form of Hindu personal laws is not in consonance with the Hindu Traditions
and is very restrictive in nature. Denial of registration of marriage to people with non-heterosexual identity is not
only against the spirit of all encompassing Hindu Dharma but also violates the fundamental rights of the
individuals. 6
3. Recognizing the existence, life, Human Rights, and Civil Rights of people with diverse sex characteristics and Non
-heterosexual Orientation:
Article 14 of the Constitution of India guarantees equality before law and equal protection of law to all the
citizens. Every person can marry person of their choice and can register under their personal laws but a person with
non-heterosexual identityare denied the right to marry any person of his choice only because of their diverse sex
characteristics. This denial of registration of marriage only on the basis of the diverse sex characteristics/gender
identity/sexual orientation is violation of Article 14. Furthermore, it is pertinent to recognize the people with
intersex variations and diverse sex characteristics and shall be included in the Census of India for attaining the
equality.
Article 15 provides that the State shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of religion, race, caste,
sex, place of birth or any of them. The denial of registration of marriage only on the basis of diverse sex
characteristics/gender identity/sexual orientation is violative of the Article 15.
Denying people with non-heterosexual orientation to choose a partner of their choice solemnize and register
marriage and live a dignified life is violative of Right to personal life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the
Constitution.
Any law which prohibits or restricts a person of non-heterosexual orientation to choose partner of their choice,
solemnize and register their marriage is in blatant violation of the Fundamental Rights under Article 14, 15 and 21
and is unconstitutional.
4. Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Civil Rights of people with Non-heterosexual Orientation:
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 doesn't recognize all diverse forms of Hindu Marriage traditions and rituals, and
confinesit to the heteronormative structure of our society. Though the Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
provides for solemnization of marriage between 'two hindus', the sub-section 3 use the word bridegroom and bride
(with the prescribed age) thereby implying and confining the marriage as between the individuals of two opposite
sex.
Further many States have formulated their own rules for registration of marriage as per the provisions of the
Section 8 of Hindu Marriage Act, which further creates confusion and aid in denying the right to solemnize and
register marriage to the people with the diverse characteristics/genden identity/sexual orientation. For instance, the
Delhi Government vide Order No. 1(12)/DC/MC/2014/4342 dated 21.04.2014 notified 'The Delhi (Compulsory
Registration of Marriage) Order, 2014', the Section 2 (a) of the aforesaid order clearly mentions the marriage
solemnized between 'male' and 'female' is compulsorily registrable. The Section 2(a) is reproduced below:
Section 2 Compulsory registration of marriage:
(a) On the commencement of this order, any marriage solemnized in Delhi, between a male having completed
21 years of age and a female having completed 18 years of age on the date of solemnization of the
marriage and of which at least one of the parties is an Indian citizen, such marriage shall be compulsorily
registerable in accordance with this order, irrespective of caste, creed and religion professed by any party or
parties to such marriage, provided that if the marriage has already been registered under any existing law,
the same shall not be required to be registered under this order.
The marriagerules notified by the Delhi Government deny the people with non-heterosexual orientation the right to
marry a person of their choice. Every state has such rules/law to regulate the registration of marriage and these rules
also have to be scrutinized to recognize civil rights of the people with non-heterosexual orientation and practical
problems faced while registering the marriage.
IV. RELIEF SOUGHT:
The petitioner no. 2 approached this Hon'ble Court praying for the following reliefs:
a. Declare and Recognize the Civil Rights of People with Nonheterosexual orientation under the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955; AND/OR
b. Declare and recognize the existence, life, and basic human rights of the intersex people and people with diverse
sex characteristics; AND/OR
C. Direct the State Governments to modify the rules of registration of marriage notified by them under the Section 8
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 to include people with non-heterosexual identities and allow them to register the
marriage.
FILED BY:
[NAMIT SAXENA]
Advocate for Petitioner No. 2
Seema V. Ashwani Kumar
(BEFORE DR ARIJIT PASAYAT AND S.H. KAPADIA, JJ.)
SEEMA (SMT) Appellant;
Versus
ASHWANI KUMAR ... Respondent.
Transfer Petition (C) No. 291 of 2005460, decided on February 14, 2006
A. Family Law - Marriage - Registration of marriages - Held, marriages of all persons who are citizens
of India belonging to various religions should be made compulsorily registrable in their respective States,
where the marriage is solemnised - Reasons for, discussed - Directions in respect thereof, issued - Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 - S. 8 - Special Marriage Act, 1954, S. 13
B. Constitution of India - Sch. VII List III Entry 30 - Words "vital statistics" - Scope - Held,
registration of marriages would come within ambit of the expression vital statistics
C. Evidence Act, 1872 - Ss. 77 and 114 - Marriage certificate - Evidentiary value - Presumption arising
from - Held. though registration of a marriage itself cannot be a proof of valid marriage per se. and would
not be the determinative factor regarding validity of a marriage, yet it has a great evidentiary value in
family matters - As a natural consequence, effect of non-registration would be that the presumption
available from registration of marriages would be denied to a person whose marriage is not registered -
Family Law
Except four statutes applicable to the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra
Pradesh registration of marriages is not compulsory in any of the other States.
(Para 14)
The registration of marriages would come within the ambit of the expression "vital statistics" in Schedule VII List
III Entry 30.
(Para 5)
If the record of marriage is kept, to a large extent, the dispute concerning solemnisation of marriages between two
persons is avoided. As rightly contended by the National Commission, in most cases non-registration of marriages
affects the women to a great measure. If the marriage is registered it also provides evidence of the marriage having
taken place and would provide a rebuttable presumption of the marriage having taken place. Though, the registration
itself cannot be a proof of valid marriage per se, and would not be the determinative factor regarding validity of a
marriage, yet it has a great evidentiary value in the matters of custody of children, right of children born from the
wedlock of the two persons whose marriage is registered and the age of parties to the marriage. That being so, it
would be in the interest of the society if marriages are made compulsorily registrable. As a natural consequence, the
effect of non-registration would be that the presumption which is available from registration of marriages would be
denied to a person whose marriage is not registered.
(Paras 15 and 16)
Therefore marriages of all persons who are citizens of India belonging to various religions should be made
compulsorily registrable in their respective States, where the marriage is solemnised. Directions in respect of the same
are being issued [contained in para 18 herein].
(Para 17)
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 1979, referred to
D-M/TZ/33839/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
G.E. Vahanvati, Solicitor General and Ranjit Kumar, Senior Advocate (Balraj Dewan, Mukesh Sharma, Manish
Shankar, Pankaj K. Singh, Yash Pal Dhingra, S.W.A. Qadri, Aruneshwar Gupta, Rajeev Kr. Dubey, V.G. Pragasam, Ms
Anil Katiyar, Gopal Singh, Rituraj Biswas, Tara Chand Sharma, Ms Neelam Sharma, K.R. Sasiprabhu, Balraj, B., J.S.
Attri, Ms Shivani Thakur, Ms D. Bharathi Reddy, Nikhal Shakad Danda, Ms Nandini Gore, Gopal Prasad, Ajay Sharma,
Rajeev Sharma, Ms Kamini Jaiswal, Ms Sunita Diwedi, Ms Shamita Bakshi, Ms Rani, Ranjan Mukherjee, Manjeet Singh,
Ms Vivekta Singh, Harikesh Singh, T.V. George, Sanjay R. Hegde, Anil K. Mishra, A. Rohen Singh, Ravi P. Mehrotra,
Garvesh Kabra, Ms Suparna Srivastava, Ms Deepti Singh, Rajesh Srivastava, Ms Sunita Sharma, D.S. Mahra and Kh.
Nobin Singh, Advocates) for the appearing parties.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.- The origin of marriage amongst Aryans in India, as noted in Mayne's Hindu Law and
Usage, as amongst other ancient peoples is a matter for the science of anthropology. From the very commencement of
the Rigvedic age, marriage was a well-established institution, and the Aryans' ideal of marriage was very high.
2. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (in short "CEDAW") was
adopted in 1979 by the United Nations General Assembly. India was a signatory to the Convention on 30-7-1980 and
ratified on 9-7-1993 with two declaratory statements and one reservation. Article 16(2) of the Convention says,
though India agreed on principle that compulsory registration of marriages is highly desirable, it was said as follows:
"It is not practical in a vast country like India with its variety of customs, religions and level of literacy' and
has
expressed reservation to this very clause to make registration of marriage compulsory."
3. While a transfer petition was being heard it was noted with concern that in large number of cases some
unscrupulous persons are denying the existence of marriage taking advantage of the situation that in most of the
States there is no official record of the marriage. Notice was issued to various States and Union Territories and learned
Solicitor General and Mr Ranjeet Kumar, learned Senior Counsel were requested to act as amicus curiae to assist the
Court in laying down guidelines in the matter of registration of marriages. Without exception, all the States and the
Union Territories indicated their stand to the effect that registration of marriages is highly desirable.
4. It has been pointed out that compulsory registration of marriages would be a step in the right direction for the
prevention of child marriages still prevalent in many parts of the country. In the Constitution of India, List III (the
concurrent list) of the Seventh Schedule provides in Entries 5 and 30 as follows:
"5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and
partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal law.
30. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths."
5. It is to be noted that vital statistics including registration of deaths and births is covered by Entry 30. The
registration of marriages would come within the ambit of the expression "vital statistics".
6. From the compilation of relevant legislations in respect of registration of marriages, it appears that there are four
statutes which provide for compulsory registration of marriages. They are : (1) the Bombay Registration of Marriages
Act, 1953 (applicable to Maharashtra and Gujarat), (2) the Karnataka Marriages (Registration and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1976, (3) the Himachal Pradesh Registration of Marriages Act, 1996, and (4) the Andhra Pradesh
Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2002. In five States provisions appear to have been made for voluntary
registration of Muslim marriages. These are Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa and Meghalaya. The "Assam Moslem
Marriages and Divorces Registration Act, 1935", the "Orissa Mohammadan Marriages and Divorces Registration Act,
1949" and the "Bengal Muhammadan Marriages and Divorce Registration Act, 1876" are the relevant statutes. In Uttar
Pradesh also it appears that the State Government has announced a policy providing for compulsory registration of
marriages by the Panchayats and maintenance of its records relating to births and deaths. Under the Special Marriage
Act, 1954 which applies to Indian citizens irrespective of religion, each marriage is registered by the Marriage Officer
specially appointed for the purpose. The registration of marriage is compulsory under the Christian Marriage Act, 1872.
Under the said Act, entries are made in the marriage register of the church concerned soon after the marriage
ceremony along with the signatures of bride and bridegroom, the officiating priest and the witnesses. The Parsi
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 makes registration of marriages compulsory. Under Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 (in short "the Hindu Act") certain provisions exist for registration of marriages. However, it is left to the
discretion of the contracting parties to either solemnise the marriage before the Sub-Registrar or register it after
performing the marriage ceremony in conformity with the customary beliefs. However, the Act makes it clear that the
validity of the marriage in no way will be affected by omission to make the entry in the register. In Goa, the Law of
Marriages which is in force in the territories of Goa, Daman and Diu w.e.f. 26-11-1911 continues to be in force. Under
Articles 45 to 47 of the Law of Marriages, registration of marriage is compulsory and the proof of marriage is ordinarily
by production of certificate of marriage procured from the register maintained by the Civil Registrar and issued by the
Civil Registrar concerned appointed for the purpose by the Government. The procedural aspects about registration of
marriages are contained in Articles 1075 to 1081 of the Portuguese (Civil) Code which is the common Civil Code in
force in the State. It is pointed out in the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent State of Goa that the Hindu Act is
not in force in the said State since it has not been extended to the State either by the Goa, Daman and Diu Laws
Regulations, 1962 or by the Goa, Daman and Diu Laws No. 2 Regulations, 1963 by which Central Acts have been
extended to the State after the liberation of the State. Procedure for marriages is also provided in the Code of Civil
Registration (Portuguese) which is in force in the State. The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 also provides for registration
of marriages.
7. As noted above, the Hindu Act enables the State Government to make rules with regard to the registration of
marriages. Under sub-section (2) of Section 8 if the State Government is of the opinion that such registration should
be compulsory it can so provide. In that event, the person contravening any rule made in this regard shall be
punishable with fine.
8. In various States different marriage Acts are in operation e.g. in Jammu and Kashmir, the Jammu and Kashmir
Hindu Marriage Act, 1980 empowers the Government to make rules to provide that the parties (Hindus) shall have
their particulars relating to marriages entered in such a manner as may be prescribed for facilitating proof of such
marriages. Admittedly, no rules have been framed. As regards Muslims, Section 3 of the Jammu and Kashmir Muslim
Marriage Registration Act, 1981 provides that marriage contracted between Muslims after the commencement of the
Act shall be registered in the manner provided therein within 30 days from the date of conclusion of Nikah ceremony.
However, the Act has not been enforced. So far as Christians are concerned, the Jammu and Kashmir Christian
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1957 provides for registration of marriages in terms of Sections 26 and 37 for registration of
marriages solemnised by Minister of Religion and marriages solemnised by, or in the presence of a Marriage Registrar
respectively.
9. In exercise of powers conferred by Section 8 of the Hindu Act the State of U.P. has framed the U.P. Hindu
Marriage Registration Rules, 1973 which have been notified in 1973. In the affidavit filed by the State Government it
is stated that the marriages are being registered after enactment of the Rules.
10. In Pondicherry, the Pondicherry Hindu Marriage (Registration) Rules, 1969 have come into force w.e.f. 7-4-
1969. All Sub-Registrars of Pondicherry have been appointed under Section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908 (in short
"the Registration Act") as Marriage Registrars for the purposes of registering marriages. In the State of Haryana, the
Haryana Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 2001 under Section 8 of the Hindu Act have been notified. In the State of
West Bengal, the Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1958 have been notified.
11. From the affidavit filed on behalf of the State of Tripura, it appears that the said State has introduced rules
called the Tripura Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1957. It has also introduced the Tripura Special Marriage Rules,
1989 under the Special Marriage Act, 1954. So far as the State of Karnataka is concerned, it appears that the
Registration of Hindu Marriages (Karnataka) Rules, 1966 have been framed. It further appears that the Karnataka
Marriages (Registration and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976 has been introduced. Section 3 of the Act requires
compulsory registration of all marriages contracted in the State.
12. So far as the Union Territory of Chandigarh is concerned, the Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1966 have
been framed.
13. In the affidavit filed on behalf of the National Commission for Women (in short "the National Commission") it
has been indicated as follows:
"That the Commission is of the opinion that non-registration of marriages affects the most and hence has since
its inception supported the proposal for legislation on compulsory registration of marriages. Such a law would be of
critical importance to various women-related issues such as:
(a) Prevention of child marriages and to ensure minimum age of marriage.
(b) Prevention of marriages without the consent of the parties.
(c) Check illegal bigamy/polygamy.
(d) Enabling married women to claim their right to live in the matrimonial house, maintenance, etc.
(e) Enabling widows to claim their inheritance rights and other benefits and privileges which they are entitled to
after the death of their husband.
(f) Deterring men from deserting women after marriage.
(g) Deterring parents/guardians from selling daughters/young girls to any person including a foreigner, under
the garb of marriage.
14. As noted supra, except four statutes applicable to the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Himachal
Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh registration of marriages is not compulsory in any of the other States.
15. As is evident from narration of facts, though most of the States have framed rules regarding registration of
marriages, registration of marriage is not compulsory in several States. If the record of marriage is kept, to a large
extent, the dispute concerning solemnisation of marriages between two persons is avoided. As rightly contended by
the National Commission, in most cases non-registration of marriages affects the women to a great measure. If the
marriage is registered it also provides evidence of the marriage having taken place and would provide a rebuttable
presumption of the marriage having taken place. Though, the registration itself cannot be a proof of valid marriage per
se, and would not be the determinative factor regarding validity of a marriage, yet it has a great evidentiary value in
the matters of custody of children, right of children born from the wedlock of the two persons whose marriage is
registered and the age of parties to the marriage. That being so, it would be in the interest of the society if marriages
are made compulsorily registrable. The legislative intent in enacting Section 8 of the Hindu Act is apparent from the
use of the expression "for the purpose of facilitating the proof of Hindu marriages".
16. As a natural consequence, the effect of non-registration would be that the presumption which is available from
registration of marriages would be denied to a person whose marriage is not registered.
17. Accordingly, we are of the view that marriages of all persons who are citizens of India belonging to various
religions should be made compulsorily registrable in their respective States, where the marriage is solemnised.
18. Accordingly, we direct the States and the Central Government to take the following steps:
(i) The procedure for registration should be notified by respective States within three months from today. This can
be done by amending the existing rules, if any, or by framing new rules. However, objections from members of
the public shall be invited before bringing the said rules into force. In this connection, due publicity shall be
given by the States and the matter shall be kept open for objections for a period of one month from the date of
advertisement inviting objections. On the expiry of the said period, the States shall issue appropriate notification
bringing the rules into force.
(ii) The officer appointed under the said rules of the States shall be duly authorised to register the marriages. The
age, marital status (unmarried, divorcee) shall be clearly stated. The consequence of non-registration of
marriages or for filing false declaration shall also be provided for in the said rules. Needless to add that the
object of the said rules shall be to carry out the directions of this Court.
(iii) As and when the Central Government enacts a comprehensive statute, the same shall be placed before this
Court for scrutiny.
(iv) Learned counsel for various States and Union Territories shall ensure that the directions given herein are carried
out immediately.
19. The Registry is directed to hand over a copy of this order to learned Solicitor General for necessary follow-up
action.
20. We record our appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by Mr G.E. Vahanvati, the Solicitor General and
Mr Ranjeet Kumar, Senior Advocate, who appeared as amicus curiae.
TO BE PUBLISHED IN PART-IV OF THE DELHI GAZETTE EXTRA ORDINARY GOVT. OF NATIONAL CAPITAL
TERRITORY OF DELHI
REVENUE DEPARTMENT
5, SHAM NATH MARG, DELHI -110054
NO. F.1 (12yDC/MC/2014/4392
DATED : 21.04.2014
ORDER
NO. F.1 (12)/DC/MC/2014.-This executive order is issued in compliance of the directions given in the judgement
dated 14-02-2006 by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case titled Smt. Seema Vs. Ashwani Kumar in
Transfer Petition (C) No. 291 of 2005.
Whereas, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above said judgement directed for compulsory registration of marriages
solemnized in the respective state/U. Territories.
And whereas, in compliance thereof and also to consolidate the law governing registration of marriage in Delhi and
to
maintain procedural uniformity these executive directions are hereby issued for compulsory registration of
marriages solemnized in the Union Territory of Delhi.
1. Short title extent and commencement.-(a This order is called The Delhi (Compulsory Registration of
Marriage) Order, 2014.
(b) This order shall extend to all marriages solemnized in Delhi irrespective of caste creed and religion professed by
the parties to the marriage.
(c) This order shall come into effect on the date of its notification in the official gazette.
2. Compulsory registration of marriage.-(a On the commencement of this order, any marriage solemnized in
Delhi, between a male having completed 21 years of age and a female having completed 18 years of age on the date
of solemnization of the marriage and of which at least one of the parties is an Indian citizen, such marriage shall be
compulsorily registerable in accordance with this order, irrespective of caste, creed and religion professed by any party
or parties to such marriage. Provided that if the marriage has already been registered under any existing law, the
same shall not be required to be registered under this order.
(b) Notwithstanding anything in any custom or practice, which may be in derogation with the aforesaid provision
regarding compulsory registration of marriage, the provision of sub-clause (a) of this order shall have an overriding
effect.
3. Marriage officer.-Fo the purpose of compulsory registration of marriage in accordance with this order, the
marriage officer already appointed for registration of marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act, Special Marriage Act or
any other law for the time being in force in Delhi shall have the jurisdiction to register marriage under this order also:
Provided that the Government of NCT of Delhi may appoint additional marriage officers for the purpose of this order
and may also delegate the power of marriage officer to any retired gazetted officer appointed for this purpose for
such period not exceeding 5 years after his retirement and having not attained the age of 65 years.
4. Procedure.-(a) Within a period of 60 days, excluding the day on which the final ceremony of marriage is
solemnized, the parties to the marriage shall apply jointly in the prescribed Form-A for registration of their marriage
addressed to the marriage officer having jurisdiction to register the same.
(b) Such prescribed application shall be accompanied by documentary proof of age of both of the parties to the
marriage, solemnization of marriage, identification of the parties, place of residence of the parties to the marriage,
citizenship of the parties if any along with the requisite fee of Rupees Two Hundred.
(c) On receiving such application alongwith requisite documents as prescribed above and satisfaction of the
marriage officer as regard authenticity of such proof, the same shall be entered in the register of marriage prescribed
for this purpose as per Form-B.
(d) After having received such application complete in all aspect and having entered the same in the prescribed
register, the marriage officer shall fix a date for the parties to appear in person alongwith two witnesses who shall
certify to the solemnization of such marriage and bearing proof of permanent resident of Delhi.
(e) The marriage officer thereafter on personal appearance of the parties with witnesses on such appointed date or
any other extended date and on satisfaction of solemnization of such marriage in Delhi shall issue the requisite
certificate of registration of such marriage as per Form-C.
5. Jurisdiction of marriage officer. marriage officer within whose district the marriage has been solemnized
shall have the jurisdiction to register the marriage.
Provided that the Sub-Divisional Magistrate (Head Quarter), Additional District Magistrate and District Magistrate of
Delhi shall have concurrent jurisdiction over entire Delhi to register any marriage solemnized in Delhi within any
Revenue District of Union Territory of Delhi.
6. Condonation of delay.-In case of default to get the marriage registered within the prescribed period of 60
days, the marriage officer shall have the power to condone the delay not exceeding further so days subject to
additional fee of Rupees Five hundred and thereafter register the marriage.
7. Consequence of non-registration of marriage within the period prescribed.-An party to the marriage
having not registered their marriage within the prescribed period/or extended period shall suffer a penalty of Rupees
One Thousand, imposed by the marriage officer.
Provided that such penalty or any part of it may be remitted by the Additional District Magistrate of such district or
the District Magistrate, Delhi on application made in respect thereof by any party explaining reasonable cause for not
getting the marriage registered. The Additional District Magistrate or the
District Magistrate shall thereafter direct the marriage officer having jurisdiction, to register such marriage on
payment of requisite fee and the penalty so imposed.
8. Validity.-Registration of marriage under this order will not tantamount to validity of marriage as the same
would be the subject matter of the respective law, custom and practice professed by the parties as applicable to such
marriage.
9. E-registration. The Govt. of NCT of Delhi shall endeavor to create a dedicated portal for the purpose of online
submission of application and prior appointment to facilitate compulsory registration of marriage. The application form
alternatively shall be available on such portal which may be downloaded by the parties and be submitted alongwith
requisite documents manually at the respective counters of the marriage registration offices. On such submission
either manually or online, a computer generated priority number alongwith appointed date for registration of marriage
shall be made available to the applicants to be produced at the time of personal appearance before the marriage
officer to register the marriage.
10. Tatkal registration of marriage.-To facilitate registration of marriage in case of urgency on priority basis,
corresponding optional facility shall also be available subject to payment of additional fee of Rupees Ten Thousand
By order and in the name of the
Lt. Governor of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(DHARAM PAL)
DIVISIONAL COMMISSIONER
NO. F.1(12)/DC/MC/2014
DATED:
Copy to:
1. The Secretary to L.G., Delhi.
2. The O.S.D. to Chief Secretary, Delhi.
3. The Secretary to Govt. of India, Ministry of Home Affairs,
4. The Secretary to Govt. of India, Ministry of External Affairs.
5. The Secretary ( Law, Justice & Legislative affairs) Govt. of NCT of Delhi.
6. The Secretary of the Ministry of Revenue, Delhi.
7. P.S. to Divisional Commissioner, Delhi,
8. P.A. to Additional Secretary (Revenue) Headquarter, Delhi.
9. Deputy Secretary (GAD), Govt. of NCT of Delhi for publication in the part-IV Extraordinary Gazette, Delhi.
10. All Deputy Commissioner (Reveue) Delhi.
11. All Additional District Magistrate ( Revenue) Delhi.
12. All Sub Divisional Magistrate, Delhi.
13. SDM (HCH), 5, Sham Nath Marg, Delhi.
14. SDM (HQ-II). 5, Sham Nath Marg, Delhi.
15. SDM (HQ-III), 5, Sham Nath Marg, Delhi.
16. SDM (HQ-IV), 5, Sham Nath Marg, Delhi.
17. System Analyst to upload on the website of the Department.
(ASHOK KUMAR SHARMA)
SUB DIVISIONAL MAGISTRATE-IV (HQ)
For Respondent
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborthy V. Union of India
In the Supreme Court of India
Extraordinary Civil Writ Jurisdiction
IN THE MATTER OF:
SUPRIYO @ SUPRIYA CHAKRABORTHY Petitioners;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ANR. Respondents.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1011 of 2022
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
BEHALF OF TUSHAR MEHTA, SOLICITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
I. SUBMISSIONS ON THE QUESTION THAT ONLY THE LEGISLATURE CAN DEAL WITH THE SUBJECT MATTER
| NDEX
Sr. No.
Particulars
1.
Opening Statement
2.
Propositions
3.
The sanctity and religious significance of marriage as a sociological and religious concept
A. The Concept of Marriage as an institution - Sociological analysis
B. The jurisprudential concept of marriage law regime in India
C. Marriage in major religions
D. Institution of Marriage as provided in the Manusmriti and Rig Veda
E. Institution of Marriage as provided in the Holy Bible
F. Institution of Marriage as provided in the Quran
4.
Why this Issue ought to be decided by the Parliament or appropriate Legislature
A. Democratic right of the people to regulate themselves
B. Limitations on power of purposive interpretation
C. The worldwide position unimpeachably indicates that Legislative intervention has enabled same sex
marriage recognition and not judicial processes
D. Legislative policy viz. power of Courts
5.
THE "RE-DRAFTING" EXERCISE OF SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954 AND/OR OTHER ALLIED LAWS
CANNOT BE CARRIED OUT BY THE COURTS
A. Legislative intention behind Special Marriage Act and the legislative debates
B. Impact on the Indian Succession Act
C. Casus Omissus - Addition or omission of words is impermissible - only Legislature has such power
D. Different words in different statutes or same statute mean different things
E. Same words in different statutes or same statute would mean same things
F. No construction or interpretation can expressly be at odds with purpose and intent of the statute
6.
OUT OF CONTEXT RELIANCE ON GHAIDAN V. GODIN-MENDOZA
A. Difference in powers available to the Court
B. Indian constitutional scheme in contradistinction to United Kingdom
7.
Democracy and Separation of powers
8.
How Personal laws will inevitably be affected, which only Legislature can do
9.
Non-application of the primary precedent relied upon by Petitioners
10.
ANNEXURE A - Definition and List of Genders, etc.
11.
ANNEXURE B - Illustrative list of laws which will be affected by a judicially mandated gender-neutral
interpretation
12.
ANNEXURE C - Relevant portion of Kaul and Shakdhar "Practice and Procedure of Parliament" which
describes in detail the elaborate process through which Parliamentary Committees work
1
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
EXTRAORDINARY CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1011 OF 2022
IN THE MATTER OF:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborthy
Petitioners
Versus
Union of India & Anr.
Respondents
OPENING STATEMENT
1. The present mater represents a profound anthropological and social question concerning prayers made by the
petitioners seeking creation of a new socio-legal status and institution of "marriage" for the class of persons for which
no such legal status exists under the statutory mechanism in place. Admitedly there is no law recognising such
"marriage".
2. The institution of marriage, as a vehicle that perpetuates human civilisation and society, has a unique distinction
of originating in different histories, cultures, religions and civilisations, in largely the same heterosexual manner.
Broadly, as far as socially sanctioned and legally bestowed status of "marriage" is concerned, never has in the history
of humankind [2000 years of Western history or 5000 years of Indian history], has the special status of "marriage"
been extended to anyone other than in the heterosexual form. The exception to heterosexuality, as a sexual orientation
beyond the binary, may indeed have received varying treatments in very few different cultures and may even have
found limited acceptance. However, as far as socio-legal recognition of "marriage" is concerned, it has consistently
remained a heterosexual institution461.
3. The socio-legal recognition to "same sex relationships" [the said reference includes reference to all relationships
between homosexual, lesbians, queers, transgenders and all other form of non-binary relationship in all permutations
and combinations possible] in particular and all shades of LGBTQIA+ in general, has a very nascent history which
started in 2001 in Netherlands. This movement for socio-legal recognition to same sex relationships needs to put in to
perspective that it has roughly been 20 years since this "experiment" began in a particular part of the world in
contradistinction to the unbroken line of continuity of opposite sex marriage in human civilisation since time
immemorial. The tall claims of "scientific evidence",
especially with regard to the impact of socio-legal recognition to non-heterosexual relationships as "marriage",
considering the nascent history of the same, require far more evidence, material and time before any sweeping claims
can be made or accepted.
4. The impact of the socio-legal recognition to same sex relationships as "marriage" on the society as a whole,
therefore, has to be kept in mind before any decision is taken in the mater. The mater cannot be just viewed as an
individualistic constitutional pursuit, and the larger interest of human society and Indian society, need to be
appreciated in this regard. Therefore, the fundamental approach has to be at a much broader canvass and viewing the
present question from merely constitutional identification of same sex relationships as "marriage" in terms of the
linear "progression" of rights, would do grave injustice to this constitutional enquiry.
5. While it is undeniable that the rights extended and recognised till date by this Hon'ble Court - from the legal
are important developments in constitutional law, however, the same do not necessarily create space to enter the legal
space of "marriage" The heterosexual institution of marriage, at a generic normative level, performs a crucial societal
role of naturally perpetuating society, maintaining and imbibing shared values in their young ones and preparing the
human resource of the next generation. It is for this reason that the heterosexual institution of marriage, has always
held a special status across cultures, religions and civilisations. This forms the rational basis and the legitimate state
aim for according special status to opposite sex marriage.
PROPOSITIONS
6. The protection and preservation of fundamental rights of LGBTQIA+ community is not in dispute. In fact, this is
fully protected by the Parliament itself by making the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. The
definition of "transgender" is very wide worded.
The question really is whether to confer socio-legal status of "marriage" or any other name to such a relationship.
This is essentially is a question based upon the legislative policy. The Court can adjudicate an enactment and protect
fundamental rights but will not have the jurisdiction to create a new socio-legal institution between two or more
human beings clearly not contemplated by any legislation.
7. The heart of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is to provide a legislative framework for interfaith marriages but
doubtlessly between heterosexual couples. The Court will have to examine the entire architecture of the Act rather
than to examine few words like "husband", "wife" etc. The prayer to declare the said Act unconstitutional merely
because it recognizes only heterosexual marriages, therefore, must fail.
8. The Court can neither re-write the provisions nor can alter the very fundamental architecture of an Act as
conceived by the legislature at the time of framing of the Act even by reading something which was consciously
omitted at the time of enactment.
9. The course suggested by the petitioner does not fall within the ambit of interpretation process since :
a. An interpretative judicial exercise cannot change the character of the principle Act itself;
b. An interpretative judicial exercise cannot read into the terms of any Act, other terms which are larger in
amplitude viz. "person" is larger than the "male" and "female"
C. An interpretative judicial exercise cannot re-work any Act, in multiple sections and does not substitute the
legislative intent to such an extent that multiple provisions of the Act are re-engineered;
d. An interpretative exercise can only supplement the manifest legislative intent. It cannot substitute it or add
something manifestly not included by legislature.
10. Any exercise of either reading down the provisions of Special Marriage Act, 1954 and/or reading into some
words in various provisions of the said Act or any other Act not intended to be used by the Legislature will have
a. an unintended effect on the rights of heterosexual couples under the Act;
b. will amount to conferring additional provisions for non-heterosexual couples never intended by legislature.
11. The judicial process of interpreting any legislation, even for the purpose of making such legislation constitution
compliant, cannot result into a situation where the same enactment applies to one class of citizens differently and to
another class of citizens differently. Such internal classification can be made only by the competent legislature and not
by the process of judicial interpretation.
12. If the Court were to attempt making Special Marriage Act or any other Act gender neutral, either by reading
some words into it or giving different meaning to the expressions intentionally used by the legislation at the time of
framing it, the Court will unintentionally impact the operation of other Statutes which uses the same expressions and
one enacted by the same legislature.
Such other Statutes are neither the subject matter of the present proceedings nor can be amended by the judicial
process of interpretation. This can be done only the competent legislature.
13. In the countries where same sex marriages are recognized are so recognized by law by their respective
legislatures and such legislations have, simultaneously, amended other incidental provisions in various other Acts.
Such an exercise can be conducted only by the legislature.
14. The focus of the Court is invited by the petitioners broadly to two classes only viz. 'gays' and lesbians'. The
term LGBTQIA+ refers to much more than these two categories of individuals. It will be impermissible for the Court to
re-write the Special Marriage Act, 1954 keeping only these two categories in mind.
As per the information available in public domain, there are total 72 categories of genders [Annexure A] falling
within LGBTQIA+ community. This would mean several permutations and combinations of marriage and fact-specific
peculiar problems arising therefrom of the relationship is to be given legal recognition. It will be impossible for the
Court to conceive and provide for all such permutations and combinations upon whom the socio-legal recognized
relationship of "marriage" would be conferred and provide for detailed mechanism/provisions to deal with such
situations. This can be considered by Parliament only.
15. It is only the legislature which can, in its wisdom after gathering all details, taking several factors into
consideration and as per the emerging legislative policy, conceive of a comprehensive piece of legislation making it
comprehensive for all categories belonging to LGBTQIA+ persons.
16. The legislature is otherwise also well suited to undertake this exercise of deciding to create such new socio-legal
recognized institution of marriage and also providing for inevitable other regulatory provisions since -
a. It reflects the view of every part of the nation;
b. It will have the advantage of larger public debate, views of various sections of the society, various religious
denominations and reflection of all these in Parliamentary debates;
C. Any legislature functions through the Committees of the legislatures consisting of all elected members from all
political ideologies/parties and such committees have the power to call for experts for its guidance and also call
witnesses to assist it.
17. This Hon'ble Court, if undertakes the exercise of creating a new socio-legal institution of marriage by
impermissible process of interpretation, this Hon'ble Court will be deprived of-
a. The views of the entire nation which are absolutely essential before conferring any mew socio-legal status of
'marriage'
b. The exercise of judicial adjudication would, obviously, not be preceded by any public debate and public
consultations based upon which representatives of every corner of India will be able to express their views on
such a vital and sensitive subject.
C. The assistance of experts in the field of sociology, anthropology, medicine etc. will be completely lacking which
would be very crucial to arrive at a decision whether to confer one Section of the population with a completely
new socio-legal recognized institution status called "marriage" or called by any other name only legislature can
undertake this exercise.
18. The entire argument is based upon the interpretation of Petitioners regarding their fundamental rights. There is
nothing in the Constitution to suggest that the Parliament would not examine and take a legislative call to take care of
such fundamental rights.
19. Deciding the legislative policy based upon the view of the entire nation, protecting fundamental rights of every
segment of the society, creating new socio-legal institution called 'marriage' or any other name and making regulatory
provisions for such peculiar category of social relationship is essentially a legislative function. Any intrusion by any
other organ under the Constitution will be detrimental to the basic constitutional feature of "separation of powers" and
thus, will violate constitutional morality.
20. Though right to relationship of same sex is held to be a fundamental right, right to get such marriage legal
sanction, recognition and registration has to be based upon the law made by the competent legislature. A mere
exclusion of one category of marriage within the sweep of the Special Marriage Act and/or any other law would not
make the provisions of the Special Marriage Act or any other Act unconstitutional only based upon such exclusion.
21. The marriage as an institution has an inevitable and intrinsic impact on the children, succession, maintenance
and other incidental provisions governing such human relationships.
Even if this Hon'ble Court were to read some words of the Special Marriage Act differently [which would not be
permissible], there will be a complete vacuum about regulations of such rights and incidental issues as it is impossible
to encompass regulations concerning all categories falling within the LGBTQIA community.
22. While dealing with a category of persons who are having fluidity inbuilt in them, any judicial adjudication for
conferment of a new recognized relationship is bound to create problems which this Hon'ble Court can never conceive.
Only competent legislature can.
PRELIMINARY SUBMISSIONS
I. The sanctity and religious significance of marriage as a sociological and religious concept
A. The Concept of Marriage as an institution - Sociological analysis
23. It is submitted that before proceeding to present the legal arguments pertaining to this subject, it is important
to examine the importance of the institution of marriage, which is one of oldest institutions on which the foundation of
society, nation and civilization is built.
24. The history of human society is nothing, but the description of the evolution and diffusion of various institutions
designed toward perpetuation, maintenance and survival of society. The institution of marriage occupies a unique
place in the realm of institutions, and it is this institution which is instrumental in perpetuating human society through
regulations of conjugal and filial ties. As a social, legal and religious institution, marriage has undergone any number
of modifications and changes; nevertheless, its basic realities remain the same.
25. The study of cultural anthropology reveals the historical fact that, there exists an inherently sacred and religious
character to marriage, expressed by special and symbolic rites of solemn kind. These rites became part of traditions,
customs and the law.
26. It is submitted that Marriage as a physical as well as a moral union is recognized by society as the basis of a
family. It may be a sacrament and, in that way, an indissoluble union for this life and hereafter, as in the case of
Hindus or Catholics, or a civil contract as in the case of Muslims. But whether a sacrament or a civil contract, the
relationship, is above sexual satisfaction, to join two members of opposite sexes for the procreation of legitimate
children. While particular marriages may, of course, be entered into for any number of other reasons as family
pleasure, social conveniences, financial considerations and similar motives, basically the prime objects of marriage are
companionship, sexual intimacy and procreation.
27. This Hon'ble Court has, in a catena of judgments, discussed the sanctity of marriage as a union between a man
and a woman:
"8. The language used is "husband or relative of the husband". Marriage is a legal union of a man and a
woman as husband and wife and cannot extend to a woman whose marriage is void and not a valid marriage
in the eye of the law."
"31. Marriage is the sacred union, legally permissible, of two healthy bodies of opposite sexes
"
"14. Matrimonial matters are matters of delicate human and emotional relationship. It demands mutual trust,
regard, respect, love and affection with sufficient play for reasonable adjustments with the spouse. The
relationship has to conform to the social norms as well. The matrimonial conduct has now come to be
governed by statute framed, keeping in view such norms and changed social order. It is sought to be
controlled in the interest of the individuals as well as in broader perspective, for regulating matrimonial norms
for making of a well-knit, healthy and not a disturbed and porous society. The institution of marriage occupies
an important place and role to play in the society, in general."
d)
36. We have already dealt with what is "marriage", "marital relationship" and "marital obligations". Let us
now examine the meaning and scope of the expression "relationship in the nature of marriage" which falls
within the definition of Section 2(f) of the DV Act. Our concern in this case is of the third enumerated
category, that is, "relationship in the nature of marriage" which means a relationship which has some inherent
or essential characteristics of a marriage though not a marriage legally recognised, and, hence, a comparison
of both will have to be resorted, to determine whether the relationship in a given case constitutes the
characteristics of a regular marriage.
38.5.(e) Domestic relationship between same sex partners (gay and lesbians). -The DV Act does not
recognise such a relationship and that relationship cannot be termed as a relationship in the nature of
marriage under the Act. The legislatures in some countries, like the Interpretation Act, 1984 (Western
Australia), the Interpretation Act, 1999 (New Zealand), the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (South Africa), the
Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act, 2004 (UK), have recognised the relationship between the same sex
couples and have brought these relationships into the definition of domestic relationship.
39. Section 2(f) of the DV Act though uses the expression "two persons", the expression "aggrieved person"
under Section 2(a) takes in only "woman", hence, the Act does not recognise the relationship of same sex
(gay or lesbian) and, hence, any act, omission, commission or conduct of any of the parties, would not lead to
domestic violence, entitling any relief under the DV Act."
28. It is submitted that social institutions, are essentially "public markers of social meaning.
"462
It is submitted
that social institutions consist largely of interlocking sets of ideas that regulate or affect the way people actually
behave and the way they understand their relationships with others. It is submitted that "meaning matters, and the
institutions that bear it serve to structure our experiences and to steer them in a particular direction. They define our
goals, focus attention on those goals, and direct us toward them."
29. It is submitted that Barbara Dafoe Whitehead pointed out the power of words as markers of shared meaning,
"The Experts' Story of Marriage":
[T]he marriage critics seek to devalorize marriage by stripping away its inherited mantle of meaning and by
erasing the linguistic boundaries between marriage and non-marriage. This amounts to cultural hardball. For
language-or more precisely, normative vocabulary-is one of the key cultural resources supporting and regulating
any institution. Nothing is more essential to the integrity and strength of an institution than a common set of
understandings, a shared body of opinion, about the meaning and purpose of the institution. And, conversely,
nothing is more damaging to the integrity of an institution than an attack on this common set of
understanding with the consequent fracturing of meaning.
463
30. Undeniably, therefore, marriage is a social institution464 464 Social institutions shape and guide individuals'
identities, perceptions, aspirations, and conduct. Therefore, it is essential to note that marriage [even the so called
secular Special Marriage Act, 1954 marriages] originate in personal law. The said secular enactments were enacted not
as a means to create new sociO-legal institutions rather as a means to overcome some limitations of religious personal
laws [like inter-caste marriage and inter-religion marriage].
31. It is submitted that the concept of marriage, across personal law and jurisdictions, once solemnised as per the
prevailing societal rituals or legal requirements, creates reciprocal legal and social obligations on part of both
individuals. It is submitted that at the same time, marriage creates social and legal rights on the part of both
individuals and others in the family, in various domains of civil laws and even criminal law. It is submitted that
marriage creates rights in the civil domain relating to property rights, successions and adoption amongst other aspects
of social life. Further, marriage creates rights, obligations and even punishments under criminal laws thereby creating
an entire ecosystem of statutory laws, adequately protecting women [as understood biologically] living within the
institution of marriage with key provisions in the Indian Penal code, 1860, the Evidence Act, 1872, the Protection of
Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, etc. It is submitted that marriage is an institution that converges a delicate
balance of rights, obligations, duties and conditions between a man and a woman, in order to regulate the relationship
as husband and wife and the family that they create.
32. It is submitted that from the perspective of biology and sociobiology, all individual human beings, as with other
species are driven to reproduce and invest in their offspring to ensure that their genes are passed on to future
generations. For at least two million years and perhaps longer, marriage or some arrangement like it has been the
social relationship that has proven to be the most effective for this purpose. Marriage has two distinct purposes, when
seen from a sociological standpoint; for the individual, the purpose is the continuity of its genetic legacy, however,
additionally, there is also a sociological group purpose that is served by marriage, in as much as the proliferation of
future generations by the members of a group is likely to enable the continuity of the group.
33. Therefore, marriage has traditionally established a stable living unit (a family). In this unit children are
socialized into society's norms and values. Thus, marriage, in effect, has been a societal method of regulating the
sexual relations between adults and the socialization and protection of the children born as a result of that social
activity. At its very core, marriage has always been a societal recognition of the conjugal relations between two adults,
on the terms and conditions which are otherwise in compliance with and in consonance to the prevalent social mores
and moral values of the society.
34.
McIntyre defined marriage as "a legal contract where the state regulates the economic and sexual relations
between two heterosexual adults". The best available evidence suggests that the institution of marriage is at least 's
about 4,350 years old. For thousands of years before that, most anthropologists believe, families consisted of loosely
organized groups of as many as 30 people, with several male leaders, multiple women shared by them, and children.
As hunter-gatherers settled down into agrarian civilizations, society had a need for more stable arrangements. The first
recorded evidence of marriage ceremonies uniting one woman and one man dates from about 2350 B.C., in
Mesopotamia. Over the next several hundred years, marriage evolved into a widespread institution embraced by the
ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans.
B. The jurisprudential concept of marriage law regime in India and no absolute right to marry
35. Though right to marry is a right conferred, but such right is always subject to the statutory regime provided by
the competent legislature.
36. The right flowing from Entry V of List 111 and with a view to protect the compelling State interest, the
Legislature is bound to legislate various facets of marriage to preserve the institution of marriage, institution of family
and can restrict it only to heterosexual persons for the purpose of granting statutory recognition.
37. All relationships in the society are not regulated by law. However, so far as the marriage is concerned, it
is
regulated by the society through the legislative power flowing from the Constitution and there is no absolute right to
marriage de hors such regulation which can only be enacted by the competent legislature.
38. The State, with a view to recognize and regulate the institution of marriage can impose statutory conditions by
way of law which exists in the present regime. For example-
(i) Age of consent to marriage;
(ii) Prohibition of bigamy;
(iii) Proscription of prohibited degrees of marriage;
(iv) How to derecognize such social union called "marriage" by way of either "judicial separation" and "divorce;
(v) The grounds on which such de-recognition of a statutorily recognized institution of marriage can be claimed and
the procedure thereof;
(VI) The provisions for maintenance and alimony etc.
39. The above factors clearly show that the legislature does regulate, inter alia, the following in legitimate State
interest regulate-
(i) When to marry;
(ii) How many times to marry;
(iii) Whom to marry;
(iv) How to separate etc.
Thus, there is no absolute right to marry or getting legal recognition to the marriage in absence of a statutory
mechanism provided by competent legislature.
40. So far as the right to privacy and autonomy is concerned, there is a restrictions on the of autonomy with regard
to sexual orientation and complete privacy with regard to what is happening between two consenting adults within the
four corners of privacy.
41. However, the moment such consenting adults wants a societal acceptance of their relationship by ways of
marriage, they are conferred with a public status by the State.
42. This is socially, institutionally and jurisprudentially completely different from consenting sex between two
adults. It is submitted that consenting sex between two adults is in the sphere of privacy [within the intimate zone],
however, recognizing a relationship between the very same two individuals as marriage [falling in the public zone],
has a necessary and inevitable public element.
43. There are no unfettered or unregulated spaces once a public status of institution of marriage is conferred,
except with regard to most private acts within private spaces.
Even within the private acts and private spaces, there are valid legislative regulations regulating the conduct of
mental and physical cruelty, by providing for grounds of divorce on the ground of impotence/non consummation etc. It
is submitted that these are statutory regulations where there is an exception to right of privacy as understood in
Navtej Johan supra which merely decriminalize private acts [sexual or otherwise] between consenting adults within
private spaces.
C. Generic concept of Marriage in major religions which can be taken into consideration only by competent
legislature
44. The world religions have shaped the history of marriage and family and continue to form the basis of marriage
as an essentially religious concept. While it is correct that there is significant divergence between different faiths and
their practices in relation to marriage, what must not be lost sight of is that there is more convergence than conflict in
the teachings marriage and family. All six major world religions overlap on the following attributes of marriage, as
identified by (Browning, green and Witte Jr, 2006)4
I. First, each of these religious traditions confirms marriage as a vital and valuable institution and practice that lies
at the heart of the family and at the foundation of broader society.
11.
Second, each tradition recognizes that marriage has inherent goods that lie beyond the preferences of the
couple. One fundamental good of marriage, emphasized by Judaism, Christianity, Hinduism, and Confucianism is
that the husband and wife complete each other; indeed, they are transformed through marriage into a new
person-a new one-flesh reality. Another fundamental good of marriage is the procreation and nurture of
children. Children are sacred gifts to a married couple who carry forth not only the family name, lineage, and
property but also the community's religion, culture, and language. All these religions thus see a close relation
between marriage and children, just as they saw a close relation, although not an identity, between marriage and
sexual expression. And all these religions teach that stable marriages and families are essential to the well being
of children.
111. Third, each tradition regards marriage as a special form of sacrament, promise, oath, or contract over and any
generic relationship, economic or social.
IV. Fourth, each tradition eventually came to insist that marriage depended in its essence on the mutual consent of
the man and the woman. Even if the man and woman are
represented by parents or guardians during the contract negotiation, their own consent is essential to the validity of
their marriage. Jewish, Hindu, Confucian, and Muslim writers came to this insight early in the development of
marriage. The Christian tradition reached this insight canonically only in the twelfth century, and Buddhism more
recently still.
V. Fifth, marriage is a concept that is deeply embedded as a union between two opposite sexes, ordained by the
religious texts and practices, specifically for the furtherance of society and the orderly interface between persons
inhabiting the society and following the specific religions.
D. Institution of Marriage as provided in the Manusmriti and Rig Veda
45. It is submitted that Hindus have idolised the institution of marriage as a sacramental union. Manu Smriti
enjoins on the wife that she should become a paturnuvrate i.e. she should follow the same principles as her husband.
The Rig Veda, which is centred around the wedding ritual as the sole context of human transformation or completion,
takes up the subject of marriage at a considerable Length, addressing the duties of husband and wives as well as the
benefits or the distresses that would follow if the obligations are not fulfilled.
46. The Hindu tradition acknowledges that the fundamental basis of the establishment of marriage is the conjugal
relation between a man and a woman, where the man has specific roles in a family unit and the woman has specific
roles in the household. It is submitted that the Hindu tradition recognizes that marriage has inherent goods which lie
beyond the preferences of the individuals, that is to say that the husband [as a biological man] and wife [as
a
biological woman] complete each other and are transformed after marriage into a new one-flesh reality.
47. It is submitted that Hindu marriage is not a social institution but a religious, and it is a sacrament. The couple
there is a 'superhuman, spiritual and divine element' present in marriage. The permanent relationship between
husband and wife depends very much on the divine element. They are responsible not only to each other than God.
Marriage is considered a new bond. There is a ceremony called 'Samanjnana' or anointment. The father of the bride
anoints the pair. This anointment is symbolic of 'sneha' which is love that should exist in the union of the pair. Then
there is the ceremony of the 'panigrahana' or the grasping of the bride's hand. The bridegroom holds the right hand
of the bride and says "I seize thy hand for sake of happiness that thou may live to old age with me thy husband.
Bhaga, Aryama, Savitr, gods have given thee to me that we may rule over the house-hold." (The Atharvaveda, XIV.
i. 49. The Gobhila Grhya -Sutra, 11. 2. 16.)
48. The next ceremony is the 'Hrdayasparsa' or 'touching the heart of the bride.' (The paraskara Grhya Sutra,
1. 8. 8.) The husband touches the heart of the bride and says "into my will / take thy heart; thy mind shall dwell in
my mind; in my word thou shall rejoice with all thy heart : may prajapati join thee to me." (The paraskara Grhya -
Sutra, 1. 8. 8.) This indicates that marriage is not only a physical union of two persons but also is a union of two
'hearts.'
49. The last ceremony is the 'Sthalipaka' or the 'common dinner.' (The paraskara Grhya - Sutra, 1. 11. 5.)
The husband makes the wife to eat the cooked food saying "I add breath to my breath, bones to thy bones, flesh to
thy flesh, skin to thy skin." (The paraskara Grhya- Sutra, 1.11.. 5.)
50. In Hinduism, the marriage is also looked at as the sacrifice. The seriousness of life begins with marriage. They
abandon their old family in order to form a new family. They begin a new life of responsibility and cares. The word
'vivaha' is the word for marriage which means to 'lift, to support, to sustain." So according to Hinduism, vivaha
involves a great understanding and mutual sacrifice. The marriage gets its full meaning and perfection only when the
couples are able to sacrifice and commit themselves, their time and their life for the other in willingness to serve
another. (Taittiriya Samhita, III 2. 9. 7.)
51. The marriage samskara consists of two parts : the giving away of the bride to the bridegroom by her father or
guardian and the ceremony of marriage itself. Secondly the bridegroom, supporting the folded hands of the bride with
his left hand, seizes her right thumb with his right hand and recites the prescribed mantras which are prayers for
matrimonial harmony, and happiness. Then the couple goes around the ritual fire, while the husband recites the
mantras and the wife drops the fried grains into the fire. This fire-oblation is called laja - homa'.
52. There is also a ceremony in which the couple takes seven steps around the fire This action is something
symbolic Agni or fire will lead the couple in their married life and it is the fire that will brighten their life together.
Then the bride's foot is put on the stone as a symbol of 'constancy', faithfulness and permanency in their married life.
53. Post the samskara, the wife is the "ardhangini" and is incomplete without her other half i.e. her husband and
vice versa for man who is to be led in life by his wife. Manusmriti implies that from this notion of unity of personality,
the mutual fidelity that flows between a "husband" and his "wife" is the highest dharma. The Shastra recognises
several names for the husband and his wife indicative of their role and contribution in each other's married life. The
"husband" is known as the bhartri (the one who supports) and pati (the one who protects), whereas the "wife" is also
called dharampatni (the one who leads the husband on the righteous path). It is submitted that it is clear as daylight
that as per Hindu samskara form of marriage, this idealisation is of the roles of the male and his female counterpart in
a cohesive manner which is only possible between opposite sexes.
54. It is submitted that as per Hindu Shastra, the other fundamental good as recognized is the ability to procreate
and nurture children who will carry forward the lineage, family name and the community's culture, religion and
language. Rig Veda reads as - "Together we participate in the act of procreation, may you conceive May a child be born
without deficiency, with all its limbs, not blind, not Lame, not afflicted by demons. To be mothers
were women created and to be fathers' men, the Veda ordains that Dharma must be practised by man together with
his wife only. As per the Manusmriti, the only perfect man is the one who consists of his wife, himself and his offspring
and only those who have a wife can fulfil their due obligation to the world. Thus, only those males who have a wife can
truly have a family life and lead a full and happy life.
55. A natural corollary to above is that Hindu marriage, between a man and a woman, is obligatory, for begetting a
son, for discharging his debt to his ancestors and for performing his religious duties. It is submitted that therefore, the
Hindu marriage is a special form of promise or oath or commitment, which recognizes the close linkage between
marriage, procreation, parenting and family unit only and no such linkage is traceable or expressed in the Hindu
customs between marriage and sexual expression between opposite sexes.
E. Institution of Marriage as provided in the Holy Bible
56. It is submitted that Christian theology affirms the true nature of the sacred union in the Holy Bible by
highlighting the essence and purpose of the relationship between a man and a woman. The Bible identifies the concept
of marriage as an act of honour as well as a command of the Lord himself. The relationship is depicted as a devotion
and a commitment towards the partner of the opposite sex, akin to the relation of devotion, a man or a woman has,
towards the Lord, Christ and the Church.
57. It is submitted that as per Christian theology, God made "male" and "female", the two distinct sexes, only for
the fulfilling the purpose of uniting under the sacred bond. This is understood from Matthew 19 : 4-6 which reads as -
"Have you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female, and said, 'Therefore
a
man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh'? So they are
no longer two but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let not man separate. Even the perception of "the
ideal wife", as traceable in the texts of the Holy Bible, is that of a woman whose worth is more than rubies, who is
good to her husband and provides for their household.
58. The Lord created Adam and Eve, and commanded them "to be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth".
This is how "the first family" was brought into existence which clearly highlights that the special status of marriage
also revolved around the power of procreation and building a family, by a male with his female counterpart, as only a
male and a female have the biological capacity to reproduce and nurture their progeny.
59. Thus, considering the long solidified inter-linkage between the notions of marriage, sexes, reproduction and
parenting, reflected by the beliefs enshrined in the Holy Bible, same-sex marriage is a wholly foreign concept to
Christian theology purporting a fundamental change in the concept of "marriage" itself.
60. As a matter of fact, as late as January of 2023, Pope Francis, the Leader of the Christian Faith has come out to
state that Homosexuality, though not a crime, continues to be regarded as a sin in the Christian Faith and the
Christian faith does not bless any union in sin.
F. Institution of Marriage as provided in the Holy Quran
61. It is submitted that very similar to the concept and essence as capsulized above, the Quran also recognizes
only a sacred bond which would ensure procreation i.e. between a male and a female, as well as the rights and
obligation that arise thereof. It is submitted that Islam recognises this institution and accepts it as the basis of human
society after purging it of all those evils which had penetrated it. Islam further views the bond as an act of worship for
pleasing Allah.
62. Thus, the sole purpose of the spouse, as recognised by the Quran, is to provide protection from immoral
desires. Thus, the natural attraction between two individuals is permissible (halal) only in the context of "marriage"
and the same becomes forbidden (haram) if two individuals try to satiate their desires without the context of marriage
and without the intention to further procreate.
The life teachings of Prophet Muhammad emphasise on marriage as a stepping-stone and "family unit" as the
sole outcome of the act of marriage, as it is only through a legitimate marriage only between two opposite sexes can
be formed.
64. As is clear from the historical development of the law in this regard, the institution of marriage existed far
before statutory law or Legislature came into being.
The statutory law, when introduced for the said purpose, only sought to recognize an already existing social
institution in order to give special status and legal sanctity to the institution which perpetuates its society.
Owing to the special status, the Legislators thought it to be imperative that such inter se relationship must, to
some extent, be regulated by law. In a similar manner various statutes, taking cue from the already existing
institution of marriage under various religions, merely provided a legal marker to such institution and provided for
limited regulation of such relationships, while leaving it open for the parties to be governed by personal and
religious laws.
It may be noted that even in the case of Special Marriage Act, the background remains the same. It is submitted
that it may have been enacted to overcome the limitations of the existing religious connotation of marriage, in order
to enable parties to ostensibly enter into secular inter-religion or inter-caste marriages.
Despite the same, the said legal marker in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 was also an attempt to recognize the
heterosexual institution of marriage in a form beyond the contemplation of personal law, however, deeply rooted
and embedded in the prevailing societal norms. The debates under the Special Marriage Act are a clear pointer
towards the prevailing societal beliefs and norms that forms the basis of the Act.
11. Why This Issue Ought To Be Decided By The Parliament Or Appropriate Legislature
A. Democratic right of the people to regulate themselves
65. It is submitted that whether or not same sex marriage is to be recognised is purely a matter of legislative policy
which ought to be determined by the appropriate Legislature. It is submitted that creation or recognition of a new
social institution altogether, cannot be claimed as a matter of right. It follows from this that the right to personal
autonomy, and right of sexual preference does not include right for state recognition of "marriage". It is submitted
that the question as to which social relationships will be recognised by the appropriate Legislature as the same is
ultimately to be decided by the representatives of the people based upon several considerations which go into making
the legislative policy. The State may not discriminate but it certainly can make non-discriminatory classification to
recognise one type of relationship over another and it must be given wide latitude in that regard.
66. As per the information available in public domain, there are total 72 categories of genders falling within
LGBTQIA+ community. This would mean several permutations and combinations of marriage and fact-specific peculiar
problems arising therefrom It will be impossible for the Court to conceive all such permutations and combinations
upon whom the socio-legal recognized relationship of "marriage" would be conferred and provide for detailed
mechanism/provisions to deal with such situations.
67. It is only the legislature which can, in its wisdom having views of every Section of the society and after
gathering all details, taking several factors into consideration and as per the emerging legislative policy, conceive of a
comprehensive piece of legislation making it comprehensive for all categories belonging to LGBTQIA+ persons.
68. Further, it is submitted that marriage is considered to be an aspect of social policy of the State across the
world. It is within the remit of the State and whether the Parliament, which consist of the elected representatives of
the people, to regulate it and the choice to recognise same-sex marriage or not is simply a facet of the State's
under in the context of marriage:
"4. It cannot be denied that society is generally interested in maintaining the marriage bond and preserving the
matrimonial state with a view to protecting societal stability, the family home and the proper growth and happiness
of children of the marriage. Legislation for the purpose of dissolving the marriage constitutes a departure from that
primary principle, and the legislature is extremely circumspect in setting forth the grounds on which a marriage
may be dissolved. The history of all matrimonial legislation will show that at the outset conservative attitudes
influenced the grounds on which separation or divorce could be granted. Over the decades, a more liberal attitude
has been adopted, fostered by a recognition of the need for the individual happiness of the adult parties directly
involved. But although the grounds for divorce have been liberalised, they nevertheless continue to form an
exception to the general principle favouring the continuation of the marital tie. In our opinion, when a legislative
provision specifies the grounds on which divorce may be granted they constitute the only conditions on which the
court has jurisdiction to grant divorce. If grounds need to be added to those already specifically set forth in the
legislation, that is the business of the legislature and not of the courts. It is another matter that in construing the
language in which the grounds are incorporated the courts should give a liberal construction to it. Indeed, we think
that the courts must give the fullest amplitude of meaning to such a provision. But it must be a meaning which the
language of the Section is capable of holding. It cannot be extended by adding new grounds not enumerated in the
section.
5. When therefore Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act specifically sets forth the grounds on which a marriage
may be dissolved, additional grounds cannot be included by the judicial construction of some other Section unless
that Section plainly intends SO. That, to our mind, Section 7 does not. We may point out that in M. Barnard V. G.H.
Barnard [AIR 1928 Cal 657 : 32 CWN 742] the Calcutta High Court repelled a similar contention and held that
Section 7 could not be construed so as to "import into Indian Divorce Jurisprudence any fresh ground for relief other
than those set forth in Section 10" and that "the only grounds on which a marriage may be dissolved are those set
forth in Section 10 of the Act...' The Punjab High Court in Miss Shireen Mall V. John James Taylor [AIR 1952 Punj
277] has also taken the view that the grounds set forth in Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act cannot be enlarged
by reference to Section 7 of the Act. So also has a Special Bench of the Madras High Court in T.M. Bashiam V. M.
Victor [AIR 1970 Mad 12 : 82 Mad LW 422] and a Single Judge of that Court in A. George Cornelius V. Elizabeth
Dopti Samadanam [AIR 1970 Mad 240 83 Mad LW 63 : (1970) 2 Mad LJ 351]
6. Miss Thomas appeals to us to adopt a policy of "social engineering" and to give to Section 7 the content which
has been enacted in Section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955, both of which provide for divorce by mutual consent. It is possible to say that the law relating to Hindu
marriages and to marriages governed by the Special Marriage Act presents a more advanced stage of development
in this area than the Indian Divorce Act. However, whether a provision for divorce by mutual consent should be
included in the Indian Divorce Act is a matter of legislative policy. The courts cannot extend or enlarge legislative
policy by adding a provision to the statute which was never enacted there."
69. It is submitted that in light of the constitutional scheme in existence, the legal regime holding the field on the
socio-legal institution of marriage and the above referred facts that whether or not same sex marriage is to be
recognised or not is purely a matter of legislative policy under Entry 5 of List 111 of Schedule VII of the Constitution
which ought to be determined by the appropriate Legislature only. What is the position in other countries can never be
a relevant criteria specially while dealing with a social relationship of "marriage" in an Indian Context. The following
a guiding light in the present case:
1107. On the desirability of drawing heavily or relying on the provisions of the Constitutions of other countries or
on the decisions rendered therein, a word of caution will be necessary. It cannot be denied that the provisions of
the Constitutions of other countries are designed for the political, social and economic outlook of the people of those
countries for whom they have been framed. The seed of the Constitution is sown in a particular soil and it is the
nature and the quality of the soil and the climatic conditions prevalent there which will ensure its growth and
determine the benefits which it confers on its people. We cannot plant the same seed in a different climate and in a
different soil and expect the same growth and the same benefit therefrom. Law varies according to the
requirements of time and place. Justice thus becomes a relative concept varying from society to society according
to the social milieu and economic conditions prevailing therein. The difficulty, to my mind, which foreign cases or
even cases decided within the Commonwealth where the Common Law forms the basis of the legal structure of that
unit, just as it is to a large extent the basis in this country, is that they are more often than not concerned with
expounding and interpreting provisions of law which are not in pari materia with those we are called upon to
consider. The problems which confront those Courts in the background of the State of the society, the social and
economic set-up, the requirements of a people with a totally different ethics, philosophy, temperament and outlook
differentiate them from the problems and outlook which confront the courts in this country. It is not a case of
shutting out light where that could profitably enlighten and benefit us. The concern is rather to safeguard against
the possibility of being blinded by it."
"8. We are not, as we cannot be, unmindful of the danger to people's liberties which comes in any community
from what is called the tyranny of the majority. Uncontrolled power in the executive is a great enemy of freedom
and therefore, eternal vigilance is necessary in the realm of liberty. But we cannot transplant, in the Indian context
and conditions, principles which took birth in other soils, without a careful examination of their relevance to the
interpretation of our Constitution. No two Constitutions are alike, for it is not mere words that make a Constitution.
It is the history of a people which lends colour and meaning to its Constitution.."
71. It is submitted that the creation or recognition of a new social institution altogether, cannot be claimed as a
matter of right/choice, much less as a fundamental right. Therefore, it necessarily follows that the right to personal
autonomy or sexual preference does not include a right for the statutory recognition of same sex marriage and that too
by way of judicial adjudication.
72. In The Nature of the Judicial Process Justice Cardozo remarked the legendary passage which should always be
kept in mind:
"The Judge, even when he is free, is still not wholly free. He is not to innovate at pleasure. He is not a knight-
errant roaming at will in pursuit of his own ideal of beauty or of goodness. He is to draw his inspiration from
consecrated principles. He is not to yield to spasmodic sentiment, to vague and unregulated benevolence. He is to
exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodized by analogy, disciplined by system, and subordinated to 'the
primodical (sic primordial) necessity of order in the social life'.
"467
Wide enough in all conscience is the field of discretion that remains.
73. The landmark dissent of J. Oliver Wendell Holmes in Lochner V. New York [198 US 45 (1905)] which criticised
the majority of the Court for becoming a "super legislature" by inventing a "liberty of contract" theory, thereby
enforcing its particular laissez faire economic philosophy, is still remembered as a remarkable piece of judicial
foresight.
74. Thereafter in Day-Brite Lighting, Inc. V. Missouri, 342 U.S. 421 (1952), it was held as under:
"The liberty of contract argument pressed on us is reminiscent of the philosophy of Lochner V. New York, 198
U.S. 45, which invalidated a New York law prescribing maximum hours for work in bakeries; Coppage V. Kansas,
236 U.S. 1, which struck down a Kansas statute outlawing "yellow dog" contracts; Adkins V. Children's Hospital,
261 U.S. 525, which held cunconstitutional a federal statute fixing minimum wage standards for women in the
District of Columbia, and others of that vintage. Our recent decisions make plain that we do not sit as a super-
legislature to weigh the wisdom of legislation non to decide whether the policy which it expresses offends the public
welfare. The legislative power has limits, as Tot V. United States, 319 U.S. 463, holds. But the state legislatures
have constitutional authority to experiment with new techniques; they are entitled to their own standard of the
public welfare; they may within extremely broad limits control practices in the business-labor field, so long as
specific constitutional prohibitions are not violated and so long as conflicts with valid and controlling federal laws
are avoided. That is the essence of West Coast Hotel Co. V. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379; Nebbia V. New York, 291 U.S.
502; Olsen V. Nebraska, 313 U.S. 236; Lincoln Union V. Northwestern Iron & Metal Co., 335 U.S. 525, and California
State Auto. Assn. V. Maloney, 341 U.S. 105."
75. Specifically, the dissent of J. Holmes came to be fully accepted in Ferguson V. Skrupa, 372 U.S. 726, 728-33,
83 S. Ct. 1028, 1030-32, 10 L. Ed. 2d 93 (1963), and continues to be the law of America till date. Interestingly, the
dissents in both same sex marriage cases in the American Supreme Court in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644
(2015) [5 is to 4] and United States V. Windsor, 570 US 744 [5 is to 4], blame the majority for committing the same
"mistake" it did in Lochner supra.
76. Similarly, in his dissenting judgment in Griswold V. Connecticut [381 US 479 : 14 L Ed 2d 510 (1965)] Mr
Justice Hugo Black warned that (US p. 520) "unbounded judicial authority would make of this Court's members a day-
to-day constitutional convention".
77. Further, Frankfurter, J. of the US Supreme Court dissenting in the controversial expatriation case of Trop V.
Dulles [356 US 86 : 2 L Ed 2d 630 (1958)] observed as under : (US pp. 119-20)
All power is, in Madison's phrase, "of an encroaching nature". Judicial power is not immune against this
human weakness. It also must be on guard against encroaching beyond its proper bounds, and not the less so since
the only restraint upon it is self-restraint
Rigorous observance of the difference between limits of power and wise exercise of power-between questions
of
authority and questions of prudence-requires the most alert appreciation of this decisive but subtle relationship of
two concepts that too easily coalesce. No less does it require a disciplined will to adhere to the difference. It is not
easy to stand aloof and allow want of wisdom to prevail, to disregard one's own strongly held view of what is wise in
the conduct of affairs. But it is not the business of this Court to pronounce policy. It must observe a fastidious
regard for limitations on its own power, and this precludes the Court's giving effect to its own notions of what is
wise or politic. That self-restraint is of the essence in the observance of the judicial oath, for the Constitution has
not authorised the Judges to sit in judgment on the wisdom of what Congress and the executive branch do.
78. In Dennis V. United States [341 US 494-592 : 95 L Ed 1137 (1951)], Mr Frankfurter, J. observed : (US p. 525)
Courts are not representative bodies. They are not designed to be a good reflex of a democratic society. Their
judgment is best informed, and therefore, most dependable, within narrow limits. Their essential quality is
detachment, founded on independence. History teaches that the independence of the judiciary is jeopardised when
courts become embroiled in the passions of the day and assume primary responsibility in choosing between
competing political, economic and social pressures."
79. Further, J. Frankfurter also observed:
"For the highest exercise of judicial duty is to subordinate one's personal pulls and one's private views to the law
of which we are all guardians-those impersonal convictions that make a society a civilized community, and not the
,468
victims of personal rule.
The learned Judge has further stated:
"What becomes decisive to a Justice's functioning on the Court in the large area within which his individuality
moves is his general attitude toward law, the habits of the mind that he has formed or is capable of unforming, his
capacity for detachment, his temperament or training for putting his passion behind his judgment instead of in
front of it. The attitudes and qualities which I am groping to characterize are ingredients of what compendiously
469,,
might be called dominating humility.
"19. It needs no special emphasis to state that a Judge is not to be guided by any kind of notion. The decision-
making process expects a Judge or an adjudicator to apply restraint, ostracise perceptual subjectivity, make one's
emotions subservient to one's reasoning and think dispassionately. He is expected to be guided by the established
norms of judicial process and decorum.
20. A Judge should abandon his passion. He must constantly remind himself that he has a singular master "duty
to truth" and such truth is to be arrived at within the legal parameters. No heroism, no rhetorics."
"14. The aforestated thoughts are not only meaningfully pregnant but also expressively penetrating. They clearly
expound the role of a Judge, especially the effort of understanding and attitude of judging. A Judge is expected to
abandon his personal notion or impression gathered from subjective experience. The process of adjudication lays
emphasis on the wise scrutiny of materials sans emotions. A studied analysis of facts and evidence is a categorical
imperative. Deviation from them is likely to increase the individual gravitational pull which has the potentiality to
take justice to her coffin."
held as under:
"6. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent has submitted that such an interpretation would defeat the
ends of justice and make the petitions under the Companies Act, infructuous inasmuch as any unscrupulous
litigant, after suffering an order of winding up, may approach the Board merely by filing a petition and consequently
get the proceedings in the company case stayed. Such a grievance may be justified and the submission having
substance but in view of the language of Sections 15 and 16 of the Act particularly the Explanation to Section 16
inserted by Act, 12 of 1994, this Court has no option but to adhere to its earlier decision taken in Real Value
provision of law is misused and subjected to the abuse of process of law, it is for the legislature to amend, modify
or repeal it by having recourse to appropriate procedure, if deemed necessary."
"6. Outcome - This analysis reveals that the legislative embargo against counterfeiting envelops and takes
within its sweep "currency notes" of all countries. The embargo is not restricted to "Indian" currency notes. The
legislature could have, but has not, employed the expression "Indian currency note". If the legislative intent was to
restrict the parameters of prohibition to "Indian currency" only, the legislature could have said so unhesitatingly.
The expression "currency note" is large enough in its amplitude to cover the currency notes of 'any' country. When
the legislature does not speak of currency notes of India the court interpreting the relevant provision of law cannot
substitute the expression "Indian currency note" in place of the expression "currency note" as has been done by the
High Court. The High Court cannot, do so for, the court can merely interpret the section; it cannot re write, recast or
redesign the section. In interpreting the provision the exercise undertaken by the court is to make explicit the
intention of the legislature which enacted the legislation. It is not for the court to reframe the legislation for the
very good reason that the powers to "legislate" have not been conferred on the court. When the expression
"currency note" is interpreted to mean "Indian currency note", the width of the expression is being narrowed down
or cut down. Apart from the fact that the court does not possess any such power, what is the purpose to be
achieved by doing so? A court can make a purposeful interpretation so as to 'effectuate' the intention of the
legislature and not a purposeless one in order to "defeat" the intention of the legislators wholly or in part. When the
court (apparently in the course of an exercise in interpretation) shrinks the content of the expression "currency
note", to make it referable to only "Indian currency note", it is defeating the intention of the legislature partly
inasmuch as the court makes it lawful to counterfeit notes other than Indian currency notes. The manifest purpose
of the provision is that the citizens should be protected from being deceived or cheated. The citizens deal with and
transact business with each other through the medium of currency
84. Therefore, it is submitted that the representatives of people are the appropriate democratic institution to under
Article 246 keeping in mind, inter alia, the sanctity attached to the institution of marriage in the country across
relegions, the societal ethos, cherished values on the concept of family and other such relevant considerations.
85. It is submitted that the ripple effects of such decisions are difficult to anticipate. It is submitted that former
Chief Justice Antonio Lamen of the Supreme Court of Canada has appropriately addressed the difficulties Courts face in
deciding such issues:
"I sometimes think of these sorts of cases as being somewhat like a spider's web. If you pull on one strand of the
web, the entire structure moves, but not necessarily all in the same direction. The implications are widespread and,
at times, hard to foresee 470
B. Limitations on power of purposive interpretation
86. It is submitted that under the scheme of our Constitution, the Hon'ble Courts do not replace or substitute the
policy of Legislature with its own. The exercise should only be "what is the law" and not "what the law should have
been". It is submitted that personal laws and the laws recognizing personal relationships, are essentially those social
norms which have been codified into legal norms by the Legislature. Hence, questions of such personal relationships
ought not to be decided without accounting for the views of the society at large which can be done only by the
under:
"52
The question is how should it be brought about. The learned Judge says that it should be the constant endeavour
of the Courts and the legislature to close the gap between the law and morality and bring about as near an
approximation between the two as possible. Lord Denning might have exhorted the Judges not to be timorous souls
but to be bold spirits, ready to allow a new cause of action if justice so requires. These are lofty ideals which one
should steadfastly pursue. But before embarking on this mission, it is necessary for the Court to understand clearly
its limitations. The power of the Court to legislate is strictly limited. "Judges ought to remember that their office is
jus dicere and not jus dere to interpret law, and not to make law or give law." Chandrachud, C.J. speaking for a
clearly pointed out the limited powers of the Courts to make laws in construing the provisions of the statutes. The
"The true question is whether by a process of construction, the amplitude of judicial discretion which is given to
the High Court and the Court of Session, to impose such conditions as they may think fit while granting
anticipatory bail, should be cut down by reading into the statute conditions, which are not to be found
therein Our answer, clearly and emphatically, is in the negative."
"Judges have to decide cases as they come before them, mindful of the need to keep passions and prejudices out
of their decisions. And it will be strange if, by employing judicial artifices and techniques, we cut down the
discretion so wisely conferred upon the Courts, by devising a formula which will confine the power to grant
anticipatory bail within a strait-jacket Therefore, even if we were to frame a 'code for the grant of
anticipatory bail', which really is the business of the legislature, it can at best furnish broad guide lines and
cannot compel blind adherence."
53. the Courts by its very nature are most ill-suited to undertake the task of legislating. There is no machinery
for the Court to ascertain the conditions of the people and their requirements and to make laws that would be most
appropriate. Further two Judges may think that a particular law would be desirable to meet the requirements
whereas another two Judges may most profoundly differ from the conclusions arrived at by two Judges. Conscious
of these handicaps, the law requires that even an amendment of the Supreme Court Rules which govern the
procedure to be adopted by it for regulating its work, can only be effected by the whole Court sitting and deciding."
"92. The concept of public policy is, however, illusive, varying and uncertain. It has also been described as
"untrustworthy guide", "unruly horse" etc. The leading judgment describing the doctrine of public policy has been
accepted to be that of Parke, B. in Egerton V. Brownlow, [(1853) 4 HLC 121] in which it was stated as below at p.
123, as quoted in paragraph 22 of Gherulal Parakh V. Mahadeodas Maiya, [AIR 1959 SC 781 : 1959 Supp (2) SCR
406]:
" 'Public policy' is a vague and unsatisfactory term, and calculated to lead to uncertainty and error, when applied
to the decision of legal rights; it is capable of being understood in different senses; it may, and does, in its
ordinary sense, mean 'political expedience' or that which is best for the common good of the community; and
in that sense there may be every variety of opinion, according to education habits, talents and dispositions of
each person, who is to decide whether an act is against public policy or not. To allow this to be a ground of
judicial decision, would lead to the greatest uncertainty and confusion. It is the province of the statesman and
not the lawyer, to discuss, and of the Legislature to determine what is best for the public good and to provide
for it by proper enactments. It is the province of the judge to expound the law only; the written from the
statutes; the unwritten or common law from the decisions of our predecessors and of our existing courts, from
text writers of acknowledged authority, and upon the principles to be clearly deduced from them by sound
reason and just inference; not to speculate upon what is the best, in his opinion, for the advantage of the
community. Some of these decisions may have no doubt been founded upon the prevailing and just opinions
of the public good; for instance, the illegality of covenants in restraint of marriage or trade. They have become
a part of the recognised law, and we are therefore bound by them, but we are not thereby authorised to
establish as law everything which we may think for the public good, and prohibit everything which we think
otherwise.
88. It is submitted that the Hon'ble Courts ought to be wary of replacing the views of the Legislature with its own.
It
is submitted that personal laws are essentially those social norms which have been codified into legal norms by the
State, Hence, questions of personal law ought not to be decided without accounting for the views of the society at
large. It is submitted that the same has been reiterated by this Hon'ble Court in the case of Subramaniam Swamy V.
"49. Where there is challenge to the constitutional validity of a law enacted by the legislature, the Court must
keep in view that there is always a presumption of constitutionality of an enactment, and a clear transgression of
constitutional principles must be shown. The fundamental nature and importance of the legislative process needs to
be recognised by the Court and due regard and deference must be accorded to the legislative process. Where the
legislation is sought to be challenged as being
unconstitutional and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, the Court must remind itself to the principles relating
to the applicability of Article 14 in relation to invalidation of legislation. The two dimensions of Article 14 in its
application to legislation and rendering legislation invalid are now well recognised and these are : (i) discrimination,
based on an impermissible or invalid classification, and (ii) excessive delegation of powers; conferment of uncanalised
and unguided powers on the executive, whether in the form of delegated legislation or by way of conferment of
authority to pass administrative orders-if such conferment is without any guidance, control or checks, it is violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution. The Court also needs to be mindful that a legislation does not become unconstitutional
merely because there is another view or because another method may be considered to be as good or even more
effective, like any issue of social, or even economic policy. It is well settled that the courts do not substitute their
views on what the policy is.'
89. It is submitted that the proceedings in Courts, being essentially of an adversarial nature, would not be
conducive toward effectively redressing these social issues. It is for this reason that these questions must left to the
Government of the day, which carries the popular mandate.
90. It is submitted that further, the subject matter of the present petitions concerns the interpretation and
challenge to validity of laws concerning marriage and further to personal laws in the country and creation/recognition
of a new social institution of same sex marriage which is undoubted against the legislative framework of all statutes in
the country in force. It is submitted that the said subject is unequivocally a subject within the domain of the State
Legislatures also as the same falls under the Concurrent List. The relevant portion is quoted as under:
"List 111-Concurrent List
5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and partition;
all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution subject to their personal law."
91. It is submitted that even in the expansive, plenary public interest jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court has limits
and cannot be used to create a new social institution through a supposedly innocuous challenge to the validity of
family laws which claim that relief sought is mere reading-down of provisions. It is submitted that the same would be
a gross oversimplification of the matter and the direct, proximate and inevitable impact of the granting of such relief is
undoubtedly a form of judicial legislation. It is submitted that as stated above, the power and the prerogative to
create/recognise such a social institution lies solely with the elected bodies of representatives and cannot be done
through judicial legislation.
92. It is submitted that further, this understanding of the legislative bodies being the appropriate forum for
decision on such issues is near universal across all jurisdictions. It is
submitted that even where same sex marriage has been recognized, almost all countries have done so through the
legislative route except in handful of countries.
This understanding has also come to be judicially accepted even in in the United States which had earlier permitted
same sex marriage by judicial decision. The United States Supreme Court in Dobbs V. Jackson Women's Health
Organization has held that fundamental rights must be "objectively, deeply rooted in this Nation's history and
tradition". Justice Clarence Thomas in his concurrence in Dobbs noted specially that this meant that the court should
reconsider Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015) in which the Supreme Court by a judicial order granted
recognition to same-sex marriage. Further, the majority led by J. Alito in Dobb's [Supra], was emphatic in what it
referred to as usurpation of power by the Court and held that the issue be returned to the elected
representatives. It is submitted that his ruling in that regard was as follows:
"J. Alito
Roe was on a collision course with the Constitution from the day it was decided, Casey perpetuated its errors, and
those errors do not concern some arcane corner of the law of little importance to the American people. Rather, wielding
nothing but "raw judicial power," Roe, 410 U. S., at 222 (White, J., dissenting). the Court usurped the power to
address a question of profound moral and social importance that the Constitution unequivocally leaves for the people.
Casey described itself as calling both sides of the national controversy to resolve their debate, but in doing so, Casey
necessarily declared a winning side. Those on the losing side-those who sought to advance the State's interest in
fetal life-could no longer seek to persuade their elected representatives to adopt policies consistent with their views.
The Court short-circuited the democratic process by closing it to the large number of Americans who dissented in any
respect from Roe. "Roe fanned into life an issue that has inflamed our national politics in general, and has obscured
with its smoke the selection of Justices to this Court in particular, ever since." Casey, 505 U. S., at 995-996 (opinion of
Scalia, J.). Together, Roe and Casey represent an error that cannot be allowed to stand.
When the Court summarized the basis for the scheme it imposed on the country, it asserted that its rules were
"consistent with" the following : (1) "the relative weights of the respective interests involved," (2) "the lessons and
examples of medical and legal history," (3) "the lenity of the common law," and (4) "the demands of the profound
problems of the present day." Roe, 410 U. S., at 165. Put aside the second and third factors, which were based on the
Court's flawed account of history, and what remains are precisely the sort of considerations that legislative bodies
often take into account when they draw lines that accommodate competing interests. The scheme Roe produced
looked like legislation, and the Court provided the sort of explanation that might be expected from a legislative body.
Our decision returns the issue of abortion to those legislative bodies, and it allows women on both sides of the
abortion issue to seek to affect the legislative process by influencing public opinion, lobbying legislators, voting, and
running for office.
Neither decision has ended debate over the issue of a constitutional right to obtain an abortion. Indeed, in this
case, 26 States expressly ask us to overrule Roe and Casey and to return the issue of abortion to the people and their
elected representatives. This Court's inability to end debate on the issue should not have been surprising. This Court
cannot bring about the permanent resolution of a rancorous national controversy simply by dictating a settlement and
telling the people to move on. Whatever influence the Court may have on public attitudes must stem from the
strength of our opinions, not an attempt to exercise "raw judicial power." Roe, 410 U. S., at 222 (White, J.,
dissenting).
We do not pretend to know how our political system or society will respond to today's decision overruling Roe and
Casey. And even if we could foresee what will happen, we would have no authority to let that knowledge influence our
decision. We can only do our job, which is to interpret the law, apply longstanding principles of stare decisis, and
decide this case accordingly.
We therefore hold that the Constitution does not confer a right to abortion. Roe and Casey must be overruled, and
the authority to regulate abortion must be returned to the people and their elected representatives.
We end this opinion where we began. Abortion presents a profound moral question. The Constitution does not
prohibit the citizens of each State from regulating or prohibiting abortion. Roe and Casey arrogated that authority. We
now overrule those decisions and return that authority to the people and their elected representatives.
J. Clarence Thomas [Concurring]
The Court today declines to disturb substantive due process jurisprudence generally or the doctrine's application in
other, specific contexts. Cases like Griswold V. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965) (right of married persons to obtain
contraceptives)[1]*; Lawrence V. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003) (right to engage in private, consensual sexual acts); and
Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015) (right to same-sex marriage), are not at issue. The Court's abortion cases
are unique, see ante, at 31-32, 66, 71-72, and no party has asked us to decide "whether our entire Fourteenth
Amendment jurisprudence must be preserved or revised," McDonald, 561 U. S., at 813 (opinion of Thomas, J.). Thus, I
agree that "[n]othing in [the Court's] opinion should be understood to cast doubt on precedents that do not concern
abortion." Ante, at 66.
For that reason, in future cases, we should reconsider all of this Court's substantive due process precedents,
including Griswold, Lawrence, and Obergefell. Because any substantive due process decision is "demonstrably
erroneous," Ramos V. Louisiana, 590 U.S.
(2020) (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 7), we have
a duty to "correct the error" established in those precedents, Gamble V. United States, 587 U. S.,
(2019)
(Thomas, J., concurring) (slip op., at 9) After overruling these demonstrably erroneous decisions, the question would
remain whether other constitutional provisions guarantee the myriad rights that our substantive due process cases
have generated. For example, we could consider whether any of the rights announced in this Court's substantive due
process cases are "privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States" protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Amdt. 14, 1; see McDonald, 561 U. S., at 806 (opinion of Thomas, J.). To answer that question, we would need to
decide important antecedent questions, including whether the Privileges or Immunities Clause protects any rights that
are not enumerated in the Constitution
and, if so, how to identify those rights. See id., at 854. That said, even if the Clause does protect unenumerated
rights, the Court conclusively demonstrates that abortion is not one of them under any plausible interpretive approach.
See ante, at 15, n. 22."
93. At this juncture, the dissent in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015) [5 is to 4] and United States V.
Windsor, 570 US 744 [5 is to 4], deserve closer attention. Specifically on the point of the issue of same sex marriage,
being an issue solely to be decided by the people, the dissents are emphatically clear. The following table is relevant in
this regard:
Sr.
Judgment
Id. dissenting
Page No - VOL - IV - Foreign Precedents -Petitioners
No.
Judge
Compilation
1.
Obergefell V. Hodges, 576
CJ Roberts
Pg 2438 - 2441; 2447; 2462 - 2466
U.S. 644 (2015)
J. Scalia
Pg 2467 2475
J. Thomas
Pg 2488 2489
J. Alito
Pg 2494 2495 ; 2499
2.
United States V. Windsor,
J. Scalia
Pg 3269 3271
570 US 744
J. Alito
P 3295; 3307 3310
94. It is submitted that considering the shifting sands in the American Supreme Court, it is undeniable that the
minorities led by J. Alito and CJ Roberts, gain currency in the future. The said dissent are based in sound judicial
policy and deserve to be accorded due regard by this Hon'ble Court, especially in light of the reliance placed by the
Petitioners on the majority opinions in Obergefell supra and Windsor supra.
95. It is submitted that any encroachment on the legislative powers solely reserved for the elected representatives
would be against the well-settled principles of "separation of powers". It is submitted that the doctrine of separation of
powers, is undoubtedly a part of the basic structure of the Constitution and is a constitutional necessity for a healthy
working of the democratic Constitution.
C. The worldwide position unimpeachably indicates that Legislative intervention has enabled same sex
marriage recognition and not the judicial processes
96. It is relevant to note, that the reliance of the Petitioners on the recognition of same-sex marriage in other
countries is illustrative in one regard. An overwhelming majority of the countries wherein such unions are recognised
as either "marriage" or simply "civil unions", the same has been carried out by the appropriate Legislature and not the
Hon'ble Courts. The following table may be relevant in this regard:
COUNTRIES WHERE SAME SEX MARRIAGE Is LEGAL
S. No
COUNTRY
MODE OF LEGALISATION
1.
Andorra
BY LEGI SLATURE
Andorran Family Code was updated in 2020 to permit civil unions for same sex couples.
In 2023, the code was further amended to create a uniform law of marriage irrespective
of sexual orientation
The relevant provision is Article 77(2) of the Family Code which reads-" El matrimoni
contret en forma civil t els mateixos requisits i efectes quan ambds contraents sn
persones del mateix o de diferent sexe"
Translation.- Marriage contracted in civil form has the same requirements and effects
whether both contracting parties are people of the same or different sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- The Amendment
Act of February 2023 amended the following provisions
Article 77 of the Family Code on forms of Marriage
Article 78 of the Family Code on effects of civil and canon Marriage
Article 91 on civil consequences of entering into a Canon Marriage
Article 244 on the competence of Andorran Authorities to celebrate Civil Marriage
2.
Argentina
BY LEGISLATURE.
Civil Code amended in 2010.
The relevant provision is Article 172 of the Civil Code which reads-El matrimonio tendr
los mismos requisitos y efectos, con independencia de que los contrayentes sean del
mismo o de diferente sexo
Translation.- - Marriage will have the same requirements and efects, regardless of
whether the contracting parties are of the same or different sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes in other statutes.-
The Amendment Act of July 2010 amended the following provisions
Multiple provisions of the Argentinian Civil Code governing inter alia declaration of
insanity, conditions of marriage, marriage procedures, domcile, separation rights etc
Article 36 of the law on Registration of Civil Status and Capacity governing contents
of Registration
Article 4 on the Law of Registration of Names governing Names of Children.
3.
Australia
BY LEGISLATURE.
Legal Since 2010
The relevant provision is Section 5(1) of the Marriage Act as amended by Marriage
Amendment (Defnition and Religious Freedoms) Act, 2017 which reads as follows-
marriage means the union of 2 people to the exclusion of all others, voluntarily entered
into for life.
Further legislative changes.- The Amending Act made changes to the following
legislations
Marriage Act, 1961
Sex Discrimination Act, 1984
Acts Interpretation Act, definition of spouse
Defence Forces Discipline Appeals Act, 1955.
Defence Visiting Forces Act, 1963
Evidence Act, 1995
Family Laws Act, 1975, multiple provisions
Financial Transaction Reports Act, 1988, gender neutral language introduced
Maintainence Orders (Commonwealth Officers) Act, 1966, gender neutral language
introduced
Australian Defence Force Cover Act, 2015, gender neutral language introduced
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation 1988, gender neutral language introduced
Seafarers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1992, gender natural language
introduced
Federal Circuit Court of Australia Act, 1999, gender neutral language introduced
Governor-General Act, 1974, gender neutral language introduced
Judges Pension Act, 1968, gender neutral language introduced
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act, 1948, gender neutral language
introduced
Superannuation Act, 1976, gender neutral language introduced
Migration Act, 1958, Gender neutral language introduced
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act, 1948, gender neutral language
introduced
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 2004, gender neutral language
introduced
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence-related Claims) Act, 1988, gender
neutral language introduced
4.
Austria
MIXED - LEGISLATURE FIRST
The Legislature provided for Registered Partnerships for same sex couples in 2010
The relevant provision is Section 3 of the Registered Partnerships ACT which reads-Eine
eingetragene Partnerschaft knnen nur zwei Personen begrnden (eingetragene
Partner). Sie verbinden sich damit zu einer Lebensgemeinschaft auf Dauer mit
gegenseitigen Rechten und Pfichten. Translation.- A registered partnership can only
be founded by two people (registered partners). In this way, they form a long-term
partnership with mutual rights and obligations.
Role of Court.- In January 2013, the Constitutional Court ruled that the registered
partnership law was partially unconstitutional, broadening the rights of registered
partners. On 4 December 2017, the Constitutional Court struck down the ban as
unconstitutional, ruling that preventing same-sex couples from marrying violates the
principles of equality and (non-discrimination of the Constitution of Austria.
5.
Belgium
BY LEGI SLATURE.
Legal Since 2003. The relevant provision is Article 143 of the Belgian Civil Code which
reads as follows-Deux personnes de sexe difrent ou de mme sexe peuvent contracter
marriage
Translation. - Two people of diferent sex or of the same sex can enter into marriage.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- The Amendment
Act of 2010 made changes to the following provisions
Multiple Provisions of the Belgian Civil Code amended
Article 16 of the General Commercial Rental Act of 1951 dealing with grounds on
which lease renewal may be refused
Article 48 on the Law of Mortgage of 16th December 1951 on Mortgage by the State
6.
Brazil
MIXED PROCESS.
A part of Brazil, though local legislations in the States of Alagoas, Bahia, Cear, Esprito
Santo, Mato Grosso do Sul, Paraba, Paran, Piau, Rondnia, Santa Catarina, So Paulo,
and Sergipe, as well as the Federal District and the city of Santa Rita do Sapuca, had
already legalized same-sex marriages In Rio de Janeiro, same-sex couples could
petition to local judges to register their "marriage".
Thereafter in 2013, the Supreme Court of Brazil legalised civil Unions in ADI 4277
Prosecutor General V. President of the Republic and in 2013, the National Justice
Council provided full marriage rights in Resoluo 175/2013.
7.
Canada
BY LEGI SLATURE.
The federal recognition came by the Civil Marriage Act, 2005.
Relevant provisions are Sections 2 and 3.1 which read as follows:
2 Marriage, for civil purposes, is the lawful union of two persons to the exclusion of all
others.
3.1 For greater certainty, no person or organization shall be deprived of any beneft, or
be subject to any obligation or sanction, under any law of the Parliament of Canada
solely by reason of their exercise, in respect of marriage between persons of the same
sex, of the freedom of conscience and religion guaranteed under the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms or the expression of their beliefs in respect of marriage as the
union of a man and woman to the exclusion of all others based on that guaranteed
freedom.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- The Amendment of 2010
introduced changes to the following provisions
Canada Business Corporations Act, Gender neutral language introduced
Canada Cooperatives Act, Gender neutral language introduced
Civilian War-Related Benefits Act, Gender neutral language introduced
Divorce Act, Gender neutral language introduced
Federal Law and Civil Law of the Province of Quebec Act,
Gender neutral language introduced
Income Tax Act, Multiple Sections amended, Gender neutral language introduced
Marriage (Prohibited Degrees) Act
Modernization of Benefits and Obligations Act
8.
Chile
BY LEGISLATURE.
Legal Since 2022. The relevant provision is Article 102 of the Chilean Civil Code which
reads as follows-Art. 102 El matrimonio es un contrato solemne por el cual dos
personas se unen actual e indisolublemente, y por toda la vida, con el fn de vivir
juntos, de procrear, y de auxiliarse mutuamente.
Translation. - Marriage is a solemn contract by which two people are currently and
indissolubly united, and for a lifetime, in order to live together, to procreate, and to
help each other.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amendment Act of March
2022 amended the following provisions
Multiple provisions of the Chilean Civil Code
Article 2 of the Law on Civil Marriage on the prohibition to marry one responsible for
the murden of another's spouse, Article 42 on the termination of Marriage, Article 80 on
the formal and substantive requirements of Marriage
Article 12 of the Civil Unions was abolished
Articles 39 and 40 on the law of Civil Registration governing Marriage Registrations
Article 59 of the Labour Code governing the amount a worker may assign for the
maintenance of the family and Article 207 outlining the duties of the Labour
department
Article 44 of the Law on Occupational Hazards and Diseases in the Course of
Employment on pension given to surviving spouse and Article 93 governing savings
Article 7 of the Law on Family Benefits on family and maternal allowance
9.
Colombia
MIXED PROCESS.
In 2011, the Constitutional Court ruled unanimously 9-0 (in case C-577/2011) that,
although it could not change the definition of marriage as the union of a man
and a woman", same-sex couples have the right to form a family.
Thereafter, guidelines were prepared by the Executive for notaries and judges to
conduct "solemn contracts" for same-sex couples.
In line with that, notaries started performing these unions and LGBTQ couples made
petitions to judges to have their relationships recognized as a marriage.
In effect, civil unions had been regulated by laws made by the Executive/Legislature.
Same Sex Marriage legalised by the Constitutional Court in 2016 in Sentencia
SU214/16.
10.
Costa Rica
MIXED PROCESS.
In 2013, the Legislative Assembly amended the General Young Person's Act (Spanish :
Ley General de la Persona Joven). The Act changed article 4(m) of the Act to
recognize: The right to recognition, without discrimination contrary to human dignity,
of the social and economic effects of domestic partnerships which constitute in a public,
notorious, unique and stable manner, with legal capacity for marriage for more than
three years."
The Act also changed the Family Code to allow couples living together for three years or
more to be recognized as having a common-law marriage, which would grant them
some legal benefits such as alimony. The definition of "marriage" was therefore not
limited by gender.
Thus, in effect, civil unions had been regulated by laws made by the Legislature.
Thereafter, in 2018, the Constitutional Court upheld the validity of same sex marriage
in 2018 in Voto No. 2018-012782.
11.
Cuba
BY LEGI SLATURE.
Cuba updated its Family Code in 2022 and held a referendum on the same. The Cuban
public voted in favour of the Code and legalised Same Sex Marriage
The relevant provision is Section 201 of the Code which states- El matrimonio es la
unin voluntariamente concertada de dos personas
Translation. - Marriage is the Consensual union of two people.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- The Amendment Act of 2019
modified the following provisions
Family Code almost entirely rewriten
Extensive changes made to the Cuban Civil Code
Extensive changes made to the Law of Contracts
Extensive changes made to the Law of Succession
12.
Denmark
BY SLATURE.
Denmark amended its Marriage Act in 2012 to permit Same Sex Marriage.
The relevant provision is Article 1 of the Marriage Act which reads as follows-. Loven
fnder anvendelse pa xeteskab mellem to personer af forskelligt kon og mellem to
personen af samme kon.
Translation. - The law applies to marriage between two people of different sexes and
between two people of the same sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amendment Act of 2012
introduced changes to the following provisions
Heading of Chapter 1 of the Marriage and Dissolution Act amended to be gender
neutral
Section 53(a) of the Act on the Legal Effects of Marriage relating to Special Rules
applying to one of the parties to the marriage made inapplicable to same sex marriage
Section 448 of the Court Administration Act amended to be inclusive of same sex
marriage.
13.
Ecuador
MIXED PROCESS [LARGELY DEMOCRATIC PROCESS].
After democratic campaign by right groups, the Constitution of Ecuador was sought to
be amended to provide for civil unions for LGBTQ couples. The amendment was
approved through a referendum by 69.46% of voters The text of Article 68 of the
Ecuador Constitution in Spanish is : Art. 68. La unin estable y monogmica entre
dos personas libres de vnculo matrimonial que formen un hogar de hecho, por el lapso
y bajo las condiciones y circunstancias que seale la ley, generar los mismos derechos
y obligaciones que tienen las familias constituidas mediante matrimonio. La adopcin
corresponder slo a parejas de distinto sexo."
Translation. "The stable and monogamous union between two persons, free of
matrimonial bond, who form a de facto couple, for the duration and under the
conditions and circumstances that the law provides, will generate the same rights and
obligations as held by families built through marriage. Adoption will pertain only to
couples of different sexes."
The Ecuadorean Constitution of 2008 therefore, distinguished Marriage defined in
Article 67 and Civil Unions defined in Article 68.
In 2019, the Constitutional Court interpreted Article 67 to include same sex couples
in
Setencia No. 10-18-CN/19
However, adoption by married couples remains restricted to opposite-sex couples.
14.
Finland
BY LEGI SLATURE.
Registered Partnerships allowed for same sex couples in 2001 by legislature through
the "Laki rekisteridystt parisuhteesta" (Law on Registered Partnerships). However,
adoption was not permited for same sex couples
The relevant provision was Section 1 of the Law which read- "Kahden samaa sukupuolta
olevan 18 vuota tytneen henkiln parisuhde voidaan rekisterida siten kuin tssa
laissa sdetn"
Translation.- A partnership between two persons of the same sex who have reached
the age of 18 can be registered in accordance with the provisions of this law
In 2017, Finland Amended its Marriage Act to allow same sex Marriage The relevant
provision is Section 1 of the Act which reads-Kaksi henkil, jotka ovat sopineet
menevns avioliitoon keskenn, ovat kihlautuneet. (20.2.2015/156) Avioliito
solmitaan vihkimisell. Ennen vihkimist on selvitetv, etei avioliitolle ole esteit.
Translation.- Two people who have agreed to marry each other are engaged.
(20.2.2015/156) A marriage is concluded by a marriage ceremony. Before getting
married, It shall be established that there are no impediments to the marriage.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amendment Act of 2017
modified the following provisions
Marriage Act
Act on Transgender Gender Afrimation (Laki transseksuaalin sukupuolen
vahvistamisesta) amended to remove the requirement
that a Transgender not be in a marriage oe Registered Partnership
Religious Freedom Act (Uskonnonvapauslaki) Section 3 amended to remove references
to "the mother"
The Section 2 of Law on Fertility Treatments (Laki hedelmityshoidoista) amended
to
include treatmentss between a Woman and a Man
Section 13 of the Law on Population System (Laki vesttietojrjestelmst ja Digi- ja
vesttietoviraston varmennepalveluista) amended to make language gender-neutral
15.
France
BY LEGISLATURE.
Legalised in 2013 via enactment of "LAW n 2013-404 of May 17, 2013 opening
marriage to same-sex couples"
The Law amended Section 143 of the French Civil Code which reads-Le mariage est
contract par deux personnes de sexe difrent ou de mme sexe.
Translation.- - Marriage is contracted by two persons of different sex or of the same
sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- The Amending Act of 2013
changed the following provisions
Multiple amendments in the French Civil Code
Articles 211-1 and 211-4 of the Social Action and Family Code amended to introduce
gender neutral language
Article 88 of the Code of Civil and Military Retirement pensions amended to allow
orphans to receive pension of both deceased same sex parents
Rural and Maritime Fisheries code Article 732-10 amended to introduce gender
neutral language
Multiple Amendments in the Social Security Code to replace the terms "father" and
"mother" with gender neutral language
Section 1132-3-2 inserted in the Labour Code to prevent sexual orientation based
discrimination
Article 6 of Ordinance No 2002-149 amended to specifically provide the right of same
sex parents to make decisions regarding Family Benefits.
16.
Germany
BY LEGISLATURE.
Germany initially recognised Registered Partnerships for same-sex couples via the
Geset ber die Eingetragene Lebenspartnerschaft (Registered Civil Partnership Act).
The German Federal Constitutional Court gradually expanded the rights available under
the Act until it stood nearly at par with Marriage.
In 2017, the German Legislature passed a bill amending the Brgerliches Gesetbuch
(Civil Code), to allow same sex marriage.
The relevant provision is Section 1353 which reads-(1) Die Ehe wird von zwei Personen
verschiedenen oder gleichen Geschlechts auf Lebenszeit geschlossen. Die Ehegaten
sind einander zur ehelichen Lebensgemeinschaft verpfichtet; sie tragen freinander
Verantwortung.
Translation. - 1) Marriage is entered into by two persons of the same or different sex,
for life. The spouses are obligated to each other in marital cohabitation; they are
responsible for each other.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- - The Amending Act of 2019
introduced changes to the following provisions
Section 1309 and 1324 of the German Civil Code
Chapter 4 and Section 14 of The Personal Status Act amended to permit conversion of
Civil Partnerships into Marriage
Section 7 Paragraph 1 of the Transsexuals Act amended
Article 3 of the Introductory Law to the Civil Code amended to recognise same sex
marriage.
17.
Iceland
BY ISLATURE.
Marriage Act amended in 2010 to allow same sex marriage.
Relevant Provision is Section 1 of the Marriage Act which reads- Lg pessi gilda um
hjuskap [tveggja einstaklinga].
Translation. - This law applies to the marriage of [two persons].
Legislature made following consequential changes.- The Amendment Act of 2010
modified the following provisions
Multiple Sections of the Marriage Act
Article 8 of the Act of Notices on Change of Residence amended to provide for
declaration of change of residence as terminating cohabitation with the Spouse
Act on Icelandic Citizenship, Article 1 amended to make it gender neutral
National Register and Civil Registration Act amended to repeal the term confirmed
cohabitation since marriage rights were granted
Law on Legal Domicile amended to make it gender neutral
Article 100 of the Law on Exchange of Estates amended to include the term spouse
Article 8 para 2 of Act on Personal Names amended to include the term parent in
addition to Father
Article 2 of The Adoption Act amended to remove the term confirmed cohabitation
Multiple Amendments made to Act on Foreigners to make it Gender neutral
Article 3 of Children's Act amended
Article 62 of Income Tax Act amended to tax cohabiting partners who were capable in
law of being married
Article 7 of State Employees Pension Funds Act amended to make it gender neutral
Article 49 of the Social Security Act amended to extend rights to persons in unmarried
partnerships
Multiple Other Acts Amended
18.
Ireland
BY LEGI SLATURE.
The Constitution of Ireland was amended via referendum in 2015 to recognise same
sex marriage.
The relevant provision is Article 11(4) of the Constitution which states -Marriage may
be contracted in accordance with law by two persons without distinction as to their sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Ireland passed Civil
Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act, 2010 to provide for
the rights and obligations of cohabitants.
Various acts were Amended such as
Section 45(2) of Health Act, 1970
Section 6(2)(a)(ii) of prosecution of Offences Act, 1974
Section 2(1)(c) of Unfair Dismissals Act, 1977
Section 45(1) and 59 of Bankruptcy, 1988
Section 11(1), (1) and 15(1) was of Criminal Assets Bureau Act, 1966
Various other laws were also amended
19.
Luxembourg
BY LEGI SLATURE.
Registered Partnerships recognised by law in 2004 but adoption rights not granted In
2015, the Legislature amended the Civil Code to allow same sex marriage.
The relevant provision is Article 143 of the Code which reads- Deux personnes de sexe
difrent ou de mme sexe peuvent contracter mariage
Translation.- - Two people of different sex or of the same sex can enter into marriage.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amending Act of 4 July 2014
was passed which amended various provisions
Article 143, 144, 145, 147, 148, 161 to 164, 165 to 171, 173 to 175 of Civil Code was
amended
Article 265(1) and 278 of New Code of Civil Procedure was amended
Article 66 of the Commercial Code was amended;
Act of 19 December 1972 introducing a pre-marriage medical examination was
repealed
Chapter VII-1 was inserted in Criminal Code Various other laws were also amended.
20.
Malta
BY LEGISLATURE.
Civil Unions were recognised in 2014. In 2017, the Marriage Act was amended to be
gender neutral via the Marriage and Other Laws (Amendment), Act, 2017
The relevant provision is Section 11(1) of the Marriage Act which reads - Section 11.
(1) A marriage may be contracted either in a civil form between two consenting
individuals, that is to say in the form established by this Act for civil marriage, or in
a
religious form, that is to say in a religious form in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- - Marriage Act and other Laws
(Amendment) of 2017 was passed to amend provisions of various other acts:
Article 62, 159, 196, 197, 204 and various other provisions of Criminal Code was
amended
Article 180, 287, 293, 388, 388, 521 and various other provisions of Code of
Organization and Civil Procedure was amended
Article 4, 33, 62, 62A, 67, 69 and various other provisions of Civil Code was amended
Article 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 15 and carious other provisions of Marriage act was amended
Various other laws were also amended
21.
Mexico
MIXED PROCESS - ADOPTION LEFT TO STATES.
In 2006, the Legislative Assembly of Mexico City approved a civil union law called Ley
de Sociedades de Convivencia followed by a similar law in State of Coahuila.
There was a political debate on the issue as a leading party in the Legislative Assembly
of Mexico City, announced that it was introducing an amendment to the Civil Code to
legalize same-sex marriage in Mexico City, which was strongly opposed by another
political party.
In 2010, the Supreme Court of Mexico voted 8-2 to uphold the constitutionality of
Mexico City's same-sex marriage law.
The Court later ruled on 10 August 2010 that Mexico City marriages are valid
throughout the entire country.
The Supreme Court held in 2015 that that prohibition on same sex marriage is
unconstitutional in Case No 1a./J. 85/2015 (10a.)
Currently, all the states in Mexico permit same sex marriage. However, 10 out of 31
States do not permit adoption for same sex couples.
22.
Netherlands
BY LEGISLATURE.
Legal since 2001, when the Burgerlijk Wetboek (Civil Code) of the Netherlands was
amended to allow same sex marriage
The relevant provision is Article 30, Clause 1 which reads- Een huwelijk kan worden
aangegaan door twee personen van verschillend of van gelijk geslacht.
Translation. - A marriage can be entered into by two persons of different or same sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amending Act of 1998, 2001
amended provisions of Acts mentioned below
Article 30(1) of Civil code was amended
Article 80(a) to 80(e) was inserted in Civil Code
23.
New Zealand
BY LEGISLATURE.
Civil Unions legal since 2004 following the enactment of the Civil Union Act, 2004.
In 2013, the Marriage (Definition of Marriage) Amendment Act, 2013 was passed which
amended the Marriage Act, 1955 to permit same sex marriage
The relevant provision is Section 2(1) of the Marriage Act 1955 which reads- "marriage
means the union of 2 people, regardless of their sex, sexual orientation, or gender
identity".
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Civil Union Act, 2004
amended various provisions of Acts mentioned below
Section 2 of Births, Deaths, and Marriages Registration Act, 1995 was amended
New Part 7A was inserted in Births, Deaths, and Marriages Registration Act, 1995
Sections 16 and 23 of Adoption Act, 1955 was amended Section 205, 206 of Crimes
Act, 1966 was amended.
24.
Norway
BY LEGISLATURE.
Registered Partnerships provided for in 1993. Marriage Act was amended in 2009 to
allow same sex Marriage
The relevant provision is Article 1 of the Marriage Act which reads as follows- Two
persons of opposite sex or of the same sex may contract marriage. Legislature made
following consequential changes.- Amending Act of 2008 modifed the following
provisions
Multiple amendments in the Marriage Act
Section 1A of Children's Act amended to make the language gender neutral. Multiple
other amendments made
Penal Code amended to make ofences under Marriage Act gender neutral
Pension scheme for nurses amended to include same sex couples
Act on National Insurance amended to make registered partnerships equivalent to
marriage
Child Rights Act amended to include registered partnerships
Multiple other acts amended
25.
Portugal
BY LEGI SLATURE
De facto unions recognised since 2001. Portuguese civil Code amended in 2010 to
recognise Same Sex Marriage.
The relevant provision is Article 1577 of the Code which reads as follows-Casamento 
o
contrato celebrado entre duas pessoas que pretendem constituir famlia mediante uma
plena comunho de vida, nos termos das disposies deste Cdigo.
Translation. - Marriage is the contract celebrated between two people who intend to
start a family through a full communion of life, in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amending Act of May 31,
2010 amended various provisions of Acts mentioned below
Article 1577, 1591, 1690 of civil code was amended
Article 1628 of the Civil Code was revoked.
26.
Slovenia
MIXED PROCESS.
Registered Partnerships first recognised under Registration of Same-Sex Partnerships
Act 2005 with limited rights granted.
Further rights granted under Partnership Act, 2016 but adoption not granted.
In 2022, the Constitutional Court of Slovenia in Case No U-1-486/20, Up-572/18
and No. U-1-91/21, Up-675/19 held that denying marriage rights to same sex
couples was unconstitutional.
Subsequently, the Slovenian Legislature amended its Civil Laws to bring them into
conformity with the Judgement.
Further legislative changes. - Amending Act of 2023 was passed and Article 3 & 4 of
Family code was amended.
27.
South Africa
JUDICIARY, FOLLOWED BY LEGISLATURE.
In Minister of Home Afairs V. Fourie, 2005 ZACC 19, the Constitutional Court of South
Africa extended the definition of marriage to same sex couples.
However, to effectuate the decision a Bill had to be passed which was done after heated
political debate with the largest political party in South Africa supporting the
amendment. The Civil Union Bill, 2006 was passed and legislative changes were made.
Legislature made following consequential changes. Amending act of 2022
amended provisions of Acts mentioned below
Section 6 of the Civil Union Act, 2006 was repealed
28.
Spain
BY LEGI SLATURE.
In 2005, Act, 13/2005 of July 1 was passed which amended the Spanish Civil Code,
Article 44 to include same sex Marriage.
The Article reads- men and women are entitled to marry in accordance with the
provisions of this Code. - Marriage shall have the same requirements and effects when
both prospective spouses are of the same or different genders"
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amending Act of 2005
modified the following provisions
Multiple amendments to Spanish Civil Code
Article 46 of Civil Registry law amended to make language used therein gender
neutral.
29.
Sweden
BY LEGISLATURE.
Registered Partnerships provided for in 1995 and in 2009 the Civil Code was amended
for allow Same Sex Marriage
The relevant provision is Section 1 of the Code which reads- / denna balk fnns
bestmmelser om samlevnad i ktenskap. De tva som ingar ktenskap med varandra
blir makar
Translation. - This code contains provisions on cohabitation in marriage. The two who
enter into marriage with each other become spouses
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amending Act of 2001
changed multiple provisions of the Swedish Civil Code.
30.
Switerland
BY LEGISLATURE
Registered Partnerships allowed in 2005. In 2022, the Civil code was amended to allow
Same Sex Marriage.
The relevant provision is Section 94 of the Code which reads Die Ehe kann von zwei
Personen eingegangen werden, die das 18. Altersjahr zurckgelegt haben und
urteilsfhig sind.
Translation. - Marriage may be entered into by two person who have reached 18 years
of age and have capacity of judgement.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- - The Amending Act of 2022
amended the following provisions
Multiple provisions of the Swiss Civil Code Amended
Article 1 of Partnership Acgt amended to make language gender neutral
Federal Law on Private International Law amended i.e Article 43 and 45 to use the
word "spouse"
Article 16 of Reproductive Medicine Act, 1968 amended to allow same sex couples to
commission children.
31.
Taiwan
MIXED PROCESS.
From 2015 to 2017, several municipalities/local governments of Taiwan, like
Kaohsiung, Taipei, Tainan, New Taipei, Chiayi City, Taoyuan City, Changhua County,
Hsinchu County, etc allowed registration for same-sex marriages and allowed civil
unions of sorts.
In 2017, the Ministry of the Interior formally asked all local governments to open
registration for same-sex couples.
It was after the said Legislative/Executive process that in Judicial Yuan Interpretation
No. 748, the Constitutional Court further expanded rights to allow formation of
permanent unions to include same sex couples.
32.
United Kingdom
BY EGI SLATURE.
The Civil Partnership Act, 2004 came into effect in December 2005. It created civil
partnerships, which gave same-sex couples who entered into them most of the rights
and responsibilities of marriage.
Thereafter, the Marriage Act, 2013 for England and Wales, Marriage and Civil
Partnership Act, 2014 for Scotland and Northern Ireland (Executive Formation etc) Act,
2019 for Ireland all provided for Same Sex Marriage Legislature made following
consequential changes. Marriage Act 2013 changed the following laws
Marriage Act, 1949-Multiple Sections
Marriage (Registrar General's License) Act, 1970, Section 13 providing for voidness of
marriage in certain cases of same sex couples inserted
Public Order Act, 1986, Section 29JA(2) inserted to remove discussion of sex as
a
ground for threat to public order
Social Security and Contribution Benefits Act, 1992, gender neutral language
substituted
Pension Schemes Act, 1993 inserted to make language gender neutral
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act, 2008-Multiple Amendments to make
language gender neutral
Multiple other enactments amended.
33.
United States
MI IXED PROCESS.
In USA the situation is very different as the federal system there gives great autonomy
to the states. In some states the judiciary by way of a court ruling allowed same sex
marriage. However, in some States the Legislature intervened to provide for same sex
marriage.
Given the very different nature of federalism in the USA and especially given the fact
that the States in the USA have much greater autonomy, no direct comparison can be
made with the situation in India.
In United States V. Windsor, 570 US 744 the United States Supreme Court struck down
Section 5 of the Defence of Marriage Act which denied federal recognition to Same Sex
Marriage.
Subsequently in Obergefell V. Hodges all state bans on Same Sex Marriage were struck
down by 5-4 verdict [The dissent is important as it may gain currency in the future in
the US Supreme Court].
It should however be noted that in Dobbs V. Women Health Organization, 597 US 2022,
Justice Clarence Thomas has called for overruling Dobbs as the basis of Roe V. Wade,
410 US 113 (1973) and Dobbs supra was the doctrine of substantive due process,
which has been criticised in Dobbs supra.
34.
Uruguay
BY LEGISLATURE.
Civil Unions recognised in 2008. In 2013 the Civil Code was amended to include Same
Sex Marriage.
The relevant provision is Article 83 of the Code which reads as follows- el matriomonio
civil es la union permanente con arreglo a la ley, de dos personas de distinto o igual
sexo
Translation. - Civil marriage is the permanent union, according to the law, of two
persons of the same or different sex.
Legislature made following consequential changes.- Amendment Act of 2013
modified the following provisions
Multiple Articles of the Uruguayan Civil Code Amended
Childhood and Adolescence Code Article 27 amended to make the language gender.
SUMMARY
Same Sex marriage position
No.
Countries where same sex marriage or a similar arrangement is given recognition
34
Countries where recognition was through a purely Legislative process
24
Countries where this recognition was through a mixed process initiated largely by the Legislature
9
or Executive
Country where process was first imitated by Judiciary and then followed by Legislature
1
[South Africa]
97. It is submitted that similarly for countries where 'civil unions' are recognised, the position can be summarised
as under:
COUNTRIES WHERE CIVIL UNIONS ARE LEGAL
S. No
COUNTRY
MODE OF LEGALISATION
1.
Bolivia
BY JUDICIARY
Second Constitutional Chamber of the La Paz Departmental Court of Justice, citing
advisory opinion OC 24/7 issued by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
ruled in favour of the couple recognizing same-sex civil union.
However, it may be noted that several Bills had been introduced in the country's
Legislature seeking recognition and the political debate was ongoing on the said
issue.
2.
Croatia
BY LEGI SLATURE.
Through a law on unregistered same-sex unions, which was later replaced by the
Life Partnership Act.
3.
Cyprus
BY LEGISLATURE:
The legislation established a partnership scheme known as civil cohabitation, open
to both same-sex and opposite-sex couples. This provides civil partners with the
several of the legal rights and benefits of marriage, such as hospital visitation
rights, tax benefits, property rights, etc., but excluding adoption rights.
4.
Czech Republic
BY LEGISLATURE:
The Registered Partnership law was passed in March 2006 and went into effect on
1st July 2006.
Registered partnerships grant several of the rights of marriage, including
inheritance, the right to declare a same-sex partner as next of kin, hospital
visitation rights, jail and prison visitation rights, spousal privilege, and alimony
rights, but do not allow joint adoption, widow's pension, or joint property
rights.
5.
Estonia
BY LEGI SLATURE:
Registered Partnership Act was introduced. It was signed into law by the President
the same day and took effect on January 1, 2016.
6.
Greece
BY LEGISLATURE:
Legislation allowing such unions was approved by the Hellenic Parliament on 23
December 2015 and published in the Government Gazete the following day.
7.
Hungary
BY LEGISLATURE:
On 12 February 2009, the government approved the new bill (The Registered
Partnership Act), and it was adopted by the National Assembly on 20 April 2009
Unlike married spouses, registered partners cannot take a common surname,
adopt or participate in artificial insemination.
8.
Italy
BY LEGISLATURE:
Through passage of a Civil Union Bill which was published in the official gazette
and took effect on 5 June 2016.
9.
Latvia
BY JUDICIARY FIRST, THEREAFTER LEGISLATURE
Latvia does not recognize same-sex marriage but same-sex couples are able to
register their partnerships with the government through the courts. On 12
November 2020, the Constitutional Court of Latvia ruled that the Latvian
Constitution entitles same-sex couples to receive the benefits and protections
afforded by Latvian law to married opposite-sex couples, and gave the Saeima
(Parliament of Latvia) until 1 June 2022 to enact a law protecting same-sex
couples.
In December 2021, the Supreme Court ruled that should the Parliament of Latvia
fail to pass civil union legislation before the 1 June deadline, same-sex couples
may apply with a court to have their relationship recognized and enjoy similar
rights and benefits to married couples. The Parliament of Latvia failed to approve
such legislation by the deadline, and the first same-sex union was recognized by
the Administrative District Court on 30 May. It may be noted Latvia had a vibrant
political debate on the issue since 1999.
10.
Liechtenstein
BY LEGISLATURE.
Liechtenstein has recognized same-sex registered partnerships since 1st
September 2011 following approval by voters in a referendum.
11.
Monaco
BY LEGISLATURE
On 4 December 2019, the National Council passed cohabitation agreement bill
establishing cohabitation agreements, offering both same-sex and opposite-sex
couples limited rights and benefits in the areas of inheritance and property.
The legislation was signed into law by Prince Albert 11 on 17 December 2019,
published in the official journal on 27 December and took effect six months later
(i.e. 27 June 2020)
12.
Montenegro
BY LEGI SLATURE
In July 2020, the Parliament of Montenegro passed a bill on life partnership of
same sex partners, to recognise life partnerships for same-sex couples offering
several, but not all, of the rights and benefits of marriage. The bill was signed into
law on 3 July 2020 by President Milo Dukanovi, and took effect on 15 July 2021.
13.
the
Netherlands
BY LEGISLATURE.
state of Aruba
Parliament of Aruba voted in favor of an amendment to the Aruban Civil Code
legalizing registered partnerships for both same-sex and opposite-sex couples.
14.
San Marino
BY LEGISLATURE.
Civil Union Bill was passed by the parliament on 15 November 2018. The law was
published in the Official Bulletin on 20 November 2018 and entered into force on 5
December 2018.
On 24 June 2021, a law came into effect making clear that all laws and regulations
referring to marriage, married couples, and spouses, apply equally to partners in a
civil union.
15.
The
British
BY LEGISLATURE
territories
of
Same-sex marriage first became legal on 5 May 2017, when the Supreme Court of
Bermuda
and
Bermuda declared that same-sex couples had a legal right to marry. However,
a
Cayman Islands
bill to ban same-sex marriage and establish domestic partnerships was passed by
the Parliament in December 2017 and went into effect on 1 June 2018.
In response to the renewed ban on same-sex marriage, two legal challenges were
fled opposing the domestic partnership law. On 6 June 2018, the Supreme Court
struck down the parts of the domestic partnership law that banned same-sex
marriages but stayed the ruling while the government appealed to the Court of
Appeal. The appeals court upheld the right of same-sex couples to marry when
it
handed down its ruling on 23 November 2018. The government challenged the
Court of Appeal's ruling to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, which
reversed the appeals court's finding on 14 March 2022, and banned same-sex
marriage once again.
16.
The
British
BY JUDICIARY, FOLLOWED BY LEGISLATURE.
territories
of
A lawsuit with the Grand Court successfully challenged the ban on same-sex
Cayman Islands
marriage in March 2019, however, the Court of Appeal overturned the ruling in
November 2019. Same-sex civil partnerships became legal following the
enactment of the Civil Partnership Law, 2020 on 4 September 2020.
SUMMARY
Civil Union position
No.
Countries where civil union or a partnership arrangement is given recognition
16
Countries where recognition was through a purely Legislative process
13
Country where process was mixed
3
98. Therefore, it is clear that societies and countries have acted only after the said concept has gained currency or
acceptability in their respective jurisdictions and the elected representatives have acted on the basis of locally
prevailing ethos, beliefs and understanding of marriage or civil unions. It is submitted that therefore, there was a clear
and direct democratic mandate behind the recognition of same-sex marriages in which ever jurisdiction such
relationships were recognised. The democratic aspect therefore, cannot be understated as far as the present issue is
concerned.
D. Legislative policy versus power of Courts
99. It is submitted that it is settled law that Court cannot substitute legislative policy with judicial policy especially
in matters wherein there is high possibility of conflicting claims. It is submitted that across a wide array of subjects,
from social policy to economic policy, the Court has held that judicial forums are ill-suited to entertain challenges to
legislative policy and pass value judgments on efficacy and justiciability of the same. In a recent judgment in Dr.
25. From the above, it is apparent that law-making within certain limits is a legitimate element of a judge's role,
if not inevitable. A judge has to adjudicate and decide on the basis of legal provisions, which when indeterminate
on a particular issue require elucidation and explanation. This requires a judge to interpret the provisions to decide
the case and, in this process, he may take recourse and rely upon fundamental rights, including the right to life, but
even then he does not legislate a law while interpreting such provisions. Such interpretation is called 'judge made
law' but not legislation. Aileen Kavanagh, in explaining the aforesaid position, had observed:
If there has not been a case in point and the judge has to decide on the basis of legal provisions which may
be indeterminate on the issue, then the judge cannot decide the case without making new law. This
is
because Parliament has formulated the Act in broad terms, which inevitably require elaboration by the courts
in order to apply it to the circumstances of each new case. Second, even in cases where judges apply existing
law, they cannot avoid facing the question of whether to change and improve it Interpretation has an
applicative and creative aspect."
26. Legislating or law-making involves a choice to prioritise certain political, moral and social values over the
others from a wide range of choices that exist before the legislature. It is a balancing and integrating exercise to
give expression/meaning to diverse and alternative values and blend it in a manner that it is representative of
several viewpoints so that it garners support from other elected representatives to pass institutional muster and
acceptance. Legislation, in the form of an enactment or laws, lays down broad and general principles. It is the
source of law which the judges are called upon to apply. Judges, when they apply the law, are constrained by the
rules of language and by well identified background presumptions as to the manner in which the legislature
intended the law to be read. Application of law by the judges is not synonymous with the enactment of law by the
legislature. Judges have the power to
spell out how precisely the statute would apply in a particular case. In this manner, they complete the law
formulated by the legislature by applying it. This power of interpretation or the power of judicial review is exercised
post the enactment of law, which is then made subject matter of interpretation or challenge before the courts.
27. Legislature, as an institution and a wing of the Government, is a microcosm of the bigger social community
possessing qualities of a democratic institution in terms of composition, diversity and accountability. Legislature
uses in-built procedures carefully designed and adopted to bring a plenitude of representations and resources as
they have access to information, skills, expertise and knowledge of the people working within the institution and
outside in the form of executive. Process and method of legislation and judicial adjudication are entirely distinct.
Judicial adjudication involves applying rules of interpretation and law of precedents and notwithstanding deep
understanding, knowledge and wisdom of an individual judge or the bench, it cannot be equated with law making in
a democratic society by legislators given their wider and broader diverse polity. The Constitution states that
legislature is supreme and has a final say in matters of legislation when it reflects on alternatives and choices with
inputs from different quarters, with a check in the form of democratic accountability and a further check by the
courts which exercise the power of judicial review. It is not for the judges to seek to develop new all-embracing
principles of law in a way that reflects the stance and opinion of the individual judges when the society/legislators
as a whole are unclear and substantially divided on the relevant issues. In Bhim Singh V. Union of India, while
observing that the Constitution does not strictly prohibit overlapping of functions as this is inevitable in the modern
parliamentary democracy, the Constitution prohibits exercise of functions of another branch which results in
wresting away of the regime of constitutional accountability. Only when accountability is preserved, there will be no
violation of principle of separation of powers. Constitution not only requires and mandates that there should be right
decisions that govern us, but equal care has to be taken that the right decisions are made by the right body and the
institution. This is what gives legitimacy, be it a legislation, a policy decision or a court adjudication.
28. It is sometimes contended with force that unpopular and difficult decisions are more easily grasped and
taken by the judges rather than by the other two wings. Indeed, such suggestions were indirectly made. This
reasoning is predicated on the belief that the judges are not directly accountable to the electorate and, therefore,
enjoy the relative freedom from questions of the moment, which enables them to take a detached, fair and just
view. The position that judges are not elected and accountable is correct, but this would not justify an order by a
court in the nature of judicial legislation for it will run afoul of the constitutional supremacy and invalidate and
subvert the democratic process by which legislations are enacted. For the reasons stated above, this reasoning is
constitutionally unacceptable and untenable."
100. It is submitted that one of the earliest pronouncements on the subject came from this Court in Rustom
wherein this Court held that it is not the forum where conflicting policy claims may be debated; it is only required to
adjudicate the legality of a measure which has little to do with relative merits of different theories. The Court observed
as under:
" This Court is not the forum in which these conflicting claims may be debated. Whether there is a genuine
need for banking facility in the rural sector, whether certain classes of the community are deprived of the benefit of
the resources of the banking industry, whether administration by the Government of the commercial banking sector
will not prove beneficial to the community and will lead to rigidity in the administration, whether the Government
administration will eschew the profit-motive, and even if it be eschewed, there will accrue substantial benefits to
the public, whether an undue accent on banking as a means of social regeneration, especially in the backward
areas, is a doctrinaire approach to a rational order of priorities for attaining the national objectives enshrined in our
Constitution, and whether the policy followed by the Government in office or the policy propounded by its
opponents may reasonably attain the national objectives are matters which have little relevance in determining the
legality of the measure. It is again not for this Court to consider the relative merits of the different political theories
or economic policies. Parliament has under List I Entry 45 the power to legislate in respect of banking and other
commercial activities of the named banks necessarily incidental thereto it has the power to legislate for acquiring
the undertaking of the named banks under List 111 Entry 42. Whether by the exercise of the power vested in the
Reserve Bank under the pre-existing laws, results could be achieved which it is the object of the Act to achieve, is,
in our judgment, not relevant in considering whether the Act amounts to abuse of legislative power. This Court has
the power to strike down a law on the ground of want of authority, but the Court will not sit in appeal over the
policy of Parliament in enacting a law. The Court cannot find fault with the Act merely on the ground that it is
inadvisable to take over the undertaking of banks which, it is said by the petitioner, by thrift and efficient
management had set up an impressive and efficient business organisation serving large sectors of industry."
must be shown towards a law relating complex problems and their fulfilment through a specific legislative approach.
As noted above, it was also clarified that the fact that legislation may be troubled by crudities, inequities, uncertainties
or the possibility of abuse cannot be the basis for striking it down. The following observations which refer to a couple
of American Supreme Court decisions are a limpid enunciation on the subject:
"8. Another rule of equal importance is that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed with greater
latitude than laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech, religion, etc. It has been said by no less a person
than Holmes, J. that the legislature should be allowed some play in the joints, because it has to deal with complex
problems which do not admit of solution through any doctrinaire or straitjacket formula and this is particularly true
in case of legislation dealing with economic matters, where, having regard to the nature of the problems required to
be dealt with, greater play in the joints has to be allowed to the legislature. The court should feel more inclined to
give judicial deference to legislative judgment in the field of economic regulation than in other areas where
fundamental human rights are involved. Nowhere has this admonition been more felicitously expressed than in
Morey V. Doud [1 L Ed 2d 1485 354 US 457 (1957)] where Frankfurter, J. said in his inimitable style:
'In the utilities, tax and economic regulation cases, there are good reasons for judicial self-restraint if not judicial
deference to legislative judgment. The legislature after all has the affirmative responsibility. The courts have only
the power to destroy, not to reconstruct. When these are added to the complexity of economic regulation, the
uncertainty, the liability to error, the bewildering conflict of the experts, and the number of times the Judges have
been overruled by events - self-limitation can be seen to be the path to judicial wisdom and institutional prestige
and stability.'"
validity of a law and not its efficacy that can be challenged. This Hon'ble court, noted as under:
"54. It is not the domain of the court to embark upon unchartered ocean of public policy in an exercise to
consider as to whether a particular public policy is wise or a better public policy can be evolved. Such exercise must
be left to the discretion of the executive and legislative authorities as the case may be. The court is called upon to
consider the validity of a public policy only when a challenge is made that such policy decision infringes
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India or any other statutory right."
opening up of the telecom sector reiterated that the forum for debate and discourse over the merits and demerits of a
policy is Parliament. It restated that the services of this Hon'ble Court are not sought till the legality of the policy is
disputed, and further, that no direction can be given or be expected from the courts, unless while implementing such
policies, there is violation or infringement of any of the constitutional or statutory provisions. It held as under:
"7. What has been said in respect of legislations is applicable even in respect of policies which have been
adopted by Parliament. They cannot be tested in court of law. The courts cannot express their opinion as to whether
at a particular juncture or under a particular situation prevailing in the country any such national policy should have
been adopted or not. There may be views and views, opinions and opinions which may be shared and believed by
citizens of the country including the representatives of the people in Parliament. But that has to be sorted out in
Parliament which has to approve such policies.'
104. Therefore, once the legislative intent and policy is clearly discernable from various enactment treating the
institution of marriage as one between opposite sexes, it would be impermissible for this Hon'ble Court to superimpose
the concept of same sex marriage over the same.
111. The "re-drafting" exercise of Special Marriage Act, 1954 and/or other allied laws cannot be carried out
by the Courts and only parliament can undertake it
A. Legislative intention behind Special Marriage Act and the Parliamentary debates
105. At the outset, it may be noted that if the principle canvassed by the Petitioners, that words "man" or "woman"
or other phrases representing the two opposite sexes, are capable to interpretation in a gender-neutral manner, it
would open up a whole host of statutes and provisions, to constitutional susceptibility.
It is submitted that, if other notions of fluidity of gender are lock stock and barrel imported and held to be part of
Article 21 by judicial adjudication, then the entirety of statutory laws in favour of women [specifically designed to
favour biological women facing disadvantages in society due to prevailing conditions] will become completely
unworkable or prone to massive misuse or abuse.
106. As far as the present case is concerned, the debates in the Parliament, during the framing of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 are illustrative in this regard. The said debates clearly identify
that the entire architecture of the statutes was premised on "opposite sex" marriages and the provisions surrounding
the legal recognition of marriage, the succession amongst children and other aspects, are all completely premised on
the legislative presumption of opposite sex marriage.
The Parliament was aware of 'gays' and 'lesbians' even in 1954. However, it is clear that the Parliament took a
conscious call of not mentioning them.
107. It is interesting to note that Select Committee on the Special Marriage Bill, 1952 approved Section 4 of the
Bill in a form which did not use the words "male" or "female" and rather used the words "parties". The clause is quoted
as under:
"(c) the parties have completed the age of eighteen years;
(d) each party, if he or she has not completed the age of twenty one years, has obtained
the consent of his or her guardian to the marriage"
108. It was after a heated debate going on for days and days, that Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, brought an
amendment that provided for separate age for "boys" and "girls" in the form of 18 years and 21 years.
109. It is submitted that apart from the above, the debates clearly show the limited purpose behind the
enactment, and the clear unequivocal understand of marriage as an institution between opposite sexes. The speech of
the Ld. Minister of Law and Justice at the time, Shri Charu Chandra Biswas, is illustrative in this regard.
110. The relevant portions of the debates are as under:
"Special Marriage Act, 1954 Parliamentary debates
Shri Biswas : Let me now refer specifically to some of the salient features of this Bill. The first is, as I have
already pointed out marriage under this law will not require the parties to forswear their religion or to declare that
they do not belong to any religion. Any two persons residing in India will be eligible to marry under the provisions
of this law. It is permissive, no doubt, but it is compulsory only to this extent that if they marry under this law, the
conditions herein laid down must apply. They must make up their minds as to whether they wish to be subjected to
these conditions. If they do not choose to be subjected to these conditions, it is open to them to discard this, and to
marry according to the law which now governs them. The Act of 1872 applies to two categories of persons, firstly to
persons who do not profess any of the major religions of the country, and secondly to persons who profess the
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religions. The result is that this Act does not permit any inter-religious marriages,
unless the parties are prepared to for- swear their religions. If they are Hindus, then both of them must be Hindus;
if they are Buddhists, both of them must be Buddhists; if they are Sikhs, both of them must be Sikhs, and if they
are Jains, both of them must be Jains, in order that they might marry under the Act of 1872, as it stands now. For
the first time now, we are going to do away with all distinctions based upon religion. The Bill, if passed, will permit
of inter-religious marriages. Religious differences are put out of the way altogether. Government feel that the time
has now come when religious difference should not stand in the way of a couple getting to- gather, if they feel that
their lives are cast together, and the fact of their marriage should not in any way affect their religious beliefs. That
is the main change.
Shri Biswas : Sir, it was provided that if either party to the marriage belonged to one of these religions which are
specified here, well, then the marriage could be solemnized under this Act. The religions which are specified in this
context are : Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina; Christian, Jewish, Mohammedan and Parsi religions are excluded. Shri
R. K. Chaudhuri : If either of the party belongs to Hindu religion, will they be governed by this Act? Supposing a
Muslim wanted to marry to Hindu
Shri Biswas : Under the provisions of the original Act, none of the parties to the marriage could belong to any of
the recognised forms of religion mentioned therein. Now, two persons if they belong to the same religion will be
allowed to marry, but this privilege is confined only to Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains. That is because the main
rights which were secured by this Act were monogamy and divorce. The religions which were excluded already
provided for monogamy and divorce. The Christian marriage is monogamous and divorce is permitted. Muslims also
have the right of divorce, though it is not monogamous.
Shri Punnoose (Alleppey): How do you say that Christians also allow divorce? Christian law does not allow
divorce.
Shri Biswas : Except Roman Catholics. Sin Hari Singh Gour did not include these religions on the ground that
those who professed them al- ready enjoyed the benefits which it was the object of this law to provide for. That is
the explanation. Although among Christians the Roman Catholics have recognised monogamy but not divorce, these
exceptions were not taken into account, but it was on the general ground that the exclusion was made.
16th December 1954
Smt. Rena Chakravarty : Mr. Deputy-Speaker, Sir, I do not propose to answer the various things that have
been said just now because I feel it is very difficult to answer people whose mind still remains in mediaeval times.
It is even more difficult to convince anybody who thinks that he himself has the monopoly of all morality and
everybody else who demands progress, immediately should be dubbed as irreligious. We support this Bill because
the principles underlying this Bill is progress. The entire idea is to have contractual form of marriage without the
necessity of repudiating religion, which was necessary in the Bill of 1872. We also support it because we hope that
this is the first step towards the codification of the law.
19th May 1954
Shri Biswas Sin this idea of one territorial law of marriage for the whole of the country is not a new one. It
originated-many of us will be surprised to here-^so far back as 1868. It was the great Keshab Chandra Sen and
leaders like him who felt such a law was necessary. And Keshab Sen took the initiative in this matter. In 1868, he
put himself in touch with the then Viceroy and Governor-General went up to Simla, had discussion with him and
induced the Government to accept the principles of such a general legislation for the entire country. That led
afterwards to the passing of what is known as the Special Marriage Act, Act III of 1872. It would be a mistake to
suppose that that Act was passed only for the benefit of the Brahmo Samaj. No doubt, the Brahmo Samaj,
community was principally concerned in this law, and, it has been taken advantage of by members of that
community. In order to be able to understand the provisions which were embodied in the original Act of 1872, it is
just as well that I referred to a few facts. As you all know, the Adi Brahmo Samaj was the original sect of Brahmos
that was founded by Raja Ram Mohan Roy. Then, about fifty years later, came into existence the progressive sect of
Brahmos led by Keshab Chander Sen. Now, the marriage law of both the Adi Brahmo Samaj and the progressive
sect was essentially the Hindu law of marriage, but there was a difference in the ceremony of marriage. The Adi
Samaj retained portions of the orthodox ceremony, but the progressives omitted it altogether and substituted for it
a special form which they devised, consisting principally of an exchange of mutual promises, accompanied by
certain prayers. The question arose how far this new form of marriage was valid in law. The authority of custom
could not be invoked in its favour, because this was of recent origin. Although the word 'custom' does not and may
not bear the same meaning as in English law- ^for instance, in England, a custom, in order to fulfil the condition
of antiquity, must be traceable to the reign of Richard ^here, in India, | need not go so far back for the validity
of custom, and usage for a sufficiently long duration probably be regarded quite as good as a custom of long
standing. As I said, doubts were entertained in many quarters in those days regarding the validity of the form of
marriage which the progressive Brahmos adopted, and they themselves referred the matter to the Advocate-
General, Mr. Cowie, for legal opinion. I have not that opinion before me, but the opinion was against the validity of
such marriages. Thereupon, the question arose as to what was to be done. In 1868, as I said, Keshab Chander Sen
had already conceived the idea, along with some of the leading members of the community in those days, of a
general territorial law of marriage. The opinion, which was given by the Advocate-General, gave further momentum
to that movement and it then became absolutely essential for the progressive Brahmos to have a legislation which
would render marriages celebrated in
accordance with their new form valid. They petitioned the legislature for a special Act, and the result was Act III
of 1872.
Shri Biswas : The Adi Brahmos refused to believe and let it be believed that they were not Hindus, although
they had departed from the orthodox form of marriage in respect of certain matters; in essentials, they accepted it.
I
need not go into the details of the vedic forms and so on and so forth. The Adi Brahmos claimed to be Hindus
whereas the progressive Brahmos did not share that view. Therefore, the Special Marriage Act enacted a special
form of marriage
Shri Biswas I was just going to read from the Act of 1872. It says: "Marriages may be celebrated under this
Act between persons neither of whom, professes, the Christian, or the Jewish, or the Hindu, or the Mohammedan, or
the Parsi, or the Buddhist or the Sikh or the Jaina religion." Then you were required to sign a declaration in the
prescribed form stating that you did not belong to these religions. The result was that in a large number of cases,
although the parties claimed to be not Hindus on signing such a declaration to get married under this law-well,
this was hardly the right thing to do; at any rate that was the opinion held by many people-when the question of
succession arose, these parties who had married under this Act were not then prepared to say that they were not
Hindus, because they wanted to have the benefits of the Hindu law for the purposes of succession.
Shri Gidwani (Thana) : Only for marriage they said they were not Hindus.
Shri Biswas Only for the purposes of marriage under this Act they gave the declaration that they were not
Hindus.
An Hon. Member Very wise people.
Shri Biswas : Wise or unwise I do not know, but this question arose in many cases and the Privy Council had to
give its decision. The Privy Council said that mere departure from orthodox forms would not make a Hindu cease to
be a Hindu. Then, there were cases in where it was held that the declaration required by the Act of 1872 was only
for the purposes of marriage and would not affect the question of their being Hindus or non-Hindus for other
purposes. So, the position was rectified in such cases* But, instead of depending upon the judgments of courts
which might on this last point I do not think there is a Privy Council decision-differ from one another, and the
judgment of one court might not be accepted by another; instead of relying on such uncertain factors, many leaders
thought that the best course would be to amend the legislation, and the honour of initiating such legislation fell to
the late Sir Hari Singh Gour. He said:" what is this; for one purpose you say, | am not a Hindu, and for another
purpose you claim to be a Hindu. It does not help anybody to encourage such practices. It is better that the
Legislature should intervene, amend the Act and provide for marriages under that Act even between persons who
would not be prepared to forswear their religion". Then, this amendment was introduced."
ON HOMOSEXUALITY
6th September, 1954
Shri Raghavaehari (Penukonda) : I do not wish to take up much time. From the arguments that have been
advanced for straying away from a thing that has been recommended by the other House. I am not satisfied' that
there has been a fair or a clear approach to the matter but only there is an attempt to confuse the issues. One thing
that I find is that this Act was meant to afford an opportunity for advanced people, people with reformed ideas and
people who are economically independent and have their own judgement-mature judgement- about their course
of action for the future. It is only for such people that this Special Marriage Act was intended. In the course of their
arguments, Members have been urging that the marriage age in the country should not be high, that this is too old
an age, and that therefore more people cannot come under this Act, etc. It was also stated that this was only
a
permissive legislation for people who want to take advantage of it If they are in a position to understand what they
are about. You will see that the whole thing is made topsy turvy. The idea was that the people who have attained a
certain age when they can make up their minds, nobody should interfere with their judgment. Now, you want to
reduce the age and put in a guardian. Why this spoke in the wheel? You know that this is a permissive legislation;
that marriage can be permitted between a person of one sex with any other person who is of the other sex.
irrespective of caste, community, religion-anything. Then, you want to introduce the element of the guardian's
consent. Do you expect that the guardians are more advanced than the present generation which wants to marry
without the guardian's consent? | am afraid this guardian's consent for marriage between people, which you are
introducing, is going to be the cause of all tht ineffectiveness of this legislation
16th September 1954,
Dr. Jaisoorya I beg to move : In page 9, line 43, after "sodomy" insert "with her, homosexuality"
17th September, 1951
M.A. Ayyangar- Notwithstanding the fact that pro-hibited degrees have been brought down, 1 do not know
whether the next generation may not say that a brother can marry a sister. According to Mandal's law the
idiosyncrasies of parents among animals will persist or generations. My friend Dr. Jaisoorya will support me in this.
Is this law to be ignored in the case of man? A man must marry only a woman; he cannot marry a man. Is this all
that counts?
16TH December 1954
See S. No 5, statement by Pandit KC Khanna
On marriage between opposite sexes
20.05.1954
Mr. Achutan XXX
I
agree with that viewpoint. The girl and the boy must have sufficient maturity, sufficient age growth to
understand the consequences by which they will be tied when they marry under this special law. So there is no
necessity, no special ground, no coherent ground for saying that it must be reduced to 18. Moreover, according to
me, why marriage means early responsibilities. There might be a sexual feeling, passions will be there and all that.
We must try to restrain them. According to me, youngsters cannot think of marriage before 25 or 22. I t is not a
simple matter. | is a serious thing so that the age-
limit must be at least 21. There cannot be any reduction either in the case of the boy or in the case of the
girl.
21.05.19
Mr. Deputy-Speaker : It is to them to marry under the old form of marriage. Shri R.K. Chaudhari : Expensive.
Does not believe in sacrament. This is the order of the day. No belief in sacramental marriage. Here is a temptation.
I am accusing him of throwing this kind of temptation before our Hindu boys and girls. Then it goes still further. If
you Mr, A want to marry Miss B. have your choice. Come and have this form of marriage; You need not have the
consent of your parents about this marriage. Come straightway.
Shri Gadgil : Whatever it is, the fact that she has been given a vote has added to her self-consciousness. She
has become confident and believe me when I say that no woman will take things lying down if man misbehaves.
Therefore, it is to the greater advantage of the society, if along with political equality we add social and economic
equalities as well, so that there will be greater initiative in our women to add to the glory and I should say, dignity
of our country. So, there must be as wide a field for boys and girls to choose their partners. What is the good now of
contending that the girl should marry within the caste, this, that and the other. These restrictions ought to go and
they are going. But if they go in the way in which things are developing, it will not be good. As I said the other day,
it is the responsibility of those who are leaders of social thought and conduct that they should direct social affairs in
such a manner that what follows will be consistent with what we desire and we do not meet with a situation in
which we are completely unprepared. I am, therefore, of the view that the girl should be free to marry whomsoever
she chooses after the attainment of the age of 18. In this particular Bill, the age has been raised to 21. At the age
of 18, if a boy or girl belonging to different communities develops a sort of love with one another, they can live
together; nobody can prosecute them because both of them are majors. (An Hon. Member : Calf love). If the boy
goes away with the girl, it is not abduction because the consent of the girl is there; it cannot be kidnapping because
neither party is a minor. Look at the perversity of the amendment effected by the other House. If they live and do
not marry, nothing happens but if they honestly come forward and get married, the law will say *No, you must
attain the age of 21* Just consider this aspect.
06.09.1954
Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan (Dindigul) : I rise to support the amendment (No, 227) moved by Pandit
Thakur Das Bhargava which provides that "the man has completed the age of twenty-one years and the women the
age of eighteen years".
07.09.1954
Shrimati Da Palchondhury : I shall be still briefer than the one who have gone before me. I fully support the
amendment of Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava because it is quite right that girls of 18 and boys of 21 should be
allowed to marry."
Pandit K.C. Sharma I am rather surprised at the arguments of my friends both supporting this Bill as well AS
opposing it. It is a simple measure. In this country in the Hindu, Christian, and Mohammedan religions, marriage is
predominantly governed by personal law and there are rules of conduct for the husband and wife in all these
religions. Then cases had happened when marriages were to be performed and the people did not belong to these
religions. So in 1872 a law was passed-the Special Marriage Act-under which certain people who did not belong to
certain religions could perform their marriages, and the basis of the marriage was contractual, i.e. as human beings,
the young man taking the young woman as wife and the young woman taking the young man as husband. When
they took each other as husband and wife, it did not follow that they said goodbye, as Mr. Nandla Sharma said, to
everything decent in human life. That is not the question. The words 'husband' and 'wife' are significant words.
They carry certain implications, a certain significance, a certain meaning behind them, and the young man and the
young girl who took each other as husband and wife undertook to observe the law of decency and good conduct in
society. It cannot be said that because they married beyond the Hindu, Muslim, Christian or any other religion,
therefore, they said goodbye to everything that was good in those religions. That is not the point. For my friend's in
formation, I may say that even in the rigveda it is said : Ye, the young girl, go to the youngest man. Be thou
mother of heroio children for the good of society." The 'the good of the society* means the good of the race.
Therefore, the emphasis is not on the performance of yagna as such, the emphasis is on loping the thread of the
race alive. What is important is the progeny, therefore, the emphasis lies with regard to the race, not with regard to
religion The contractual form, I may again mention, is not doing away with everything ethical or decent in Jife.
The simple difference was that the sacramental forms were done away with, that a Hindu was not required to go 7
times round the sacred fire. But it does not follow that because he has not gone round the sacred fire seven times,
therefore everything that was said before the sacred fire was not in the mind of the girl or the boy. They say 'we
observe the rule of piety' In the form in which it is presented, this Bill takes away this declaration that they
belong to the same religion-Hindu, Jain, Buddhist or Sikh religion. Under the proposed Bill, any Indian citizen can
marry another Indian citizen, of course of the other sex.
111. The debates of the Hindu Marriage Act, are also relevant as they discuss the purpose behind the enactment
and further discuss some views on homosexuality. The relevant portions are as under:
"Hindu Marriage Act, 1956
20th DECEMBER, 1952
Principal Devaprasad Ghosh-One other point I shall make before I resume my. seat, very briefly, and it is this,
the institution of marriage has been devised by human society from time immemorial mainly for the purpose of
social health and morality and the upkeep and the improvement of the future of the children. Our hon. Law Minister
knows as well as any Member in this House that the condition of Western society, on the model of which we are
trying to shape some portions of Indian society at least has on account of divorce become perilous in the extreme.
SHRI B.K. P. SINHA : Then he spoke of the future of children. The main purpose of marriage is the upbringing of
children.
11th March 1954
PROF. N.R. MALKANI : We want our women not only to be wives but also to be
help-meets to earn for the family while formerly they were merely wives for our homes. {Interruption.) Now we
want our wives to earn as the men do. So, Sir, so far as monogamy is concerned, it is a fact. Well, we want to put
it into law. Always first comes opinion and then follows law. The opinion is there; the fact is there; and the law
must follow. Already there is monogamy. It is there established by fact. We only want to take away from the man,
that old brute, the power of threat to marry a second wife. We want to take from, him the threat of saying "Do this
or Otherwise monogamy is a settled fact which nothing is going to unsettle. There is another serious objection. It
is said: "Marriage is a sacrament, it is a great sacrament according to Shastras." What is a sacrament? Will you
kindly tell me why it is a sacrament? I begin to analyse it. | also am married; everyone of us is probably married;
when I think of the sacredness of marriage all elements of sacredness slowly slip away from me. When I married, I
did not know my wife; | had never seen her before. We were simply married blind, and there were a lot of people
making a hell of noise and feasting merrily. Now what was the sacramental character about it? Yes, this was a
sacrament that we founded and established a family for upbringing children. Without that life would be imperfect,
not full. We founded a family,
which was a great thing for family is the very beginning of society, of civilisation. But the family then and the
family today are different. We all the time forget that the family 4,000 years ago is not the family of today. The
family then was the club; the family was then the State; the family then was the school; it was also the temple.
What was it not? And especially the joint family. It was everything. And today what is it? It is a place for my
children. Without them family would be nothing. A club or hotel would be better. And then, when the world is too
much with us, when the world is too harsh and hostile to us, we go to the family and feel secure there. Good or bad,
your wife is with you; good or bad, your children are with you. You may be a thorough scoundrel, but your wife will
tell you "Oh, you are a very fine husband; that other fellow is a rascal; that fellow is a vagabond; every body knows
that that fellow is the greatest vagabond." So, Sir, to a man coming home thoroughly discontented, thoroughly
discredited, thoroughly dis-reputed, the wife says "You are a fine man". So the family has become a refuge from the
outer and distrustful society. But, Sir, what is sacredness of a wife within the family? It is the mother not the wife
that makes the family holy. We have made the name of mother holy; we have made even the name of the father
next to the mother holy. The family is holy because of the mother, because of the father, because of the sister and
because of the brother. And the very word 'maa' in various shades and various sounds, the very word 'Bahaen' is so
sweet, is. so sacred. That is sacrament, not the wife, not the pati and putni. That is a common place thing. But,
mother and father or brother and sister are really spiritual terms. And the family is to be maintained for them. That
is sacramental, not the wife, not the husband.
Pandit S. Dube : This is a question which is not only irrelevant but also improper. The practice of a man does
not take away from the validity of the principle he believes in. Because | am a bad Hindu, does it mean that
Hinduism is bad? Because a Christian is bad, does it mean that Christianity is wrong? Does it mean that because
there is a bad Muslim, the principles of Koran are wrong. Certainly not. Only the practice of those principles is
wrong. You don't believe in these Sanskars. Then, why do you want that I should be converted to your view? This
principle of sacredness, this principle of Sanskar, applies to the marriage ceremony also. The girl, at the time of her
marriage, goes through a Sanskar. After marriage, the husband and wife enter upon a life of union of the spirits.
What is the marriage therefor? So far as our Shastras are concerned, it is "sp3rpf faq^fatJTif" (SIC) for the purpose
of getting issues, for the purpose of begetting
sons. It is for this that the marriage is there. Now, you want contraceptives. You want to enjoy sexual pleasure
without any restraint. You want that you should be able to indulge in your personal pleasures. Sir, for us, for those
who believe in this vital principle of our religion, marriage is a Sanskar; it is a sacrament. The marriage tie is sacred
and inviolable. They take the oath that they would live together their lives and be constant as the Pole Star, which
never moves from place to place. It is this complete union of the spirits that prevents any possible escape into
divorce or separation from one another. It is the idea that you are made for one another that makes the marriage
inviolable. It is this idea which enables you to carry on as husband and wife without any fight or disagreement.
15th March, 1954
SHRI H. D. RAJAH : You will have to see; it cannot he that in two minutes new things could be developed and
sprung. Therefore, on the basis of Queen Victoria's Proclamation, namely, that there will be no interference with any
religious sects, the Britishers were running the administration of this country. Meanwhile finding that there were
difficulties with regard to Hindu marriage and divorce and other codes governing the Hindus as such, one civilian
under the British decided to codify the laws pertaining to the Hindus, and that started the whole trouble in this
country. Now, Sir, in between, various important changes have taken place. The ruling British have left India. We
have got into power and our people have produced a Constitution which is today governing our country and our
future. Now, Sir, I am not a purist or a pedantic old type of man who wants to perpetuate everything holy whether
it is good or bad. Change is essential and we have to change. I believe the relationship between the man and the
woman is based upon pure sublime love and love originates and love binds the people, the two human beings, one
man and the other woman. Beyond that | have no distinction, neither of caste non of community non of religion non
anything; but now what is sought to be done by this Bill is to affect a particular class of people in this country
called Hindus and I challenge the Minister for Law to produce evidence to show who is a Hindu. I want him to go
into the origin of Hinduism and let us know as to who is a Hindu. Sir, with all humility, if I say that, I am not a
Hindu and I am prepared to prove to this House that none of the old stupid precepts of Hinduism are governing my
conduct and my life. (Interruption.) What will be the position?
Shri M. A. Ayyangar : XXXX Each country is proud of its own achievement and culture. This is the unfortunate
country where everything is wrong from start to finish, and we say that our ancestors have been wrong in having
produced us! I want to appeal to the hon. Members of this House, and particularly, to the lady Members to realise
this, namely, that marriage is not a unilateral affair. I also find one lacuna here. It can say that marriage must be
between two Hindus of opposite sexes. It must be there. Of course, nowadays we do not hear of such nasty,
unnatural offences-incests and so on. Nothing of the kind. Let us realise that we have got a message to give to the
rest of the world. We are one of the most ancient civilizations in the world. Let us realise this. XXXX
Shri Tek Chand What is the objective of marriage? That seems to have been lost sight of My colleague Dr.
Jaisoorya asked "what right have we to legislate
for the youth? thinking that this Bill is intended for the youth only. So far as I can see, procreation no doubt is
the major function of marriage. But apart from procreation there also the consideration of social companionship.
There is also the question of
continence. There is also the problem of regulating, in a respectable manner, the ungovernable impulses with
which the human flesh has been endowed. Marriage is there also because marital association in the post-procreative
age becomes absolutely imperative, more so then than in the earlier exuberance of youth. Nurturing of children,
their bringing up is another consideration which makes it imperative that marriage as an institution, so far as is
humanly possible, should be made indissoluble. Therefore I was hearing spell-bound when Shri M. A, Ayyangar
expressed his views on the matter, with which I find myself in complete agreement. Experimentation in marriage is
a very dangerous thing. Social legislation is a controversial matter. I can understand and I can be in sympathy with
those who believe in pruning here and there. But rooting it out stalk and stem, I am opposed to that. With all the
vehemence at my command, | must raise my feeble voice on behalf of sanity, on behalf of decency, on behalf of
cleanliness, and I concede that if there are plague spots in the society, remove them by all means. (An hon.
Member How?)
I am about to suggest it. But removing the whole institution of marriage, making it dissoluble virtually at the
whim and caprice of the people who cannot stand the rigours of continence, to that I am opposed.
11th DECEMBER 1954
Mr. Jhaikmajm : You should not generalise.
Shri H.D. Rajah : I should not generalise? Should I take particular instances? Sir, in India the particular issue
with regard to this marriage is fundamentally different. How many of our Legislators, I ask today, will allow their
women or their children-either boys or girls-to start that kind of wooing and then give them in marriage? It is
considered to be the sacred responsibility of the parents, when a boy or a girl comes of mature age, to select a
decent bride or a bridegroom and get that marriage consummated according to his own concept, his cultural
affinity. his blood which is thick with tradition as to how to conduct the marriage. XXX
14th DECEMBER 1954
Diwan Chaman Lall : No, they will prefer yours.
Shri H.N. Kunzru : But as he has moved no amendment, I am having a ray of hope that these amendments of
mine, or some one of them might be accepted by the Government.
SHRI K. B. LALL : Sir, there is an amendment in my name also. I should like to speak.
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Yes, after Mr. Mahanty. Please be brief, Mr. Mahanty.
SHRI S. MAHANTY : Yes, Sir, I shall be brief. I speak in support of amendment No. 135, which is a very
innocuous one, namely; That at page 8, for lines 12 to 14, the following be substituted, namely: - "and by either
spouse on the ground that the husband or wife, as the case may be, has, since the solemnization of the marriage,
been guilty of rape, homosexuality or bestiality." It will be apparent from the wording of this amendment, Sir, that
it only seeks to substitute one very obnoxious, though Biblical word sodomy-by the word "homosexuality". I can
well anticipate the objection that the hon. Minister in charge of the Bill would bring forward against this
amendment. He may point out that the term "sodomy" is one which has received wide recognition in the Indian
Penal Code and, therefore, we cannot substitute that word by another, namely, "homosexuality" however more
scientific and appropriate that term may be. But I would submit that it has also to be borne in mind that here we
are not going to
make "sodomy" a penal offence. Therefore, it has got no relation whatsoever to the Indian Penal Code here. We
are here discussing this question in isolation. So, it has no relation whatsoever to the Indian Penal Code. Therefore,
I hope my esteemed friend, the hon. Law Minister, will have no such argument to offer while replying. in me second
place, there is no reason to believe that sodomy is only a masculine vice. I have not the time, non is this the
occasion, otherwise I could have quoted chapter and verse to show that homosexuality among women is also to-day
on the increase, that it is on the rising scale. I have got whole literature on this with me.
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : But this will do.
SHRI S. MAHANTY : I am trying to convince them.
DR. SHRIMATI SEETA PARMANAND : Pertaining to which country?
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : You only want substitution of the word by another.
SHRI S. MAHANTY : Yes, Sir.
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : That is all right. You have already said that the word "sodomy" should be substituted
by another. You need not consider the extent of sodomy.
SHRI S. MAHANTY Yes, Sir. I submit instead of using the term "sodomy" you should use the better and more
appropriate and scientific term "homosexuality."
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Yes, I think that will do.
SHRI S. MAHANTY : But before I resume my seat, Sir, I wish to urge this House not to take a philistine
attitude. I would request the hon. Minister not to take any such prudish attitude regarding this matter. We are not
moving this amendment In a sense of levity.
On the contrary, if you want to contribute to the solidarity of marital life, if you want to contribute to a healthy
married life, and if you consider that sodomy is one of the reasons which can render married life unhappy, then
there is every reason why you should also include the feminine vice of lesbianism and substitute the word
"homosexuality" for the word "sodomy". That is my submission, Sir.
SHRI D.P. KARMARKAR : For the time being let us be content with the use of the word "sodomy", if
homosexuality becomes a problem, then we shall consider it.
DR. R.P. DUBE : Sir, I wish to correct the hon. Minister. "Homosexuality" is different from "sodomy". The one is
done by a man; the other 'is done by a woman.
SHRI D.P. KARMARKAR : As I said, for the time being let us be content with the use of the word "sodomy". If
homosexuality becomes a problem, we shall face it courageously"
112. It is submitted that therefore, it is clear that the entire scheme of the "Hindu Code" or the Special Marriage
Act, 194 and the acts connected thereto or naturally affected by the marriage itself as an institution, will be affected
by any purported gender-neutral construction of the Special Marriage Act, 1954. It is submitted that this furthers the
assertions that there are cascading effects of the prayers sought by the Petitioners, which can not necessarily be even
gauged by the Court or the Petitioner. Further, this implies that laws pertaining to marriage are a larger whole and the
entire architecture is based on the legislative presumption of opposite sex marriage. To change the same by way of
judicial declaration, would not just cause violence to the provisions, it would render absurd result incapable of
implementation. Therefore, if at all, the issue is to be considered, the appropriate forum is the Legislature.
113. Further the assertion of the Petitioners that the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is itself a "reformative" enactment
is wholly erroneous. It is submitted that it was enacted merely for the purpose of giving recognition to marriage
outside the scope of religious laws which was previously unavailable. As per the Special Marriage Act, 1872, a person
had to give up his religion altogether to marry under the said Act. The new enactment of 1954 allowed a person to
retain his personal religious identity whilst still maintaining the ouster in Section 19 and 20 of the enactment for the
purposes of succession under religious laws.
B. / impact on the Indian Succession Act
114. In this regard, it may further specifically be noted that apart the impact on personal laws, considering the fact
that succession in case of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, is being governed by the Indian Succession Act [except in
cases covered under Section 21-A of Special Marriage Act, various provisions of the Indian Succession Act would also
become wholly unworkable. Some of the provisions can be noted as under:
Section 15. Domicile acquired by woman on marriage.-
By marriage a woman acquires the domicile of her husband, if she had not the same domicile before.
Section 16. Wife's domicile during marriage.-
A wife's domicile during her marriage follows the domicile of her husband. Exception.-The wife's domcile no longer
follows that of her husband if they are separated by the sentence of a competent Court, or if the husband is
undergoing a sentence of transportation
Section 32. Devolution of such property.-
The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, or upon those who are of the kindred of the
deceased, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained in this Chapter.
Section 33. Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and kindred only, or widow and no
kindred.-
Where the intestate has left a widow-
(a) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one-third of his property shall belong to his widow, and the remaining
two-thirds shall go to his lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(b) save as provided by Section 33A, if he has left no lineal descendant, but has left persons who are of kindred to
him, one-half of his property shall belong to his widow, and the other half shall go to those who are kindred to
him, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained;
(c) if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his property shall belong to his widow.
Section 33A. Special provision where intestate has left widow and no lineal descendants.-
(1) Where the intestate has left a widow but no lineal descendants and the nett value of his property does not
exceed five thousand rupees, the whole of his property shall belong to the widow.
(2) Where the nett value of the property exceeds the sum of five thousand rupees, the widow shall be entitled to
five thousand rupees thereof and shall have a charge upon the whole of such property for such sum of five
thousand rupees, with interest thereon from the date of the death of the intestate at 4 per cent. per annum until
payment.
(3) The provision for the widow made by this Section shall be in. addition and without prejudice to her interest and
share in the residue of the estate of such intestate remaining after payment of the said sum of five thousand
rupees with interest as aforesaid, and such residue shall be distributed in accordance with the provisions of
Section 33 as if it were the whole of such intestate's property.
(4) The nett value of the property shall be ascertained by deducting from the gross value thereof all debts, and all
funeral and administration expenses of the intestate, and all other lawful liabilities and charges to which the
property shall be subject.
(5) This Section shall not apply- (a) to the property of- (i) any Indian Christian, (ii) any child or grandchild of any
male person who is or was at the time of his death an Indian Christian, or (iii) any person professing the Hindu,
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion the succession to whose property is, under Section 24 of the Special Marriage
Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), regulated by the provisions of this Act; (b) unless the deceased dies intestate in respect
of all his property.
Section 34 - Where intestate has left no widow, and where he has left no kindred.-
Where the intestate has left no widow, his property shall go to his lineal descendants or to those who are of kindred
to him, not being lineal descendants, according to the rules hereinafter contained; and, if he has left none who are of
kindred to him, it shall go to the Government.
Section 35 - Rights of widower.-
A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in respect of her property, if she dies intestate, as a widow has in
respect of her husband's property, if he dies intestate
Section 41. - Rules of distribution where intestate has left no lineal descendants.-
Where an intestate has left no linal descendants, the rules for the distribution of his property (after deducting the
widow's share, if he has left a widow) shall be those contained in sections 42 to 48.
Section 43 - Where intestate's father dead, but his mother, brothers and sisters living. If the intestate's father
is
dead, but the intestate's mother is living and there are also brothers or sisters of the intestate living, and there is no
child living of any deceased brother or sister, the mother and each living brother or sister shall succeed to the property
in equal shares.
Illustration
A dies intestate, survived by his mother and two brothers of the full blood, John and Henry, and a sister Mary, who
is the daughter of his mother but not of his father. The mother takes one-fourth, each brother takes one-fourth and
Marv. the sister of half blood. takes one-fourth.
Section 44 - Where intestate's father dead and his mother, a brother or sister, and children of any deceased brother
or sister, living.
If the intestate's father is dead but the intestate's mother is living, and if any brother or sister and the child or
children of any brother or sister who may have died in the intestate's lifetime are also living, then the mother and each
living brother or sister, and the living child or children of each deceased brother or sister, shall be entitled to the
property in equal shares, such children (if more than one) taking in equal shares only the shares which their respective
parents would have taken if living at the intestate's death.
Illustration
A, the intestate, leaves his mother, his brothers John and Henry, and also one child of a deceased sister, Mary, and
two children of George, a deceased brother of the half blood who was the son of his father but not of his mother. The
mother takes one-fifth, John and Henry each takes one-fifth, the child of Mary takes one-fifth, and the two children of
George divide the remaining one-fifth equally between them.
Section 45 - Where intestate's father dead and his mother and children of any deceased brother or sisten living.-
If the intestate's father is dead, but the intestate's mother is living, and the brothers and sisters are all dead, but
all or any of them have left children who survived the intestate, the mother and the child or children of each deceased
brother or sister shall be entitled to the property in equal shares, such children (if more than one) taking in equal
shares only the shares which their respective parents would have taken if living at the intestate's death.
Illustration
A, the intestate, leaves no brother or sister but leaves his mother and one child of a deceased sister, Mary, and two
children of a deceased brother, George. The mother takes one-third, the child of Mary takes one-third, and the children
of George divide the remaining one-third equally between them.
Section 46 - Where intestate's father dead, but his mother living and no brother, sister, nephew or niece.-
If the intestate's father is dead, but the intestate's mother is living, and there is neither brother, nor sister, nor
child of any brother or sister of the intestate, the property shall belong to the mother."
115. In all the above examples, which will directly occur if a "gender-neutral" interpretation is accorded to the
Special Marriage Act, 1954, the provisions will become unworkable to such an extent that no amount of judicial
"interpretation" can set it straight.
C. Casus Omissus - addition or omission of words is impermissible - only Legislature has such power
116. In this regard, it may also be noted that it is settled law the Hon'ble Courts ought not to assume any omission
and Howard de Walden (Lord) V. IRC, (1948) 2 All ER 825 (HL) throw considerable light on the same. It is submitted
that Crawford supra states as under:
we cannot aid the legislature's defective phrasing of an Act, we cannot add or mend and, by construction,
make up deficiencies which are left there.
It is contrary to all rules of construction to read words into an Act unless it is absolutely necessary to do so.
Similarly, it is wrong and dangerous to proceed by substituting some other words for words of the statute. Speaking
briefly the court cannot reframe the legislation for the very good reason that it has no power to legislate."
117. It is settled law that a court cannot add or subtract a word. It is submitted that this Hon'ble Court in V.L.S.
"17. Ordinarily, the offence is compounded under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the power
to accord permission is conferred on the court excepting those offences for which the permission is not required.
However, in view of the non obstante clause, the power of composition can be exercised by the court or the
Company Law Board. The legislature has conferred the same power on the Company Law Board which can exercise
its power either before or after the institution of any prosecution whereas the criminal court has no power to accord
permission for composition of an offence before the institution of the proceeding. The legislature in its wisdom has
not put the rider of prior permission of the court before compounding the offence by the Company Law Board and in
case the contention of the appellant is accepted, same would amount to addition of the words "with the prior
permission of the court" in the Act, which is not permissible.
18. As is well settled, while interpreting the provisions of a statute, the court avoids rejection or addition of
words and resorts to that only in exceptional circumstances to achieve the purpose of the Act or give purposeful
meaning. It is also a cardinal rule of interpretation that words, phrases and sentences are to be given their natural,
plain and clear meaning. When the language is clear and unambiguous, it must be interpreted in an ordinary sense
and no addition or alteration of the words or expressions used is permissible. As observed earlier, the aforesaid
enactment was brought in view of the need of leniency in the administration of the Act because a large number of
defaults are of technical nature and many defaults occurred because of the complex nature of the provision.
552 [5 judges], rejected the contention that Part I of the Act was also applicable to arbitrations seated in foreign
countries on the ground that in such a case certain words would have to be added to Section 2(2), which would then
have to provide that 'this Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India and to arbitrations having its place
out of India'. The Constitution Bench prospectively overruled the decision of a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme
apply to international commercial arbitrations held outside India unless the parties, by agreement, express or implied,
exclude all or any of its provisions. The Court held as under:
"65. Mn Sorabjee has also rightly pointed out the observations made by Lord Diplock in Duport Steels Ltd.
[(1980) 1 WLR 142 : (1980) 1 All ER 529 (HL)] In the aforesaid judgment, the House of Lords disapproved the
approach adopted by the Court of Appeal in discerning the intention of the legislature; it is observed that : (WLR p.
157 C-D)
the role of the judiciary is confined to ascertaining from the words that Parliament has approved as
expressing its intention what that intention was, and to giving effect to it. Where the meaning of the statutory
words is plain and unambiguous it is not for the Judges to invent fancied ambiguities as an excuse for failing to give
effect to its plain meaning because they themselves consider that the consequences of doing so would be
inexpedient, or even unjust or immoral. In controversial matters such as are involved in industrial relations there is
room for differences of opinion as to what is expedient, what is just and what is morally justifiable. Under our
Constitution it is Parliament's opinion on these matters that is paramount."
(emphasis supplied)
In the same judgment, it is further observed : (WLR p. 157 F)
But if this be the case it is for Parliament, not for the judiciary, to decide whether any changes should be
made to the law as stated in the Acts
(emphasis supplied)
67. We are unable to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants that the omission of the
word "only" from Section 2(2) indicates that applicability of Part | of the Arbitration Act, 1996 is not limited to the
arbitrations that take place in India. We are also unable to accept that Section 2(2) would make Part | applicable
even to arbitrations which take place outside India. In our opinion, a plain reading of Section 2(2) makes it clear
that Part I is limited in its application to arbitrations which take place in India. We are in agreement with the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the respondents, and the interveners in support of the respondents,
that Parliament by limiting the applicability of Part I to arbitrations which take place in India has expressed a
legislative declaration. It has clearly given recognition to the territorial principle. Necessarily therefore, it has
enacted that Part | of the Arbitration Act, 1996 applies to arbitrations having their place/seat in India.
82. Another strong reason for rejecting the submission made by the learned counsel for the appellants is that if
Part I were to be applicable to arbitrations seated in foreign countries, certain words would have to be added to
Section 2(2). The Section would have to provide that "this part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India
and to arbitrations having its place out of India." Apart from being contrary to the contextual intent and object of
Section 2(2), such an interpretation would amount to a drastic and unwarranted rewriting/alteration of the
language of Section 2(2). As very strongly advocated by Mr Sorabjee, the provisions in the Arbitration Act, 1996
must be construed by their plain language/terms. It is not permissible for the court while construing a provision to
reconstruct the provision. In other words, the court cannot produce a new jacket, whilst ironing out the creases of
the old one. In view of the aforesaid, we are unable to support the conclusions recorded by this Court as noticed
earlier."
119. It is submitted that the Supreme Court in Ram Narain V. State of U.P., AIR 1957 SC 18, refused to read
"residence" within the "town area" as a necessary part of the condition for imposition of a tax. The Hon'ble Court
stated as under:
"To do so will be to read in clause (f) words which do not occur there."
120. It is submitted that in this regard, the observations of Lord Denning may provide some guidance. It is
submitted that Lord Denning, in Seaford Court Estates Ld. V. Asher, [1949] 2 K.B. 481, has held as under:
"The question for decision in this case is whether we are at liberty to extend the ordinary meaning of "burden" so
as
to include a contingent burden of the kind I have described. Now this court has already held that this sub-
section is to be liberally construed so as to give effect to the governing principles embodied in the legislation
(Winchester Court Ld. V. Miller); and I think we should do the same. Whenever a statute comes up for consideration
it must be remembered that it is not within human powers to foresee the manifold sets of facts which may arise,
and, even if it were, it is not possible to provide for them in terms free from all ambiguity. The English language is
not an instrument of mathematical precision. Our literature would be much the poorer if it were. This is where the
draftsmen of Acts of Parliament have often been unfairly criticized. A judge, believing himself to be fettered by the
supposed rule that he must look to the language and nothing else, laments that the draftsmen have not provided
for this or that, or have been guilty of some or other ambiguity. It would certainly save the judges trouble if Acts of
Parliament were drafted with divine prescience and perfect clarity. In the absence of it, when a defect appears a
judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman. He must set to work on the constructive task of
finding the intention of Parliament, and he must do this not only from the language of the statute, but also from a
consideration of the social conditions which gave rise to it, and of the mischief which it was passed to remedy, and
then he must supplement the written word SC as to give "force and life" to the intention of the legislature. That was
clearly laid down by the resolution of the judges in Heydon's case, and it is the safest guide to-day. Good practical
advice on the subject was given about the same time by Plowden in his second volume Eyston V. Studd. Put into
homely metaphor it is this : A judge should ask himself the question : If the makers of the Act had themselves
come across this ruck in the texture of it, how would they have straightened it out? He must then do as they would
have done. A judge must not alter the material of which it is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases.
Approaching this case in that way, I cannot help feeling that the legislature had not specifically in mind a
contingent burden such as we have here. If it had would it not have put it on the same footing as an actual burden?
I
think it would. It would have permitted an increase of rent when the terms were so changed as to put a positive
legal burden on the landlord. If the parties expressly agreed between themselves the amount of the increase on
that account the court would give effect to their agreement. But if, as here, they did not direct their minds to the
point, the court has itself to assess the amount of the increase. It has to say how much the tenant should pay "in
respect of" the transfer of this burden to the landlord. It should do this by asking what a willing tenant would agree
to pay and a willing landlord would agree to accept in respect of it. Just as in the earlier cases the courts were able
to assess the value of the "fair wear and tear" clause, and of a "cooker." so they can assess the value of the hot
water clause and translate it fairly in terms
of rent; and what applies to hot water applies also to the removal of refuse and so forth. I agree that the appeal
should be allowed, and with the order proposed by Asquith L.J."
as under:
"16. In Seaford Court Estates Ltd. V. Asher [(1949) 2 All ER 155 (1949) 2 KB 481] Lord Denning, LJ. (as he
then was) held:
[W]hen a defect appears a judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman. He must set to work
on the constructive task of finding the intention of Parliament,
and
then
he
must
supplement
the
written
word so as to give 'force and life' to the intention of the legislature.
A judge should ask himself the question
how, if the makers of the Act had themselves come across this ruck in the texture of it, they would have
straightened it out? He must then do as they would have done. A judge must not alter the material of which
the Act is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases."
17. This rule of construction is quoted with approval by this Court in M. Pentiah V. Muddala Veeramallappa [AIR
1961 SC 1107 (1961) 2 SCR 295] and also referred to by Beg, C.J. in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board
122. It is submitted that plain and unambiguous construction has to be given without addition and substitution of
the words. It is submitted that when a literal reading produces an intelligible result it is not open to read words or add
words to statute.
D. Different words in different statutes or same statute mean different things
123. Further, as claimed by the Petitioner, if different words in the statues and/or specifically the Special Marriage
Act, 1954, which connote different things, are to be reframed in a "gender neutral" manner, it would amount to
treating two different words being ascribed the same meaning. It is submitted that apart from being against the
statutes, it would be against the basic cannons of human rationale. It is submitted that it is settled law that when the
Legislature uses two different phrases, the meaning it would carry would have to be necessarily different. It is
"7. "Retiring member" different from previously retired member -Clearly, the language of sub-section (7) of
Section 6 above said, is plain and simple. There are two manners of reading the provision. Read positively, it
confers a right on a retiring member to seek re nomination. Read in a negative manner, the provision speaks of a
retiring member not being eligible for re nomination for more than one term. The spell of ineligibility is cast on "re
nomination" of a member who is "retiring". The event determinative of eligibility or ineligibility is "re nomination",
and the person, by reference to whom it is to be read, is "a retiring member". "Retiring member" is to be read in
contradistinction with a member/person retired sometime in the past, and so, would be called a retired or
former member. "Re" means again, and is freely used as a prefix. It gives colour of "again" to the verb with
which it is placed. "Re nomination" is an act or process of being nominated again. Any person who had held office of
member sometime in the past, if being nominated now, cannot be described as being "again nominated". It is only
a member just retiring who can be called "being again nominated" or "re-nominated". No other meaning can be
assigned except by doing violence to the language employed. The legislature does not waste its words. Ordinary,
grammatical and full meaning is to be assigned to the words used while interpreting a provision to honour the rule
- the legislature chooses appropriate words to express what it intends, and therefore, must be attributed with such
intention as is conveyed by the words employed so long as this does not result in absurdity or anomaly or unless
material - intrinsic or external - is available to permit a departure from the rule."
124. It is submitted that this Hon'ble Court in Member, Board of Revenue V. Arthur Paul Benthall, AIR 1956 SC 35,
held as under:
4. "matter" different from "description"- We are unable to accept the contention that the word "matter" in
Section 5 was intended to convey the same meaning as the word "description" in Section 6. In its popular sense,
the expression "distinct matters" would connote something different from distinct "categories". Two transactions
might be of the same description, but all the same, they might be distinct. If A sells Black-acre to X and mortgages
White-acre to Y, the transactions fall under different categories, and they are also distinct matters. But if A
mortgages Black-acre to X and mortgages White-acre to Y, the two transactions fall under the same category, but
they would certainly be distinct matters. If the intention of the legislature was that the expression 'distinct matters'
in Section 5 should be understood not in its popular sense but narrowly as meaning different categories in the
Schedule, nothing would have been easier than to say SO. When two words of different import are used in a statute
in two consecutive provisions, it would be difficult to maintain that they are used in the same sense, and the
conclusion must follow that the expression "distinct matters" in Section 5 and "descriptions" in Section 6 have
different connotations.
So, the above said para said that when two words of different import are used in a statute in two consecutive
provisions, it would be difficult to maintain that they are used in the same sense."
as under:
"7. The Explanation has reference to the point of time at two places : the first one has been stated as "at the end
of the previous year" and the second, which is in issue, is "in the course of such previous year". Counsel for the
revenue has emphasised upon the feature that in the same Explanation reference to time has been expressed
differently and if the legislative intention was not to distinguish and while stating "in the course of such previous
year" it was intended to convey the idea of the last day of the previous year, there would have been no necessity of
expressing the position differently. There is abundant authority to support the stand of the counsel for the revenue
that when the situation has been differently expressed the legislature must be taken to have intended to express a
different intention."
"70. Article 301 is quoted hereunder:
"301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.-Subjec to the other provisions of this Part, trade,
commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free."
"Trade and business" is different from "Trade and Commerce"- In difference, we find that the words used under
this Article are "trade, commerce and intercourse". We find Article 301 is confined to trade and commerce while
Article 298 refers to trade and business and to the making of contracts for any purpose. The use of the words
"business" and "contracts for any purpose" and its title trade, etc." makes the field of Article 298 wider than
Article 301. Significantly, the different use of words in the two Articles is for a purpose; if the field of the two
Articles are to be the same, the same words would have been used. It is true, as submitted, that since "trade" is
used both in Articles 298 and 301, the same meaning should be given. To this extent, we accept it to be so, but
when the two Articles use different words, in a different set of words conversely, the different words used could only
be to convey different meanings. If different meaning is given then the field of the two Articles would be different.
So, when instead of the words "trade and commerce" in Article 301, the words "trade or business" are used it
necessarily has a different and wider connotation than merely "trade and commerce". "Business" may be of varying
activities, may or may not be for profit, but it necessarily includes within its ambit "trade and commerce"; so
sometimes it may be synonymous but its field stretches beyond "trade and commerce"."
127. It is submitted that this Hon'ble Court in Kailash Nath Agarwal V. Pradeshiya Industrial & Investment Corpn.
"8. "Proceedings "is different from "Suit"- Section 3 specifically states that no suit for the recovery of any sum
shall lie in the civil court against any such person to whom a certificate was issuable under Section 3(1). It is
submitted that since a suit was already barred by the U.P. Act, the question of it being further barred under Section
22(1) did not arise. It is also pointed out that in Section 22(1) of SICA, Parliament has drawn a distinction between
the words "proceeding" and "suit". It is pointed out that this Court in its decision in Maharashtra Tubes, Arising out
of SLPs (C) Nos. 21370 and 21371 of 2002] had construed the word "proceeding" to include proceedings under the
State Financial Corporations Act. The Section was subsequently amended by the introduction of the prohibition
relating to the filing of a suit inter alia to enforce a guarantee in respect of loans advanced to a sick industrial
company. It is argued that had Parliament intended to include proceedings like those under the U.P. Act within the
word "suit", it would have used the word "proceeding" and not consciously used the word "suit". The respondents
word "suit" did not cover any proceeding which was not in a court. It is then contended that the proceedings under
the U.P. Act were really in the nature of recovery proceedings under Section 22(1) of the Act. Recovery proceedings
were prohibited only against the industrial company itself and not against the guarantor. It is further submitted
that the High Court had given liberty to the appellants to approach BIFR under Section 22(3) of the Act but the
appellants had not availed of that remedy."
128. It is submitted that this Hon'ble Court in DLF Qutab Enclave Complex Educational Charitable Trust V. State of
"43. "At his own cost" is different from "at its cost"- The High Court in our opinion, committed a manifest error
in holding that despite the fact that the statute uses two different expressions as regards cost to be incurred for
construction of schools, hospitals and community centres etc., the effect thereof would be the same. In case of the
licensee the words used are "at his own cost" whereas in respect of the others, the words used are "at its cost".
When different terminologies are used by the legislature it must be presumed that the same had been done
consciously with a view to convey different meanings. Had the intention of the legislature been, as has been held by
the High Court, that the cost for such a construction has to be borne by the licensee irrespective of the fact as to
whether it undertakes such constructions itself or gets them constructed by its contractors, there was absolutely no
reason as to why clearer terms could not be used by the legislature. The words "at his own cost" refer to the
licensee, whereas in the case of his nominee being either an institution or a person, as the case may be, the words
"at its cost" have been used. The expression "at his own cost" and "at its cost" must be held to have separate and
distinct meaning. They are not meant to aim at the same person."
E. Same words in different statutes or same statute would mean same things
129. At the same time, it would amount to treating the same words, occurring across all statutes in the form of
"man" or "woman" or its cognate "bridegroom" or "bride", to connote different meanings in different places. It is
submitted that the same is contrary to all rules of statutory interpretation and would result in causing havoc to the
settled regime. In K.N. Guruswamy V. State of Mysore, (1955) 1 SCR 305 [J. Vivian Bose - 5 judges], this Hon'ble
Court held as under:
"16. We are unable to agree. The same word appearing in the same Section of the same set of Rules must be
given the same meaning unless there is anything to indicate the contrary. The full content of the "otherwise" is
specified in Rule 1.1. It must be construed in the same sense in Rule 11. 10. But that apart, this would, in our
opinion, run counter to the policy of the Legislature which is that matters of such consequence to the State revenue
cannot be dealt with arbitrarily and in the secrecy of an office. Whatever is done must be done either under the
Rules or under a notification which would receive like publicity and have like force, and of which the people at large
would have like notice. Arbitrary improvisation of an ad hoc procedure to meet the exigencies of a particular case is
ruled out. The grant of the contract to Thimmappa was therefore wrong."
"70. It is also well settled that in the absence of any context indicating a contrary intention, the same meaning
would be attached to the word used in the later as is given to them in the earlier statute. It is trite that the words
or expression used in a statute before and after amendment should be given the same meaning. It is a settled law
that
when the legislature uses the same words in a similar connection, it is to be presumed that in the absence of any
context indicating a contrary intention, the same meaning should attach to the words. (See Lennon V. Gibson &
Howes Ltd. [1919 AC 709 (PC)], AC at p. 711, Craies on Statute Law, 7th Edn., p. 141 and G.P. Singh's Principles of
Statutory Interpretation, 10th Edn., p. 278.)
71. In Venkata Subamma V. Ramayya [(1931-32) 59 IA 112 AIR 1932 PC 92] it is stated that an Act should be
interpreted having regard to its history, and the meaning given to a word cannot be read in a different way than
what was interpreted in the earlier repealed section."
131. In State of A.P. V. Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao, (1964) 3 SCR 297, it was held as under:
"25.
The expression "same transaction" occurring in clauses (a), (c) and (d) of Section 239 as well as that
occurring in Section 235(1) ought to be given the same meaning according to the normal rule of construction of
statutes. Looking at the matter in that way, it is pointless to inquire further whether the provisions of Section 239
are subject to those of Section 236(1). The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 235 are enabling
provisions and quite plainly can have no overriding effect. But it would be open to the court to resort to those
provisions even in the case of a joint trial of several person permissible under Section 239."
132. It is submitted that the duty of Judges is to expound and not to legislate is a fundamental rule. But by no
stretch of imagination, can Courts add something more than what is there in the statute by way of a supposed
intention of the Legislature. It is submitted that caution is all the more necessary in dealing with a Legislation enacted
to give effect to policies that are subject to bitter public and parliamentary controversy, for in controversial matters
there is room for differences of opinion as to what is expedient, what is just and what is morally justifiable; it is
Legislature's opinion in these matters that is paramount. In Union of India V. Elphinstone Spg. and Wvg. Co. Ltd.,
"17.
While examining a particular statute for finding out the legislative intent it is the attitude of Judges in arriving at
a solution by striking a balance between the letter and spirit of the statute without acknowledging that they have in
any way supplemented the statute would be the proper criterion. The duty of Judges is to expound and not to
legislate is a fundamental rule. There is no doubt a marginal area in which the courts mould or creatively interpret
legislation and they are thus finishers, refiners and polishers of legislation which comes to them in a state requiring
varying degrees of further processing. (See : Corocraft Ltd. V. Pan American Airways Inc. [(1968) 3 WLR 714 :
810] But by no stretch of imagination a Judge is entitled to add something more than what is there in the statute
by way of a supposed intention of the legislature. It is, therefore, a cardinal principle of construction of statutes that
the true or legal meaning of an enactment is derived by considering the meaning of the words used in the
enactment in the light of any discernible purpose or object which comprehends the mischief and its remedy to
which the enactment is directed. Applying the aforesaid principle we really fail to understand as to how the learned
Judges of the
Bombay High Court could come to a conclusion that the mismanagement must necessarily mean an element of
fraud or dishonesty. Courts are not entitled to usurp legislative function under the guise of interpretation and they
must avoid the danger of determining the meaning of a provision based on their own preconceived notions of
ideological structure or scheme into which the provision to be interpreted is somehow fitted. Caution is all the more
necessary in dealing with a legislation enacted to give effect to policies that are subject to bitter public and
parliamentary controversy, for in controversial matters there is room for differences of opinion as to what is
expedient, what is just and what is morally justifiable; it is Parliament's opinion in these matters that is paramount.
(See : Duport Steels Ltd. V. Sirs [(1980) 1 All ER 529 : (1980) 1 WLR 142], All ER at p. 541.) When the question
arises as to the meaning of a certain provision in a statute it is not only legitimate but proper to read that provision
in its context. The context means the statute as a whole, the previous state of law, other statutes in pari materia,
the general scope of the statute and the mischief that it was intended to remedy. An Act consists of a long title
which precedes the Preamble and the said long title is a part of the Act itself and is admissible as an aid to its
construction". It has been held in several cases that a long title along with the Preamble or even in its absence is a
good guide regarding the object, scope or purpose of the Act whereas the Preamble being only an abbreviation for
purposes of reference is not a useful aid to construction."
133. It is submitted that the Respondent has prepared a representative list of statutes and provisions which may
require to be perused by this Hon'ble Court, before embarking upon the journey of making any one or more statutes
relating to marriage "gender-neutral". A copy of the illustrative list of statutes and provisions which are gender specific
is annexed herewith as Annexure B.
F. No construction or interpretation can expressly be at odds with purpose and intent of the statute
134. It is submitted that the interpretive powers of the Court are not unbound. They are guided by well-established
principles governing judicial discipline. It is submitted that one such principle is that the Judiciary ought not to give a
construction to any law which is expressly at odds with the purpose and intent of that law. In Union of India V. Deoki
"14. We are at a loss to understand the reasoning of the learned Judges in reading down the provisions in
paragraph 2 in force prior to November 1, 1986 as "more than five years" and as "more than four years" in the
same paragraph for the period subsequent to November 1, 1986. It is not the duty of the court either to enlarge the
scope of the legislation or the intention of the legislature when the language of the provision is plain and
unambiguous. The court cannot rewrite, recast or reframe the legislation for the very good reason that it has no
power to legislate. The power to legislate has not been conferred on the courts. The court cannot add words to a
statute or read words into it which are not there. Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the words used by
the legislature the court could not go to its aid to correct or make up the deficiency. Courts shall decide what the
law is and not what it should be. The court of course adopts
a construction which will carry out the obvious intention of the legislature but could not legislate itself. But to
invoke judicial activism to set at naught legislative judgment is subversive of the constitutional harmony and
488] Mangilal V. Suganchand Rathi [(1964) 5 SCR 239 : AIR 1965 SC 101], Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi V. State of
Bombay [1959 Supp 1 SCR 489 : AIR 1959 SC 459], Hira Devi (Smt) V. District Board, Shahjahanpur [1952 SCR
1
Modifying and altering the scheme and applying it to others who are not otherwise entitled to under the scheme,
will not also come under the principle of affirmative action adopted by courts sometimes in order to avoid
discrimination. If we may say so, what the High Court has done in this case is a clear and naked usurpation of
legislative power."
135. Where the provision of a law is clear and direct, it would not be open for the Court to give that provision
another meaning because in the Court's opinion such meaning would better effectuate the law. In V. Jagannadha Rao
"18. We find that para 5(2) of the Presidential Order speaks of transfer and not of promotion. It would be
hazardous to accept the contention of the appellants that promotion is included in the expression "transfer" and no
assistance can be availed from the distinction made in para 5(1) of the Order. No provision or word in a statute has
to be read in isolation. In fact, the statute has to be read as a whole. A statute is an edict of the legislature. It
cannot be said that without any purpose the distinction was made in para 5(1) between transfer and promotion and
such distinction was not intended to be operative in para 5(2). The intention of the legislature is primarily to be
gathered from the language used, which means that attention should be paid as to what has been said as also to
construction which requires for its support addition or substitution of words or which resorts to rejection of words as
meaningless, has to be avoided. As stated by the Privy Council in Robert Wigram Crawford V. Richard Spooner
[(1846) 6 Moore PCC 4 MIA 179]: "We cannot aid the legislature's defective phrasing of an Act, we cannot add or
mend and, by construction make deficiencies which are left there." The aforesaid decision was referred to by this
253]. It is contrary to all rules of construction to read words into an Act unless it is absolutely necessary to do so.
[See Stock V. Frank Jones (Tipton) Ltd. [(1978) 1 All ER 948 (HL)] Similarly, it is wrong and dangerous to proceed
by substituting some other words for words of the statute. (See Pinner V. Everett [(1969) 3 All ER 257 (HL)].) In
other words, there should be no attempt to substitute or paraphrase of general application. Attention should be
confined to what is necessary for deciding a particular case. Much
trouble is made by substituting other phrases assumed to be equivalent, which then are reasoned from as if they
(1992) 19 ATC 219 : AIR 1992 SC 96] it was observed that the court cannot reframe the legislation for the very
good reason that it has no power to legislate. It is incumbent on the court to avoid the construction if reasonably
permissible on the language which would render a part of the statute devoid of any meaning or application. In the
interpretation of statutes, the courts always presume that the legislature inserted every part thereof for a purpose
and the legislative intention is that every part of the statute should have an effect."
136. It is submitted that the first exercise a court undertakes when interpreting a provision is to apply the plain
meaning rule. Where the plain meaning accorded to each word of the statute produces an intelligible result, nothing
as under:
"12. Three. It is not necessary to discuss the additional assignments of error in respect of cross-examination,
admission of testimony, statements made by the district attorney to the jury claimed to be prejudicial, and
instructions of the court. These matters were properly disposed of by the court below. Non is there merit in the
contention that the language of the penal Section of the Narcotic Act (section 9, 26 USCA  705), any person who
violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this act,' shall be punished, etc., is to be construed as
imposing a single punishment for a violation of the distinct requirements of sections 1 and 2 when accomplished by
one and the same sale. The plain meaning of the provision is that each offense is subject to the penalty prescribed;
and, if that be too harsh, the remedy must be afforded by act of Congress, not by judicial legislation under the
guise of construction. Under the circumstances, so far as disclosed, it is true that the imposition of the full penalty
of fine and imprisonment upon each count seems unduly severe; but there may have been other facts and
circumstances before the trial court properly influencing the extent of the punishment. In any event, the matter
was one for that court, with whose judgment there is no warrant for interference on our part."
"8. There is a further contention that the broad purpose of the act declared in Section 100 (section 3078 1/4 a)
[Sec. 100. That for the purpose of enabling the United States the more successfully to prosecute and carry on the
war in which it is at present engaged, protection is hereby extended to persons in military service of the United
States in order to prevent prejudice or injury to their civil rights during their term of service and to enable them to
devote their entire energy to the military needs of the nation, and to this end the following provisions are made for
the temporary suspension of legal proceedings and transactions which may prejudice the civil rights of persons in
such service during the continuance of the present war.] demands that it be liberally construed to include the
situation presented by this case. Persuasive legislative reasons for distinguishing between the cases explicitly cared
for by sections 302, 205, and the present case suggest themselves. We have no occasion to state them. The judicial
function to be exercised in construing a statute is limited to ascertaining the intention
of the Legislature therein expressed. A casus omissus does not justify judicial legislation."
138. It is submitted that in reading a provision, the Hon'ble court's duty is to find and effectuate the legislative
intent. Where such intent can be clearly made out, the Court would be incorrect to nullify the same by giving the law a
American Supreme Court held as under:
"93. The court then proceeded to consider the second of the above questions, saying: The next question to be
discussed is as to what is the true construction of the statute, assuming that it applies to common carriers by
railroad. What is the meaning of the language as used in the statute, that 'every contract, combination in the form
of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states or with foreign
nations, is hereby declared to be illegal?' Is it confined to a contract or combination which is only in unreasonable
restraint of trade or commerce, or does it include what the language of the act plainly and in terms covers,
contracts of that nature?
It is now with much amplification of argument urged that the statute, in declaring
illegal every combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce, does not
mean what the language used therein plainly imports, but that it only means to declare illegal any such contract
which is in unreasonable restraint of trade, while leaving all others unaffected by the provisions of the act; that the
common-law meaning of the term 'contract in restraint of trade' includes only such contracts as are in unreasonable
restraint of trade; and when that term is used in the Federal statute it is not intended to include all contracts in
restraint of trade, but only those which are in unreasonable restraint thereof.
By the simple use of the term
'contract in restraint of trade, all contracts of that nature, whether valid or otherwise would be included, and not
alone that kind of contract which was invalid and unenforceable as being in unreasonalbe restraint of trade. When,
therefore, the body of an act pronounces as illegal every contract or combination in restraint of trade or commerce
among the several states, etc., the plain and ordinary meaning of such language is not limited to that kind of
contract alone which is in unreasonable restraint of trade, but all contracts are included in such language, and no
exception or limitation can be added without placing in the act that which has been omitted by Congress.
If
only that kind of contract which is in unreasonable restraint of trade be within the meaning of the statute, and
declared therein to be illegal, it is at once apparent that the subject of what is a reasonable rate is attended with
great uncertainty. To say, therefore, that the act excludes agreements which are not in unreasonable restraint
of trade, and which tend simply to keep up reasonable rates for transportation, is substantially to leave the question
of reasonableness to the companies themselves.
But assuming that agreements of this nature are not void at
common law, and that the various cases cited by the learned courts below show it, the answer to the statement of
their validity now is to be found in the terms of the statute under consideration
The arguments which have
been addressed to us against the inclusion of all contracts in restraint of trade, as provided for by the language of
the act, have been based upon the alleged presumption that Congress notwithstanding the language of the act,
could not have intended to embrace all contracts, but only such contracts as were in unreasonable restraint of
trade. Under these circumstances we are, therefore, asked to
hold that the act of Congress excepts contracts which are not in unreasonable restraint of trade, and which only
keep rates up to a reasonable price, notwithstanding the language of the act makes no such exception. In other
words, we are asked to read into the act by way of judicial legislation an exception that is not placed there by the
lawmaking branch of the government, and this is to be done upon the theory that the impolicy of such legislation is
so clear that it cannot be supposed Congress intended the natural import of the language it used. This we cannot
and ought not to do
If the act ought to read, as contended for by defendants, Congress is the body to amend it, and not this court,
by a process of judicial legislation wholly unjustifiable. Large numbers do not agree that the view taken by
defendants is sound or true in substance, and Congress may and very probably did share in that belief in
passing the act. The public policy of the government is to be found in its statutes, and when they have not
directly spoken, then in the decisions of the courts and the constant practice of the government officials; but
when the lawmaking power speaks upon a particular subject, over which it has constitutional power to
legislate, public policy in such a case is what the statute enacts. If the law prohibit any contract or
combination in restraint of trade or commerce, a contract or combination made in violation of such law is void,
whatever may have been theretofore decided by the courts to have been the public policy of the county on
that subject. The conclusion which we have drawn from the examination above made into the question before
us is that the anti-trust act applies to railroads, and that it renders illegal all agreements which are in restraint
of trade on commerce as we have above defined that expression, and the question then arises whether the
agreement before us is of that nature.'
139. It is submitted that the cases where a departure may be made from the plain meaning of a provision are
specific and limited. If an absurdity would result from the plain meaning, the same can be varied. However, the
present case regarding definition of marriage is not one of absurdity but a clear, conscious and deliberate legislative
choice based on societal consensus on the issue. The Court ought to give due respect to the same. In Boddington V.
Wisson, [1951] 1 K.B. 606, the Court Of Appeal in the UK, held as under
"In modern times it has been found convenient, and I do not doubt that it is most useful, to give to ministers the
power, subject to Parliamentary supervision, to legislate by regulation, as it is sometimes called. It is not for this
court to question the wisdom of what Parliament has quite plainly authorized ministers to do. It is one result of that
policy that instruments of this kind, which affect the rights of many citizens, may not have the advantage of
consideration in Parliamentary debate upon their terms; and therefore there may be cases (and this may be one) in
which there is a lacuna in the provisions of the instruments. But it is not, I conceive, the function of this court in
these cases to do the work of Parliament and indulge in what is referred to as "judicial legislation". It was, I think,
Cardozo, C.J, who said that in modern times, when the legislative body is more or less in continuous session and
therefore able quickly to remedy any defects in its enactments, there is less room for such judicial legislation than
in the past. In the case of statutory instruments that is certainly more rather than less true, for the means of
remedying a defect in a statutory instrument is always to hand. I should not like it to be thought that I was
criticizing the draftsman of these
regulations. We are fortunate in that the drafting is carefully and most skilfully done; but that there may be
sometimes a casus omissus is not surprising."
140. In In re DNick Holding plc Eckerle V. Wickeder Westfalenstahl GmbH, [2013] EWHC 68 (Ch), it was held as
under:
"The Act made new provisions that expressly concern and confer rights on holders of beneficial interests. Section
145 of the Act allows for indirect investors to enjoy membership rights where, as in the present case, a company's
articles so provide. It is clear from Section 145(4) that only a registered shareholder can enforce any of those rights
against a company. Only a registered shareholder has the right to transfer shares. It would be anomalous if Section
98 granted holders of beneficial interests in shares a right to issue proceedings against a company where they are
unable to enforce the rights given to them by Section 145 against the company. The exercise which the claimants
require from the court would be "an impermissible form of judicial legislation" : see Enviroco Ltd V. Farstad Supply
A/S [2011] 1 WLR 921, para 49. The claimants' construction, aside from creating considerable uncertainty as to
who has standing to apply under Section 98, would have the wholly undesirable consequence that both the legal
and beneficial owners of a share could theoretically issue separate applications in respect of the same interest. The
claimants' understanding that they always considered themselves to be shareholders in the company has no
bearing on whether they have standing under Section 98(1) : see In re Astec (BSR) plc [1998] 2 BCLC 556, 589."
141. It is submitted that where the Courts must exercise special care is in adding words to the statute which are
not there, especially where such additions were not envisaged by the Legislature. In Inco Europe Ltd V. First Choice
Distribution, [2000] 1 WLR 586, the House of Lords, held as under:
"I freely acknowledge that this interpretation of Section 18(1)(g) involves reading words into the paragraph. It
has long been established that the role of the courts in construing legislation is not confined to resolving
ambiguities in statutory language. The court must be able to correct obvious drafting errors. In suitable cases, in
discharging its interpretative function the court will add words, or omit words or substitute words. Some notable
instances are given in Professor Sir Rupert Cross's admirable opuscule, Statutory Interpretation, 3rd ed (1995), pp
93-105. He comments, at p 103: In omitting or inserting words the judge is not really engaged in a hypothetical
reconstruction of the intentions of the drafter or the legislature, but is simply making as much sense as he can of
the text of the statutory provision read in its appropriate context and within the limits of the judicial role.' This
power is confined to plain cases of drafting mistakes. The courts are ever mindful that their constitutional role in
this field is interpretative. They must abstain from any course which might have the appearance of judicial
legislation. A statute is expressed in language approved and enacted by the legislature. So the courts exercise
considerable caution before adding or omitting or substituting words. Before interpreting a statute in this way the
court must be abundantly sure of three matters : (1) the intended purpose of the statute or provision in question;
(2) that by inadvertence the draftsman and Parliament failed to give effect to that purpose in the provision in
question; and (3) the substance of the provision Parliament would have made, although not necessarily the precise
words Parliament would have used, had the error in the Bill been noticed. The third of these conditions is of crucial
importance. Otherwise any attempt to determine the meaning of the enactment would cross the boundary between
construction and legislation : see Lord Diplock in Jones V. Wrotham Park Settled Estates, [1980] AC 74, 105."
142. It is therefore submitted that therefore the interpretative exercise as suggested by the Petitioners, is wholly
outside the domain of the Court and further amounts to impermissible judicial legislation in guise of judicial review.
IV. OUT OF CONTEXT RELIANCE ON GHAIDAN V. GODIN-MENDOZA
143. Further, apart from the absurdities that the said principle as canvassed by the Petitioner may lead to, it is
necessary to also settle the issue raised through the judgment in Ghaidan V. Godin-Mendoza, [2004] UKHL 30. It is
submitted that the reliance on the said judgment is wholly irrelevant to the present case for the short reasons noted
as under:
a. The system of judicial review in UK and the system of judicial review in India, are starkly different.
b. Prior to the enactment of of Human Right Act, 1998 [hereinafter referred to as "HRA, 1998"], there was no
judicial review of legislation in the UK. Specifically Section 3 of the HRA, 1998, empowers the UK domestic Court
to "re-interpret" or force through treaty obligations under the European Convention, in local statues.
C. In Ghaidan supra, the Court was dealing with an entirely different subject matter of an enactment dealing with
rent and not of creating a social institution in the nature of marriage. It was a question of a singular provision to
be read in consonance with the treaty obligation and not the case wherein an entire architecture of multiple
statues, built around the heterogenous institution of marriage, is sought to be re drafted by the Petitioners, in
the name of judicial review.
A. Difference in powers available to the Court
144. A bare perusal of the HRA, 1998, which for the first time in the UK, provided something akin to judicial review
of legislation, would make it clear that the said legislation and our Constitution, operate very differently in terms of
mode and the results it seeks to achieve. The relevant provisions of the HRA, 1998, are as under:
"Section 1 The Convention Rights.
(1) In this Act "the Convention rights" means the rights and fundamental freedoms set out in-
(a) Articles 2 to 12 and 14 of the Convention,
(b) Articles 1 to 3 of the First Protocol, and
(c) Article 1 of the Thirteenth Protocol], as read with Articles 16 to 18 of the Convention.
(2)
Those Articles are to have effect for the purposes of this Act subject to any designated derogation or reservation
(as to which see sections 14 and 15).
(3) The Articles are set out in Schedule 1.
(4) The Secretary of State may by order make such amendments to this Act as he considers appropriate to reflect
the effect, in relation to the United Kingdom, of a protocol.
(5) In subsection (4) "protocol" means a protocol to the Convention- (a) which the United Kingdom has ratified; or
(b) which the United Kingdom has signed with a view to ratification. (6) No amendment may be made by an
order under subsection (4) so as to come into force before the protocol concerned is in force in relation to the
United Kingdom."
Legislation
Section 3 - Interpretation of legislation.
(1) So far as it is possible to do so, primary legislation and subordinate legislation must be read and given effect in
a way which is compatible with the Convention rights.
(2) This section-
(a) applies to primary legislation and subordinate legislation whenever enacted;
(b) does not affect the validity, continuing operation or enforcement of any incompatible primary legislation; and
(c) does not affect the validity, continuing operation or enforcement of any incompatible subordinate legislation if
(disregarding any possibility of revocation) primary legislation prevents removal of the incompatibility.
Section 4 - Declaration of incompatibility.
(1) Subsection (2) applies in any proceedings in which a court determines whether a provision of primary
legislation is compatible with a Convention right.
(2)
Declaration of "incompatibility" and not "unconstitutionality"- If the court is satisfied that the provision is
incompatible with a Convention right, it may make a declaration of that incompatibility.
(3) Subsection (4) applies in any proceedings in which a court determines whether a provision of subordinate
legislation, made in the exercise of a power conferred by primary legislation, is compatible with a Convention
right.
(4) If the court is satisfied-
(a) that the provision is incompatible with a Convention right, and
(b) that (disregarding any possibility of revocation) the primary legislation concerned prevents removal of the
incompatibility, it may make a declaration of that incompatibility.
(6) A declaration under this Section ("a declaration of incompatibility")-
(a) does not affect the validity, continuing operation or enforcement of the provision in respect of which it is
given; and
(b) is not binding on the parties to the proceedings in which it is made.
145. It is submitted that from the above, it is clean that all that the domestic Courts in UK may do is merely make
a "declaration of incompatibility", which is effectively not even enforceable in light of Section 4(6)(a) which states that
"does not affect the validity, continuing operation or enforcement of the provision in respect of which it is given".
146. Further, the HRA, 1998, specifically provides the expansive power to the domestic courts, in light of the fact
that Courts do not hold power to strike down legislation, under Section 3, to provide for a Convention compliant
interpretation. It is submitted that because the Courts hold only a power to softly nudge the Parliament and nothing
more, the HRA, 1998 designedly provides wider interpretative powers in order to balance the situation. The same is
clearly manifested in the emphatic language of Section 3(1) which states that "So far as it is possible to do so,
primary legislation and subordinate legislation must be read and given effect in a way which is compatible with the
Convention rights."
147. It is submitted that despite the wide powers, the Court in the UK have clarified that the powers are limited
interpreting not legislating. In considering what is 'possible', the Courts have repeatedly stressed the constitutional
importance of maintaining the boundary between 'interpretation, which is a matter for the courts and others who have
to read and give effect to legislation, and amendment, which is a matter for Parliament'
472
148. It is submitted that the judgment in Ghaidan supra itself notes these limits and rules as under:
"Lord Nicholas
33. Parliament, however, cannot have intended that in the discharge of this extended interpretative function the
courts should adopt a meaning inconsistent with a fundamental feature of legislation. That would be to cross the
constitutional boundary Section 3 seeks to demarcate and preserve. Parliament has retained the right to enact
legislation in terms which are not Convention-compliant. The meaning imported by application of Section 3 must be
compatible with the underlying thrust of the legislation being construed. Words implied must, in the phrase of my
noble and learned friend Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, 'go with the grain of the legislation'. Nor can Parliament have
intended that Section 3 should require courts to make decisions for which they are not equipped. There may be
several ways of making a provision Convention-compliant, and the choice may involve issues calling for legislative
deliberation. XXX
Lord Rodger
110. What excludes such provisions from the scope of Section 3(1) is not any mere matter of the linguistic form
in which Parliament has chosen to express the obligation. Rather, they are excluded because the entire substance of
the provision, what it requires the public authority to do, is incompatible with the Convention. The only cure is to
change the provision and that is a matter for Parliament and not for the courts : they, like everyone else, are bound
by the provision. So from Section 6(2)(a) and (b) one can
tell that, however powerful the obligation in Section 3(1), it does not allow the courts to change the substance of
a provision completely, to change a provision from one where Parliament says that X is to happen into one saying
that X is not to happen. And, of course, in considering what constitutes the substance of the provision or provisions
under consideration, it is necessary to have regard to their place in the overall scheme of the legislation as enacted
by Parliament. In International Transport Roth GmbH V. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] QB
728, for instance, the Court of Appeal held that it was impossible for the court to use the interpretative obligation in
Section 3(1) in effect to recreate the fixed penalty scheme enacted by Parliament so as to turn it into a scheme that
was compatible with article 6. As Simon Brown LJ observed, at p 758C - D, it would have involved turning the
scheme inside out - something that the court could not do. Only Parliament, not the courts, could create a wholly
different scheme so as to provide an acceptable alternative means of immigration control.
111. Another illustration of this limitation on the obligation under Section 3(1) is to be found in the decision of
your Lordships' House in R (Anderson) V. Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2003] 1 AC 837. Section 29
of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 provided that, "if recommended to do so by the Parole Board, the Secretary of
State may release on licence" certain life prisoners, viz convicted murderers. The House was satisfied that it was
incompatible with the Convention rights of Mr Anderson, who had been convicted of murder, for the power to
release him to lie with the Home Secretary rather than with a judicial body. Counsel for Anderson submitted
accordingly that, under Section 3(1) of the 1998 Act, Section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act could be read and
given effect in a manner which would be compatible with his Convention rights. In effect, this would have
amounted to reading the Section in such a way as to deprive the Home Secretary of the express power to release
him. The House rejected this submission since it was clear that, under Section 29, the power of release and the
power to determine how long a convicted murderer should remain in prison for punitive purposes were to lie with
the Home Secretary and with no-one else. In these circumstances, in the words of Lord Bingham of Cornhill [2003]
1 AC 837, 883C - D, para 30: "To read Section 29 as precluding participation by the Home Secretary, if it were
possible to do so, would not be judicial interpretation but judicial vandalism : it would give the Section an effect
quite different from that which Parliament intended and would go well beyond any interpretative process sanctioned
by Section 3 of the 1998 Act The "judicial vandalism" would lie not in any linguistic changes, whether great or
small, which the court might make in interpreting Section 29 but in the fact that any reading of Section 29 which
negatived the explicit power of the Secretary of State to decide on the release date for murderers would be as
drastic as changing black into white. It would remove the very core and essence, the "pith and substance" of the
measure that Parliament had enacted - to use the familiar phrase of Lord Watson (in a different context) in Union
Colliery Co of British Columbia Ltd V. Bryden, [1899] AC 580, 587. Section 3(1) gives the courts no power to go
that far. In these circumstances the House made a declaration of incompatibility, which left it to the minister and
ultimately to Parliament to decide whether to remedy the incompatability by amending or repealing Section 29 and,
if so, how.
114. Again, it is important to notice that the problem identified by the House did not derive from any perceived
difficulty in finding language to frame a power to require a report on the progress of the local authority; rather, the
problem was that, however the
courts might frame the power, they would be introducing something which was not to be found in the Children
Act - and, more particularly, something which was actually inconsistent with one of its cardinal principles. If such a
change to the Act was to be made, Parliament would have to make it.
115. In the second passage from his speech in In re S which I have quoted in paragraph 112 above, Lord
Nicholls made the further point that a departure from a fundamental feature of an Act of Parliament may be more
readily treated as crossing the boundary into the realm of amendment where it has important practical
repercussions which the court is not equipped to evaluate. It appears to me that difficult questions may also arise
where, even if the proposed interpretation does not run counter to any underlying principle of the legislation, it
would involve reading into the statute powers or duties with far-reaching practical repercussions of that kind. In
effect these powers or duties, if sufficiently far-reaching, would be beyond the scope of the legislation enacted by
Parliament. If that is right, the answer to such questions cannot be clear-cut and will involve matters of degree
which cannot be determined in the abstract but only by considering the particular legislation in issue. In any given
case, however, there may come a point where, standing back, the only proper conclusion is that the scale of what is
proposed would go beyond any implication that could possibly be derived from reading the existing legislation in a
way that was compatible with the Convention right in question. In that event, the boundary line will have been
crossed and only Parliament can effect the necessary change."
149. It is submitted that the discussion of the boundary between legislation and interpretation has tended to focus
on two factors. First, it will not be 'possible' to construe legislation in a Convention-compliant way if to do so would be
inconsistent with some important feature of the legislation. 473 Secondly, the courts even in UK have shown reluctance
to place creative reliance on Section 3, in cases involving complex questions of social policy which the courts are ill-
equipped to decide and which are therefore best left to Parliament.
150. The earlier authorities, prior to Ghaidan supra and after HRA, 1998, which were summarised by Lord Bingham
in Sheldrake V. DPP; A-G's Reference (No 4 of 2002). 474 it was held that a Convention-compliant interpretation may
not be 'possible' where it:
"[28]
would be incompatible with the underlying thrust of the legislation, or would not go with the grain of
it, or would call for legislative deliberation, or would change the substance of a provision completely, or would
remove its pith and substance, or would violate a cardinal principle of the legislation
Lord Bingham went on to stress that while all these terms provide valuable insights none of them should be
allowed to supplant the test enacted in the Act 'So far as it is possible to do so
151. In this regard, it may significantly be noted that the after the judgment in Ghaidan supra, the House of Lords
has had occasion to opine on the contours of the power under
Section 3 of the HRA, 1998. In R (Wilkinson) V. Inland Revenue Commissioners, [2005] 1 WLR 1681, it was noted
that Section 3 does not give the power to the Court to give "acontextual meanings" to statutes as that "would be
playing games with words". It was held as under:
Construction
14. Before your Lordships, Miss Dinah Rose raised, with leave, an entirely new point on behalf of Mr Wilkinson.
She submitted that it was possible to read Section 262 as including widowers. If it was, that was an end of the
matter. He had a statutory entitlement to an allowance.
15. The foundation for this submission was Section 6 of the Interpretation Act 1978, which provides that "unless
the contrary intention appears words importing the feminine gender include the masculine". Miss Rose accepts that
ICTA is brim-full of indications of contrary intent. The purpose of Section 6 is to save the parliamentary draftsman
from having to say "he or she" or to find awkward gender-neutral terms. But Part VII of ICTA, which deals with
personal reliefs, has no difficulty in finding a gender-neutral term when it wishes to be gender-neutral. It says
"individual" (section 256(1)) or "spouse" (section 259(4), now repealed). And Section 258 (also now repealed)
which gave an allowance for a widower with a housekeeper, provided in subsection (4) that the section?
"shall apply to a claimant being a widow as it applies to a claimant being a widower". There is no similar
extension in Section 262.
16. Thus it is clear that by no process of interpretation, attempting to ascertain what a reasonable reader would
understand the notional author of the text ("Parliament") to have meant by using those words in their context,
could "widow" in Section 262 be read to include "widower". But Miss Rose says that does not matter. Section 3 of
the 1998 Act is a counterweight which neutralises the indications of contrary intent in Section 262 itself and the
context provided by the rest of Part VII of the 1988 Act. Section 6 of the Interpretation Act shows that it is possible
to read Section 262 compatibly with the Convention and therefore one should do SO.
17. I do not believe that Section 3 of the 1998 Act was intended to have the effect of requiring the courts to give
the language of statutes acontextual meanings. That would be playing games with words. The important change in
the process of interpretation which was made by Section 3 was to deem the Convention to form a significant part of
the background against which all statutes, whether passed before or after the 1998 Act came into force, had to be
interpreted. Just as the "principle of legality" meant that statutes were construed against the background of human
rights subsisting at common law (see R V. Home Secretary, Ex p Simms, [2000] 2 AC 115), so now, Section 3
requires them to be construed against the background of Convention rights. There is a strong presumption, arising
from the fundamental nature of Convention rights, that Parliament did not intend a statute to mean something
which would be incompatible with those rights. This of course goes far beyond the old-fashioned notion of using
background to "resolve ambiguities" in a text which had notionally been read without raising one's eyes to look
beyond it. The Convention, like the rest of the admissible background, forms part of the primary materials for the
process of interpretation. But, with the addition of the Convention as background, the question is still one of
interpretation, i.e. the ascertainment of what, taking into account the presumption created by Section 3, Parliament
would reasonably be understood to have meant by using the actual language of the statute.
18. It is therefore sometimes possible, as my noble and learned friend Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead pointed out in
Ghaidan V Godin-Mendoza, [2004] 2 AC 557, paras 26-33, to construe a statutory provision as referring to, or
qualified by, some general concept implied rather than expressly mentioned in the language used by Parliament.
Thus in the Ghaidan case, the words "as his or her wife or husband" (my emphasis) were interpreted to refer to a
relationship of social and sexual intimacy exemplified by, but not limited to, the heterosexual relationship of
husband and wife. The deemed background of the Convention enabled the House to adopt this construction in
preference to the more restricted construction adopted before the 1998 Act came into force. It may have come as a
surprise to the members of the Parliament which in 1988 enacted the statute construed in the Ghaidan case that
the relationship to which they were referring could include homosexual relationships. In that sense the construction
may have been contrary to the "intention of Parliament". But that is not normally what one means by the intention
of Parliament. One means the interpretation which the reasonable reader would give to the statute read against its
background, including, now, an assumption that it was not intended to be incompatible with Convention rights.
19. In the present case, there is no way in which any reasonable reader could understand the word "widow" to
refer to the more general concept of a surviving spouse. The contrary indications in the language of Part VII of the
1988 Act are too strong. In my opinion Miss Rose was right to concede in the lower courts that it was not possible
to read it compatibly with Convention rights."
152. From the above, it is clear that the latitude available under Section 3 of the HRA, 1998 to the Courts in the
UK, is extremely wide and the exercise carried out is quite "unconventional". To import the exercise to Indian
jurisprudence would be alien to the scheme of our Constitution and jurisprudence of our Courts.
B. Indian constitutional scheme in contradistinction to United Kingdom
153. The leading commentary on statutory interpretation in the UK, Bennion On Statutory Interpretation4
in
this
regard, notes as under:
Comment
The interpretative obligation in S 3 requires the courts (and public authorities and others) to interpret and apply
legislation in a way that is compatible with the Convention rights so far as it is possible to do so. In essence, it
creates a strong presumption in favour of an interpretation that is Convention-compliant The validity of primary
legislation that is incompatible with the Convention rights is unaffected. The main area of difficulty lies in
determining the limits to what is 'possible'.
Scope of interpretation obligation
Section 3 has been described as 'a powerful tool whose use is obligatory'; it is expressed in 'forthright,
uncompromising language'476. The latitude given to the court in seeking to achieve compatibility is of an 'unusual
and far-reaching character4 and allows the court considerable flexibility.
But it is important to remember that the interpretative obligation, although powerful, is no more than a rule of
construction4 It is confined to reading and giving effect to legislation and to what is 'possible'. The main difficulty
lies in determining the boundaries of what is 'possible' for those purposes.
The nature of the interpretative exercise
When the duty in S 3 comes into play it is clear that the nature of the interpretative exercise is different from
that traditionally adopted by the courts. The traditional role of the court is to give effect to the intention of
Parliament as expressed in the words used, applying the interpretative criteria discussed elsewhere in the work.
Where the ordinary legal meaning is incompatible with the Convention rights, is 3 requires the court (is possible) to
construe the provisions as having a legal meaning which is compatible with Convention rights479 In
so
doing
the
court is giving effect to Parliament's intention as expressed S 3, rather that the intention of Parliament in enacting
the provisions whose interpretation is in question. Adopting this approach, the court may well arrive at a conclusion
that would come as a surprise to members of the Parliament who enacted the provisions.4
Language used not critical
The House of Lords has held that the mere fact that the language under consideration is inconsistent with a
Convention-compliant meaning does not of itself make a Convention-compliant interpretation impossible. Section
481
482
3 does not 'depend critically upon the particular form of words adopted by the parliamentary draftsman'. Where
the duty to read a provision compatibly with the Convention arises, this may result in a construction that involves 'a
considerable departure from the actual words'. 483
Techniques used
As is apparent from the examples above, a variety of techniques may be used to read a provision compatibly
with the Convention in accordance with the interpretative obligation under S 3. Reference is often made to reading
down', 'reading up' and other similar phrases, but these are no more than a convenient shorthand. The court is not
tied to any particular technique. A strained construction may involve reading words restrictively or expansively or
484
reading words in. As Lord Steyn said in A :
'[44]
In accordance with the will of Parliament as reflected in S 3 it will sometimes be necessary to adopt an
interpretation which linguistically may appear strained. The techniques used will not only involve the reading
down of express language in a statute but also the implication of provisions
The court does not need to formulate the precise adjustments required to the language of the legislation to make
it
Convention compliant; it is the substantive effect that matters. 485 'It may be enough simply to say what the effect of
the provision is without altering the meaning of the words used. ,486 In other cases, it
may
be
convenient
for
the
words
to be set out in order to explain the meaning that the provision is to be given."
154. It is submitted that the power to "interpret" under the Indian Constitution, is clearly in contradistinction with
the HRA, 1998 of the United Kingdom. In this regard, in a scholarly work on the comparative analysis of the
comparative position in the UK and India, titled as "Balanced Constitutionalism : Courts and Legislatures in
India and the United Kingdom*4 it has been noted as under:
"The chapter begins by arguing that courts in India and the UK adopt a similar three-stage approach in reviewing
legislation for compliance with substantive constitutional rights or rights under the Convention. They first examine
whether the legislation is compliant with rights, based on ordinary methods of interpretation. If not then they
determine whether the legislation can be upheld based on special interpretive techniques. In the UK, these
techniques are specifically sanctioned by Section 3 of the HRA, which requires courts to give effect to legislation in
a manner compliant with Convention rights, 'SO far as it is possible' to do so. In India, these special interpretive
techniques have no special textual grounding and have developed through case law. Finally, if legislation cannot be
protected in this way, Indian courts strike it down and courts in the UK may choose to issue a declaration
of
incompatibility under Section 4 of the HRA.
In the context of this three-stage process of review, Indian courts have a smaller range of interpretive tools at
their disposal than courts in the UK to interpret primary legislation in a manner compliant with human rights.
In the UK, after courts decide that primary legislation is prima facie incompatible with Convention rights, they
are tasked with deciding whether it can be read compatibly with Convention rights. Section 3 of the HRA directs
courts to read and give effect to primary and subordinate legislation in a manner that is compatible with Convention
rights, 'so far as it is possible to do so' It applies to existing legislation and legislation passed after the
enforcement of the HRA482 Section 3 enhanced the influence of Convention rights in the process of interpretation-
rather than simply having to take them into account while interpreting ambiguous legislative provisions, courts
would be required to interpret legislation so as to uphold Convention rights unless the legislation was so clearly
incompatible that it would be impossible to do SO. 489
What is discernible from the case law is that courts in the UK remain context sensitive when determining the
extent to which they are willing to mould statutory language and purpose490 This was made clear by
Lord
Hoffman's observation in Wilkinson that Section 3 was not intended to 'have the effect of requiring the courts to
give the language of
statutes acontextual meanings491. Thus, developing a self-standing test independent of context would probably
be a futile exercise. 492
The major distinction between the three-stage analysis conducted in India and the UK is the point at which
courts progress from stage two to stage three. Two factors indicate that stage two is prolonged in the UK, since
courts in the UK HAVE A LARGER INTERPRETIVE TOOLBOX at their disposal than their Indian counterparts. First
unlike British courts, which are quite prepared to adopt the technique of 'reading in' to protect statutory provisions,
Indian courts (which frequently 'read down' legislation) consider 'reading in' as an illegitimate interpretive
technique. In the absence of a Section 3-type mandate, Indian courts remain unwilling to adopt this technique on
account of the fact that, unlike 'reading down', 'reading in' involves extending the application of a statute to areas
beyond parliamentary contemplation. 493,
155. It is submitted that therefore, the interpretative exercise that was adopted in Ghaidan supra, was in a specific
context of the HRA, 1998, sanctioned by the provisions of the HRA, 1998 and further limited to the fact situation
arising in the case of a singular provision concerning rent. The same is made clear from the following observations in
Ghaidan supra:
"Lord Nicholas
16. My difficulty with this submission is that there is no reason for believing these factual differences between
heterosexual and homosexual couples have any bearing on why succession rights have been conferred on
heterosexual couples but not homosexual couples. Protection of the traditional family unit may well be an important
and legitimate aim in certain contexts. In certain contexts this may be a cogent reason justifying differential
treatment : see Karner V. Austria, (2003) 2 FLR 623, 630, para 40. But it is important to identify the element of the
'traditional family' which paragraph 2, as it now stands, is seeking to protect. Marriage is not now a prerequisite to
protection under paragraph 2. The line drawn by Parliament is no longer drawn by reference to the status of
marriage. Non is parenthood, or the presence of children in the home, a precondition of security of tenure for the
survivor of the original tenant Non is procreative potential a prerequisite. The survivor is protected even if, by
reasons of age or otherwise, there was never any prospect of either member of the couple having a natural child.
17. What remains, and it is all that remains, as the essential feature under paragraph 2 is the cohabitation of a
heterosexual couple. Security of tenure for the survivor of such a couple in the house where they live is, doubtless,
an important and legitimate social aim. Such a couple share their lives and make their home together. Parliament
may readily take the view that the survivor of them has a special claim to security of tenure even though they are
unmarried. But the reason underlying this social policy, whereby the survivor of a cohabiting heterosexual couple
has particular protection, is equally applicable to the survivor of a homosexual couple. A homosexual couple, as
much as a heterosexual couple, share each other's life and make their home together. They have an equivalent
relationship. There is no rational or fair ground for
distinguishing the one couple from the other in this context : see the discussion in Fitzpatrick V. Sterling Housing
Association Ltd., [2001] 1 AC 27, 44."
156. It is submitted that therefore, the reliance on Ghandan supra, serves no purpose.
V. Democracy and Separation of powers
157. The appropriate Legislature, being a body directly elected by the people, is democracy itself in function. It is
submitted that to override that function or to bring in something in that process where none was envisaged, would
"26. Professor S.P. Sathe, in his recent work (year 2002) Judicial Activism in India - Transgressing Borders and
Enforcing Limits, touches the topic 'Directions A New Form of Judicial Legislation'. Evaluating legitimacy of judicial
activism, the learned author has cautioned against court 'legislating' exactly in the way in which a legislature
legislates and he observes by reference to a few cases that the guidelines laid down by court, at times, cross the
border of judicial law-making in the realist sense and trench upon legislating like a legislature.
'Directions are either issued to fill in the gaps in the legislation or to provide for matters that have not been
provided by any legislation. The court has taken over the legislative function not in the traditional interstitial sense
but in an overt manner and has justified it as being an essential component of its role as a constitutional court' (p.
242) 'In a strict sense these are instances of judicial excessivism that fly in the face of the doctrine of separation of
powers. The doctrine of separation of powers envisages that the legislature should make law, the executive should
execute it, and the judiciary should settle disputes in accordance with the existing law. In reality such watertight
separation exists nowhere and is impracticable. Broadly, it means that one organ of the State should not perform a
function that essentially belongs to another organ. While law-making through interpretation and expansion of the
meanings of open-textured expressions such as "due process of law", "equal protection of law", or "freedom of
speech and expression" is a legitimate judicial function, the making of an entirely new law through directions
is not a legitimate judicial function." (p. 250)"
158. The American Supreme Court has often further declined to enter in to policy questions 'firmly imbedded in the
legislative and judicial tissues of the body politic'. The US Supreme Court has developed what it calls the 'political
question' doctrine. The US Supreme Court views the non-justiciability of a political question as primarily a function of
the separation of powers, the relationship between the judiciary and the coordinate branches of the federal
government. In Baker V. Carr, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962), J. Brennan outlined six criteria for political questions as under:
a. A textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department; or
b. A lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it; or
C. The impossibility of deciding without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion; or
d. The impossibility of a court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the respect due
coordinate branches of government; or
e. An unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made; or
f.
The potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one question.
159. It is therefore necessary that such issues are left for being decided by the competent Legislature where social,
psychological, religious and other impacts on society can be debated. It would also have to be seen if such recognition
or creation would dimmish the special status enjoyed by heterogenous institution of marriage across the country. This
will ensure that wide ranging ramifications of recognizing such sacred relationships are debated from every angle and
legitimate state interest can be considered by the Legislature.
160. It is submitted that further, considering the seminal nature of the issue, the wide-ranging ramifications and
the distinct possibility of cascading effects that the reliefs sought by the Petitioners may have, it is imperative
appropriate body in the constitutional setup, takes a position on the said issue.
161. It is respectfully submitted that the Constitution does not give power to Courts to direct the framing of a law,
which is settled by a judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Lok Prahari V. Union of India, reported as
" At the outset, we must make it clear that Prayers 1(2) and 3 seek directions to the respondents for
amendment of the provisions of the 1951 RP Act.
64. Amendment of the 1951 RP Act is a matter exclusively within the domain of Parliament. It is well settled
that no court could compel and no writ could be issued to compel any legislative body to make a law. I t
must be left to the wisdom of the legislature. Prayers (2) and 3, insofar as they seek directions in the nature
of mandamus to consider amendment of the 1951 RP Act cannot be granted."
It is submitted that where the Hon'ble Court is directly prohibited from compelling the legislature to make a law,
it
cannot do the same indirectly by so reading the existing law as to negate the very purpose and intent behind it.
162. Furthermore, it is submitted that this Hon'ble Court in Ashwini Kumar V. Union of India, reported as (2020) 13
"13. The most significant impact of the doctrine of separation of powers is seen and felt in terms of the
institutional independence of the judiciary from other organs of the State. Judiciary, in terms of personnel, the
Judges, is independent. Judges unlike members of the legislature represent no one, strictly speaking not even the
citizens. Judges are not accountable and answerable as the political executive is to the legislature and the elected
representatives are to the electorate. This independence ensures that the Judges perform the constitutional function
of safeguarding the supremacy of the Constitution while exercising the power of judicial review in a fair and even-
handed manner without pressure and favours. As an interpreter, guardian and protector of the Constitution, the
judiciary checks and curbs violation of the Constitution by the Government when they overstep their constitutional
limits, violate the basic structure of the Constitution, infringe fundamental rights or act contrary to law. Power of
judicial review has expanded taking within its ambit the concept of social and economic justice. Yet, while
exercising this power of judicial review, the courts do not encroach upon the field marked by the Constitution for
the legislature and the executive, as the courts examine legality and validity of the legislation or the governmental
action, and not the wisdom behind the legislative measure or relative merits or demerits of the governmental
action. Neither does the Constitution permit the courts to direct, advise or sermonise others in the spheres reserved
for them by the Constitution, provided the legislature or the executive do not transgress their constitutional limits
or statutory conditions. Referring to the phrase "all power is of an encroaching nature", which the judiciary checks
while exercising the power of judicial review, it has been observed [Asif Hameed V. State of J&K, 1989 Supp (2)
58)"18. '58. Rigorous observance of the difference between limits of power and wise exercise of power - between
questions of authority and questions of prudence - requires the most alert appreciation of this decisive but subtle
relationship of two concepts that too easily coalesce. No less does it require a disciplined will to adhere to the
difference. It is not easy to stand aloof and allow want of wisdom to prevail to disregard one's own strongly held
view of what is wise in the conduct of affairs. But it is not the business of this Court to pronounce policy. It must
observe a fastidious regard for limitations on its own power, and this precludes the court's giving effect to its own
notions of what is wise or politic. That self-restraint is of the essence in the observance of the judicial oath, for the
Constitution has not authorised the Judges to sit in judgment on the wisdom of what Congress and the executive
encroaching beyond its bounds since the only restraint upon it is the self-imposed discipline of self-restraint.
Independence and adherence to constitutional accountability and limits while exercising the power of judicial review
gives constitutional legitimacy to the court decisions. This is essence of the power and function of judicial review
that strengthens and promotes the rule of law."
1 It is submitted that the Hon'ble Court's own view of what is right and wrong cannot lead to it supplanting the
Legislature and becoming a third chamber of law-making. It is submitted that in case this Hon'ble Court in the case of
"18. There can be no manner of doubt that the parliamentary wisdom of seeking changes in an existing law by
means of an amendment lies within the exclusive domain of the legislature and it is not the province of the Court to
express any opinion on the exercise of the legislative prerogative in this regard. The framing of the Amendment Bill;
reference of the same to the Parliamentary Standing Committee; the consideration thereof by the said Committee;
the report prepared along with further steps that are required to be taken and the time-frame thereof are essential
legislative functions which should not be ordinarily subjected to interference or intervention of the Court. The
constitutional doctrine of separation of powers and the demarcation of the respective jurisdiction of the Executive,
the Legislature and the Judiciary under the constitutional framework would lead the Court to the conclusion that the
exercise of the amendment of the Act, which is presently underway, must be allowed to be completed without any
intervention of the Court. Any other view and any interference, at this juncture, would negate the basic
constitutional principle that the legislature is supreme in the sphere of law-making. Reading down a statute to
make it workable in a situation where an exercise of amendment of the law is pending, will not be justified either. A
perception, however strong, of the imminent need of the law engrafted in the Act and its beneficial
effects on the citizenry of a democratic country, by itself, will not permit the Court to overstep its
jurisdiction. Judicial discipline must caution the Court against such an approach."
164. It is humbly submitted that the present petitions are an attempt to enforce the social institution in the
personal understanding of the Petitioner by way of an order of this Hon'ble Court. It is submitted that the Petitioners
through this petition are trying to circumvent the parliamentary procedure and the concept of separation of powers
and trying to do indirectly what they cannot do directly, which is not permissible under law.
165. It is submitted that Jeremy Waldron in the Yale Law Journal in a seminal article titled The Core of the Case
Against Judicial Review" Apr 2006; 115, 6; ABI/INFORM Global pg. 1346, notes as under:
"Arguments to this effect have been heard before, and often. They arise naturally in regard to a practice of this
kind. In liberal political theory, legislative supremacy is often associated with popular self-government495 and
democratic ideals are bound to stand in an uneasy relation to any practice that says elected legislatures are to
operate only on the sufferance of unelected judges. Alexander Bickel summed up the issue in the well-known
phrase,
"the counter-majoritarian difficulty. "496 We can try to mitigate this difficulty, Bickel said, by showing that
existing legislative procedures do not perfectly represent the popular or the majority will. But, he continued,
nothing in the further complexities and perplexities of the system, which modern political science has explored with
admirable and ingenious industry, and some of which it has tended to multiply with a fertility that passes the mere
zeal of the discoverer- nothing in these complexities can alter the essential reality that judicial review is a deviant
institution in the American democracy. 497 In countries that do not allow legislation to be invalidated in this way, the
people themselves can decide finally, by ordinary legislative procedures, whether they want to permit abortion,
affirmative action, school vouchers, or gay marriage. They can decide among themselves whether to have laws
punishing the public expression of racial hatred or restricting candidates' spending in elections. If they disagree
about any of these matters, they can elect representatives to deliberate and settle the issue by voting in the
legislature. That is what happened, for example, in Britain in the 1960s, when Parliament debated the liberalization
of abortion law, the legalization of homosexual conduct among consenting adults, and the abolition of capital
punishment. 498 On each issue, wide-ranging public deliberation was mirrored in serious debate in the House of
Commons. The quality of those debates (and similar debates in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and elsewhere)
make nonsense of the claim that legislators are incapable of addressing such issues responsibly -just as the liberal
outcomes of those proceedings cast doubt on the familiar proposition that popular majorities will not uphold the
rights of minorities.
In this Essay, I shall argue that judicial review is vulnerable to attack on two fronts. It does not, as is often claimed,
provide a way for a society to focus clearly on the real issues at stake when citizens disagree about rights; on the
contrary, it distracts them with side-issues about precedent, texts, and interpretation. And it is politically illegitimate,
so fan as democratic values are concerned : By privileging majority voting among a small number of unelected and
unaccountable judges, it disenfranchises ordinary citizens and brushes aside cherished principles of representation and
political equality in the final resolution of issues about rights."
166. It is submitted that there is no denial that the Constitution provides for power of judicial review, but judicial
review should not become judicial overreach. It is submitted that the Personal Laws in India essentially represents a
social concurrence by which certain norms have been crystallised into law. judicial intervention to create this new
institution of same sex marriage risks upsetting this balance.
167. At this juncture, the words of Alexander Hamilton's famous Federalist Paper No. 78 may be noted:
"Whoever attentively considers the different departments of power must perceive, that, in a Government in
which they are separated from each other, the judiciary, from the nature of its functions, will always be the least
dangerous to the political rights of the Constitution; because it will be least in a capacity to annoy or injure them.
The executive not only dispenses the honors, but holds the sword of the community. The legislature not
only commands the purse, but prescribes the rules by which the duties and rights of every citizen are to
be regulated. The judiciary, on the contrary, has no influence over either the sword or the purse; no direction
either of the strength or of the wealth of the society; and can take no active resolution whatever. It may truly be
said to have neither force nor will, but merely judgment; and must ultimately depend upon the aid of the executive
arm even for the efficacy of its judgments.
This simple view of the matter suggests several important consequences. It proves incontestably, that the
judiciary is beyond comparison the weakest of the three departments of power; that it can never attack with
success either of the other two; and
that all possible care is requisite to enable it to defend itself against their attacks. It equally proves, that though
individual oppression may now and then proceed from the courts of justice, the general liberty of the people can
never be endangered from that quarter; I mean so long as the judiciary remains truly distinct from both the
legislature and the executive. For I agree, that 'there is no liberty, if the power of judging be not separated from the
legislative and executive powers.' And it proves, in the last place, that as liberty can have nothing to fear from the
judiciary alone, but would have everything to fear from its union with either of the other departments; that as all
the effects of such a union must ensue from a dependence of the former on the latter, notwithstanding a nominal
and apparent separation; that as, from the natural feebleness of the judiciary, it is in continual jeopardy of being
overpowered, lawed, or influenced by its coordinate branches; and that as nothing can contribute so much to its
firmness and independence as permanency in office, this quality may therefore be justly regarded as an
indispensable ingredient in its constitution, and, in a great measure, as the citadel of the public justice and the
public security."
168. It is submitted that further, as far as the general principle of separation of powers is concerned, in Ram Jaway
a Kapur V. State of Punjab, AIR 1955 SC 549 [5 judges], this Hon'ble Court explained the doctrine of separation of
powers as under:
"12.
The Indian Constitution has not indeed recognised the doctrine of separation of powers in its absolute
rigidity but the functions of the different parts or branches of the Government have been sufficiently differentiated
and consequently it can very well be said that our Constitution does not contemplate assumption, by one
organ or part of the State, of functions that essentially belong to another."
judges] reveals that "separation of powers" creates a system of checks and balances, by reasons of which, powers are
so distributed that none of the three organs transgresses into the domain of the other. Accordingly, the demarcation of
powers between the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, is regarded as the basic element of the constitutional
170. The purpose of this doctrine is not only to prevent transgression of one organ into the domain of another. It
also serves the positive goal of maintaining harmonious functioning between the three organs. If that harmony is
held as under:
"35. Our Constitution charges the various organs of the State with affirmative responsibilities of protecting the
interests of, the welfare of and the security of the nation. Legislative powers are granted to enable the
accomplishment of the goals of the nation. The powers of judicial review are granted in order to ensure that
legislative and executive powers are used within the bounds specified in the Constitution. Consequently, it is
imperative that the powers so granted to various organs of the State are not restricted
impermissibly by judicial fiat such that it leads to inabilities of the organs of the State in discharging
their constitutional responsibilities.
36. Powers that have been granted, and implied by, and borne by the constitutional text have to be perforce
admitted. Nevertheless, the very essence of constitutionalism is also that no organ of the State may
arrogate to itself powers beyond what is specified in the Constitution. Walking on that razor's edge is
the duty of the judiciary. Judicial restraint is necessary in dealing with the powers of another coordinate branch of
the Government; but restraint cannot imply abdication of the responsibility of walking on that edge."
171. It is submitted that the Constitution has embarked spheres of functioning for all organs of the State and over
expansionism of one organ would lead to a dysfunctional democracy. It is submitted that democracy is a part of the
basic structure of the Constitution and breach of separation of powers leads to derogation of democratic principles. It
"7. While we agree that the High Court has been impelled by a right judicial instinct to undo injustice to an
individual, we feel that a finer perception of the limits of judicial review would have forbidden it from going beyond
directing the Executive to reconsider and doing it on its own venturing into an area of surmise and speculation in
regard to the possibilities of escalation in service of the appellant. Judicial expansionism, like allowing the
judicial sword to rust in its armoury where it needs to be used, can upset the constitutional symmetry
and damage the constitutional design of our founding document."
172. Thus, separation of powers embodies the principle of Judicial restraint. It is submitted that in State of
"40. This Court has never abandoned its constitutional function as the final Judge of constitutionality of all acts
purported to be done under the authority of the Constitution. It has not refused to determine questions either of
fact or of law so long as it has found itself possessed of power to do it and the cause of justice to be capable of
being vindicated by its actions. But, it cannot assume unto itself powers the Constitution lodges elsewhere
or undertake tasks entrusted by the Constitution to other departments of State which may be better
equipped to perform them. The scrupulously discharged duties of all guardians of the Constitution
include the duty not to transgress the limitations of their own constitutionally circumscribed powers by
trespassing into what is properly the domain of other constitutional organs. Questions of political
wisdom or executive policy only could not be subjected to judicial control. No doubt executive policy must
also be subordinated to constitutionally sanctioned purposes. It has its sphere and limitations. But, so long as it
operates within that sphere, its operations are immune from judicial interference. This is also a part of
the doctrine of a rough separation of powers under the Supremacy of the Constitution repeatedly
propounded by this Court and to which the Court unswervingly adheres even when its views differ or
change on the correct interpretation of a particular constitutional provision.
51. The basic assumption underlying the views expressed above is that each of the three organs of the State
-
the Executive, the Legislature, and the Judiciary has its own orbit of authority and operation. It must be left free by
the other organs to operate within that sphere even if it commits errors there. It is not for one of the three organs
of State either
to correct or to point an accusing finger at the other merely because it thinks that some error has been
committed by the other when acting within the limits of its own powers. But, if either the Executive or the
Legislature exceeds the scope of its powers, it places itself in the region where the effects of that excess should be
capable of removal by the Judiciary which ought to redress the wrong done when properly brought up before it. A
scrupulous adherence to this scheme is necessary for the smooth operations of our constitutional
mechanism of checks and balances. It implies due respect for and confidence in each organ of our
Republic by the other two."
"77. Another contention raised by the petitioners is that the Scheme violates the principle of separation of
powers under the Constitution. The concept of separation of powers, even though not found in any particular
constitutional provision, is inherent in the polity the Constitution has adopted. The aim of separation of powers
is
to achieve the maximum extent of accountability of each branch of the Government.
78. While understanding this concept, two aspects must be borne in mind. One, that separation of powers is an
essential feature of the Constitution. Two, that in modern governance, a strict separation is neither possible, nor
desirable. Nevertheless, till this principle of accountability is preserved, there is no violation of separation of powers.
We arrive at the same conclusion when we assess the position within the constitutional text. The
Constitution does not prohibit overlap of functions, but in fact provides for some overlap as a
parliamentary democracy. But what it prohibits is such exercise of function of the other branch which
results in wresting away of the regime of constitutional accountability.
87. Thus, the test for the violation of separation of powers must be precisely this. A law would be violative of
separation of powers not if it results in some overlap of functions of different branches of the State, but if it takes
over an essential function of the other branch leading to lapse in constitutional accountability. It is through this test
that we must analyse the present Scheme."
174. It is submitted that the accountability of the Legislature is ultimately to the citizens. In the question of
personal laws, the Legislature is duty bound to act in accordance with the popular will. Where the social consensus
favours a particular definition of Marriage, the Legislature in giving sanction to that form is only discharging its duty of
adhering to the will of the people. This unequivocal democratic will should not be negated by a judicial order. A copy of
the relevant portion of Kaul and Shakdhar "Practice and Procedure of Parliament" which describes in detail the
elaborate process through which Parliamentary Committees work is attached herewith and marked as Annexure C.
VI. How Personal laws will inevitably be affected, which only Legislature can do
175. It is submitted that the present set of the petitions seeks to alter the understanding and the scope of laws
concerning marriage in India, which have their understanding and basis, deeply embedded in religion and religious
freedoms. It is submitted that even the Special Marriage Act, 1954, which the Petitioners claim to be "secular" law and
irreligious, may not be the same if one peruses the debates during the framing of the said enactment and other
provisions which clearly protect that customs and practices of "man" and "woman" seeking to enter matrimony.
Therefore, the seminal question would be to what extend can this Hon'ble Court interfere with/read-down/strike down,
laws which are an embodiment of "personal laws".
176. Further, as per the following provisions, it is undeniable that any recognition of same sex marriages even
under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, will result in impacting the personal laws of citizens - especially the Hindu
personal law through Section 21A. It is submitted that Section 21A is quoted as under:
"Section 21A. Special provision in certain cases-
Where the marriage is solemnized under this Act of any person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
religion with a person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion, section 19 and Section 21 shall
not apply and so much of Section 20 as creates a disability shall also not apply."
Section 19. Effect of marriage on member of undivided family-
The marriage solemnized under this Act of any member of an undivided family who professes the Hindu, Buddhist,
Sikh or Jaina religions shall be deemed to effect his severance from such family.
Section 21. Succession to property of parties married under - Notwithstanding any restrictions contained
in the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), with respect to its application to members of certain communities,
succession to the property or any person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and to the property of the issue
of such marriage shall be regulated by the provisions of the said Act and for the purposes of this Act shall have effect
as if Chapter III of Part V (Special Rules for Parsi Intestates) had been omitted therefrom
177. At the time of enactment of the SMA, the Joint Select Committee on the 1952 Bill, on Section 19 noted as
under:
"Clause 19 (old clause 18) - The Joint Committee gave very anxious consideration to this clause as this had been
made the subject of attack in many of the opinions received on the ground that it penalises marriages under this
law. After careful consideration the Joint Committee have decided to' retain this clause in its original form,
particularly because it has the desirable effect of simplifying the law of succession. Were the clause to be
omitted, the share in the joint-family property of a person marrying under this
law will necessarily have to devolve to the survivors, which would mean that the daughters will be left out of
account. Moreover. one of the chief reasons why persons marry under this law is that in case of intestate
succession, the Succession Act will apply and it would be extremely inconvenient to have different laws of
succession applicable to different types of property. Succession from the joint- family does not, of course, prevent
the parties from reuniting if they so desire."
178. It is submitted that therefore, Section 21A, provides for a re-entry to the religious personal laws in case of a
Hindu, Jaina, Sikh or Buddhist in case both parties who solemnised the marriage were Hindu, Jaina, Sikh or Buddhist.
It is submitted that through the route of Section 21A therefore, despite being married under the Special Marriage Act,
1954, the persons would be governed by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. The relevant provisions are as under:
"Section 3 - Definitions and interpretation
(a) "agnate"-one person is said to be an "agnate" of another if the two are related by blood or adoption wholly
through males;
(c) "cognate"-one person is said to be a "cognate" of another if the two are related by blood or adoption but not
wholly through males;
(d) the expressions "custom" and "usage" signify any rule which, having been continuously and uniformly
observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, tribe, community,
group or family : Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy : and
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not been discontinued by the
family;
(e) full blood "half blood" and "uterine blood"-
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are descended from a common
ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they are descended from a common ancestor but by
different wives;
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are descended from a
common ancestress but by different husbands;
Explanation.-In this clause "ancestor" includes the father and "ancestress" the mother;
(f) "heir" means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed to the property of an intestate under this
Act;
(j) "related" means related by legitimate kinship:
Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to their mother and to one another, and their
legitimate descendants shall be deemed to be related to them and to one another; and any word expressing
relationship or denoting a relative shall be construed accordingly.
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the masculine gender shall not be
taken to include females.
Section 9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.-
Among the heirs specified in the Schedule, those in class I shall take simultaneously and to the exclusion of all
other heirs; those in the first entry in class 11 shall be preferred to those in the second entry: those in the second
entry shall be preferred to those in the third entry: and so on in succession.
Section 10. Distribution of property among heirs in class I of the Schedule.-
The property of an intestate shall be divided among the heirs in class I of the Schedule in accordance with the
following rules:-
Rule 1-The intestate's widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the widows together, shall take one share.
Rule 2-The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall each take one share.
Rule 3-The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased daughter of the intestate shall take
between them one share.
Rule 4-The distribution of the share referred to in Rule 3 (i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased son
shall be so made that his widow (or widows together) and the surviving sons and daughters get equal portions; and
the branch of his pre-deceased sons gets the same portion; (ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased
daughter shall be so made that the surviving sons and daughters get equal portions.
Section 14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property.-
(1) Any property possessed by a female Hindu, whether acquired before or after the commencement of this
Act, shall be held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner.
Explanation-In this sub-section, "property" includes both movable and immovable property acquired by a female
Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance, or by gift from
any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, on by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase
or by prescription, or in any other manner whatsoever, and also any such property held by her as stridhana
immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any property acquired by way of gift or under a will or any
other instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the terms of the gift, will or other
instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe a restricted estate in such property.
Section 15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus.-
(1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set out in Section 16,-
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) and the
husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the absence of any son or
daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs
referred in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the father; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in the
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not
upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the
husband."
179. The said Act, can in no manner, be ever applied in a gender-neutral manner as the terms, the succession and
its divisions, and other provisions, clearly demarcate the legislative space between a "man" and a "woman" with no
room for a "man" and a "man" relationship or a "woman" and "woman" relationship.
180. In this regard, the submissions of the Petitioners, that the rights under Section 21A would therefore have to
be given up by same sex persons, would be an absurd suggestion for more than one reason. It is submitted that the
same can be summarised as under:
a. It would amount to creating a class within a class. Once two Hindus enter in to a marriage under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, they still continue to be governed by the customary Hindu law and to keep same sex couples
outside the same, would amount to an "impermissible classification" as suggested by the Petitioners themselves.
b. The applicability of the Act, or any Section for that matter, cannot be truncated unless the language of the
statute so provides.
C. The Petitioner cannot "give up" the rights on behalf of all the person who may fall under that category.
181. It is submitted that the concept of marriage is a concept essentially emanating from the personal laws of
citizens. With the evolution of jurisprudence, some of the aspects of marriage have been codified by the competent
legislature. It is submitted that in any society, conduct of the parties and their inter-se relationship is always governed
and circumscribed by personal laws, codified laws or in some cases even customary laws/religious laws. The
jurisprudence of any nation, be it by way of codified law or otherwise, evolves based upon societal values, beliefs,
cultural history and other factors. In case of issues concerned personal relationships like marriage, divorce, adoption,
maintenance, etc., either the codified law or the personal law occupies the filed.
182. It is submitted that as pointed out hereinabove "marriage" is essentially a socially recognized union of two
individuals which is governed either by uncodified personal laws or codified statutory laws. The acceptance of the
institution of marriage between two individuals of the same gender is neither recognized nor accepted in any
uncodified personal laws or any codified statutory personal laws. It must be kept in mind that granting recognition and
conferring rights recognising human relations which has its consequences in law, and privileges, is in essence a
legislative function and can never be the subject matter of judicial adjudication. The prayer made by the petitioner
before this Hon'ble Court, is, therefore, wholly unsustainable, untenable and misplaced.
183. It is submitted that marriage between a biological man and a biological woman takes place either under the
personal laws or codified laws namely, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Christian Marriage Act, 1872, the Parsi
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 or the Special Marriage Act, 1954 or the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969. The parties
entering into marriage creates an institution having its own public significance as it is a social institution from which
several rights and liabilities flow. Seeking declaration for solemnisation/registration of marriage has more ramifications
than simple legal recognition. Family issues are far beyond mere recognition and registration of marriage between
persons belonging to the same gender. Living together as partners and having sexual relationship by same sex
individuals [which is decriminalised now] is not comparable with the Indian family unit concept of a husband, a wife
and children which necessarily presuppose a biological man as a 'husband', a biological woman as a 'wife' and the
children born out of the union between the two - who are reared by the biological man as father and the biological
woman as mother.
184. Therefore, it is submitted that the Parliament has designed and framed the marriage laws in the country,
which are governed by the personal laws/codified laws relatable to customs of various religious communities, to
recognise only the union of a man and a woman to be capable of legal sanction, and thereby claim legal and statutory
rights and consequences. It is submitted that any interference with the same would cause a complete havoc with the
delicate balance of personal laws in the country and in accepted societal values.
185. It is submitted that the decision on the said issues is directly connected with the objection of the Union of
India, with regard to the degree of protection "personal laws" enjoy under the scheme of the Constitution.
VII. Non-application of the primary precedent relied upon by Petitioners while seeking a judicial
declaration
186. It is submitted that Petitioners have placed primary reliance on the precedents of this Hon'ble Court, wherein
certain observations have been made. It is submitted that the primary case of the Petitioners revolves around the said
case law and seeks to extend the legal recognition and equal sanctity of same-sex/non-binary relationship with
heterogenous institution of marriage as understood by the society and as reflected by the legislative policy on various
statutes.
187. The relevant case law, and the reasons for their inapplicability can be summarised as under:
S.
CASE
REASONS OF INAPPLICABILITY
No
1.
NALSA V. Union of India,
The said judgment is limited only to the question of recognition in law of varied
gender identities or sexual orientations. Further, the said judgment pre-dates the
predates the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 [hereinafter
referred to as "TG Act, 2019"].
Therefore, the limited question in the said case was whether varied gender
identities or sexual orientations, would be a part of life and liberty under Article 21
and expression in Article 19 and other fundamental rights. The said aspect is clear
from the directions of the Hon'ble Court at Para 135.
The said judgment, in no way whatsoever, seeks to deal with the question
of
recognition of same-sex marriage.
2.
K.S. Puttaswamy V.
The said judgment established the Right to Privacy and held that choices within the
Union of India, (2017)
"private sphere" are protected. However, marriage is not entirely within the private
sphere and indisputably has connotations of public law. The regulation of marriage
via a plethora of enactments itself is proof that it is not a purely private concern.
The State governs the conditions of valid marriage through the law it enacts as well
as defning conditions for dissolution of the marital tie, the status of children in a
marriage, laws of succession etc. All these aspects taken together show that
Marriage is not a question confned to the private sphere. On that count alone,
Putaswamy supra cannot apply in full force to the question of marriage.
The Right to Privacy cannot be read as to mean that all private choices must
necessarily have legal recognition. This would amount to an over-expansion of the
"private sphere" as defned in Putaswamy supra. The Right to Privacy applies to
those choices and decisions which are purely in the private sphere. The said
judgment in laying down the theory of "zones of privacy" itself states that when
any choice touches upon an aspect of public life, the Right to Privacy would be
governed to that extent by the law regulating such aspect of Public Life.
Therefore, as far as rights in the private sphere are concerned, the same stand
protected post the judgment in Navtej supra. Furthermore, as far other forms of
active discriminations are concerned, the same stand protected by the TG Act,
2019.
3.
Shafin Jehan V. Asokan
The decision in Shafn supra is based on the presumption that the marriage is valid
according to the law under which it was entered into [and between a biological
SC 201
man and a biological woman]. The
underlying presumption was that the marriage must be such as is capable of
recognition under the concerned Law.
In Shafn supra the Court expressly noted that the marriage was valid under the
Muslim Law (Para 83). This is a recognition of the fact that choice of partner cannot
be such as conficts with the law. The Court itself acknowledges that the Court may
regulate, subject to constitutional Compliance, the conditions of a valid marriage
(Para 86)
The State has not "dictated a choice of partners" or "limited the ability" (Para 84)"
for LGBT citizens. It has simply exercised its option not to confer a particular status
to the Partnership. LGBT citizens are free to pursue their "way of life" (Para 86).
The State has imposed no constraint on the right of LGBT citizens to express their
sexual identity. It has only refrained from classifying this way of life as marriage.
4.
Shakti Vahini V. Union of
The said judgment was decided in the context of honour killings by Khap
Panchayats and the observations made therein have be interpreted in that regard.
The observation with regard to protection of choice under Article 21 (Para 43) was
made with respect to Honour Killings. It is again reiterated that the choice of
partner is not restricted but only the recognition of that partnership as equivalent to
a "marriage" is restricted.
5.
Navtej Singh Johar V.
It is abundantly clear from a plain reading of Navtej supra that the decision therein
Union of India, (2018)
was confned to consensual physical relationships between same sex couples and
nothing further beyond was held. It is stated - There can be no doubt that
an
individual also has a right to a union under Article 21 of the Constitution. When we
say union, we do not mean the union of marriage, though marriage is a union.
As a concept, union also means companionship in every sense of the word, be it
physical, mental, sexual or emotional." (Para 167)
The Court recognises that marriage is one of several kinds of Union or forms
of
companionship. While the LGBT community may freely enter into various forms of
"companionship", "marriage" is expressly not one of them. Insofar as Article 15(1)
is concerned, non-recognition of Same Sex Marriage is not based in "stereotypical
understanding of the role of sex" (Para 438) but upon the real and rational criteria
which shall be discussed separately.
In so far as the issue of expression of identity is concerned (Para 161), Marriage is
not an "expression of identity" as understood in Navtej supra as that term concerns
expression of sexual
orientation. No restrictions on the same have been imposed in respect of the LGBT
community.
6.
Joseph Shine V. Union of
The discussion in Shine supra was confined to general human sexuality [not
specifically LGTBQIA+ orientations] as part of "identity". There is no restriction for
same sex couples "sharing of physical intimacies as a refection of choice" as
expressed in the said judgment at Para 169.
Marriage however is different from mere sexual orientation and proclivities. All that
Joseph Shine supra states is that individuals have the right to make choices of
physical intimacy in a consensual manner
It is reiterated that there is no restriction or same sex couples to have physical
intimacy with a partner of their choice after Navtej supra.
However, that is where the right ends. Nothing in Joseph Shine
supra can be even remotely construed as creating a basis of same sex marriage
especially since the question related to the validity of the provisions for Adultery in
the Indian Penal Code.
7.
Deepika Singh V. Central
Deepika supra was decided in the context of a second marriage entered into by the
Administrative Tribunal,
Petitioner and consequent demand for maternity leave after birth of a child though
two children already existed from the husband's previous marriage.
1088
This family unit of a husband, wife and children is recognised in Indian Law as
remarriage and is valid under the relevant statutory law. However, the Indian law
does not recognise same sex relationships as "family" for the purposes of family law
non does it recognise same-sex marriage.
Deepika supra proceeds on the factual position that the family unit is legally valid
and then addresses the question of Maternity Leave. Where the unit is not a valid
family unit under the Personal Law, the judgement can have no applicability
The observations in Deepika supra (Para 26), state that "familial relationships" can
include marriage, domestic partnerships, unmarried partnerships and Queen
relationships. The overriding phrases herein is "relationship" which would be a sub-
set wider than "marriage".
Marriage as a form of relationship is specific and distinct from a domestic or
unmarried partnership or a same sex relationship. While all the four are types of
relationship, marriage is one with a special status, capable of being created only
between a man and a woman. A domestic partnership is certainly a "relationship"
but in law is not equated with marriage nor provided the same
recognition. It cannot be said that differential treatment of the two is a
"disadvantage". Likewise, a queer relationship is one which cannot be put on the
same footing as marriage.
In Deepika supra it is stated that "such atypical manifestations of the family unit are
equally deserving not only of protection under law but also of the benefits available
under social welfare legislation". (Para 26) It is submitted that the term "family
unit" has been is used by this Hon'ble Court in a generic sense and not in the sense
of a family under the Family Laws. It does not refer to marriage. This is clear from
the preceding observations of Para 26, where unmarried partnerships were also
considered "family unit". The expression "protection under law" must be read in that
light.
Further, Para 26 states that marriage, domestic partnership, unmarried partnership
and queer relationships are different types of relationship. The judgement holds that
they are all equally deserving of protection. Be that as it may, the nature of that
protection must be determined by the nature of the relationship. Different forms of
relationship are differentially protected. There is nothing unsound about this
because it stands to reason that where the very nature of the relationships differ,
the degree of sanction they enjoy under law would also differ.
For instance, "Live-in relationships" are considered "in the nature of marriage" but it
cannot be said to be "marriage" itself. It certainly cannot be purely for the purposes
of statutory law, an unmarried relationship/partnership. Even for such live-in
relationship, such relationships must exist and continue for a considerable length of
time before any rights are conferred on them. As opposed to the same, rights in
case of marriage come into force by operation of law automatically on solemnisation
of marriage.
Lastly, the right to enter into non-binary relationships is protected by Navtej supra.
However, they cannot claim parity with marriage, just as a live-in relationship or
unmarried partnership cannot claim such parity.
8.
V. Principal Secretary,
In the said judgment, it was held by the Court that, Societal reality, as observed by
Health
and
Family
this Court in Deepika Singh (supra), indicates the need to legally recognize non-
Welfare
Department,
traditional manifestations of familial relationship".
2022
SC
(Para 45).
1321
This observation was made in the context of termination of pregnancy by X who was
at the time 24 weeks pregnant and related to extension of Section 3(2) of the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act and Rule 3B(c) of the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Rules to unmarried women.
The "recognition" spoken of in Para 45 can at best be a recognition of the right to
companionship as already held in Navtej supra. It cannot be recognition in terms of
a "Marriage" as per statutory law. The State does in fact recognise non-traditional
relationships. For instance, as stated above, "relationships in the nature of marriage"
as defined in the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act. However, the
scope and extent of that recognition is a mater for the State alone to determine in
accordance with its social policy.
188. From the above, it is clear that the judgments on which the Petitioners have placed significant reliance and
further claimed to have covered the issue, cannot be said to be applicable to the present context. The present context,
which is the recognition or treatment same-sex relationship or non-binary relationship as marriage under statutory
law, stands on a completely different footing and cannot be oversimplified or concluded by a cursory reliance on the
said judgements.
189. It is submitted that it is reiterated that it would necessarily follow that the Constitution empowers only the
competent legislature to decide a legislative policy as to which social relationship should be recognized, which
necessarily includes a decision based on the legislative policy as to whether the marriage as an institution should be
between heterosexual couple or same sex couple.
190. The constituent intent behind making this subject a categorical part of legislative decision making is clear. The
institution of marriage is a recognition of a social union of two people which will be conferred with a sanctity attached
to the institution of marriage. It is submitted that any law recognizing persons' relationship and conferring legal
sanctity on the same, is essentially the codification of social norms based upon the societal ethos, cherished values in
the concept of family across religion and such other relevant considerations, in to legal standards. This would not in
fact and cannot, in law, mean a majoritarian approach. This is the only constitutional approach permissible under the
constitution while recognizing any social relationship as an institution with sanction under the law. The competent
legislature is aware of the above referred considerations. The petitioners do not represent or refer the view of the
entire population.
191. Lastly, it is submitted that without prejudice to the above, the Respondent - Union of India submits that the
present issue can be decided on narrow points, without delving in to the larger questions raised by the Petitioner. It is
submitted that this Hon'ble Court in Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar V. State of Maharashtra, (1966) 3 SCR 744 [9 judges],
held as under:
"16. We have referred to these respective arguments just to indicate the extent of the field which has been
covered by learned Counsel who assisted us in dealing with the present petitions. As this Court has frequently
emphasised, in dealing with constitutional matters, it is necessary that the decision of the Court should be confined
to the narrow points which a particular proceeding raises before it. Often enough, in dealing with the very
narrow point raised by a writ petition, wider arguments are urged before the Court; but the Court should
always be careful not to cover ground which is strictly not relevant for the purpose of deciding the
petition before it. Obiter observations and discussion of problems not directly involved in any proceeding should
be avoided by courts in dealing with all matters brought before them; but this requirement becomes almost
compulsive when the Court is dealing with constitutional matters. That is why we do not propose to deal with the
larger issues raised by the learned Counsel in the present proceedings, and we wish to confine our decision to the
narrow points which these petitions raise."
192. In light of the above, the present petitions deserve to be dismissed.
Settled by:
Mr. Tushar Mehta
Solicitor General of India
Drafted by:
Mr. Kanu Agrawal, Adv.
Mr. Gaurang Bhushan, Adv.
Mr. Kritagya Kait, Adv.
Mr. Anirudh Sharma, Adv.
ANNEXURE A
Definitions of Lgbtqqiaap as Per Oxford Dictionary Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer,
questioning, intersex, asexual, allies,
and pansexual.
1. LESBIAI 499
(Of a Woman) Woman sexually attracted to another woman
lesbianism, also called sapphism or female homosexuality, the tendency of a human female to be emotionally and
500
usually sexually attracted to other females, or the state of being so attracted.
2. GAY
(Of People Specially Men) Sexually attracted to people of the same sex
3. BI SEXUAL
Sexually attracted to people of more than one gender
501
bisexuality, in human sexuality, sexual interest in and attraction to members of one's own and the opposite sex.
4. TRANSGENDER
Describing or relating to people whose gender identity does not match the sex they were set to have at birth
transgender, term self-applied by persons whose gender identity varies from that traditionally associated with their
apparent biological sex at birth. In its original and narrower sense, transgender referred to males and females who
respectively gender-identify as females and males. In a later and broader sense, it has come to designate persons
whose gender identities incorporate behaviours and traits traditionally associated with the opposite sex. Transgender
persons may thus include transsexuals, transgenderists (in one usage of the term, persons who gender-identify with
the opposite sex but who choose not to undergo sex-reassignment surgery or hormone treatments), and androgynes
502
(biologically or psychologically androgynous persons), among other groups.
5. QUEER
Describing or relating to a sexual identity or gender identity that is different from traditional ideas about sex and
gender, for example if somebody is non-binary, bisexual or transgender.
queer, in sexual politics, description of sexuality that rejects normative definitions of appropriate feminine and
masculine sexual behaviour.
Queen is often used as an umbrella term to denote sexual identity within a particular community. A queen
community may be made up of people who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and so on. Some find queer
an easy way to describe such a large community. 503
6. QUESTIONING
Questioning their sexual orientation or gender identity
7. INTERSEX
Describing or relating to a person or animal that has both male and female sex organs or other sexual
characteristics; born with sexual characteristics that do not fit the categories of either 'male' or 'female'
8. ASEXUAL
Not having sexual qualities; not interested in sex
9. ALLIES
A person who is not LGBTQ but shows support for LGBTQ people and promotes equality in a variety of ways.
10. PANSEXUAL
Sexually attracted to people of all genders or without regard to their gender
11.
All of the gender identities and sexual orientations that letters cannot yet fully describe504
505
72 Types of Genders Associated with the LGBTQ+ + Community :
S. No.
Gender
Meaning
1.
Agender
A person who does not identify themselves with or experience any
gender. Agender people are also called null-gender, genderless,
gendervoid, or neutral gender.
2.
Abimegender
Associated with being profound, deep, and infinite. The term
abimegender may be used alone or in combination with other genders.
3.
Adamas gender
A gender that is indefinable or indomitable. People identifying with this
genden refuse to be categorized in any particular genden identity.
4.
Aerogender:
Also called evaisgender, this gender identity changes according to
one's surroundings.
5.
Aesthetigender
Also called aesthetgender, it is a type of gender identity derived from
aesthetics.
6.
Affectugender
This is based on the person's mood swings or fluctuations.
7.
Agenderflux
A person with this genden identity is mostly agender with brief shifts of
belonging to other gender types.
8.
Alexigender
The person has a fluid gender identity between more than one type of
gender although they cannot name the genders they feel fluid in.
9.
Aliusgender
This gender identity stands apart from existing social gender
constructs. It means having a strong specific gender identity that is
neither male non female.
10.
Amaregender
Having a gender identity that changes depending on the person one is
emotionally attached to.
11.
Ambigender
Having two specific gender identities simultaneously without any
fluidity or fluctuations.
12.
Ambonec
The person identifies themselves as both man and woman and yet does
not belong to either.
13.
Amicagender
A gender-fluid identity where a person changes their gender depending
on the friends they have.
14.
Androgyne
A person feels a combination of feminine and masculine genders.
15.
Anesigender
The person feels close to a specific type of genden despite being more
comfortable in closely identifying themselves with another gender.
16.
Angenital
The person desires to be without any primary sexual characteristics
although they do not identify themselves as genderless.
17.
Anogender
The gender identity fades in and out in intensity but always comes
back to the same gendered feeling.
18.
Anongenden
The person has a gender identity but does not label it or would prefer
to not have a label.
19.
Antegender
A protean gender that can be anything but is formless and motionless.
20.
Anxiegender
This gender identity has anxiety as its prominent characteristic.
21.
Apagender
The person has apathy or a lack of feelings toward one's gender
identity.
22.
Apconsugender
It means knowing what are not the characteristics of gender but not
knowing what are its characteristics. Thus, a person hides its primary
characteristics from the individual.
23.
Astergender
The person has a bright and celestial gender identity.
24.
Astral gender
Having a gender identity that feels to be related to space.
25.
Autigender
Having a gender identity that feels to be closely related to being
autistic.
26.
Autogender
Having a gender experience that is deeply connected and personal to
oneself.
27.
Axigender
A gender identity that is between the two extremes of agender and any
other type of gender. Both the genders are experienced one at a time
without any overlapping. The two genders are described as on the
opposite ends of an axis.
28.
Bigender
Having two gender identities at the same or different times.
29.
Biogender
Having a gender that is closely related to nature.
30.
Blurgender
Also called gender fuss, blurgenden means having more than one
gender identities that blur into each other so that no particular type of
gender identity is clear.
31.
Boyflux
The person identifies themselves as male, but they experience varying
degrees of male identity. This may range from feeling agender to
completely male.
32.
Burstgender
Frequent bursts of intense feelings quickly move to the initial calm
stage.
33.
Caelgender
This gender identity shares the qualities or aesthetics of outer space.
34.
Cassgender
It is associated with the feelings of considering the gender irrelevant or
unimportant.
35.
Cassflux
There is a fluctuating intensity of irrelevance toward gender.
36.
Cavusgender
The person feels close to one gender when depressed and to another
when not depressed.
37.
Cendgender
The gender identity changes from one gender to its opposite.
38.
Ceterogender
It is a nonbinary gender where the person has a specific masculine,
feminine or neutral feelings.
39.
Ceterofluid
Although the person is a ceterogender, their identity keeps fluctuating
between different genders.
40.
Cisgender
Being closely related to the gender assigned at birth during the entire
life.
41.
Cloudgender
The person's gender cannot be comprehended or understood due to
depersonalization and derealization disorder.
42.
Collgender
Various genders are present at the same time in the individual.
43.
Colorgender
In this category, colors are used to describe gender, for example, pink
gender or black gender.
44.
Commogender
The person knows that they are not cisgender yet continues to identify
as one for a while.
45.
Condigender
The person feels their gender only under specific circumstances.
46.
Deliciagender
Associated with the feeling of having multiple genders but preferring
one over the other.
47.
Demifluid
Having multiple genders, some fluid while others are static.
48.
Demiflux
A combination of multiple genders with some genders static, whereas
others fluctuating in intensity.
49.
Demigender
The individual has partial traits of one gender and the rest of the other
gender.
50.
Domgenden
The individual has multiple genders with one dominating over the rest.
51.
Duragenden
Having more than one gender with one lasting longer than the others.
52.
Egogender
It is a personal type of gender identified by the individual alone. It is
based on the person's experience within the self.
53.
Epicene
It is associated with a strong feeling of not being able to relate to any
of the two genders of the binary gender or both of the binary gender
characteristics.
54.
Esspigender
The individual relates their gender identity with spirits.
55.
Exgenden
The denial to identify with any gender on the gender spectrum.
56.
Existigenden
The person's gender identity exists only when they make conscious
efforts to realize it.
57.
Femfluid
The person is fluid or fluctuating regarding the feminine genders.
58.
Femgenden
A nonbinary gender identity that is feminine.
59.
Fluidflux
It means to be fluid between two or more genders with a fluctuation in
the intensity of those genders.
60.
Gemigenden
The person has two genders that are opposite yet they flux and work
together.
61.
Genderblank
It is closely related to a blank space.
62.
Genderflow
The gender identity is fluid between infinite feelings.
Genderfluid
The person does not consistently adhere to one fixed genden and may
have many genders.
64.
Genderfuzz
More than one gender is blurred together.
65.
Genderflux
The gender fluctuates in intensity.
66.
Genderpuck
The person resists to fit in societal norms concerning genders.
67.
Genderqueer
The individual blurs the preconceived boundaries of gender in relation
to the gender binary or having just one gender type.
68.
Gender witched
The person is inclined toward the notion of having one gender but does
not know which.
69.
Girlflux
The individual identifies themselves as a female but with varying
intensities of female identities.
70.
Healgender
A gender identity that gives the person peace, calm, and positivity.
71.
Mirrorgender
Changing one's genden type based on the people surrounding.
72.
Omnigender
Having or experiencing all genders.
OTHER RELATED DEFINITIONS
Sex
506
1. the male, female, or sometimes intersex division of a species, especially as differentiated with reference to the
reproductive functions or physical characteristics such as genitals, XX and XY chromosomes, etc.
2. a label assigned to a person at birth, usually male or female and sometimes intersex, and typically based on
genital configuration.
Heterosexuality 507
1. sexual desire or behavior directed toward people of the other binary gender.
2. the state of being sexually attracted only to the other binary gender.
Homosexuality 508
homosexuality, sexual interest in and attraction to members of one's own sex. The term gay is frequently used as
a
synonym for homosexual; female homosexuality is often referred to as lesbianism.
Gender 509
either the male or female division of a species, especially as differentiated by social and cultural roles and behavior
Gender identity510
a person's innen sense of being male or female, usually developed during early childhood as a result of parental
rearing practices and societal influences and strengthened during puberty by hormonal changes.
Sexual Orientation
one's inherent attraction to a sexual partner of a certain gender, or the absence of gender preference in a sexual
relationship; one's identity as asexual, bisexual, heterosexual, gay, pansexual, etc.
Gender Fluid5
noting or relating to a person whose gender identity or genden expression is not fixed and shifts over time or
changes depending on the situation.
Marriage 513
a legally and socially sanctioned union, usually between a man and a woman, that is regulated by laws, rules,
customs, beliefs, and attitudes that prescribe the rights and duties of the partners and accords status to their offspring
(if any). The universality of marriage within different societies and cultures is attributed to the many basic social and
personal functions for which it provides structure, such as sexual gratification and regulation, division of labour
between the sexes, economic production and consumption, and satisfaction of personal needs for affection, status, and
companionship.
ANNEXURE B
HUSBAND - WIFE LAWS
Denoting male and female
THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 403-416
1. Section 3 (g) -
"degrees of prohibited relationship" two persons are said to be within the degrees of prohibited relationship-
(i) if one is a lineal descendant of the other; or
(ii) if one was the wife or husband of a lineal ascendant or descendant of the other or
(iii) if one was the wife of the brother or of the fathers or mothers brother or of the grand fathers or grandmothers
brother of the other; or
(iv) if the two are brother and sister, uncle and niece aunt and nephew, or children of brother and sister or of two
brothers or of two sisters;
2. Section 5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage.-
A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely : -
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;
(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party-
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or
(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such
an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or
(c) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty-one years and the bride, the age of eighteen years at the time
of the marriage;
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or usage governing each of
them permits of a marriage between the two;
(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a
marriage between the two;
3. Section 7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.-
(1) A Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance with the customary rites and ceremonies of either party
thereto.
(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi (that is, the taking of seven steps by the bridegroom
and the bride jointly before the sacred fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding when the seventh step
is taken.
4. Section 9. Restitution of conjugal right...
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the
aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition and that there is no legal ground why the application
should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
Explanation. - Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal from the society,
the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from the society.
5. Section 12. Voidable marriages.-
(1) Any marriage solemnised, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable and may be
annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, namely : XXX
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no petition for annulling a marriage-
(a) on the ground specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be entertained if
(i) the petition is presented more than one year after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be,
the fraud had been discovered; or
(ii) the petitioner has, with his or her full consent, lived with the other party to the marriage as husband or
wife after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered;
6. Section 13. Divorce.
XXX
(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground,
(i) in the case of any marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act, that the husband had married
again before such commencement or that any other wife of the husband married before such commencement
was alive at the time of the solemnization of the marriage of the petitioner:
Provided that in either case the other wife is alive at the time of the presentation of the petition; or
(ii) that the husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality; or
(iii) that in a suit under Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 1956), or in a
proceeding under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (or under the corresponding
Section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has
been passed against the husband awarding maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was living apart
and that since the passing of such decree or order, cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for
one year or upwards; This gives additional grounds of divorces to the "wife" only 18
(iv) that her marriage (whether consummated or not) was solemnized before she attained the age of fifteen years
and she has repudiated the marriage after attaining that age but before attaining the age of eighteen years.
Explanation. This clause applies whether the marriage was solemnized before or after the commencement of the
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976).
7. Section 17. Punishment of bigamy.-
Any marriage between two Hindus solemnized after the commencement of this Act is void if at the date of such
marriage either party had a husband or wife living; and the provisions of sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), shall apply accordingly.
8. Section 19. Court to which petition shall be presented.-
Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the District Court within the local limits of whose ordinary
original civil jurisdiction:-
(i) the marriage was solemnized, or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition, resides, or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or 19
(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of the petition;
or
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the respondent is at
that time, residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been heard of as being alive for a
period of seven years or more by those persons who would naturally have heard of him if he were alive.
9. Section 24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings.-
Where in any proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband, as the case
may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding,
it may, on the application of the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of
the proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's own income and
the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.
Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such monthly sum during the
proceeding, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the wife or
the husband, as the case may be.
10. Section 25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.-
(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case
may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such
gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having regard
to the respondent's own income and other property,
if any, the income and other property of the applicant the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the
case, it may seem to the court to be just, 20 and any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge
on the immovable property of the respondent.
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any time after it has made
an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in
such manner as the court may deem just.
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been made under this Section has re-
married or, if such party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he
has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may at the instance of the other party vary,
modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may deem just].
11. Section 27. Disposal of property.-
In any proceeding under this Act, the court may make such provisions in the decree as it deems just and proper
with respect to any property presented, at or about the time of marriage, which may belong jointly to both the
husband and the wife.
HINDU ADOPTION AND MAINTAINENCE ACT, 1956
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 604-612
12. Section 7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption-
Any male Hindu who is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to takes on or a daughter in adoption :
Provided that, if he has a wife living, he shall not adopt except with the consent of his wife unless the wife has
completely and finally renounced the word or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be of unsound mind. 4
Explanation-If a person has more than one wife living at the time of adoption, the consent of all the wives is
necessary unless the consent of any one of them is unnecessary for any of the reasons specified in the preceding
proviso.
13. Section 8. Capacity of a female Hindu to take in adoption-
Any female Hindu who is of sound mind and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or daughter in adoption :
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or daughter except with the consent of her
husband unless the husband has completely and finally renounced the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.
14. Section 14. Determination of adoptive mother in certain cases-
(1) Where a Hindu who has a wife living adopts a child, she shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother.
(2) Where an adoption has been made with the consent of more than one wife, the seniormost in marriage among
them shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother and the others to be step-mothers.
(3) Where a widower or a bachelor adopts a child, any wife whom he subsequently marries shall be deemed to be
the stepmother of the adopted child.
(4) Where a window or an unmarried woman adopts a child, any husband whom she marries subsequently shall be
deemed to be the step-father of the adopted child.
15. Section 18. Maintenance of wife-
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a Hindu wife, whether married before or after the commencement of
this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by her husband during her life time.
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without forfeiting her claim to maintenance, -
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without reasonable cause and without her
consent or against her wish, or of wilfully neglecting her;
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in her mind that it will be
harmful or injurious to live with her husband;
1
(d) if he has any other wife living;
(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or habitually resides with a concubine
elsewhere;
(f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion;
(g) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately.
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance from her husband if she is unchaste or
ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion
16. Section 19. Maintenance of widowed daughter-in-law-
(1) A Hindu wife, whether married before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained
after the death of her husband by her father-in-law:
Provided and to the extent that she is unable to maintain herself out of her own earnings or other property or,
where she has no property of her own, is unable to obtain maintenance-
(a) from the estate of her husband or her father or mother, or
(b) from her son or daughter, if any, or his or her estate.
(2) Any obligation under sub-section (1) shall not be enforceable if the father-in-law has not the means to do SO
from any coparcenary property in his possession out of which the daughter-in- law has not obtained any share,
and any such obligation shall cease on the remarriage of the daughter-in-law.
17. Section 21. Dependants defined-
For the purposes of this Chapter "dependants" mean the following relatives of the deceased:
(vi) his widowed daughter : provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance-
(a) from the estate of her husband; or
(b) from her son or daughter if any, or his or her estate; or
(c) from her father-in-law or his father or the estate of either of them; (vii) any widow of his son or of a son of his
predeceased son, so long as she does not re-marry : provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain
maintenance from her husband's estate, or from her son or daughter, if any, or his or her estate; or in the case
of a grandson's widow, also from her father-in-law's estate
INDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 1064-1077
18. Section 15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus-
(1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set out in Section 16,
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) and the
husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), -
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the absence of any son
or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other
heirs referred in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the father; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in the
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter)
not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the
husband.
19. Section 16. Order of succession and manner of distribution among heirs of a female Hindu-
The order of succession among the heirs referred to in Section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate's
property among those heirs shall take place according to the following rules, namely:-
Rule 1-Among the heirs specified in sub-section (1) of Section 15, those in one entry shall be preferred to those in
any succeeding entry, and those included in the same entry shall take simultaneously.
Rule 2-If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre-deceased the intestate leaving his or her own children alive
at the time of the intestate's death, the children of such son or daughter shall take between them the share
which such son or daughter would have taken if living at the intestate's death.
Rule 3-The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referred to in clauses (b), (d) and (e) of sub-
section (1) and in sub-section (2) of Section 15 shall be in the same order and according to the same rules as
would have applied if the property had been the father's or the mother's or the husband's as the case may be,
and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediately after the intestate's death.
20. Section 17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumakkattayam and atiyasantana
laws-
The provisions of sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect in relation to persons who would have been governed
by the marumakkattayam law or aliyasantana law if this Act had not been passed as if-
(i) for sub-clauses (c) and (d) of Section 8, the following had been substituted, namely: - "(c) thirdly, if there is no
heir of any of the two classes, then upon his relatives, whether agnates or cognates. ";
(ii) for clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of Section 15, the following had been substituted, namely:-
"(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) and the
mother;
(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mother;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband.";
(iii) clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 15 had been omitted;
(iv) Section 23 had been omitted.
HI NDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 613-616
21. Section 6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor.-
The natural guardians of a Hindu minor; in respect of the minor's person as well as in respect of the minor's
property (excluding his or her undivided interest in joint family property), are-
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl-the father, and after him, the mother : provided that the custody of a
minor who has not completed the age of five years shall ordinarily be with the mother;
(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate unmarried girl-the mother, and after her, the father;
(c) in the case of a married girl-the husband : Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural
guardian of a minor under the provisions of this section-
(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or
(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world by becoming a hermit (vanaprastha) or an ascetic (yati or
sanyasi). Explanation. In this section, the expressions "father" and "mother" do not include a step-father and a
step-mother.
THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON DIVORCE) ACT, 1986
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 635-638
22. Section 2. Definitions.-
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "divorced woman" means a Muslim woman who was married according to Muslim law, and has been divorced
by, or has obtained divorce from, her husband in accordance with Muslim law;
(b) "iddat period" means, in the case of a divorced woman, -
(i) three menstrual courses after the date of divorce, if she is subject to menstruation;
(ii) three lunar months after her divorce, if she is not subject to menstruation; and
(iii) if she is enceinte at the time of her divorce, the period between the divorce and the delivery of her child
or
the termination of her pregnancy, whichever is earlier;
23. Section 3. Mahr or other properties of Muslim woman to be given to her at the time of divorce.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a divorced woman shall be
entitled to-
(a) a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance to be made and paid to her within the idda tperiod by her
former husband;
(b) where she herself maintains the children born to her before or after her divorce, a reasonable and fair
provision and maintenance to be made and paid by her former husband for a period of two years from the
respective dates of birth of such children;
(c) an amount equal to the sum of mahr or dower agreed to be paid to her at the time of her marriage or at any
time thereafter according to Muslim law; and
(d) all the properties given to her before or at the time of marriage or after her marriage by her relatives or
friends or the husband or any relatives of the husband or his friends.
(2) Where a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance or the amount of mahr or dower due has not been made
or paid or the properties referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) have not been delivered to a divorced
woman on her divorce, she or any one duly authorised by her may, on her behalf, make an application to a
Magistrate for an order for payment of such provision and maintenance, mahr or dower or the delivery of
properties, as the case may be.
(3) Where an application has been made under sub-section (2) by a divorced woman, the Magistrate may, if he is
satisfied that-
(a) her husband having sufficient means, has failed or neglected to make or pay her within the iddat period a
reasonable and fair provision and maintenance for her and the children; or
(b) the amount equal to the sum of mahr or dower has not been paid or that the properties referred to in clause
(d) of subsection (1) have not been delivered to her, 3 make an order, within one month of the date of the
filing of the application, directing her former husband to pay such reasonable and fair provision and
maintenance to the divorced woman as he may determine as it and proper having regard to the needs of the
divorced woman, the standard of life enjoyed by her during her marriage and the means of her former
husband or, as the case may be, for the payment of such mahr or dower or the delivery of such properties
referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) the divorced woman:
Provided that if the Magistrate finds it impracticable to dispose of the application within the said period, he may,
for reasons to be recorded by him, dispose of the application after the said period.
(4) If any person against whom an order has been made under sub-section (3) fails without sufficient cause to
comply with the order, the Magistrate may issue a warrant for levying the amount of maintenance or mahr or
dower due in the manner provided for levying fines under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and
may sentence such person, for the whole or part of any amount remaining unpaid after the execution of the
warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or until payment if sooner made, subject to
such person being heard in defence and the said sentence being imposed according to the provisions of the said
Code.
24. Section 5. Option to be governed by the provisions of sections 125 to 128 of Act, 2 of 1974.-
If on the date of the first hearing of the application under sub-section (2) of Section 3, a divorced woman and her
former husband declare, by affidavit or any other declaration in writing in such form as may be prescribed, either
jointly or separately, that they would prefer to be governed by the provisions of sections 125 to 128 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and file such affidavit or declaration in the court hearing the application, the
Magistrate shall dispose of such application accordingly.
Explanation.- the purposes of this section, "date of the first hearing of the application" means the date fixed in
the summons for the attendance of the respondent to the application
MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON MARRIAGE) ACT, 2019
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 639-641
25. Section 2
(c) "talaq" means talaq-e-biddat or any other similar form of talaq having the effect of instantaneous and irrevocable
divorce pronounced by a Muslim husband.
26. Section 3. Talaq to be void and illegal-
Any pronouncement of talaq by a Muslim husband upon his wife, by words, either spoken or written or in
electronic form or in any other manner whatsoever, shall be void and illegal.
27. Section 4. Punishment for pronouncing Talaq-
Any Muslim husband who pronounces talaq referred to in Section 3 upon his wife shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
28. Section 5. Subsistence Allowance-
Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in any other law for the time being in force, a
married Muslim woman upon whom talaq is pronounced shall be entitled to receive from her husband such amount of
subsistence allowance, for her and dependent children, as may be determined by the Magistrate.
29. Section 6. Custody of Minor Children-
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a married Muslim woman shall be
entitled to custody of her minor children in the event of pronouncement of talaq by her husband, in such manner as
may be determined by the Magistrate
THE PARSI MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE ACT, 1936
COMPILATION 111 : STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 2991-3008
30. Section 2
(5) "husband" means a Parsi husband;
*
(9) "wife" means a Parsi wife.
31. Section 4. Remarriage when unlawful.-
(1) No Parsi (whether such Parsi has changed his or her religion or domicile or not) shall contract any marriage
under this Act or any other law in the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, whether a Parsi or not, except after his or
her lawful divorce from such wife or husband or after his or her marriage with such wife or husband has lawfully been
declared null and void or dissolved, and, if the marriage was contracted with such wife or husband under the Parsi
Marriage and Divorce Act, 18654 (15 of 1865), or under this Act, except after a divorce, declaration or dissolution as
aforesaid under either of the said Acts.
32. Section 5. Punishment of bigamy.-
Every Parsi who during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, whether a Parsi or not, contracts a marriage
without having been lawfully divorced from such wife or husband, or without his or her marriage with such wife or
husband having legally been declared null and void or dissolved, shall be subject to the penalties provided in sections
494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) for the offence of marrying again during the lifetime of a husband
or wife.
33. Section 6. Certificate and registry of marriage.-
Every marriage contracted under this Act shall, immediately on the solemnization thereof, be certified by the
officiating priest in the form contained in Schedule 11. The certificate shall be signed by the said priest, the contracting
parties 1 and two witnesses present at the marriage and the said priest shall thereupon send such certificate
together with a fee of two rupees to be paid by the husband to the Registrar of the place at which such marriage is
solemnized. The Registrar on receipt of the certificate and fee shall enter the certificate in a register to be kept by him
for that purpose and shall be entitled to retain the fee.
34. Section 31. Suits for dissolution.-
If a husband or wife shall have been continually absent from his or her wife or husband for the space of seven
years, and shall not have been heard of as being alive within that time by those persons who would have naturally
heard of him or her, had he or she been alive, the marriage of such husband or wife may, at the instance of either
party thereto, be dissolved.
35. Section 32 -Grounds for Divorce
(e) that the defendant has since the marriage voluntarily caused grievous hurt to the plaintiff or has infected the
plaintiff with venereal disease or, where the defendant is the husband, has compelled the wife to submit herself to
prostitution:
36. Section 33. Joining of co-defendant.-
In every such suit for divorce on the ground of adultery, the plaintiff shall, unless the Court shall otherwise order,
make the person with whom the adultery is alleged to have been committed a co-defendant, and in any such suit by
the husband the Court may order the adulterer to pay the whole or any part of the costs of the proceedings.
37. Section 35. Decrees in certain suits.-
In any suit under Section 30, 31, 32, 2 [32A] or 34, whether defended or not, if the Court be satisfied that any of
the grounds set forth in those sections for granting relief exist, that none of the grounds therein set forth for
withholding relief exist and that-
(a) the act or omission set forth in the plaint has not been condoned;
(b) the husband and wife are not colluding together;
38. Section 36. Suit for restitution of conjugal rights.-
Where a husband shall have deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with his wife, or where a wife shall
have deserted or without lawful cause ceased to cohabit with her husband, the party so deserted or with whom
cohabitation shall have so ceased may sue for the restitution of his or her conjugal rights and the Court, if satisfied of
the truth of the allegations contained in the plaint, and that there is no just ground why relief should not be granted,
may proceed to decree such restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
39. Section 39. Alimony pendente lite.-
Where in any suit under this Act, it appears to the Court that either the wife or the husband, as the case may be,
has no independent income sufficient for her or his support and the necessary expenses of the suit, it may, on the
application of the wife or the husband, order the defendant to pay to the plaintiff, the expenses of the suit, and such
weekly or monthly sum, during the suit, as, having regard to the plaintiff's own income and the income of the
defendant, it may seem to the Court to be reasonable:
Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the suit and such weekly or monthly sum during
the suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the wife or the
husband, as the case may be.
40. Section 40. Permanent alimony and maintenance.-
(1) Any Court exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time
subsequent thereto, on an application made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, order that
the defendant shall pay to the plaintiff for her or his maintenance and support, such gross sum or such monthly
or
periodical sum, for a term not exceeding the life of the plaintiff as having regard to the defendant's own
income and other property, if any, the income and other property of the plaintiff, the conduct of the parties and
other circumstances of the case, it may seem to the Court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if
necessary, by a charge on the movable or immovable property of the defendant.
(2) The Court if it is satisfied that there is change in the circumstances of either party at any time after it has made
an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in
such manner as the Court may deem just.
(3) The Court if it is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been made under this Section has
remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he
had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may, at the instance of the other party, vary, modify
or rescind any such order in such manner as the Court may deem just.]
41. Section 41. Payment of alimony to wife or to her trustee.-
In all cases in which the Court shall make any decree or order for alimony it may direct the same to be paid either
to the wife herself, or to any trustee on her behalf to be approved by the Court or to a guardian appointed by the
Court, and may impose any terms or restrictions which to the Court may seem expedient, and may from time to time
appoint a new trustee, or guardian, if for any reason it shall appear to the Court expedient SO to do.
42. Section 42. Disposal of joint property.-
In any suit under this Act the Court may make such provisions in the final decree as it may deem just and proper
with respect to property presented at or about the time of marriage which may belong jointly to both the husband and
wife.
43. Section 50. Settlement of wife's property for benefit of children.-
In any case in which the Court shall pronounce a decree of divorce or judicial separation for adultery of the wife, if it
shall be made to appear to the Court that the wife is entitled to any property either in possession or reversion, the
Court may order such settlement as it shall think reasonable to be made of any part of such property, not exceeding
one half thereof, for the benefit of the children of the marriage or any of them.
44. Section 52. Applicability of provisions of the Act.-
(1) The provisions of this Act shall apply to all suits to which the same are applicable whether the circumstances
relied on occurred before or after the passing of this Act, and whether any decree or order referred to was passed
under this Act or under the law in force before the passing of this Act, and where any proceedings are pending in any
Court at the time of the commencement of this Act, the Court shall allow such amendment of the pleadings as may be
necessary as the result of the coming into operation of this Act.
(2) A Parsi who has contracted a marriage under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865 (15 of 1865), or under
this Act, even though such Parsi may change his or her religion or domicile, SO long as his or her wife or husband is
alive and SO long as such Parsi has not been lawfully divorced from such wife or husband or such marriage has not
lawfully been declared null and void or dissolved under the decree of a competent Court under either of the said Acts,
shall remain bound by the provisions of this Act.
THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872
COMPILATION 111 : STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 2081-2106
45. Section 51. Solemnization of Marriage after issuance of Certificate
And each of the parties shall say to the other as follows or to the like effect: - "I call upon these persons here
present to witness that I, A. B., do take thee, C. D., to be my lawful wedded wife [or husband].
46. Section 60 - On what conditions marriages of Indian Christians may be certified.-
Every marriage between Indian Christians applying for a certificate, shall, without the preliminary notice required
under Part 111, be certified under this Part, if the following conditions be fulfilled, and not otherwise:-
(1) the age of the man intending to be a married 2 [shall not be under 3 [twenty-one years]], and the age of the
woman intending to be married 4 [shall not be under 5 [eighteen years]];
(2) neither of the persons intending to be married shall have a wife or husband still living;
(3) in the presence of a person licensed under Section 9, and of at least two credible witnesses other than such
person, each of the parties shall say to the other-
"I call upon these persons here present to witness that. 1, A. B., in the presence of Almighty God, and in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, do take thee, C. D., to be my lawful wedded wife [or husband]" or words to the
like effect:
THE DIVORCE Act, 1869
COMPILATION 111 : STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 811-833
47. Section 3. Interpretation-clause.-I1 this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or
context
and in the case of any petition under this Act, "High Court" means the High Court for the area where the husband
and wife reside or last resided together :]
[(2) "District Judge" means a Judge of a principal civil court of original jurisdiction however designated :]
(3) "District Court" means, in the case of any petition under this Act, the court of the District Judge within the local
limits of whose ordinary jurisdiction, 2 [or of whose jurisdiction under this Act the marriage was solemnized or] the
husband and wife reside or last resided together:
(8) "marriage with another woman" means marriage of any person, being married, to any other person, during the
life of the former wife, whether the second marriage shall have taken place within 5 [India] or elsewhere:
(10) "property" includes in the case of a wife any property to which she is entitled for an estate in remainder
or reversion or as a trustee, executrix or administratrix; and the date of the death of the testator or intestate shall be
deemed to be the time at which any such wife becomes entitled as executrix or administratrix.
48. Section 10. Grounds for dissolution of marriage.-
(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act,
2001 (51 of 2001), may, on a petition presented to the District Court either by the husband or the wife, be
dissolved on the ground that since the solemnization of the marriage, the respondent
(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage on the ground that the husband has,
since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.]
49. Section 11. Adulterer or adulteress to be co-respondent.-
On a petition for dissolution of marriage presented by a husband or wife on the ground of adultery, the petitioner
shall make the alleged adulterer or adulteress a co-respondent, unless the petitioner is excused by the Court from SO
doing on any of the following grounds, namely:-
(a) that the wife, being the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute or the husband, being
respondent is leading an immoral life and that the petitioner knows of no person with whom the adultery has
been committed;
(b) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is unknown to the petitioner although the petitioner has
made due efforts to discover it;
(c) that the alleged adulterer or adulteress is dead.]
50. Section 15. Relief in case of opposition on certain grounds.-
In any suit instituted for dissolution of marriage, if the respondent opposes the relief sought on the ground, in case
of such a suit instituted by a husband, of his adultery, cruelty, or desertion 2 or, in case of such
a
suit
instituted by a wife, on the ground of 3 [her adultery or cruelty or desertion], the Court may in such suit give to the
respondent, on his or her application, the same relief to which he or she would have been entitled in case he or
she had presented a petition seeking such relief, and the respondent shall be competent to give evidence of or relating
to such adultery, cruelty or desertion
51. Section 16. Decrees for dissolution to be nisi.
The High Court may order the cost of Counsel and witnesses and otherwise arising from such cause being shown, to
be paid by the parties or such one or more of them as it thinks fit, including a wife if she have separate property.
Whenever a decree nisi has been made, and the petitioner fails, within a reasonable time, to move to have such
decree made absolute, the High Court may dismiss the suit.
52. Section 18. Petition for decree of nullity.
Any husband or wife may present a petition to the District Court, praying that his or her marriage may be declared
null and void
53. Section 19. Grounds of decree.-
Such decree may be made on any of the following grounds:
(1) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the institution of the suit;
(2) that the parties are within the prohibited degree of consanguinity (whether natural or legal) or affinity;
(3) that either party was a lunatic or idiot at the time of the marriage;
(4) that the former husband or wife of either party was living at the time of the marriage, and the marriage with
such former husband or wife was then in force.
Nothing in this Section shall affect the 2 [jurisdiction of the District Court] to make decrees of nullity of marriage on
the ground that the consent of either party was obtained by force or fraud.
54. Section 21. Children of annulled marriage.-
Where a marriage is annulled on the ground that a former husband or wife was living, and it is adjudged that the
subsequent marriage was contracted in good faith and with the full belief of the parties that the former husband or
wife was dead, or when a marriage is annulled on the ground of insanity, children begotten before the decree is
made shall be specified in the decree, and shall be entitled to succeed, in the same manner as legitimate children, to
the estate of the parent who at the time of the marriage was competent to contract
55. Section 22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro; but judicial separation obtainable by husband
or wife.
No decree shall hereafter be made for a divorce a mensa et toro, but the husband or wife may obtain a decree of
judicial separation, on the ground of adultery, or cruelty, or desertion 3 for two years or upwards, and such decree
shall have the effect of a divorce a mensa et toro under the existing law, and such other legal effect as here in after
mentioned
56. Section 23. Application for separation made by petition.-
Application for judicial separation on any one of the grounds aforesaid, may be made by either husband or wife
by petition to the District Court 4 ***, and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such
petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation
accordingly.
57. Section 24. Separated wife deemed spinster with respect to after-acquired property.-
In every case of a judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall from the date of the sentence, and whilst the
separation continues, be considered as unmarried with respect to property of every description which she may acquire,
or which may come to or devolve upon her. Such property may be disposed of by her in all respects as an unmarried
woman, and on her decease the same shall, in case she dies intestate, go as the same would have gone if her
husband had been then dead:
Provided that, if any such wife again cohabits with her husband, all such property as she may be entitled to
when such cohabitation takes place shall be held to her separate use, subject, however, to any agreement in writing
made between herself and her husband whilst separate.
58. Section 25. Separated wife deemed spinster for purposes of contract and suing.-
In every case of a judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall, whilst so separated, be considered as an
unmarried woman for the purposes of contract, and wrongs and injuries, and suing and being sued in any civil
proceedings; and her husband shall not be liable in respect of any contact, act or costs entered into, done, omitted or
incurred by her during the separation:
Provided that where, upon any such judicial separation, alimony has been decreed or ordered to be paid to the
wife, and the same is not duly paid by the husband, he shall be liable for necessaries supplied for her use:
Provided also that nothing shall prevent the wife from joining, at any time during such separation, in the
exercise of any joint power given to herself and her husband
59. Section 26. Decree of Separation obtained during absence of husband or wife may be reversed.-
Any husband or wife, upon the application of whose wife or husband, as the case may be, a decree of judicial
separation has been pronounced, may, at any lime thereafter, present a petition to the Court by which the decree was
pronounced, praying for a reversal of such decree, on the ground that it was obtained in his or her absence, and that
there was reasonable excuse for the alleged desertion, where desertion was the ground of such decree.
The Court may, on being satisfied of the truth of the allegations of such petition reverse the decree accordingly; but
such reversal shall not prejudice or affect the rights or remedies which any other person would have had, in case it had
not been decreed, in respect of any debts, contracts, or acts of the wife incurred, entered into, or done between the
times of the sentence of separation and of the reversal thereof
60. Section 27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection.-
Any wife to whom Section 4 of the Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865) 1 does not apply, may, when
deserted by her husband, present a petition to the District Court, at any time after such desertion, for an order to
protect any property which she may have acquired or may acquire, and any property of which she may have become
possessed or may become possessed after such desertion, against her husband or his creditors, or any person
claiming under him.
61. Section 28. Court may grant protection-order.-
The Court, if satisfied of the fact of such desertion, and that the same was without reasonable excuse, and that the
wife is maintaining herself by her own industry or property, may make and give to the wife an order protecting her
earnings and other property from her husband and all creditors and persons claiming under him. Every such order
shall state the time at which the desertion commenced, and shall, as regards all persons dealing with the wife in
reliance thereon, be conclusive as to such time
62. Section 29. Discharge or variation of orders.-
The husband or any creditor of or person claiming under him, may apply to the Court by which such order was
made for the discharge or variation thereof, and the Court, if the desertion has ceased, or if for any other reason
it
thinks fit SO to do, may discharge or vary the order accordingly
Section 30. Liability of husband seizing wife's property after notice of order.-
If the husband, or any creditor of, or person claiming under, the husband, seizes or continues to hold any property
of the wife after notice of any such order, he shall be liable, at the suit of the wife (which she is hereby empowered to
bring), to return or deliver to her the specific property, and also to pay her a sum equal to double its value.
64. Section 31. Wife's legal position during continuance of order.-
So long as any such order of protection remains in force the wife shall be and be deemed to have been, during
such desertion of her, in the like position in all respects, with regard to property and contracts and suing and being
sued, as she would be under this Act if she obtained a decree of judicial separation.
65. Section 32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights.-
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other,
either wife, or husband may apply, by petition to the District Court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court,
on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the
application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights according
66. Section 36. Alimony pendente lite.-
In any suit under this Act, whether it be instituted by a husband or a wife, and whether or not she has obtained
an order of protection the wife may present a petition for expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit.
Such petition shall be served on the husband; and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements
therein contained, may make such order on the husband 3 [for payment to the wife of the expenses of the
proceedings and alimony pending the suit] alimony pending the suit as it may deem just:
Provided further that the petition for the expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit, shall, as far as
possible, be disposed of within sixty days of service of such petition on the husband.
67. Section 37. Power to order permanent alimony.-
Where a decree of dissolution of the marriage or a decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the
District Court may order that the husband shall] to the satisfaction of the court, secure to the wife such gross sum
of money, or such annual sum of money for any term not exceeding her own life, as, having regard to her fortune (if
any), to the ability of the husband, and to the conduct of the parties, it thinks reasonable; and for that purpose may
cause a proper instrument to be executed by all necessary parties.
Power to order monthly or weekly payments. every such case the Court may make an order on the husband
for payment to the wife of such monthly or weekly sums for her maintenance and support as the Court may think
reasonable : Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes unable to make such payments, it
shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order, or temporarily to suspend the same as to the whole or
any part of the money SO ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order wholly or in part as to the court
seems fit.
68. Section 38. Court may direct payment of alimony to wife or to her trustee.
-In all cases in which the Court makes any decree or order for alimony, it may direct the same to be paid either
to the wife herself, or to any trustee on her behalf to be approved by the court, and may impose any terms or
restrictions which to the Court seem expedient, and may from time to time appoint a new trustee, if it appears to the
Court expedient SO to do.
69. Section 40. Inquiry into existence of ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements.-
The District Court may, before passing a decree for dissolution of the marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage,
inquire into] the existence of ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements made on the parties whose marriage is the
subject of the decree, and may make such orders, with reference to the application of the whole or a portion of the
property settled, whether for the benefit of the husband or the wife, or of the children (if any) of the marriage, or
of both children and parents, as to the Court seems fit : Provided that the Court shall not make any order for the
benefit of the parents or either of them at the expense of the children.
70. Section 48. Suits on behalf of lunatics.-
When the husband or wife is a lunatic or idiot, any suit under this Act (other than a suit for restitution of conjugal
rights) may be brought on his or her behalf by the committee or other person entitled to his or her custody.
71. Section 52. Competence of husband and wife to give evidence as to cruelty or desertion.-
On any petition presented, by a husband or a wife, praying that his or her marriage may be dissolved by reason of
his wife or her husband, as the case may be, having been guilty of adultery, cruelty or desertion, the husband and wife
respectively shall be competent and compellable to give evidence of or relating to such cruelty or desertion.
72. Section 60. Decree for separation or protection-order valid as to persons dealing with wife before
reversal.
Indemnity of persons making payment to wife without notice of reversal of decree or protection order. All persons
who in reliance on any such decree or order make any payment to, or permit any transfer or act to be made or
done by, the wife who has obtained the same shall, notwithstanding such decree or order may then have been
reversed, discharged or varied, or the separation of the wife from her husband may have ceased, or at some time
since the making of the decree or order been discontinued, be protected and indemnified as if, at the time of such
payment, transfer or other act, such decree or order were valid and still subsisting without variation, and the
separation had not ceased or been discontinued. unless, at the lime of payment, transfer or other act, such persons
had notice of the reversal, discharge or variation of the decree or order or of the cessation or discontinuance of the
separation
73. Section 61. Bar of suit for criminal conversation.-
After this Act comes into operation, no person competent to present a petition under sections 2 and 10 shall
maintain a suit for criminal conversation with his wife.
THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS PG 2247-2345
74. Section 15. Domicile acquired by woman on marriage.-
By marriage a woman acquires the domicile of her husband, if she had not the same domicile before.
75. Section 16. Wife's domicile during marriage.-
A wife's domicile during her marriage follows the domicile of her husband.
Exception.- The wife's domcile no longer follows that of her husband if they are separated by the sentence of a
competent Court, or if the husband is undergoing a sentence of transportation
76. Section 32. Devolution of such property.-
The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, or upon those who are of the kindred of the
deceased, in the order and according to the rules hereinafter contained in this Chapter.
77. Section 35 Rights of widower.-
A husband surviving his wife has the same rights in respect of her property, if she dies intestate, as a widow has
in respect of her husband's property, if he dies intestate
78. Section 40. Where intestate leaves lineal descendants not all in same degree of kindred to him, and
those through whom the more remote are descended are dead.-
(1) If the intestate has left lineal descendants who do not all stand in the same degree of kindred to him, and the
persons through whom the more remote are descended from him are dead, the property shall be divided into
such a number of equal shares as may correspond with the number of the lineal descendants of the intestate
who either stood in the nearest degree of kindred to him at his decease, or, having been of the like degree of
kindred to him, died before him, leaving lineal descendants who survived him.
(2) One of such shares shall be allotted to each of the lineal descendants who stood in the nearest degree of
kindred to the intestate at his decease; and one of such shares shall be allotted in respect of each of such
deceased lineal descendants; and the share allotted in respect of each of such deceased lineal descendants shall
belong to his surviving child or children or more remote lineal descendants, as the case may be; such surviving
child or children or more remote lineal descendants always taking the share which his or their parent or parents
would have been entitled to respectively if such parent or parents had survived the intestate.
Illustrations
(iv) A has two children, and no more, John and Mary. John dies before his father, leaving his wife pregnant.
Then A dies leaving Mary surviving him, and in due time a child of John is born. A's property is to be equally divided
between Mary and the posthumous child.
79. Section 67. Effect of gift to attesting witness.-
A will shall not be deemed to be insufficiently attested by reason of any benefit thereby given either by way of
bequest or by way of appointment to any person attesting it, or to his or her wife or husband; but the bequest or
appointment shall be void SO far as concerns the person so attesting, or the wife or husband of such person, or any
person claiming under either of them.
80. Section 92. implied gift to objects of power in default of appointment.-
Where property is bequeathed to or for the benefit of certain objects as a specified person may appoint or for the
benefit of certain objects in such proportions as a specified person may appoint, and the will does not provide for the
event of no
appointment being made; if the power given by the will is not exercised, the property belongs to all the objects of
the power in equal shares.
Illustration
A, by his will bequeaths a fund to his wife, for her life, and directs that at her death it shall be divided among his
children in such proportions as she shall appoint. The widow dies without having made any appointment. The fund will
be divided equally among the children
81. Section 100. Words expressing relationship denote only legitimate relatives or failing such relatives
reputed legitimate.-
In the absence of any intimation to the contrary in a will, the word "child, the word "son", the word "daughter" or
any word which expresses relationship, is to be understood as denoting only a legitimate relative, or, where there is no
such legitimate relative, a person who has acquired, at the date of the Will, the reputation of being such relative.
Illustrations
(vi) A makes a bequest in favour of his child by a certain woman, not his wife. B had acquired at the date of the
Will the reputation of being the child of A by the woman designated. B takes the legacy
(vii) A makes a bequest in favour of his child to be born of a woman who never becomes his wife. The bequest is
void.
82. Section 130. When second bequest not to take effect on failure of first.-
Where the will shows an intention that the second bequest shall take effect only in the event of the first bequest
failing in a particular manner, the second bequest shall not take effect, unless the prior bequest fails in that particular
manner.
Illustration
A makes a bequest to his wife, but in case she should die in his lifetime, bequeaths to B that which he had
bequeathed to her. A and his wife perish together, under circumstances which make it impossible to prove that she
died before him, the bequest to B does not take effect
83. Section 186. Exception to provisions of last six sections.-
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 180 to 185, where a particular gift is expressed in the will to be in
lieu of something belonging to the legatee, which is also in terms disposed of by the will, then, if the legatee claims
that thing, he must relinquish the particular gift, but he is not bound to relinquish any other benefit given to him by
the will. Illustration
Under A's marriage-settlement his wife is entitled, if she survives him, to the enjoyment of the estate of Sultanpur
during her life. A by his will bequeaths to his wife an annuity of 200 rupees during her life, in lieu of her interest in the
estate of Sultanpur, which estate he bequeaths to his son. He also gives his wife a legacy of 1,000 rupees. The widow
elects to take what she is entitled to under the settlement. She is bound to relinquish the annuity but not the legacy
of 1,000 rupees.
84. Section 219. Where deceased is not a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh, Jaina or exempted
person.-
If the deceased has died intestate and was not a person belonging to any of the classes referred to in Section 218,
those who are connected with him, either by marriage or by consanguinity, are entitled to obtain letters of
administration of his estate and effects in the order and according to the rules hereinafter stated, namely:
(a) If the deceased has left a widow, administration shall be granted to the widow, unless the Court sees cause to
exclude her, either on the ground of some personal disqualification, or because she has no interest in the estate
of the deceased.
Illustrations
(i) The widow is a lunatic or has committed adultery or has been barred by her marriage settlement of all
interest in her husband's estate. There is cause for excluding her from the administration.
(ii) The widow has married again since the decease of her husband. This is not good cause for her exclusion
(e) The husband surviving his wife has the same right of administration of her estate as the widow has in
respect of the estate of her husband.
Special Marriage Act, 1954
COMPILATION 111 : STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 417-441
85. Section 2 (b)
"degrees of prohibited relationship" - a man and any of the persons mentioned in Part / of the First Schedule and a
woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part 11 of the said Schedules are within the degrees of prohibited
relationship.
Explanation 1.- Relationship includes, a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood : b)
illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate; c) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; and all terms of
relationship in this Act shall be construed accordingly.
Explanation 11. "Full blood" and "half blood"- two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when
they are descended from a common ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when they are descended from a
common ancestor but by different wives.
Explanation III.- "Uterine blood"- two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are
descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands.
Explanation IV. In Explanations. // and 111. "ancestor" includes the father and "ancestress" the mother;
86. Section 4 - Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages-
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to the solemnization of
marriages, a marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a) neither party has a spouse living;
(b) neither party-
(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such
an
extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or
(iii) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity;
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a marriage between them, such
marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the degrees of prohibited relationship; and
(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, both parties are citizens of India
domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends.
Explanation-In this section, "custom", in relation to a person belonging to any tribe, community, group or family,
means any rule which the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf as
applicable to members of that tribe, community, group or family:
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of any tribe, community, group or
family, unless the State Government is satisfied-
(i) that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time among those members;
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and
(iii) that such rule, if applicable only to a family, has not been discontinued by the family.
87. Section 12. Place and form of solemnization-
(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the Marriage Officer, or at such other place within a reasonable
distance therefrom as the parties may desire, and upon such conditions and the payment of such additional fees
as may be prescribed.
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt : Provided that it shall not
be complete and binding on the parties unless each party says to the other in the presence of the Marriage
Officer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by the parties,- "I, (A), take the (B), to be my
lawful wife (or husband)
88. Section 15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms-
Any marriage celebrated, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, other than a marriage solemnized
under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), or under this Act, may be registered under this Chapter by a
Marriage Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties and they have .been living together as
husband and wife ever since;
89. Section 22. Restitution of conjugal rights-
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other,
the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on
being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the
application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.
90. Section 23 - Judicial separation-
(1) A petition for judicial separation may be presented to the district court either by the husband or the wife,-
(a) on any of the grounds specified 3 [in sub-section (1) 4 [and sub-section (1A)] of Section 27] on which a
petition for divorce might have been presented; or
(b) on the ground of failure to comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal rights; and the court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the
application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation accordingly.
(2) Where the court grants a decree for judicial separation, it shall be no longer obligatory for the petitioner to
cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by petition of either party and on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it considers it just and
reasonable to do SO.
91. Section 25. Voidable marriages-
Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be voidable and may be annulled by a decree of nullity if,
(i) the marriage has not been consummated owing to the wilful refusal of the respondent to consummate the
marriage; or
(ii) the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the petitioner; or
(iii) the consent of either party to the marriage was obtained by coercion or fraud, as defined in the Indian Contract
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872):
Provided further that in the case specified in clause (iii), the court shall not grant a decree if
(a) proceedings have not been instituted within one year after the coercion had ceased or, as the case may be,
the fraud had been discovered; or
(b) the petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with the other party to the marriage as husband and
wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered.
92. Section 27. Divorce-
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition for divorce may be presented
to the district court either by the husband or the wife on the ground that the respondent-
(1A) A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the district CO
(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality;
(ii) that in a suit under Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 1956), or in a
proceeding under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (or under the corresponding
Section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898) (5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has
been passed against the husband awarding maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was living
apart and that since the passing of such decree or order, cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed
for one year or upwards.
93. Section 31. Court to which petition should be made-
(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be presented to the district court within the local limits of
whose original civil jurisdiction-
(i) the marriage was solemnized; or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition resides; or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or 3
[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of the petition; or]
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the respondent is at
that time residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been heard of as being alive for a period
of seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he were alive.]
(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under sub-section (1), the district court may, by
virtue of this sub-section, entertain a petition by a wife domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends for
nullity of marriage or for divorce if she is resident in the said territories and has been ordinarily resident therein for a
period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition and the husband is not resident in the
said territories.
94. Section 36. Alimony pendente lite-
Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI it appears to the district court that the wife has no
independent income sufficient for her support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the
application of the wife, order the husband to pay to her the expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or monthly
during the proceeding such sum as having regard to the husband's income, it may seem to the court to be
reasonable.
[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such weekly or monthly sum
during the proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from
the date of service of notice on the husband.
95. Section 37. Permanent alimony and maintenance-
(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter V or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any
time subsequent to the decree, on application made to it for the purpose, order that the husband shall secure to
the wife for her maintenance and support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband's property such gross
sum or such monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life, as, having regard to her
own property, if any, her husband's property and ability 5 [the conduct of the parties and other
circumstances of the case], it it may seem to the court to be just.
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any time after it has
made an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such
order in such manner as it may seem to the court to be just.
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order has been made under this Section
has remarried or is not leading a chaste life, 1 [it may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify or rescind
any such order and in such manner as the court may deem just.
96. Section 44. Punishment of bigamy-
Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, during the lifetime of his or her wife or
husband, contracts any other marriage shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 494 and Section 495 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), for the offence of marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife,
and the marriage so contracted shall be void
THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS PG 1028-1044
97. Section 10 Form of application.-
(1) If the application is not made by the Collector, it shall be by petition signed and verified in manner prescribed
by the 2 Code, of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) for the signing and verification of a plaint, and stating, SO far as can be
ascertained-
(a) the name, sex, religion, date of birth and ordinary residence of the minor;
(b) where the minor is a female, whether she is married, and, if so, the name and age of her husband;
98. Section 12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim protection of
person and property.-
(1) The Court may direct that the person, if any, having the custody of the minor shall produce him or cause him to
be produced at such place and time and before such person as it appoints, and may make such order for the
temporary custody and protection of the person or property of the minor as it thinks proper.
(2) If the minor is a female who ought not to be compelled to appear in public, the direction under sub-section (1)
for her production shall require her to be produced in accordance with the customs and manners of the country.
(3) Nothing in this Section shall authorise-
(a) the Court to place a female minor in the temporary custody of a person claiming to be her guardian
on the ground of his being her husband, unless she is already in his custody with the consent of her
parents, if any, or
(b) any person to whom the temporary custody and protection of the property of a minor is entrusted to
dispossess otherwise than by due course of law any person in possession of any of the property.
99. Section 19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases.-
Nothing in this Chapter shall authorise the Court to appoint or declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose
property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person-
(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian
of her person, or 2
[(b) of a minor, other than a married female, whose father or mother is living and is not, in the opinion of the court,
unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or.]
(c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards competent to appoint a guardian of
the person of the minor.
100. Section 41. Cessation of authority of guardian.-
(1) The powers of a guardian of the person cease-
(a) by his death, removal or discharge;
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence of the person of the ward;
(c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor;
(d) in the case of a female ward, by her marriage to a husband who is not unfit to be guardian of her person
or, if the guardian was appointed or declared by the Court, by her marriage to a husband who is not, in the
opinion of the Court, SO unfit; or
THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 849-860
101. Section 2. Definitions.-
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "aggrieved person" means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with the respondent
and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by the respondent
q) "respondent" means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with the
aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has sought any relief under this Act:
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage may also file a
complaint against a relative of the husband or the male partner;
102. Section 17. Right to reside in a shared household.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every woman in a domestic
relationship shall have the right to reside in the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial
interest in the same.
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any part of it by the
respondent save in accordance with the procedure established by law.
THE FOREIGN MARRIAGE Act, 1969
COMPILATION 111 : STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 442-454
103. Section 13. Place and form of solemnization.-
(1) A marriage by or before a Marriage Officer under this Act shall be solemnized at the official house of the Marriage
Officer with open doors between the prescribed hours in the presence of at least three witnesses.
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless each party declares to the other in the
presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by the parties,-
"1, (A) take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband)":
Provided further that where the declaration referred to in the preceding proviso is made in any language which
is not understood by the Marriage Officer or by any of the witnesses, either of the parties shall interpret or cause
to be interpreted the declaration in a language which the Marriage Officer, or, as the case may be, such witness
understands.
104. Section 18. Matrimonial reliefs to be under Special Marriage Act, 1954.
(2) Every petition for relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) as made
applicable to the marriages referred to in sub-section (1) shall be presented to the district court within the local limits
of whose ordinary civil jurisdiction-
(a) the respondent is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition; or
(b) the husband and wife last resided together; or
(c) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, provided that the respondent is at that
time residing outside India.
THE DOWRY PROHIBITION ACT, 1961
Compilation 111 : Statutory materials - pg 861 - 864
105. Section 2. Definition of 'dowry"
In this Act, "dowry" means any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly
(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or (b) by the parents of either party to a marriage
or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person; at or before or any time after the
marriage in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but does not include dower or mahr in the case of
persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) applies.
Explanation 11. The expression "valuable security" has the same meaning as in Section 30 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).
106. Section 3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry...
(1) If any person, after the commencement of this Act, gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, and with fine which shall not
be less than fifteen thousand rupees or the amount of the value of such dowry, whichever is more:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence
of imprisonment for a term of less than five years.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in relation to, -
(a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bride (without any demand having been made in
that behalf) : Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made
under this Act;
(b) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bridegroom (without any demand having been
made in that behalf):
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made under this
Act : Provided further that where such presents are made by or on behalf of the bride or any person
related to the bride, such presents are of a customary nature and the value thereof is not excessive
having regard to the financial status of the person by whom, or on whose behalf, such presents are given.
107. Section 6. Dowry to be for the benefit of the wife or her heirs.-
(1) Where any dowry is received by any person other than the woman in connection with whose marriage it is
given, that person shall transfer it to the woman-
(a) if the dowry was received before marriage, within 3 [three months] after the date of marriage; or
(b) if the dowry was received at the time of or after the marriage, within three months after the date of its receipt;
or
(c) if the dowry was received when the woman was a minor, within three months after she has attained the age of
eighteen years; and pending such transfer, shall hold it in trust for the benefit of the woman.
(2) If any person fails to transfer any property as required by sub-section (1) within the time limit specified therefor
5
[or as required by sub-section (3), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months, but which may extend to two years or with fine 6 [which shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but
which may extend to ten thousand rupees] or with both.
(3) Where the woman entitled to any property under sub-section (1) dies before receiving it, the heirs of the
woman shall be entitled to claim it from the person holding it for the time being:
Provided that where such woman dies within seven years of her marriage, otherwise than due to natural causes,
such property shall, -
(a) if she has no children, be transferred to her parents, or
(b) if she has children, be transferred to such children and pending such transfer, be held in trust for such children.
(3A) Where a person convicted under sub-section (2) for failure to transfer any property as required by sub-section
(1) or sub-section (3) has not, before his conviction under that sub-section, transferred such property to the woman
entitled thereto or, as the case may be, her heirs, parents or children the Court shall, in addition to awarding
punishment under that subsection, direct, by order in writing, that such person shall transfer the property to such
woman or, as the case may be, her heirs, parents or children within such period as may be specified in the order, and
if such person fails to comply with the direction within the period SO specified, an amount equal to the value of the
property may be recovered from him as if it were a fine imposed by such Court and paid to such woman or, as the
case may be, her heirs, parents or children.
(4) Nothing contained in this Section shall affect the provisions of Section 3 or Section
4
THE DOWRY PROHIBITION AINTENANCE OF LISTS OF PRESENTS TO THE BRIDE AND BRI DEGROOM)
RULES, 1985
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 603
108. Rule 2. Rules in accordance with which lists of presents are to be maintained
(1) The list of presents which are given at the time of the marriage to the bride shall be maintained by the bride.
(2) The list of presents which are given at the time of the marriage to the bridegroom shall be maintained by the
bridegroom.
MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (Not annexed)
109. Section 3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered medical practitioners.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a registered medical practitioner
shall not be guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being in force, if any
pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a registered medical
practitioner,-
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twelve weeks, if such medical practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twelve weeks but does not exceed twenty weeks, if not less than
two registered medical practitioners are, of opinion, formed in good faith, that-
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury
to her physical or mental health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from such physical or mental
abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.
Explanation I.-Where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been caused by rape, the
anguish caused by such pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the
pregnant woman.
Explanation II.-Where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or method used by any married
woman or her husband for the purpose of limiting the number of children, the anguish caused by such unwanted
pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy would involve such risk of injury to the health as
is
mentioned in sub-section (2), account may be taken of the pregnant woman's actual or reasonably foreseeable
environment. (4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or, who, having
attained the age of eighteen years, is a1 [mentally ill person], shall be terminated except with the consent in writing
of her guardian. (b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy shall be terminated except with the
consent of the pregnant woman.
THE DISSOLUTION OF MUSLIM MARRIAGES ACT, 1939
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (Not annexed)
110. Section 2. Grounds for decree for dissolution of marriage.
A woman married under Muslim law shall be entitled to obtain a decree for the dissolution of her marriage on any
one or more of the following grounds, namely:
(i) that the whereabouts of the husband have not been known for a period of four years;
(ii) that the husband has neglected or has failed to provide for her maintenance for a period of two years;
(iii)
that the husband has been sentenced to imprisonment for a period of seven years or upwards;
(iv) that the husband has failed to perform, without reasonable cause, his marital obligations for a period of three
years;
(v) that the husband was impotent at the time of the marriage and continues to be so;
(vi) that the husband has been insane for a period of two years or is suffering from leprosy or a virulent venereal
disease;
(vii) that she, having been given in marriage by her father or other guardian before she attained the age of fifteen
years, repudiated the marriage before attaining the age of eighteen years:
Provided that the marriage has not been consummated;
(viii) that the husband treats her with cruelty, that is to say,
(a) habitually assaults her or makes her life miserable by cruelty of conduct even if such conduct does not
amount to physical ill-treatment, or
(b) associates with women of evil repute or leads an infamous life, or
(c) attempts to force her to lead an immoral life, or
(d) disposes of her property or prevents her exercising her legal rights over it, or
(e) obstructs her in the observance of her religious profession or practice, or
(f) if he has more wives than one, does not treat her equitably in accordance with the injunctions of the
Qoran;
(ix) on any other ground which is recognised as valid for the dissolution of marriages under Muslim law:
Provided that
(a) no decree shall be passed on ground (iii) until the sentence has become final;
(b) a decree passed on ground (i) shall not take effect for a period of six months from the date of such decree,
and if the husband appears either in person or through an authorised agent within that period and satisfied
the Court that he is prepared to perform his conjugal duties, the Court shall set aside the said decree; and
(c) before passing a decree on ground (v) the Court shall, on application by the husband, made an order
requiring the husband to satisfy the Court within a period of one year from the date of such order that he has
ceased to be impotent, and if the husband SO satisfies the Court within such period, no decree shall be passed
on the said ground. Comments : -Section 2 of the Act deals with the right of a woman married under Muslim
Law to obtain a decree for dissolution that her husband assaults her or makes her life miserable by
cruelty. If any incident perpetrated by the husband with cruelty had made her communal life miserable
then that would amount to cruel treatment as envisaged in the clause. Held, it was a cruelty to force a young
woman, who was desirious of becoming a mother, to abort her pregnancy and some drug was administered to
her and miscarriage occurred consequently. (Siddique V. Amina, (1996) 1 DMC 87)
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 1082-1229
111. Section 10
"Man". "Woman". The word "man" denotes a male human being of any age; the word "woman" denotes a female
human being of any age.
112. Section 27.
Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant". When property is in the possession of a person's wife, clerk
or servant, on account of that person, it is in that person's possession within the meaning of this Code.
113. Section 136. Harbouring deserter.-
Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to believe that an officer, soldier, 8 [sailor or
airman], in the Army, 9 [Navy or Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], has deserted, harbours such officer,
soldier, 8 [sailor or airman], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine or with both. Exception.-This provision does not extend to the case in which the
harbour is given by a wife to her husband.
114. Section 304B. Dowry death.-
(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal
circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry,
such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death
115. Section 354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.-
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will
there by outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
116. Section 354A. Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment.-
(1) A man committing any of the following acts- (i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and
explicit sexual overtures; or (ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or (iii) showing pornography against the
will of a woman; or (iv) making sexually coloured remarks, shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
(2) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (1) shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (iv) of sub-section (1) shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
117. Section 354B. Assault on use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.-
Any man who assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or
compelling her to be naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than three years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
118. Section 354C. Voyeurism.-
Any man who watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in circumstances where she
would usually have the expectation of not being observed either by the perpetrator or by any other person at the
behest of the perpetrator or disseminates such image shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine, and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.-For the purpose of this section, "private act" includes an act of watching carried out in a place
which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide privacy and where the victim's genitals,
posterior or breasts are
exposed or covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is
not of a kind ordinarily done in public.
Explanation .-Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act, but not to their dissemination to
third persons and where such image or act is disseminated, such dissemination shall be considered an offence under
this section.
119. Section 354D. Stalking.-
(1) Any man who- (i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster personal
interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or (ii) monitors the use by a
woman of the internet, email or any other form of electronic communication, commits the offence of stalking
:
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued it proves that- (i) it was
pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the man accused of stalking had been entrusted
with the responsibility of prevention and detection of crime by the State; or (ii) it was pursued under any law or
to comply with any condition or requirement imposed by any person under any law; or (iii) in the particular
circumstances such conduct was reasonable and justified.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and be punished on a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine.]
120. Section 366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.-
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that
she will be compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; [and
whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this Code or of abuse of authority or any other method of
compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place with intent that she may be, or knowing that it is likely that
she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person shall also be punishable as aforesaid].
121. Section 372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.-
Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of any person under the age of eighteen years with intent that
such person shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person
or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be employed or
used for any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation -When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise disposed of to a
prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so disposing of such female shall, until the
contrary is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of
prostitution.
Explanation II.-For the purposes of this Section "illicit intercourse" means sexual intercourse between persons not
united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amounting to a marriage, is recognised by the personal
law or custom of the community to which they belong or, where they belong to different communities, of both such
communities, as constituting between them a quasi-marital relation.
122. Section 375. Rape.-
A man is said to commit "rape" if he-
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so
with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus
of a woman or makes her to do SO with him or any other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman SO as to cause penetration into the vagina, urethra, anus or any
part of body of such woman or makes her to do SO with him or any other person; or (d) applies his mouth to the
vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person, under the circumstances
falling under any of the following seven descriptions:-
First.-Against her will.
Secondly.-Without her consent.
Thirdly.- With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is
interested, in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly. - With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and that her consent is given because
she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Exception 2.-Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years
of age, is not rape
123. Section 376B. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.-
Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether under a decree of separation
or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. Explanation.- this
section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of Section 375
124. Section 493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage.-
Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully
married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that belief, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
125. Section 494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.-
Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking
place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception. This Section does not extend to any person whose marriage with such husband or wife has been
declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, non to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a
former husband or wife, if such husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been
continually absent from such person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of by such person as
being alive within that time provided the person contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marriage
takes place, inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the real state of facts SO far as the same are
within his or her knowledge
126. Section 498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.-
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT
COMPILATION 111 STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 2160-2220
127. Section 113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
When the question is
whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her
husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her
marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may
presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by her husband
or by such relative of her husband.
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall have the same meaning as in Section 498A of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
128. Section 113B. Presumption as to dowry death.
When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon
before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in Section 304B of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
THE Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 340-602
129. Section 46 - Arrest how made
(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such
exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission
of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be
made.]
130. Section 51 - Search of arrested person.
(2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be made by another female with
strict regard to decency.
131. Section 53 - Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer.
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the examination shall be made only by,
or under the supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner.
132. Section 98. Power to compel restoration of abducted females.-
Upon complaint made on oath of the abduction or unlawful detention of a woman, or a female child under the age of
eighteen years for any unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class
may make an order for the immediate restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to her
husband, parent, guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel compliance with
such order, using such force as may be necessary
133. Section 125.-Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.-
(1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain-
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, where such child
is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of
such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such
child, father or mother, at such monthly rate 1
as such Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such
person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child referred to in clause (b) to make such
allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female
child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
[Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance for
the maintenance under this sub-section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the
Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time
direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding
under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the service of
notice of the application to such person.]
Explanation. -For the purposes of this Chapter,-
(a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) is deemed
not to have attained his majority;
(b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has
not remarried.
[(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding shall be payable
from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.]
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her living with him, and she
refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order
under this Section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.
Explanation.- a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be
considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an [allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] from her husband under this Section if she is living in adultery, or if,
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living separately by mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this Section in living in adultery, or that
without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual consent.
134. Section 126. Procedure.-
(1) Proceedings under Section 125 may be taken against any person in any district-
(a) where he is, or
(b) where he or his wife resides, or
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child.
135. Section 127. Alteration in allowance.-
(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under Section 125 a monthly allowance for
the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered under the same Section to pay a monthly allowance for the
maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may
make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance, as the case
may be.]
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of any decision of a competent Civil Court, any order
made under Section 125 should be cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as the case may be, vary the same
accordinalv.
(3) Where any order has been made under Section 125 in favour of a woman who has been divorced by, or has
obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that
(a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her
remarriage;
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received, whether before or after the date
of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, was
payable on such divorce, cancel such order,-
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date on which such order was made:
(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for which maintenance has been actually paid
by the husband to the woman;
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had voluntarily surrendered her rights to
1 [maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be,] after her divorce, cancel the order from the date
thereof.
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a 2
[monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them has been ordered] to be paid under
Section 125, the Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such person 2
[as monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them, as the case may be, in pursuance
of] the said order.
136. Section 154. Information in cognizable cases.-
(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a
police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every
such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it,
and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government
may prescribe in this behalf:
Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence under Section 326A, Section 326B,
Section 354, Section 354A, Section 354B, Section 354C, Section 354D, Section 376, 2 [section 376A, Section 376AB,
Section 376B, Section 376C, Section 376D, Section 376DA, Section 376DB], Section 376E or Section 509 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information shall be recorded, by
a woman police officer or any woman officer:
Provided further that- (a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under Section 354, Section 354A,
Section 354B, Section 354C, Section 354D, Section 376, 1 [section 376A, Section 376AB, Section 376B, Section 376C,
Section 376D, Section 376DA, Section 376DB], Section 376E or Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is
alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, then
such information shall be recorded by a police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to report such offence or
at a convenient place of such person's choice, in the presence of an interpreter or a special educator, as the case may
be; (b) the recording of such information shall be video graphed; (c) the police officer shall get the statement of the
person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate under clause (a) of sub-section (5A) of Section 164 as soon as possible.
137. 160. Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses.-
(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance
before himself of any person being within the limits of his own or any adjoining station who, from the information
given or otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall
attend as so required:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty-five years or a woman or a
mentally or physically disabled person shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such
male person or woman resides.
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment by the police officer of the
reasonable expenses of every person, attending under sub-section (1) at any place other than his residence.
138. Section 174. Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc.-
(1)
When the officer in charge of a police station or some other police officer specially empowered by the State
Government in that behalf receives information that a person has committed suicide, or has been killed by
another or by an animal or by machinery or by an accident, or has died under circumstances raising a reasonable
suspicion that some other person has committed an offence, he shall immediately give intimation thereof to the
nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless otherwise directed by any rule prescribed
by the State Government, or by any general or special order of the District or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall
proceed to the place where the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more
respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent
cause of death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may be found on the
body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument (if any); such marks appear to have been
inflicted
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by SO many of them as concur therein,
and shall be forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub-divisional Magistrate.
(3) [When-
(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage in any circumstances
raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an offence in relation to such woman; or
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage and any relative of the
woman has made a request in this behalf; or
139. Section 198. Prosecution for offences against marriage.-
(1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860) except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence:
Provided that-
(a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity
unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be
compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or
her behalf;
(b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed Forces of the Union under conditions
which are certified by his Commanding Officer as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to enable him
to make a complaint in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under 1 [section 494 or Section 495] of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf by her father, mother,
brother, sister, son or daughter or by her father's or mother's brother or sister 2 [, or, with the leave of the Court,
by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption].
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than the husband of the woman shall be deemed to be
aggrieved by any offence punishable under Section 497 or Section 498 of the said Code:
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman on his behalf at the time
when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his behalf.
(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the complaint is sought to be made
on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen years or of a lunatic by a person who has not been appointed or
declared by a competent authority to be the guardian of the person of the minor or lunatic, and the Court is satisfied
that there is a guardian SO appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for leave, cause
notice to be given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), shall be in writing, shall
be signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement to the effect that he has been
informed of the allegations upon which the complaint is to be founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding
Officer, and shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the
purpose of making a complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to the husband.
(5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and complying with the provisions of sub-section (4), and
any document purporting to be a certificate required by that sub-section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be
presumed to be genuine and shall be received in evidence.
(6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where
such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife being under 3 [eighteen years of age],
if more than one year has elapsed from the date of the commission of the offence.
(7) The provisions of this Section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an offence as they apply to the
offence.
140. Section 198B. Cognizance of offence.-
No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Section 376B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the
offence upon a complaint having been filed or made by the wife against the husband.]
141. Section 437. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.-
(1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested or
detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station or appears or is brought before a Court other
than the High Court or Court of session, he may be released on bail, but-
(i) such person shall not be SO released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been guilty of
an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life;
(ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence and he had been previously
convicted of an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, or
he had been previously convicted on two or more occasions of a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for three years or more but not less than seven years:
Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail if such
person is under the age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm:
THE Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 1-339
142. Section 33. Discretion of Court in executing decrees for restitution of conjugal rights.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything in rule 32, the Court, either at the time of passing a decree against a husband for
the restitution of conjugal rights or at any time afterwards, may order that the decree shall be executed in the manner
provided in this rule.
*
143. Section 60 Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, namely : - (a) the necessary
wearing-apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of the judgment-debtor his wife and children, and such
personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be parted with by any woman
144. Order XXII Rule 7. Suit not abated by marriage of female party...
(1) The marriage of a female plaintiff or defendant shall not cause the suit to abate, but the suit may
notwithstanding be proceeded with the judgment, and, where the decree is against a female defendant, it may be
executed against her alone. (2) Where the husband is by law liable for the debts of his wife, the decree may, with
the permission of the Court, be executed against the husband also; and, in case of judgment for the wife,
execution of the decree may, with such permission, be issued upon the application of the husband, where the
husband is by law entitled to the subject-matter of the decree
145. Order XXXI Rule 3. Husband of married executrix not to join.
Unless the Court directs otherwise, the husband of a married trustee, administratrix or executrix shall not as
such be a party to a suit by or against her.
146. Order XXXIIA Rue 6. Family"-meaning of.-
For the purposes of this Order, each of the following shall be treated as constituting a family, namely : - (a)
(i) a man and his wife living together,
(ii) any child or children, being issue of theirs; or of such man or such wife,
(iii) any child or children being maintained by such man and wife;
(b) a man not having a wife or not living together with his wife, any child or children, being issue of his, and any
child or children being mantained by him;
(c)
a woman not having her husband or not living together with her husband, any child or children being issue
of hers, and any child or children being maintained by her;
MAN - WOMAN LAWS
Denoting male and female - Recognition of same sex marriage may result is absurd results
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
COMPILATION III : STATUTORY MATERIALS - PG 1-402
147. Article 15
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or
any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any
disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to- (a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and
places of public entertainment; or (b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children."
148. Article 243D - Reservation of seats.
(1) Seats shall be reserved for- (a) the Scheduled Castes; and (b) the Scheduled Tribes, in every Panchayat and
the number of seats SO reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat
area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area and such seats
may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in
the Panchayats at each level in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the State:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each
level shall be reserved for women : Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall be
allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the
reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in
article 334.
[Similar provision exists in Article 243T for Municipalities]
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 692-704
149. Section - 2. Definitions.-
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) "aggrieved woman" means- (i) in relation to a workplace,
a woman, of any age whether employed or not, who alleges to have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by
the respondent; (ii) in relation to dwelling place or house, a woman of any age who is employed in such a dwelling
place or house;
150. Section 3 - Prevention of sexual harassment.-
(1) No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace. (2) The following circumstances, among
other circumstances, if it occurs, or is present in relation to or connected with any act or behavior of sexual
harassment may amount to sexual harassment:- (i) implied or explicit promise of preferential treatment in her
employment; or (ii) implied or explicit threat of detrimental treatment in her employment ; or (iii) implied or explicit
threat about her present or future employment status; or (iv) interference with her work or creating an intimidating or
offensive or hostile work environment for her; or (v) humiliating treatment likely to affect her health or safety.
IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) ACT, 1956
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - UOI - PG 617-634
151. Section 6. Detaining a person in premises where prostitution is carried on.
(1) Any person who detains any other person, whether with or without his consent, - (a) in any brothel, or (b) in or
upon any premises with intent 3 [that such person may have sexual intercourse with a person who is not the
spouse of such person], shall be punishable on conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten years
and shall also be liable to fine : Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(2) Where any person is found with a child in a brothel, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he
has committed an offence under sub-section (1).
(2A) Where a child or minor found in a brothel, is, on medical examination, detected to have been sexually abused,
it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the child or minor has been detained for purposes of
prostitution or, as the case may be, has been sexually exploited for commercial purposes.
(3) A person shall be presumed to detain a woman or girl in a brothel or in or upon any premises for the purpose of
sexual intercourse with a man other than her lawful husband, if such person, with intent to compel or induce her
to remain there,-
(a) withholds from her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or other property belonging to her, or
(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she takes away with her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or
other property lent or supplied to her by or by the direction of such person.
(4) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against such
woman or girl at the instance of the person by whom she has been detained, for the recovery of any jewellery,
wearing apparel or other property alleged to have been lent or supplied to or for such woman or girl or to have
been pledged by such woman or girl or for the recovery of any money alleged to be payable by such woman or
girl.
The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (not annexed)
152. Section 2. Application of Personal Law to Muslims.-
Notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, in all questions (save questions relating to agricultural land)
regarding intestate succession, special property of females, including personal properly inherited or obtained under
contract or gift or any other provision of Personal Law. marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar,
lian, khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, quardianship, gifts, trusts and trust properties, and wakfs (other than
charities and charitable institutions and charitable and religious endowments) the rule of decision in cases where the
parties are Muslims shall be the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat).
The Information Technology Act, 2000
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (not annexed)
153. Section 77A. Compounding of offences.-
A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other than offences for which the punishment for life or
imprisonment for a term exceeding three years has been provided, under this Act:
Provided that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by reason of his previous conviction,
liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind:
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects the socio economic
conditions of the country or has been committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a woman.
(2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for compounding in the court in which
offence is pending for trial and the provisions of sections 265B and 265C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974) shall apply.
The Commission Of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (not annexed)
154. Section 2. Definitions.-
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- -
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
(b) "glorification", in relation to sati, whether such sati, was committed before or after the commencement of this
Act, includes, among other things,
(i) the observance of any ceremony or the taking out of a procession in connection with the commission of
sati; or
(ii) the supporting, justifying or propagating the practice of sati in any manner; or
(iii) the arranging of any function to eulogise the person who has committed sati; or
(iv) the creation of a trust, or the collection of funds, or the construction of a temple or other structure or the
carrying on of any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony thereat, with a view to perpetuate
the honour of, or to preserve the memory of, a person who has committed sati;
(c) "sati" means the act of burning or burying alive of-
(i) any widow along with the body of her deceased husband or any other relative or with any article, object or
thing associated with the husband or such relative; or
(ii) any woman along with the body of any of her relatives, irrespective of whether such burning or burying is
claimed to be voluntary on the part of the widow or the woman or otherwise;
(d) "Special Court" means a Special Court constituted under Section 9;
(e) "temple" includes any building or other structure, whether roofed or not, constructed or made to preserve the
memory of a person in respect of whom sati has been committed or used or intended to be used for the
carrying on of any form of worship or for the observance of any ceremony in connection with such commission.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or in
the Code shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code or the
Code.
155. Section 4. Abetment of sati.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), if any person commits sati, whoever
abets the commission of such sati, either directly or indirectly, shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life
and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) If any person attempts to commit sati, whoever abets such attempt, either directly or indirectly, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, any of the following acts or the like shall also be deemed to be an
abetment, namely: -
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or buried alive along with the body of her deceased
husband or with any other relative or with any article, object or thing associated with the husband or such relative,
irrespective of whether she is in a fit state of mind or is labouring under a state of intoxication or stupefaction or other
cause impeding the exercise of her free will;
(b) making a widow or woman believe that the commission of sati would result in some spiritual benefit to her or
her deceased husband or relative or the general well being of the family;
(c) encouraging a widow or woman to remain fixed in her resolve to commit sati and thus instigating her to commit
sati;
(d) participating in any procession in connection with the commission of sati or aiding the widow or woman in her
decision to commit sati by taking her along with body of her deceased husband or relation to the cremation or burial
ground;
(e) being present at the place where sati is committed as an active participant to such commission or to any
ceremony connected with it;
(f) preventing or obstructing the widow or woman from saving herself from being burnt or buried alive;
(g) obstructing, or interfering with, the police in the discharge of its duties of taking any steps to prevent the
commission of sati.
Protection Of Women From Domestic Violence Rules, 2006
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (not annexed)
156. Section 11. Registration of service providers.
(1) Any voluntary association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or a company
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law for time being in force with the objective
of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means including providing of legal aid, medical,
financial or other assistance and desirous of providing service as a service provider under the Act shall make an
application under sub-section (1) of Section 10 for registration as service provider in Form VI to the State
Government.
(2) The State Government shall, after making such enquiry as it may consider necessary and after satisfying itself
about the suitability of the applicant, register it as a service provider and issue a certificate of such registration
:
Provided that no such application shall be rejected without giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.
(3) Every association or company seeking registration under sub-section (1) of Section 10 shall possess the
following eligibility criteria, namely- (a) It should have been rendering the kind of services it is offering under the
Act for at least three years before the date of application for registration under the Act and these rules as a
service provider.
(b) In case an applicant for registration is running a medical facility, or a psychiatric counselling centre, or a
vocational training institution, the State Government shall ensure that the applicant fulfils the requirements for
running such a facility or institution laid down by the respective regulatory authorities regulating the respective
professions or institutions. (c) In case an applicant for registration is running a shelter home, the State
Government shall, through an officer or any authority or agency authorised by it, inspect the shelter home,
prepare a report and record its finding on the report, detailing that-
(i) the maximum capacity of such shelter home for intake of persons seeking shelter;
(ii) the place is secure for running a shelter home for women and that adequate security arrangements can be
put in place for the shelter home;
(iii) the shelter home has a record of maintaining a functional telephone connection or other communication
media for the use of the inmates.
(4) The State Government shall provide a list of service providers in the various localities to the concerned
Protection Officers and also publish such list of newspapers or on its website.
(5) The Protection Officer shall maintain proper records by way of maintenance of registers duly indexed, containing
the details of the service providers.
I indecent Representation of women (Prohibition) Rules, 1987
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (not annexed)
157. Section 2. Definitions:
(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
a. 'Act' means the Indecent Representation of women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 (60 of 1986) ;
b. 'article' means any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, representation of
figure;
C. 'authorized officer' means any Gazetted Officer authorized by the State Government for the purpose of Section 5
of the Act.
d. 'section' means a Section of the Act.
(2) Words and expressions used in these rules and not defined, shall have the meanings respectively, assigned to
them in the Act.
The Maternity Benefit (Mines And Circus) Rules, 1963
COMPILATION OF STATUTES - (not annexed)
158. Section 3. Muster-roll.-
(1) The employer of [every mine or circus] in which women are employed shall prepare and maintain a muster-roll
in Form 'A' and shall enter therein particulars of all women workers in [the mine or circus.
(2) All entries in the muster-roll shall be made in ink and maintained up-to-date and it shall always be available for
inspection by the Inspector during working hours.
(3) The employer may enter in the muster-roll such other particulars as may be required for any other purpose of
the Act.
ANNEXURE C
M.N. KAUL
S.L. SHAKDHER
Practice and Procedure of Parliament
(with particular reference to the Lok Sabha)
P.D.T. ACHARY
Editor
(Sixth Edition)
Published for the
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
METROPOLI TAN BOOK CO. PVT. LTD.
Chapter XXX
Parliamentary Committees
(Parliamentary Committees, Consultative Committees,
Government Committees and Parliamentary Forums)
A. COMMITTEE IN GENERAL
Parliament transacts a great deal of its business through Committees. These Committees are appointed to deal with
specific items of business requiring expert or detailed consideration. The system of Parliamentary Committees is
particularly useful in dealing with matters which, on account of their special or technical nature, are better considered
in detail by a small number of members rather than by the House itself. Moreover, the system saves the time of the
House for the discussion of important matters and prevents Parliament from getting lost in details and thereby losing
hold on matters of policy and broad principles.
The Committee system in India can be traced back to the advent of the Montague-Chelmsford Reforms, but the
Committees of those days, like the Central Legislative Assembly itself, were not free from governmental control
and interference. They had no powers and privileges; they were not the masters of their own procedure; and
they could not even frame rules for their internal working.
Standing Orders of the Central Legislative Assembly provided for three Committees, namely, Committee on
Petitions relating to Bills514 Select Committee on Amendments of Standing Orders51 and Select Committee on
Bills Of these, the Committee on Petitions relating to Bills could be called a Standing Committee of the
516
Assembly. The Indian Legislative Rules, in addition, provided for the constitution of two Committees, viz., a Joint
Committee on a Bill 517 and the Committee on Public Accounts 518
In fact, the Committee on Public Accounts of the Central Legislative Assembly could hardly be termed as a
Parliamentary Committee as it did not function under the control of the House or the Speaker. The Committee
was presided over by the Finance Member and its secretarial functions were discharged by the Department of
Finance 519
Apart from Committees of the Legislative Assembly, members of both Houses of the Central Legislature also served
on the Standing Advisory Committees attached to various Departments of the Government of India. All these
Committees were purely advisory in character and functioned under the control of the Government, and the
Minister in-charge of the concerned Department acted as the Chairman of the Committee.
After the Constitution came into force, the position of the Central Legislature changed altogether and the
Committee system too underwent transformation. Not only did the number of Committees increase but their functions
and powers were also enlarged.
A Parliamentary Committee is appointed or elected by the House or nominated by the Speaker it
works
under
the direction of the Speaker and presents its report to the House or to the Speaker, and the secretarial work for it is
done by the Secretariat521. The question whether a Committee which does not satisfy all these conditions is a
Parliamentary Committee or not is referred to the Speaker whose decision is final522
Committees of the Lok Sabha
The Lok Sabha possesses an organised system of Committees523 Appointment, term of office, functions and
main
lines of procedure for conducting business of the Committees are regulated under the provisions of the Rules and the
Directions by the Speaker5 issued under those Rules. There are three sets of rules relating to Parliamentary
Committees: General Rules' which are applicable to all the Committees; 'Specific Rules' which make special
provisions for particular Committees; and Internal Rules' which regulate the internal procedure of each with the
approval of the Speaker and are in the nature of detailed working procedure and are framed in conformity with the
provisions of the "Rules" and "Directions".
Broad Classification : Committees of the Lok Sabha may be broadly classified into:
Standing Committees and ad hoc Committees.
The Standing Committees in terms of their functions can further be divided under five broad headings
528
Committees to inquire (e.g. Committee on Petitions and Committee on Privileges);
Committees to scrutinize (e.g. Committee on Government Assurances and Committee on Subordinate Legislation);
Committees relating to the day-to-day business of the House (e.g. Committee on Absence of Members from the
Sittings of the House, Business Advisory Committee, Committee on Private Members' Bills and Resolutions, Rules
Committee and Committee on Papers Laid on the Table);
Committees concerned with provision of facilities to members (e.g. General Purposes Committee, House Committee
and Library Committee); and
Committees to control financial and administrative powers of the Government (e.g. Committee on Estimates,
Committee on Public Accounts and Committee on Public Undertakings).
These Committees have been constituted in terms of the Rules, and are reconstituted annually or at other interval,
as the case may be, depending upon the tenure of the individual Committees.
In addition to these, there are other Standing Committees, viz. the Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of
Members of Parliament which has been constituted under the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament Act,
1954 the Joint Committee on Offices of Profit, which is constituted on a motion adopted by the Lok Sabha and
529
concurred in by the Rajya Sabha at the beginning of each Lok Sabha 530 the Committee on the Welfare of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes53 twenty four Departmentally Related Standing Committees and
532
Committee on Empowerment of Women, to which members of both Houses are elected/nominated. On these
Committees, members of both Houses serve jointly.
The ad hoc Committees may be broadly classified under two headings. First there are the ad hoc Committees which
are constituted, from time to time, either by the Lok Sabha on a motion adopted in that behalf, or by the Speaker, to
inquire into and report on specific subjects, e.g. the Committee on the conduct of a member (Mudgal Case, 1951)
533
the Committee on the conduct of certain members during the President's Address (1963)534, Railway Convention
Committees; Joint Committee on Salary, Allowances and other Amenities to Members of Parliament (1968)
535
Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (1968)53 Committee on the conduct of a
member during President's Address (1971) Joint Committee on Amendments to Election Law (1971) Joint
537
538
Committee of the Houses to examine the question of the working of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (1980) 539 Joint
Committee to enquire into Bofors Contract (1987)540 Committee on Inscriptions in Parliament House54 541 Committee
to Fix Hindi Equivalents for Parliamentary, Legal and Administrative Terms542 Committees on Draft Five Year Plan54
544
Committee to examine the working of catering establishments in the Parliament House (1973)
Study
Committee
on Sports (1976) Committee on the Use of Language (1978)546 Committee of Members of Parliament to bring
about reconciliation between Nirankaris and Akalis (1983)54 Joint Committee to enquire into irregularities in
securities and banking transactions Joint Committee to suggest facilities and remuneration for Members of
Parliament Joint Committee on catering in Parliament Complex; Committee on Installation of Portraits/Statues of
National Leaders in Parliament Complex; Committee on Provision of Computers to Members of Parliament, etc.; and
Committee on Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (Lok Sabha) to monitor and review periodically
the performance and problems in implementing the MPLAD Scheme while considering complaints received from the
members of the Lok Sabha in regard to the scheme. 550 JPC to examine the constitutional and legal position relating to
Office of Profit (2006)55: and Committee to Enquire into misconduct of MPs of Lok Sabha (2007)552.
The second category of ad hoc Committees comprises of those which are set up to advise the House. Under this
category fall the Select or Joint Committees on Bills which are appointed on a motion made in the House to consider
and report on a specific Bill. These Committees are distinguishable from the other ad hoc Committees inasmuch as
they are concerned with Bills and the procedure to be followed by them is laid down in the Rules and Directions by the
Speaker.
However, the normal procedure of appointing a Joint Committee on a Bill on the basis of separate motion moved
and adopted in the House was not followed in the case of the Joint Committee on Constitution (Eighty-first)
Amendment Bill, 199655 During the discussion stage itself on the motion for consideration on 13 September 1996 of
the said Bill, it was decided by the House to refer the Bill to a Joint Committee by authorising the Speaker to
constitute the Joint Committee in consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha. As required under the Rules, no
separate motion for reference of the Bill to a Joint Committee was moved in the House.
Constitution of a Joint Committee
A Joint Committee, composed of members of both the Houses, is constituted either on a motion adopted by one
House and concurred in by the other, or by communication between the Presiding Officers of the two Houses554
or
under the Rules" Such a Committee can be constituted only when there is an agreement between the two Houses.
In case there is no such agreement, a Joint Committee cannot be constituted.
The Committees of Public Accounts and Public Undertakings are not Joint Committees. They are primarily
Committees of the Lok Sabha. The Committees are formed on a motion adopted by the Lok Sabha and members of the
Rajya Sabha are nominated to these Committees in response to an independent motion requesting for the association
of the members of the Rajya Sabha with the Committees, adopted by the Lok Sabha and concurred in by the Rajya
Sabha. Even if the Rajya Sabha does not concur in the motion or the members of the Rajya Sabha do not associate
with Committees, the Committees continue to function. In case the members of the Rajya Sabha associate with the
Committees, they have equal right with the members of the Lok Sabha to vote and take part in the proceedings of the
Committees 556
Appointment of Members to Committees
Members are appointed or elected to a Parliamentary Committee by the House on a motion made and adopted, or
nominated by the Speaker 557
Committees Appointed on a Motion Adopted by the House
Select or Joint Committees on Bills are the Committees which are appointed on motions adopted by the House. The
motion for reference of a Bill to a Select Committee sets forth the names of members proposed to be appointed to the
Committee. Only members of the Lok Sabha are proposed for appointment to the Committee. However, Ministers who
are members of the Rajya Sabha may also be appointed as members of a Select Committee of the House but they are
not entitled to vote in the Committee. In the case of a Government Bill referred to a Select Committee, the Minister in
charge of the Bill is appointed a member of the Committee while in the case of a private member's Bill, the member in
-charge of the Bill and the Minister to whose Ministry the subject matter of the Bill pertains, are appointed members of
the Select Committee.
Similarly, members to a Joint Committee on a Bill are appointed on a motion adopted by the House and concurred
in by the other House.
Apart from the Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, members may also be appointed to an ad hoc Committee on a
motion adopted in that behalf. Such a motion sets forth the names of members proposed to be appointed to the
Committee, the quorum necessary to constitute its sittings, and other instructions to the
Committees Elected by the House
Members of the Committees on Public Accounts, Estimates, Public Undertakings and Welfare of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes are elected every year by the members of the Lok Sabha. For this purpose, motions must be
moved in and adopted by the House. The motions indicate the manner of elections, that is according to the principle of
proportional representation by means of single transferable vote559 exercised by members of the House present and
voting. No postal ballot is permissible for election to the Committees.
The motion for election to any of these Committees also specifies the number of members proposed to be elected,
and is moved before the expiry of the term of the outgoing Committee by its Chairman. However, at the
commencement of a new Lok Sabha after the general elections, such motions are moved by the Leader of the
House/Minister of Parliamentary Affairs
At the commencement of a new Lok Sabha after general elections, members of the Lok Sabha are also required to
be elected to the Joint Committee on Offices of Profit. 561 Necessary motion in this regard is moved by the Minister
of
Law and Justice.
Members may also be elected to an ad hoc Committee set up in pursuance of motion adopted by the House on that
behalf. 562
After a motion for election of members to the Committee on Estimates, Committee on Public Accounts, Committee
on Public Undertakings, Committee on the Welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and Joint
Committee on Offices of Profit or any ad hoc Committee is adopted, a detailed programme of dates for nomination,
withdrawal of candidature and for holding elections is notified in the Bulletin. At the expiry of the time fixed for receipt
of nominations, a list of candidates standing for election is prepared and copies thereof are displayed on the Notice
Boards for the information of members. In case the number of valid nominations after withdrawal is equal to the
number of vacancies, all the candidates are declared elected and their names are published in the Bulletin. If the
number of valid nominations is less than the number of vacancies, all the candidates are declared duly elected and the
time fixed for nomination is extended for the remaining vacancies to be filled. This process is repeated as long as the
number of candidates is less than the number of vacancies to be filled. If the number of members validly nominated,
after withdrawals, if any, exceeds the number of vacancies, an election is held in accordance with the regulations
framed by the Speaker for holding of such elections
563
On a motion moved by the Minister concerned, members of Parliament are elected by either House to serve on
Committees or bodies other than Parliamentary Committees which are set up in pursuance of the provisions of the
Constitution, or under the provisions of an Act of Parliament, or in accordance with the provisions of any resolution of
the Government constituting such a Committee or body-Elections to such Committees or bodies are held in the same
manner as in the case of other Parliamentary Committees
Committees Nominated by the Speaker
Members to specified Parliamentary Committees may be nominated by the Speaker after consultation with the
Leader of the House and the Leaders of the Opposition Parties and Groups in the House.
At the commencement of a new Lok Sabha, the Leader of the House is asked by the Secretariat to suggest, in order
of priority, a panel of names of members of the Government party to be placed before the Speaker for nomination to
the Committees. Similarly, the leaders of the Opposition Parties or Groups in the House are addressed to suggest, in
order of priority, a panel of two or three names from amongst the members of their Group or Parties565 The
Speaker,
in his discretion, selects the members out of those panels for nomination to the Committees. However, the practice of
calling for a panel of names for nomination of members of the ruling party or other Parties/Groups has been
discontinued long back. The present practice is to make a proportionate allocation of the seats available on the two
Groups of Committees, namely, 24 DRSCs and other Standing Committees separately to various parties and groups
according to their respective strength in the House. As per allocation of seats approved by the Speaker, the Leaders of
Parties are requested in writing to suggest only a name each of their members for each seat allocated to a party on a
Committee for consideration and nomination by the Speaker. As far as possible, the different parties and groups are
represented on a Committee in proportion to their respective strength in the House. The members selected for
nomination to a Committee are asked to furnish their written consent to serve on the Committee, if nominated.
Reconstitution of Committees nominated by the Speaker.-The question of reconstitution of Parliamentary
Committees nominated by the Speaker is considered every year. It is up to the Speaker to reconstitute a Committee
or not. However, as per a convention developed since 1959, all Standing Parliamentary Committees are
reconstituted every year. With a view to ensuring representation of every party/group on Parliamentary
566
Committees, seats on Committees are rotated every year amongst various parties/groups in proportion to their
respective strength in the House.
Filling of Casual Vacancies in Committees
Casual vacancies in a Parliamentary Committee are filled by appointment or election by the House on a motion
made, or made by nomination by the Speaker, as the case may be. Any member appointed, elected or nominated to
fill a casual vacancy holds office for the unexpired portion of the term for which the member in whose place he is
appointed, elected or nominated would have normally held office56 In the case of the Joint Committee on Salary and
Allowances of Members of Parliament member of the Joint Committee holds office as such member for one year from
the date of his nomination5 The procedure followed in filling a casual vacancy is generally the same as for original
568
appointment thereto.
Term of office
Committees Nominated by the Speaker
A Parliamentary Committee nominated by the Speaker holds office for a period 'not exceeding one year' or for
a
period specified by the Speaker or until a new Committee is nominated by him
The term of office of the Committee on Private Members' Bills and Resolutions, Committee on Papers Laid on the
Table, Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Committee on Government Assurances, Committee on Absence of
Members from the Sittings of the House, Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
Committee on Empowerment of Women, House Committee and Library Committee is for a period 'not exceeding one
The Business Advisory Committee, Committee on Petitions, Committee of Privileges and the Rules Committee
continue in office till reconstituted by the Speaker".
571
If no term of office has been specified by the Speaker in regard to an ad hoc Committee appointed by him, the
Committee continues in office till the completion of its work and presentation of its report, if any.
Committees Elected by the House
Members of the Committee on Public Accounts, Committee on Estimates, Committee on Public Undertakings and
Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are elected by the House for a term 'not
exceeding one year These Committees are normally elected in the month of April each year for the term beginning
on 1 May and ending on 30 April of the following year. In the case of a new House, they are elected as soon as may be
after the new House meets and hold office for the period specified in the motion (usually ending on 30 April of the
following year).
Where it is found necessary to extend the term, a motion is moved in and adopted by the House to that effect after
a motion to suspend the relevant rule in its application to the motion for extension of the term of office has been
adopted 573
There is no fixed term of office for Select or Joint Committees on Bills. The motion which is moved in the House for
reference of a Bill to a Select or Joint Committee generally specifies the date by which, or the period within which, the
Committee might present its report. In case the House has not fixed any time for the presentation of the report, the
Committee is required to present its report before the expiry of three months from the date on which the House
adopted the motion for reference of the Bill to the Select Committee
Committees Appointed/Elected on a Motion or Resolution
The motion for the appointment or election of a Committee by the House may either specify its terms of office or
may indicate the date by which or the period within which the Committee might present its report.
Where the House has not fixed any time for the presentation of a report by a Committee, the Committee is required
to present its report within one month of the date on which reference to the Committee was made. However, the time
for the presentation of the report by the Committee may be extended by the House on a Motion moved in that
behalf
578
Committees Appointed under a Statute
In the case of a Committee constituted under an Act of Parliament, the term of office of the Committee is generally
laid down in the relevant statute.
Other Committees
Apart from the above Committees, a Committee may also be appointed by the Speaker to aid and advise him in the
discharge of his functions or to report on some matter pertaining to the House or its members. Such a Committee
holds office for a term specified by the Speaker or till such time as a new Committee is appointed by him. Where no
term is specified by the Speaker, the Committee continues in office till the completion of its work and presentation of
its report, if any.
Objection to Membership
The appointment of a member to a Parliamentary Committee may be objected to on the ground that he has a
personal, pecuniary or direct interest of such an intimate character that it may prejudicially affect the consideration of
579
any matter by the Committee Such an interest should separately belong to the person whose inclusion in the
Committee is objected to, that is, it should not be in common with the public in general or with any class or Section
thereof or on a matter of State policy. The member who has taken objection is required to state precisely the ground of
his objection and the nature of the alleged interest, whether personal, pecuniary or direct, of the member whose
inclusion is objected to in the matters coming up before the Committee. The member, whose membership has been
objected to, may also be asked by the Speaker to state his position. Where there is dispute on facts, the Speaker may
call for documentary or other evidence from both the members. The decision given by the Speaker is treated as
final 580
When the matter is referred to the Speaker and until the Speaker's decision is known, the member whose
membership is objected to continues to be a member of the Committee; he can take part in its discussions but is not,
however, entitled to vote581. If the Speaker holds that the member has a personal, pecuniary or direct interest in the
matter before the Committee, his membership ceases forthwith, but the proceedings of the sittings of the Committee
at which that member might have been present are not affected by the decision of the Speaker582 It is
582
also
incumbent on the member having a personal, pecuniary, or direct interest in any matter to be considered by the
Committee to state his interest therein to the Speaker through the Chairman of the Committee58.
Membership of Committee on Estimates or Public Accounts or Public Undertakings and of Government
Committees
Wherever the Chairman or a member of the Committee on Estimates, Public Undertakings or Public Accounts is
invited to accept membership of any Committee constituted by Government, the matter is submitted to the Speaker
before the appointment is accepted58. If the Speaker considers it not appropriate that the Chairman or the member
concerned should serve on the Government Committee so long as he remains a member of the Parliamentary
Committee, he does not permit the Chairman or the member to accept the appointment on the Government
Committee. Where, in the interest of parliamentary work, he permits them to do so, he directs that the report of the
Government Committee be placed before the Parliamentary Committee concerned for such comments as the latter
might deem fit to make before it is presented to the Government
Whenever a member who is serving on a Committee constituted by Government is elected to any of these
Committees, the matter is required to be placed before the Speaker to decide whether the member might be
permitted to continue his membership of the Government Committee586 The Speaker may or may not permit
a
member to continue on the Parliamentary Committee587 If the Speaker permits a member to continue membership of
a Government Committee, he may require that the report of the Government Committee be placed before the
Parliamentary Committee concerned for such comments as the latter may deem fit to make before it is presented to
the Government Where the subject of inquiry of a Committee set up by Government and the matter to be
examined by any of the Parliamentary Committees is the same, the Speaker may, while granting permission to a
member to serve on both the Committees, direct that the member concerned should not participate in the proceedings
of the Parliamentary Committee concerned when the specific subject comes up for consideration
589
Resignation from and Vacation of Seats in a Committee
A member may resign his seat from a Committee by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker590 The letter
of resignation, which should be in clear and unambiguous terms, becomes effective only after it is received in the
Secretariat and takes effect from the date of resignation specified in the letter of resignation591. If no date is specified
in the letter, the resignation takes effect from the date of the letter5 and where the letter does not bear any date,
then from the date of its receipt in the Secretariat The resignation is automatic and is not subject to acceptance by
593
the Speaker. It can become ineffective only if any defect is found in it 594 In the case of Joint Committees, a member
may resign by addressing the resignation letter to the Presiding Officer of the House to which he belongs. In such
case, efforts are made to notify the resignation of a member from the membership of the Joint Committee in the
Bulletins of both the Houses simultaneously.
A vacancy may also be caused when a member of the Committee dies or resigns his seat in the House or otherwise
ceases
595 to be a member of the House.
If a member of the Committee on Petitions or Public Accounts or Estimates or Public Undertakings or Subordinate
Legislation or Government Assurances or Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or Empowerment of
Women or Departmentally Related Standing Committee (DRSC) is appointed as a Minister, he ceases to be a member
of
the
Committee
from
the date of such appointment  In such case, no formal letter of resignation is required
nor
cessation of membership is notified in the Bulletin. If a member of a Committee is absent from two or more
consecutive sittings of the Committee without permission of the Chairperson of the Committee, a motion may be
moved in the House for the discharge of such member from the Committee597 In the case of Committees on which
members are nominated by the Speaker, such a member may, however, be discharged by the Speaker59 On adoption
of such a motion by the House, or an order being passed by the Speaker, as the case may be, the member concerned
ceases to be a member of that Committee. Where a member is a member of a Committee by virtue of the office he
holds, he ceases to be a member of the Committee when he vacates that office599 The member cannot, however,
resign from the membership of that Committee till he holds that office600
Resignations from the Membership of Other Bodies
When a member of the Lok Sabha representing Parliament on a Government Committee, Board, Body, etc. seeks to
resign from the membership of that Body by addressing the Speaker, he is advised to address his resignation to the
Chairperson/Prescribed Authority of that Committee, Board, Body, etc. where he is a member by virtue of the office he
holds, he ceases to be a member of the Committee when he vacates that office601
601
Powers of Committees
Powers of the Committees of the Lok Sabha are as laid down in the Constitution503 the
Rules
and
the
Directions issued thereunder by the Speaker 605 from time to time. Rules relating to certain Committees, instead of
conferring specific powers on them, provide that the general rules applicable to Parliamentary Committees shall apply
to them with such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as the Speaker may consider
necessary or convenient600
Under the provisions of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954, the Joint
Committee on the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament has the power607 to regulate its procedure.
Besides the Act, the rules framed under the said Act empower608 the Joint Committee to appoint one or more Sub-
Committees. In the case of a Joint Committee on a Bill, the motion moved in the House for reference of a Bill to a Joint
Committee does not specifically confer any power on the Joint Committee but provides that the general Provisions of
the Rules of Procedure of the Lok Sabha relating to Parliamentary Committees will apply with such variations and
modifications as the Speaker may make609 Sometimes, in the case ad hoc Committees appointed by the House on a
motion adopted in that behalf, the motion for appointment of such a Committee may specifically confen on the
Committees some of the powers which are commonly possessed by other Committees of the Lok Sabha611
The powers which are generally possessed in common by all Committees of the Lok Sabha are briefly described
in
the following paragraphs.
Power to appoint Sub-Committees
A Committee may appoint one or more Sub-Committees, each having the powers of the whole Committee, to
examine matters which may require detailed study or investigation. In pursuance of this power, a number of Standing
Committees as also Select or Joint Committees on Bills have appointed sub-Committees from time to time for detailed
study of specific matters to assist them in the redrafting of particular clauses of a Bill611 In certain Committees, there
are Standing Sub-Committees, namely, (i) Sub-Committee of the Business Advisory Committee for selection of
admitted notices of "No-Day-Yet-Named Motions' for discussion in the House and (ii) accommodation Sub-
Committee of the House Committee6 Similarly, prior to the constitution of the Committee on Public Undertakings,
the Committee on Estimates used to appoint a Standing Sub-Committee on Public Undertaking every
year,
immediately after its own constitution. The Committee on Estimates, whenever it decides to examine the estimates of
the Ministry of Defence, appoints a Sub-Committee for examining the estimates of the Ministry615 and the Chairman of
the Committee himself is the Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
If the Deputy Speaker is a member of a Sub-Committee he is ex-officio appointed Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
Power to take Evidence or Call for Documents
A Committee may take oral and/or written evidence or call for documents in connection with a matter under its
consideration, examination or investigation
616
Power to send for persons, papers and records617
(See this Chapter, under 'Evidence,' infra)
Power to make Special Reports
A Committee has the power to make a special report on any matter that arises or comes to light in the course of its
work which it may consider necessary to bring to the notice of the Speaker or the House, as the case may be,
notwithstanding that such matter is not directly connected with, or does not fall within, or is not incidental to, its
terms of reference
Power to pass resolutions on matters of procedure
Where a case warrants a special procedure for conducting the business of a Committee, that Committee may pass
resolutions on matters of procedure relating to it for the consideration of the Speaker who may make such variations in
procedure as he may consider necessary619.
Power to make detailed rule
To supplement the provisions contained in the Rules and the Direction issued by the Speaker, a Committee may,
with the approval of the Speaker, make detailed rules of procedure for its internal working 600.
Sittings of Committees
Committees generally hold their sittings during sessions of the Lok Sabh but are otherwise empowered to sit during
the
intersession period. By reason of the prorogation of the House, any business before a Committee does not lapse
and the Committee continues to function notwithstanding such prorogation621. When the House is in session, the
Committees normally do not meet after the sitting of the House has commenced and before 15.00 hours If a
Committee is meeting whilst the House is sitting, the Chairman of the Committee is required, on a division being
called in the House, to suspend proceedings of the Committee for such time as will, in his opinion, enable the
members to vote in a division63.
The date and time of sitting of a Committee are fixed by the Chairman of the Where the Chairman is
not readily available, the Secretary-Genera may fix the date and time of sitting; but in the case of a Select or Joint
Committee on a Bill, he does so in consultation with the Minister in-charge of the Bill
625
Venue of Sittings
A sitting of a Parliamentary Committee or a Sub-Committee, whether formal or informal, is invariably held within
the precincts of the Parliament House626 If for any reason, it becomes necessary to hold a sitting of a Committee or a
Sub-Committee outside the Parliament House, the matter is referred to the Speaker whose decision is final627
The present practice is that sitting of Parliamentary Committees outside the Parliament House are not allowed
628
The Parliamentary Committees, while on study tour, may hold informal sittings at the place of their visit, but at
such sittings no decisions are taken non is any evidence recorded69 Normally no study tours are undertaken by the
Committees when the House is in session.
Sometimes, the terms of reference of a Committee may specifically mention about the venue of sittings of the
Committee-53
630
Quorum
The quorum to constitute a sitting of a Committee is, as near as may be, one-third of the total number of members
of
the While calculating one-third of the members of Committee, it should be with reference to the total
number of members of a Committee irrespective of vacancies in the Committee and the fraction if any should be
ignored63 Thus, for instance in a DRSC having a strength of 31 members, the quorum to constitute a sitting of the
Committee shall be ten members633 Where a Committee is appointed or elected on a motion or a resolution adopted
by the House, the quorum to constitute a sitting of the Committee is generally specified in the motion or resolution
moved in the House otherwise the general rule relating to quorum, i.e. one-third of the total number of members
of
the Committee applies The quorum of the Committee is invariably specified in the motion moved in the House
635
for reference of a Bill to a Joint Committee and it is usually fixed as one-third of the total number of members of the
Where a Parliamentary Committee is constituted under an Act of Parliament, the quorum of the
Committee may be laid down in the Act or the rules framed in pursuance of the provisions of the Act 637
In special circumstances, the quorum to constitute a sitting of a Committee may, under orders of the House or the
Speaker, be reduced to less than one-third of the total number of members of the Committee638
The usual practice is for the Chairman of a Committee to satisfy himself that there is a quorum at the
commencement of a sitting or at the time when votes are taken. At any other time any member of the Committee
present at the sitting can draw the attention of the Chairman to the lack of quorum. If at any time during any such
sitting, there is no quorum, the Chairman of the Committee is required to suspend the sitting until there is a quorum
or adjourn the sitting to some future date639 When a Committee has been adjourned for lack of quorum on two
successive dates fixed for the sitting of the Committee, the Chairman of the Committee is required to report the fact to
the House640 or the Speaker, whosoever has appointed the Committee64 The House or the Speaker, as the case may
642
be, may then decide the course of action to be taken in the matter depending on the merits of each case
Admission of Strangers
The sittings of Parliamentary Committee are held in private and are not open to public No
outsider
or
representative of the press is admitted to the sittings. The Committees do no associate any person or body from
outside, formally or informally, with their deliberations and as such all persons other than the members of a
644
Committee and officers of the Secretariat are required to withdraw when the Committee is deliberating Certain
persons may, however, with the prior permission of the Committee or its Chairman, be present at a sitting of the
Committee when the Committee is taking evidence, but they are not allowed to take part in any manner in the
proceedings non can they sit in the body of the Committee
Admission of members who are not members of Committee
The practice regarding admission to the sittings or association with the proceedings of a Parliamentary Committee
of members who are not members of that Committee differs from Committee to Committee. In certain Committees
such a member may, under orders of the Chairman of the Committee, be invited to attend its sittings as a special
invitee, but he is not entitled vote. In the Committee of Privileges no member other than the members of the
Committee can be associated with the deliberations of the Committee when a specific question of a breach of privilege
or contempt of the House is to be considered64. In the case of the Committee on Estimates, a member who is not
a
member of the Committee may, with the permission of the Chairman, attend the sittings of the Committee when
evidence is being taken but not when the Committee is deliberating. Such a member cannot take part in any manner
in the proceedings of the Committee nor can he sit in the body of the Committee 648 In the case of a Select Committee
on a Bill, a member who is not a member of the Committee may be present during the deliberations of the Committee,
but he cannot address the Committee nor can he sit in the body of the Committee In the case of Joint Committee
on a Bill if it is later felt that the association of some particular member would help the Committee in its deliberations,
that member can be invited as an expert witness but he cannot otherwise be associated with the deliberations of the
Committee55 A Minister who is not a member of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill may, with the permission of the
651
Chairman of the Committee, address the Committee but he is not entitled to vote.
Proceedings in Committees
Proceedings in Committees are largely conducted in the same manner as in the House but in a more intimate and
informal atmosphere. When a Committee is deliberating, a member can speak more than once on a question under
consideration.
After the Chairman is satisfied that sufficient discussion has taken place, he puts the question to the Committee
and ascertains its decision. All questions at a sitting of a Committee are decided by a majority of votes of the
members present and voting652 Except in the case of Select or Joint Committees on Bills, questions are not formally
put to the vote of the Committee and as far as possible, unanimous decisions are taken. In rare cases when there is a
difference of opinion in a Committee, either both opinions are included in the report of the Committee or a reference to
the difference of opinion is recorded in the minutes of the Committee. A question on which a Committee has already
taken a decision may be reopened at the same or a subsequent sitting of the Committee with the permission of the
Chairman
A verbatim record of the proceedings is kept when a witness is examined by the Committee
or
if
it
is
otherwise
considered necessary, depending upon the nature and importance of the matter discussed by the Committee655 The
655
verbatim proceedings are for the use of the Committee only and no part thereof can be communicated, shown for
reference or divulged to anyone who is not a member of the Committee without the permission of the Speaker unless
656
and until the proceedings have been laid on the Table
The proceedings of a Committee are treated as confidential and it is not permissible for a member of the Committee
or anyone who has access to those proceedings to communicate, directly or indirectly, to the press or any other person
any information regarding the proceedings, including the report or any conclusions arrived at finally or tentatively,
before the report is presented to the House
However, in the case of Joint Committee to enquire into irregularities in securities and banking transactions, the
Committee decided that in view of the widespread public interest, the Chairman should brief the press about the
deliberations of the Committee, as the motion adopted by the House provided that the Committee might, if need
arises, in certain matters, adopt a different procedure with the concurrence of the Speaker, the Speaker accorded the
necessary approval and the Chairman briefed the press at end of each meeting of the Committee.
Evidence
A Committee may take oral and/or written evidence in connection with a matter under its consideration,
examination or investigation, and every Committee has the power to send for persons, papers and records
The Ministers are generally not called before the Committees to give evidence. The Joint Committee to enquire into
irregularities in securities and banking transactions, however, decided to call for written information on certain points
from Ministers/ex-Ministers and to call them for evidence before the Joint Committee if considered necessary on
account of the wide ramifications of the subject under examination. The Speaker, while according the necessary
approval, stated that this was being done in view of the uncommon nature of the case and the views expressed by the
Leaders of all Parties at the time of constituting the Committee and also subsequent to that. The Committee called
certain information in writing and also took evidence of the Ministers of Finance and of Health & Family Welfare.
Where the disclosure of a document is, however, likely to be prejudicial to the safety or interest of the State, the
Government may decline to produce it before a Committee659
If at any time any question arises whether the evidence of a person or the production of a document is relevant for
the purpose of the Committee, the question is referred to the Speaker whose decision is final Similarly,
if
an
officer
of a State Government is required to be examined by a Committee or if a paper, document or record of a State
Government is required to be produced before a Committee, the orders of the Speaker are required to be obtained in
each case before the officer or the State Government concerned is asked to comply the request661.
Where the Speaker decides that it is not necessary to summon a particular Stat officer as a witness
or
that
the
State Government need not be asked to produce a paper, document or record, his decision is conveyed to the
Committee through its Chairman662
A Committee can take evidence of experts, public bodies, associations, individuals or interested parties suo motu or
on requests made by the persons or bodies interested in or affected by the subject matter under consideration or
examination of the Committee In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, if the Committee decides to
hear evidence, it issues generally a press communique664 inviting interested parties to send written memoranda
containing their views on the Bill. After considering the written memoranda received from the persons or
organisations, the Committee or the Chairman, when so authorised, selects the parties who may be called to give
evidence before the Committee. It is also within the discretion of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill to invite written
opinions on a Bill from experts or individuals or organisations instead of hearing them Where a Ministry,
Department or an Undertaking is required to give evidence before a Committee on any matter, it is represented by the
666
Secretary or the head of the Department or the Undertaking, as the case may If for any reason such an officer
cannot attend a Committee on any particular occasion, the Chairman of the Committee, may, on a request being made
to him, permit any other senior officer to represent the Ministry, Department or Undertaking before the Committee on
that
occasion If required by a Committee, the Ministry, Department or Undertaking concerned has to furnish for
circulation to the members of the Committee sufficient number of copies of any memorandum containing its views on
the matter under consideration well in advance of the date on which its representatives have to give evidence before
the Committee.
668
Procedure for Securing Attendance of Witnesses
A witness includes a representative of a Ministry, Department, Public Undertaking or any organisation or any other
person. A witness may be called either by a letter or by issue of a formal summons to give evidence before a
Committee and/or to produce before it any document required by the Committee66 Generally, a letter is addressed
and formal summons are issued to a witness only when a Committee is conducting an investigation of a judicial
character.
If a witness fails to appear before a Committee when summoned or called by a letter or a person refuses to produce
any document when so required by a Committee, his conduct constitutes contempt of the House and may be reported
to the House by the Committee.
If a witness to be examined by a Committee is in jail, his attendance before the Committee, if considered
necessary, is secured through the Home Ministry and the State Government concerned.
When the Parliamentary Committee on the Demand for Punjabi Suba, on requests made to them, decided on 1
February 1966, to hear a detenu detained under orders of the Punjab Government, the Home Ministry and the
Punjab Government were asked in writing and telegraphically, respectively, to ensure the detenu's appearance
before the Committee on February 4 at 15.00 hours. The detenu who was then in the Central Jail, Delhi, was
brought to Parliament House on the appointed date and time under police escort and was received at the main
gate by the Watch and Ward Officer670 Lok Sabha. The police escort waited at the Outer Reception Office and the
Watch and Ward Officer conducted the detenu to the waiting room for witness. From there, the staff attending
the Committee took the detenu to the Committee Room. After his evidence before the Committee, he was
conducted to the main gate by the Watch and Ward Officer and handed over to the waiting police escort for being
taken back to jail.
Counsel for a witness: Generally, a witness is heard in person by a Committee. In special circumstances, however,
especially in inquiries or investigations of a judicial character, a witness may be permitted to be represented or
accompanied by a counsel677
Evidence on oath : Ordinarily, oath or affirmation is not administered to witnesses appearing before the
Committees. An oath or affirmation is administered to a witness only where the investigation is of a judicial or
quasijudicial nature and the truth of facts has to be
Procedure for examining witnesses
Before a witness is called for examination, the Chairman and members of the Committee briefly confer and decide
upon the lines to be followed in the examination of the witness and the questions to be asked of him673 The Chairman
first asks the witness such questions as he may consider necessary with reference to the subject matter under
consideration or any subject connected therewith674 Thereafter, other members of the Committee may, one by one,
ask the witness any other question655. In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, where a witness is called to
give evidence after considering a written memorandum submitted by him, examination of the witness is confined
mainly to matters not clarified in his memorandum and to such other matters as may arise therefrom. The questions
asked are confined to matters that affect the interest represented by the witness or upon which he is competent to
express an opinion. After all the members of the Committee have finished with their questions, the Chairman may ask
the witness to place before the Committee any other relevant points which may not have been covered and which the
witness thinks are essential to be placed before the Committee676. A witness may also, with the permission of the
Chairman, place before the Committee any other relevant information which may not have been already placed before
the Committee 677
Decorum and etiquette to be observed by witnesses All witnesses, when appearing before a Committee or a Sub-
Committee thereof, have to observe a proper decorum and etiquette consistent with the courtesy and respect due to a
Committee of Parliament. Points of conduct and etiquette to be observed by the witnesses have been drawn up for
their guidance A copy of these points, where considered necessary, is either sent to the witness when he is called
to appear before a Committee or shown to him when he personally comes for evidence.
Verbatim record of evidence
A verbatim record of the proceedings of a Committee is kept when a witness is called to give evidence before the
Committee679 679 Relevant portions of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting, at which evidence has been taken, are
forwarded by the Secretariat to the witness and the members concerned for confirmation and return by a specified
date If corrected copies of the proceedings are not received back by the specified date, the reporter's copy is
680
treated as authentic68 In exceptional cases, reasonable cause being shown, corrections received after the specified
date may be admitted.
Corrections, if any, must be made neatly and legibly by the witness or the member in ink in his own handwriting.
A witness or a member cannot make corrections for the purpose of improving the literary form or altering the
substance of the proceedings by additions or deletions. The corrections, if any, are to be confined to correction of
inaccuracies which may have occurred in the process of reporting682.
Secret or Confidential Documents submitted to a Committee not to be quoted
Whenever a secret or confidential paper or document is circulated to the members of a Committee, the contents of
such paper or document must not be divulged by any member of the Committee either in a minute of dissent or in his
speech on the floor of the House or otherwise, without the prior permission of the Speaker683 Where such permission
has been obtained, any restriction imposed by the Speaker in regard to the manner in which, or the extent to which,
the information contained in the document may be divulged, has to be strictly observed by the member concerned
In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, although secret or confidential documents circulated to members
of the Committee cannot be referred to in minutes of dissent or speeches in the House, arguments contained in such
documents may be advanced without quoting the source or the authority685
Prohibition on publication of evidence before it is reported to the House
Evidence given before, or a document submitted to a Committee, is always treated as confidential and no part
thereof can be divulged or shown for reference to anyone who is not a member of the Committee unless and until the
same has been laid on the Table686 All documents, representations or memoranda addressed to a Committee and
received in the Secretariat form part of the records of the Committee and can neither be withdrawn non altered without
the
knowledge and approval of the Committee In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, while
acknowledging receipt of a representation or memorandum addressed to the Committee, the senden is informed that
as his representation or memorandum has gone into the records of the Committee, the same should be treated as
strictly confidential and not circulated to anyone else. No person can, without the permission of the Speaker, quote
from or, send to anyone else, copies of any document submitted to a Committee unless and until the same has been
presented to the House either along with the report of the Committee or separately688 If any person seeks permission
to make use of the representation or memorandum submitted by him to a Committee, he is, when so permitted,
required to make use of only the arguments or points contained in his representation or memorandum without alluding
to the fact that such considerations have also been urged by him in the representation, etc. submitted to the
Committee589 When copies of the relevant portions of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of a Committee at which
evidence has been given are forwarded to a witness or a member for correction and return, he is informed that it is
neither permissible to take out copies of those proceedings non can the proceedings be quoted anywhere or made use
of in any manner without the permission of the Committee.
It is a breach of privilege for any person to publish any part of the evidence given before, or any document
submitted to, a Committee before such evidence or document has been reported to the House.
It is at the discretion of the Committee to treat as secret or confidential any evidence, oral or written, given before
690
it Even where a witness expressly desires his evidence to be treated as confidential, the Committee may decide
otherwise and make it available to the members of the House691. where the Committee decides to treat the evidence
as confidential, it is not printed along with other evidence non presented to the House but the Committee may decide
to place a few copies thereof in the Library for reference by members only69. However, all evidence given before and
documents submitted to a Committee are available to all members of the Committee693 Generally, the verbatim
record of evidence given before a Committee is kept with the Secretariat for reference by members of the Committee,
but on occasions such record of evidence or a summary thereof has been circulated to members of the Committee
694
Laying of Evidence on the Table
It is for the Committee to decide if the whole or part of the evidence given before them or a summary thereof
should be laid on the Table The general practice in this regard varies from Committee to Committee. The
695
Committee on Estimates has decided that the evidence it takes need not normally be published with its reports
A
resume of the evidence is invariably embodied on the minutes of the sittings of the Committee which are laid on the
Table as soon as possible after the presentation of the report to which they relate.
Where evidence was taken by the erstwhile Sub-Committee on Public Undertakings of the Committee on Estimates,
the minutes of the sittings at which evidence was taken were laid on the Table together with the minutes of the sitting
of the whole Committee at which the report of the Sub-Committee was adopted by the whole Committee
The evidence given before the Committee on Public Accounts is also not normally laid on the Table. Where,
however, the Committee on Public Accounts decides to lay the evidence on the Table, it is printed in the form of a
separate volume which is deemed to form part of the report of the Committee dealing with the relevant accounts and
audit report thereon. Evidence given before a Sub-Committee of the Committee on Public Accounts Is not printed
verbatim; only the minutes of the Sub-Committee are appended to its report which, on approval by the Committee,
are included in the report of the whole Committee598 The evidence given before the Committee of Privileges, unless
decided otherwise by the Committee forms part of, and is appended to, the report of the Committee which is laid
on
the 700 If a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill decides that the evidence given before it need not be laid on
the Table, it does not form part of the report of the Committee701 Where it is decided that only a summary of the
evidence may be laid on the Table, the evidence is printed in summary form as part of the report presented to the
House In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, laying of evidence on the Table in extenso is more
common and where the Committee so decides, the evidence is printed in a separate volume Similarly, memoranda,
etc. submitted by organisations, associations or individuals who give evidence before a Select or Joint Committee on a
Bill may, if the Committee so decides, be laid on the Table as an Appendix to the evidence704. The Committee may
also decide that such memoranda, etc. need not be laid on the Table along with other evidence but a few copies
thereof may be placed in the Library for reference by members
Circulation of Evidence to Members of the House
Copies of the evidence given before a Committee are made available to members of the House only after the
evidence has been laid on the Table. In an urgent case, however, particularly when the House is not in session, the
Speaker may, in his discretion, direct that such evidence be confidentially made available to members before it is
formally laid on the
Sub-Committees
A Sub-Committee, having the powers of the whole Committee, may be appointed by a Parliamentary Committee to
examine any matter that may be referred to it which requires detailed study or The order of reference
to a Sub-Committee clearly states the point or points for investigation 08 The members of a Sub-Committee are
appointed from amongst the members of the whole Committee. If the Chairman of a Committee is a member of a Sub
-Committee thereof, he automatically becomes the Chairman of the Sub-Committee. Otherwise, the Chairman or the
convener of Sub-Committee is appointed by the Chairman of the whole Committee The Chairman of the Committee
on Estimates is usually the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Defence and in the case of the Accommodation, Sub-
Committee of the House Committee, the Chairman, House Committee, is the ex officio Chairman of the Sub-
Committee 710
The procedure followed in the Sub-Committee is, as far as practicable, the same in the whole Committee-
The
Chairman of the whole Committee may, subject to any general or special directions issued by the Speaker, gives such
directions on matters of procedure to the Chairman or convener of a Sub-Committee as may be necessary for the
regulation and organization of work of the Sub-Committee4 712
The report of a Sub-Committee, signed by the Chairman of the Sub-Committee, is submitted to, and considered by,
the whole Committee; if the report of the Sub-Committee is approved at the sitting of the whole Committee, it is
deemed to be the report of the whole Committee  The report of a Sub-Committee may also be appended to the
report of the whole Committee when the latter is presented to the House or the Speaker 114
Record of Decisions of a Committee
Minutes of sittings
Soon after each sitting of a Committee, minutes of the proceedings of the sitting, giving names of the members and
officers present, the duration of the sitting and the decisions arrived at are prepared and, after approval by the
Chairman or the member who presided at the sitting, circulated to the members of the Committee- However, in the
case of the Committee on Public Accounts, only consolidated minutes of the sittings of the Committee relating to the
examination of particular accounts are circulated to members of the Committee. Minutes of the sittings of a Sub-
Committee are generally circulated only to members of the Sub-Committee, but in the case of a Sub-Committee of the
Committee on Public Accounts, minutes of the sittings at which evidence is given are circulated to members of the
whole Committee.
Where considered necessary, a copy of the minutes of a sitting of a Committee or Sub-Committee or relevant
extracts therefrom may also be sent to the Ministry or other authority concerned If any member desires to make
any
alteration in the minutes on the ground that they are not in conformity with the decision arrived at, the matter is
considered by the Committee or Sub-Committee at its next sitting and the decision taken thereon is incorporated in
the minutes of the sitting?1. The minutes are treated as confidential until presented to the House
Laying of minutes on the Table : The practice regarding laying of the minutes of the sittings on the Table varies
according to the nature of work of the Committee. Minutes of the sittings of the Business Advisory Committee, General
Purposes Committee and the Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament are not laid on the
Table. In the case of the Committee on Absence of Members from the Sittngs of the House, Government Assurances,
Petitions, and Private Members' Bills and Resolutions, the minutes of the sittings held during a session are laid on the
Table by the Chairman or, in his absence, by any other member of the Committee, before the termination of the
session If any of these Committees holds its sittings when the Lok Sabha is not in session, the minutes of those
sittings are laid on the Table during the next Session at the first convenient opportunity In the case of the
Committee of Privileges, Committee on Public Accounts, Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Joint Committe on
Offices of Profit, and Select or Joint Committees on Bills, minutes of the sittings of the Committee form part of, and
721
are appended to, the relevant report of the Committee which is presented to, or laid on the Table of the House
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee on Estimates are laid on the Table as soon as possible after the presentation
of the report to which they relate Minutes of the sittings of the Rules Committee either separately are laid on the
Table by the Deputy Speaker if he is a member of the Committee or, in his absence, by any other member of the
Committee soon after the relevant report has been so laid or the Minutes are appended to the relevant report when
it is laid on the Table. Usually an entry is made in the List of Business for the day on which the minutes of sittings of a
Committee are to be laid on the Table724
Reports of Committees
The Report of a Committee may be either preliminary or final A Committee may, if it thinks fit, make a special
report on any matter that arises or comes to light in the course of its work, and which it may consider necessary to
bring to the notice of the Speaker or the House, notwithstanding that such matter is not directly connected with, or
does not fall within, or is not incidental to, its terms of reference726
Time limit for presentation of report
Standing Parliamentary Committees generally present their reports to the House or to the Speaker, as the case may
be, from time to time727
Where a matter is referred to a Committee by the House and the House has not fixed any time for presentation of
report by the Committee, the report is required to be presented to the House within one month of the date on which
the reference was made to the Committee4 728
Extention of time for presentation of report
If
a Committee anticipates that it will not be possible for it to present its report to the House by the stipulated date,
the Committee authorises the Chairman or, in his absence, any other member of the Committee, to move a motion in
the House for extension of time for the presentation of the report-Superscript(2) The motion is then moved in the House by the
person so authorised and the date up to which extension of time is sought is specified in the motion on a reasonable
presumption that the House would be in session on that date. If the House is not in session or is not likely to re-
assemble till after the expiry of the date fixed for the presentation of the report, the Chairman of the Committee, on
being so authorised by the Committee, moves the Speaker to grant the required extension of time on behalf of the
House4 Where the Speaker grants an extension of time of behalf of the House, he informs the House of it a soon as
730
it re-assembles4 731 In the case of a Joint Committee of the Houses, if the Speaker grants an extension of time on
behalf of the House, a message is sent to the Rajya Sabha informing that House about the extension granted by the
Speaker
Preparation and circulation of draft report
The draft report is prepared by the Secretariat on the basis of the minutes of the sittings of the Committee- and
consists of the substance of the deliberations of the Committee together with their recommendations. In the case of a
Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, the draft report is prepared on the pattern laid down in a direction issued by the
Speaker on the subject Where a Committee has taken evidence, the fact is specifically mentioned in the report of
735
the
Committee4 In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, when any petitions, representations or
memoranda on the Bill are received by the Committee, the report states the number of such documents, their
particulars and the action taken by the Committee thereon
The draft report as prepared by the Secretariat is placed before the Chairman of the Committee for approval
After the draft report has been approved by the Chairman, cyclostyled or proof copies thereof, together with any
other documents connected therewith are, under the directions of the Chairman, circulated to members of the
Committee well in advance of the date fixed for the consideration of the draft report by
Consideration and adoption of draft report by Committee
On the date fixed for the consideration of the draft report by the Committee, the Chairman reads out the draft
report paragraph by paragraph, putting the question to the Committee at the end of each paragraph, "That the
paragraph do stand part of the report"- A member objecting to any part of the report as not being in conformity
with the decisions arrived at by the Committee may propose an amendment. The amendment, if accepted by the
Committee, is incorporated in the report-24
After the report is adopted by the Committee, it is signed by the Chairman on behalf of the Committee. If the
Chairman is absent or is not readily available, the Committee may choose another member of the Committee to sign
the report on their behalf The Committee also fixes a date for the presentation of the report to the House by the
Chairman and, in his absence, by another member of the Committee.
Minutes/Notes of dissent
Reports of Parliamentary Committees are based on decisions arrived at by a majority of members of the Committee
present
and voting743 Except in the case of Select or Joint Committees on Bills744 and Departmentally related
Standing Committees minutes/notes of dissent are not appended to the reports of the Committees the reason
being that the Committees, working as they do no behalf of the House, function as one entity and their decisions are
as far as possible unanimous, irrespective of party affiliation of the members of the Committee. Where it is not
possible to reach unanimity in a Committee, the majority decision prevails. If a minute of dissent is allowed, issues in
a Committee are likely to be judged and decided upon on party lines746 Further, this may harden the attitude of
individual members and there may be little incentive to compromise. The inclusion of majority and minority views in a
report of the Committee would not only detract from the value of their recommendations but it would also weaken the
impact of those recommendations on the executive which is charged with their implementation. On the other hand, in
the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, the Bill referred to the Committee is again considered by the House
along with the report of the Committee. The House considers all the views contained in the report and yet it is at
liberty to arrive at its conclusions independently of the recommendations of the Committee.
Making the Report available to Government before Presentation to the House
Normally, no part of the report of a Committee can be divulged or shown to anyone who is not a member of the
Committee until the report has been presented to the House or laid on the Table747 The Committee may, however, if
it
thinks fit, make available to the Government for factual verification any completed part of their report before
presentation to the House While forwarding such reports to a Ministry/Department, it is enjoined on them to treat
the contents of the reports forwarding such report as 'confidential'/'secret' until they are finalised and presented to the
House 749
Presentation of Report to the House or the Speaker
When the report of a Committee is to be presented to the House, an entry is usually made in the List of Business for
the relevant day. The report is presented to the House by the Chairman of the Committee or, in his absence, by any
other member of the Committee who is so authorised by the Committee and while presenting the report he confines
himself to a brief statement of fact. There is no debate on the statement or the report at this stage-Superscript(2) In the case
of
Joint Committees, a copy of the report is also simultaneously laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha by a member of the
Rajya Sabha on the Committee, so authorised by the Committee for the purpose.
If a Committee completes its report when the House is not in Session. it mav authorise its Chairman to present the
report to the Speaker4 The Committee may, in appropriate cases, make a specific request to the Speaker that he
may direct that matters of factual nature or patent errors be corrected in the report before it is printed, published or
circulated and later presented to the House A report of the Committee which has been presented to the Speaker
when the House is not in session is presented to the House during the next session at the first convenient opportunity
by the Chairman or, in his absence, by another member of the Committee- who, while presenting the report,
confines himself to a brief statement to the effect that the report was presented to the Speaker when the House was
not in session, and where the Speaker had given order for its printing, publication and circulation, that fact is also
reported to the House 754
If, after presentation of the report to the Speaker, the Lok Sabha is dissolved before the report could be presented
to the House, a copy of the report is laid on the Table of the new House by the Secretary-General, While laying the
report on the Table, the Secretary-General makes a statement to the effect that the report of the Committee was
presented to the Speaker of the preceding Lok Sabha before its dissolution. Where the Speaker had ordered that the
report be printed, published and circulated, that fact is also reported to the House by the Secretary-General In the
755
case of the Public Accounts and Public Undertakings Committees or a Joint Committee, a copy of the report is also
simultaneously laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha.
Reports of Committees and the House
It is open to the House to discuss any of the reports presented to it but in practice it is guided by conventions in
regard to the reports of some Committees, and by the Rules in respect of the other Committees. In relation to the
action taken or not taken by the House on them, the reports of Parliamentary Committees may be divided into four
broad categories:
reports which are not discussed; reports which
are always discussed; reports which are
discussed and adopted; and reports which may
or may not be discused.
All these categories of reports are dealt below seriatim.
Reports which are not discussed by the House
By convention, the reports of the following Committees are not discussed:
Public Accounts Committee; Estimates Committee; Committee on Public Undertakings; Committee on Subordinate
Legislation; Committee on Government Assurances; Committee on Petitions; Committee on Papers Laid on the
Table; Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Committee on Empowerment of
Women and Departmentally Related Standing Committees.
A discussion may be allowed to be raised in the House in respect of a report of these Committees only if there is a
serious disagreement between a Committee and the Government on a specific issue. Such a situation has arisen only
once since 19474 756
Reports which are discussed by the House
The reports of Select or Joint Committees on Bills are not formally adopted but they are always discussed when the
Bills as reported by them are considered.
After the presentation of the final report of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, the member in-charge moves that
the Bill as reported by the Committee be taken into consideration757. The debate on such a motion is confined to a
consideration of the report of the Committee and the matters referred to in that report or of any alternative
suggestions consistent with the principle of the Bill
Reports which are discussed and adopted by the House
Reports of the Business Advisory Committee and the Committee on Private Member' Bills and Resolutions fall under
this category. In the case of these reports motions are moved that the House agrees, or agrees with amendments,
or disagrees with them and the recommendations contained in them can be implemented only after the reports are
adopted by the House. Amendments may be moved to such a motion that the reports may be referred back to the
Committee without limitation or with reference to any particular matter. The time allotted for discussion on such
motions is not more than half an hour.
Reports which may or may not be discussed by the House
Under this category fall the reports of the Committee of Privileges Rules Committee and the Committee on Absence
of Members. Motions for consideration of these reports are moved only in certain cases As regards the ad hoc
Committees which present their reports to the Speaker or the House, it is open to the House to discuss them or
The reports of Committees which are presented to the Speaker can be discussed only if the Speaker has caused such
reports to be laid on the Table.
Disagreement between a
Committee and the Government
The recommendations of a Parliamentary Committee are normally accepted and implemented by the Government. If
in regard to any recommendation the Government hold a view different from that of the Committee, the Government
have to apprise the Committee of the reasons that might have weighed with them in not accepting or implementing
the recommendation. The matter is considered by the Committee and a further report, if deemed necessary, may be
presented to the House.
In the case of the Fourth Report of the Public Accounts Committee, 1952-53, the Government deviated from this
procedure and laid a statement on the Table on 11 August 1953, without placing the views before the Committee in
the first instance. The Committee sought the Speaker's guidance in the matter, who directed that a circular should be
sent to all the Ministries laying down that in those cases where Government were not in a position to implement a
recommendation made by a Committee and the Government had reasons to disagree with the recommendation of the
Committee, the Ministry concerned should, in consonance with the well-established procedure place its views before
the Committee who may, if it thinks fit, present a further report to the House after considering the views of the
Government in the matter.
Where a difference of opinion between the Committee and the Government remains unresolved, the case is referred
to the Speaker for guidance.
Printing and Publication of Reports
The report of a Committee, together with the connected documents, if any, is printed either before or after its
presentation to the House or the Speaker as may be convenient Normally, the report of a Committee is printed
before it is presented to the House. Where, however, time is too short to get a report printed, the report may be
presented to the House in cyclostyled or typed form 763 The report is printed as soon as possible thereafter. Until a
report is presented to the House, it is treated as confidential 64 It becomes a public document only after its
presentation to the House
The report of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, including notes or minutes of dissent, if any, and the Bill as
reported by the Committee, are also published in the Gazette after presentation to the House for information of the
public 766 Where the report of a Committee has been presented to the Speaker when the House is not in session, the
Speaker may, when so requested, order the printing, publication or circulation of the report- Where a report
is
so
published or circulated under orders of the Speaker, that fact is notified in the Bulletin for information of members
Circulation of Reports
As soon as possible after the presentation of the report to the House, copies thereof are circulated to members of
the Lok Sabha, Ministries/Departments of the Government of India and such other persons or authorities as may be
determined from time to time769 Copies of the report are also supplied to press correspondents immediately after the
presentation of the report to the House and made available to the public at the Sales Counter of the Secretariat and
through other authorised selling agencies all over the country.
In the case of a Select or Joint Committee on a Bill, copies of the report along with the printed copies of the Bill as
reported by the Committee and copies of reports of other Joint Committees are also sent to the Rajya Sabha
Secretariat for circulation to members of the Rajya Sabha.
If the report of a Committee has been presented to the House in cyclostyled or typed form, a few copies of the
report are placed in the Library immediately after the presentation of the report to the House for reference by
members. Printed copies of such a report are circulated to members and others concerned as and when they are
available. In the case of a report which is presented to the Speaker when the House is not in session and which has
been printed and circulated under orders of the Speaker prior to its presentation to the House, the report is released to
the press only after a week from the date of despatch of copies to members 770
Effect of Prorogation on Business
Pending before Committees
Any business pending before a Committee does not lapse by reason only of the prorogation of the House and the
771
Committee continues to function notwithstanding such prorogation Even in the old Central Legislature, although
there was no specific provision to that effect in the Standing Orders, in actual practice every pending business before
the Committees survived prorogation of the Assembly. Bills pending in Parliament do not lapse consequent on
prorogation of the Houses On a point raised in the House, it was held by the Speaker that Bills pending in
Parliament, including those in the Committee stage, could be examined, considered and reported upon by the
773
Committee even when the House itself was not sitting or when it had been prorogued
In 1956, a question arose whether a Parliamentary Committee, not connected with the consideration of a Bill, could
function during the intersession period, notwithstanding the fact that the parent body, viz, the Lok Sabha itself had
been prorogued. The Attorney-General, to whom the matter was referred for opinion, expressed the following view:
Committees not connected with Bills can function during the inter-session period if the Rules of Procedure so
provide. There would seem to be nothing incongruous in the Committees functioning when, the parent body is
unable to function. The parent body would by its procedural rules authorise the Committees to function so that
the power and the authority of the Committees to function will be derived from the parent body.
774
The Rules Committee (First Lok Sabha) concurred with the above opinion and with a view to putting the matter
beyond any doubt and also confirming the established practice-which had been in existence since the inception of the
old
Central
Legislative Assembly-recommended a new rule which specifically provided that any business pending
before a Committee did not lapse by reason only of the prorogation of the House and that the Committee continued to
function despite such prorogation-4
776
The drastic consequences commonly associated with the prorogation in the United Kingdom have attended in India
not on prorogation but only upon dissolution of the Lok Sabha. In the United Kingdom, the effect of prorogation
and dissolution of Parliament on pending business is practically the same. In India, right from the beginning of
the old Central Legislature, a distinction has been made between prorogation and dissolution in so far as their
effect upon pending business is concerned. Prorogation has always been understood as not constituting an
interruption in continuity of the life of the House and its Committees whereas dissolution has been taken as
marking the end of the House and the Committees thereof.
Unfinished work of Committees
When a Committee is unable to complete its work before the expiration of its term or before the dissolution of the
Lok Sabha, it reports that fact to the House In such cases, any preliminary report, memorandum or note that may
have been prepared by the Committee or any evidence that may have been taken by it is made available to the
succeeding Committee The work of the Committee on Estimates, being of a continuous nature, the general practice
has been that the work left unfinished at the end of the term of a Committee is taken up for examination by the
succeeding Committee from the stage where it was left77. Likewise, scrutiny of replies or statements of action taken
by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India on the reports of the Committees is also of a continuous
nature. Any unfinished part of such scrutiny consequent on the expiry of the term of a Committee or on the dissolution
of the Lok Sabha is taken up by the succeeding Committee from the stage where it was left by the previous
Committee780 Similarly, all assurances, promises, undertakings which remain unimplemented at the expiry of the
term of the Committee on Government Assurances are pursued by the succeeding Committee which report upon their
implementation to the House. In respect of the assurances, promises or undertakings which remain unimplemented at
the time of the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, the general practice followed by the Committee on Government
Assurances is to select such of the assurances, etc. as are of a substantial character and of considerable public
importance and to incorporate them in their report to the House with a specific recommendation to the effect that
those assurances, promises and undertakings might be implemented by the Government The implementation of
such assurances, etc. is then watched by the succeeding Committee of the new House.
Having described broadly the salient features of Parliamentary Committees in general, the rest of this chapter
briefly deals with the composition, functions and working of each Committee of the Lok Sabha and of the twenty-four
Departmentally Related Standing Committees.
B. INDIVIDUAL COMMITTEES
Business Advisory Committee
The Business Advisory Committee consists of the Speaker and not more than fourteen other members nominated by
The Speaker is the ex officio Chairman of the Committee.
The Committee is nominated at the commencement of a new House after a General Election and thereafter, from
time to time. No specific term of its office is laid down in the Rules but like all other Parliamentary Committees, it
holds office until a new Committee is nominated 83 In practice, however, a new Committee assumes office on the first
day of June every year Casual vacancies are filled by nomination of new members for the unexpired term of the
Committee.
The need to have a Committee of the House entrusted with the task of allocating time to various Government
legislative and other business was greatly felt by Speaker Mavalankar. In his letter of 28 March 1951 to the Leader of
the House, he observed that in the absence of any procedure regarding allocation of time in respect of various items of
business, excepting financial matters, the Speaker was always placed in a delicate position in regard to curtailment of
debate and, in particular, in accepting a closure motion, if moved. He did not approve of the British procedure of
785
an
'allocation of time' motion as it might prove to be cumbrous and much time might be spent over the motion itself. The
Speaker said that he would prefer to entrust the duties connected with 'allocation of time' to a steering Committee of
the House. The Leader of the House agreed to the suggestion, and rules were accordingly framed to set up the
Committee
786
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
EXTRAORDINARY CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1011 OF 2022
IN THE MATTER OF:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborthy
Petitioners
Versus
Union of India & Anr.
Respondents
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
BEHALF OF TUSHAR MEHTA, SOLICITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
11. SUBMISSIONS ON THE QUESTION OF BREACH OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
INDEX
Sr. No.
Particulars
1.
Constitutional Response
A. Observations of other constitutional Courts on merits
B. The issue of Classification
(i) The intelligible differentia
(ii) Classification not on the basis of sexuality - basis is honorific status of heterogenous institution of
marriage
(iii) Similarity of outcomes is not necessarily the import of Article 14
(iv) Classification to protect the existing institution
(v) False equivalence claimed through scientific techniques
C. The personal liberty question
(i) Marriage is not an unqualified absolute right
(ii) The legitimate state interest of ideal mode of child rearing
(iii) Lack of data to establish equivalence with biological heterogeneous upbringing of children
(iv) The conundrum of "Substantiative Due Process"
D. The Article 19 question
E. Response to challenge to the Notice and Objection regime
(i) Right to Privacy is not infringed under the Provision of this Act
(ii) Penalty provisions for bogus objections
(iii) Legitimate State Interest
(iv) Notice and objections regime is gender neutral and reinforces the "public" nature of marriage
2.
INTERNATIONAL POSITION
A. The blanket reliance on international judgments is suspect
B. The inapplicability of International treaties
C. The European Convention and its gradual development
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
EXTRAORDINARY CIVIL WRIT JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1011 OF 2022
IN THE MATTER OF:
Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborthy Petitioners
Versus
Union of India & Anr. Respondents
I. OBSERVATIONS OF OTHER CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS ON MERITS
1. It is submitted that the claim of Petitioners there is a larger global judicial consensus on the issue of same-sex
marriage is ill-founded. A critical careful study of the world-wide position in fact shows palpable conflict of opinion on
the subject. It cannot be said that there is any international law obligation or even a large international law consensus
on the said issue.
2. In this regard, at the outset, it would relevant to note the dissent in Obergefell V. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015)
[5 is to 4], specifically on the points of classification and legitimate state interest. The relevant portion is quoted as
under:
"Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas join, dissenting. As the majority
acknowledges, marriage "has existed for millennia and across civilizations." Ante, at 3. For all those millennia,
across all those civilizations, "marriage" referred to only one relationship : the union of a man and a woman. See
ante, at 4; Tr. of Oral Arg. on Question 1, p. 12 (petitioners conceding that they are not aware of any society that
permitted same-sex marriage before 2001). As the Court explained two Terms ago, "until recent years,
marriage between a man and a woman no doubt had been thought of by most people as essential to the very
definition of that term and to its role and function throughout the history of civilization." United States V.
Windsor, 570 U.S. (2013) (slip op., at 13).
This universal definition of marriage as the union of a man and a woman is no historical coincidence. Marriage did
not come about as a result of a political movement, discovery, disease, war, religious doctrine, or any other moving
force of world history-and certainly not as a result of a prehistoric decision to exclude gays and lesbians. It arose in
the nature of things to meet a vital need : ensuring that children are conceived by a mother and father committed to
raising them in the stable conditions of a lifelong relationship. See G. Quale, A History of Marriage Systems 2 (1988);
cf. M. Cicero, De Officiis 57 (W. Miller transl. 1913) ("For since the reproductive instinct is by nature's gift the common
possession of all living creatures, the first bond of union is that between husband and wife; the next, that between
parents and children; then we find one home, with everything in common.")
The premises supporting this concept of marriage are so fundamental that they rarely require articulation. The
human race must procreate to survive. Procreation occurs through sexual relations between a man and a woman.
When sexual relations result in the conception of a child, that child's prospects are generally better if the mother and
father stay together rather than going their separate ways. Therefore, for the good of children and society, sexual
relations that can lead to procreation should occur only between a man and a woman committed to a lasting bond.
Society has recognized that bond as marriage. And by bestowing a respected status and material benefits on
married couples, society encourages men and women to conduct sexual relations within marriage rather than without.
As one prominent scholar put it, "Marriage is a socially arranged solution for the problem of getting people to stay
together and care for children that the mere desire for children, and the sex that makes children possible, does not
solve." J. Q. Wilson, The Marriage Problem 41 (2002).
This singular understanding of marriage has prevailed in the United States throughout our history. The majority
accepts that at "the time of the Nation's founding [marriage] was understood to be a voluntary contract between a
man and a woman." Ante, at 6. Early Americans drew heavily on legal scholars like William Blackstone, who regarded
marriage between "husband and wife" as one of the "great relations in private life," and philosophers like John Locke,
who described marriage as "a voluntary compact between man and woman" centered on "its chief end, procreation"
and the "nourishment and support" of children. 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *410; J. Locke, Second Treatise of
Civil Government $$78-79, p. 39 (J. Gough ed. 1947). To those who drafted and ratified the Constitution, this
conception of marriage and family "was a given : its structure, its stability, roles, and values accepted by all." Forte,
The Framers' Idea of Marriage and Family, in The Meaning of Marriage 100, 102 (R. George & J. Elshtain eds. 2006).
As the majority notes, some aspects of marriage have changed over time. Arranged marriages have largely given
way to pairings based on romantic love. States have replaced coverture, the doctrine by which a married man and
woman became a single legal entity, with laws that respect each participant's separate status. Racial restrictions on
marriage, which "arose as an incident to slavery" to promote "White Supremacy," were repealed by many States and
ultimately struck down by this Court. Loving, 388 U. S., at 6-7.
The majority observes that these developments "were not mere superficial changes" in marriage, but rather
"worked deep transformations in its structure." Ante, at 6-7. They did not, however, work any transformation in the
core structure of marriage as the union between a man and a woman. If you had asked a person on the street how
marriage was defined, no one would ever have said, "Marriage is the union of a man and a woman, where the woman
is subject to coverture." The majority may be right that the "history of marriage is one of both continuity and change,"
but the core meaning of marriage has endured. Ante, at 6.
The Court also invoked the right to privacy in Lawrence V. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003), which struck down a Texas
statute criminalizing homosexual sodomy. Lawrence relied on the position that criminal sodomy laws, like bans on
contraceptives, invaded privacy by inviting "unwarranted government intrusions" that "touc[h] upon the most private
human conduct, sexual behavior in the most private of places, the home." Id., at 562, 567.
Neither Lawrence nor any other precedent in the privacy line of cases supports the right that petitioners assert here.
Unlike criminal laws banning contraceptives and sodomy, the marriage laws at issue here involve no government
intrusion. They create no crime and impose no punishment. Same-sex couples remain free to live together, to engage
in intimate conduct, and to raise their families as they see fit. No one is "condemned to live in loneliness" by the laws
challenged in these cases-no one. Ante, at 28. At the same time, the laws in no way interfere with the "right to be let
alone."
In sum, the privacy cases provide no support for the majority's position, because petitioners do not seek privacy.
Quite the opposite, they seek public recognition of their relationships, along with corresponding government benefits.
Our cases have consistently refused to allow litigants to convert the shield provided by constitutional liberties into a
sword to demand positive entitlements from the State. See DeShaney V. Winnebago County Dept. of Social Servs.
489 U.S. 189, 196 (1989); San Antonio Independent School Dist. V. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35-37 (1973); post at 9-
13 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Thus, although the right to privacy recognized by our precedents certainly plays a role in
protecting the intimate conduct of same-sex couples, it provides no affirmative right to redefine marriage and no basis
for striking down the laws at issue here.
To be fair, the majority does not suggest that its individual autonomy right is entirely unconstrained. The
constraints it sets are precisely those that accord with its own "reasoned judgment," informed by its "new insight" into
the "nature of injustice," which was invisible to all who came before but has become clear "as we learn [the] meaning"
of liberty. Ante, at 10, 11. The truth is that today's decision rests on nothing more than the majority's own conviction
that same-sex couples should be allowed to marry because they want to, and that "it would disparage their choices
and diminish their personhood to deny them this right." Ante, at 19. Whatever force that belief may have as a matter
of moral philosophy, it has no more basis in the Constitution than did the naked policy preferences adopted in Lochner.
See 198 U. S., at 61 ("We do not believe in the soundness of the views which uphold this law," which "is an illegal
interference with the rights of individuals to make contracts regarding labor upon such terms as they may think
best").
The majority recognizes that today's cases do not mark "the first time the Court has been asked to adopt a cautious
approach to recognizing and protecting fundamental rights." Ante, at 25. On that much, we agree. The Court was
"asked"-and it agreed- to "adopt a cautious approach" to implying fundamental rights after the debacle of the
Lochner era. Today, the majority casts caution aside and revives the grave errors of that period.
One immediate question invited by the majority's position is whether States may retain the definition of marriage
as a union of two people. Cf. Brown V. Buhman, 947 F. Supp. 2d 1170 (Utah 2013), appeal pending, No. 14-4117
(CA10). Although the
majority randomly inserts the adjective "two" in various places, it offers no reason at all why the two-person
element of the core definition of marriage may be preserved while the man-woman element may not. Indeed, from the
standpoint of history and tradition, a leap from opposite-sex marriage to same-sex marriage is much greater than one
from a two-person union to plural unions, which have deep roots in some cultures around the world. If the majority is
willing to take the big leap, it is hard to see how it can say no to the shorter one. It is striking how much of the
majority's reasoning would apply with equal force to the claim of a fundamental right to plural marriage. If "[t]here is
dignity in the bond between two men or two women who seek to marry and in their autonomy to make such profound
choices," ante, at 13, why would there be any less dignity in the bond between three people who, in exercising their
autonomy, seek to make the profound choice to marry? If a same-sex couple has the constitutional right to marry
because their children would otherwise "suffer the stigma of knowing their families are somehow lesser," ante, at 15,
why wouldn't the same reasoning apply to a family of three or more persons raising children? If not having the
opportunity to marry "serves to disrespect and subordinate" gay and lesbian couples, why wouldn't the same
"imposition of this disability," ante, at 22, serve to disrespect and subordinate people who find fulfillment in
polyamorous relationships? See Bennett, Polyamory : The Next Sexual Revolution? Newsweek, July 28, 2009
(estimating 500,000 polyamorous families in the United States); Li, Married Lesbian "Throuple" Expecting First Child,
N. Y. Post, Apr. 23, 2014; Otter, Three May Not Be a Crowd : The Case for a Constitutional Right to Plural Marriage, 64
Emory L. J. 1977 (2015).
Near the end of its opinion, the majority offers perhaps the clearest insight into its decision. Expanding marriage to
include same-sex couples, the majority insists, would "pose no risk of harm to themselves or third parties." Ante, at
27. This argument again echoes Lochner, which relied on its assessment that "we think that a law like the one before
us involves neither the safety, the morals non the welfare of the public, and that the interest of the public is not in the
slightest degree affected by such an act." 198 U. S., at 57.
Then and now, this assertion of the "harm principle" sounds more in philosophy than law. The elevation of the
fullest individual self-realization over the constraints that society has expressed in law may or may not be attractive
moral philosophy. But a Justice's commission does not confer any special moral, philosophical, or social insight
sufficient to justify imposing those perceptions on fellow citizens under the pretense of "due process." There is indeed
a process due the people on issues of this sort-the democratic process. Respecting that understanding requires the
Court to be guided by law, not any particular school of social thought. As Judge Henry Friendly once put it, echoing
Justice Holmes's dissent in Lochner, the Fourteenth Amendment does not enact John Stuart Mill's On Liberty any more
than it enacts Herbert Spencer's Social Statics. See Randolph, Before Roe V. Wade : Judge Friendly's Draft Abortion
Opinion, 29 Harv. J. L & Pub. Pol'y 1035, 1036-1037, 1058 (2006). And it certainly does not enact any one concept of
marriage.
It is important to note with precision which laws petitioners have challenged. Although they discuss some of the
ancillary legal benefits that accompany marriage, such as hospital visitation rights and recognition of spousal status on
official documents, petitioners' lawsuits target the laws defining marriage generally rather than those allocating
benefits specifically. The equal protection analysis might be different, in my view, if we were confronted with a more
focused challenge to the denial of certain tangible benefits. Of course, those more selective claims will not arise now
that the Court has taken the drastic step of requiring every State to license and recognize marriages between same-
sex couples.
J. Alito
Attempting to circumvent the problem presented by the newness of the right found in these cases, the majority
claims that the issue is the right to equal treatment. Noting that marriage is a fundamental right, the majority argues
that a State has no valid reason for denying that right to same-sex couples. This reasoning is dependent upon a
particular understanding of the purpose of civil marriage. Although the Court expresses the point in loftier terms, its
argument is that the fundamental purpose of marriage is to promote the well-being of those who choose to marry.
Marriage provides emotional fulfillment and the promise of support in times of need. And by benefiting persons who
choose to wed, marriage indirectly benefits society because persons who live in stable, fulfilling, and supportive
relationships make better citizens. It is for these reasons, the argument goes, that States encourage and formalize
marriage, confer special benefits on married persons, and also impose some special obligations. This understanding of
the States' reasons for recognizing marriage enables the majority to argue that same-sex marriage serves the States'
objectives in the same way as opposite-sex marriage.
This understanding of marriage, which focuses almost entirely on the happiness of persons who choose to marry, is
shared by many people today, but it is not the traditional one. For millennia, marriage was inextricably linked to the
one thing that only an opposite-sex couple can do : procreate.
Adherents to different schools of philosophy use different terms to explain why society should formalize marriage
and attach special benefits and obligations to persons who marry. Here, the States defending their adherence to the
traditional understanding of marriage have explained their position using the pragmatic vocabulary that characterizes
most American political discourse. Their basic argument is that States formalize and promote marriage, unlike other
fulfilling human relationships, in order to encourage potentially procreative conduct to take place within a lasting unit
that has long been thought to provide the best atmosphere for raising children. They thus argue that there are
reasonable secular grounds for restricting marriage to opposite-sex couples.
If this traditional understanding of the purpose of marriage does not ring true to all ears today, that is probably
because the tie between marriage and procreation has frayed. Today, for instance, more than 40% of all children in
this country are born to unmarried This development undoubtedly is both a cause and a result of changes
in our society's understanding of marriage.
While, for many, the attributes of marriage in 21st-century America have changed, those States that do not want to
recognize same-sex marriage have not yet given up on the traditional understanding. They worry that by officially
abandoning the older understanding, they may contribute to marriage's further decay. It is far beyond the outer
reaches of this Court's authority to say that a State may not adhere to the understanding of marriage that has long
prevailed, not just in this country and others with similar cultural roots, but also in a great variety of countries and
cultures all around the globe.
3. It is submited that in United States V. Windsor, 570 US 744 [5 is to 4], on the same issue, it was held as under:
"J. Scalia
As I have observed before, the Constitution does not forbid the government to enforce traditional moral and sexual
norms. See Lawrence V. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 599 (2003) (Scalia, J., dissenting). I will not swell the U.S. Reports with
restatements of that point. It is enough to say that the Constitution neither requires non forbids our society to approve
of same-sex marriage, much as it neither requires non forbids us to approve of no-fault divorce, polygamy, or the
consumption of alcohol.
However, even setting aside traditional moral disapproval of same-sex marriage (or indeed same-sex sex), there are
many perfectly valid-indeed, downright boring-justifying rationales for this legislation. Their existence ought to be the
end of this case. For they give the lie to the Court's conclusion that only those with hateful hearts could have voted
"aye" on this Act And more importantly, they serve to make the contents of the legislators' hearts quite irrelevant:
"It
is a familiar principle of constitutional law that this Court will not strike down an otherwise constitutional statute on
the basis of an alleged illicit legislative motive." United States V. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 383 (1968). Or at least it was
a familiar principle. By holding to the contrary, the majority has declared open season on any law that (in the opinion
of the law's opponents and any panel of like-minded federal judges) can be characterized as mean-spirited.
J. Alito
It is beyond dispute that the right to same-sex marriage is not deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition.
In this country, no State permitted same-sex marriage until the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court held in 2003
that limiting marriage to opposite-sex couples violated the State Constitution. See Goodridge V. Department of Public
Health, 440 Mass. 309, 798 N.E. 2d. 941. Non is the right to same-sex marriage deeply rooted in the traditions of other
nations. No country allowed same-sex couples to marry until the Netherlands did so in 200078
What Windsor and the United States seek, therefore, is not the protection of a deeply rooted right but the
recognition of a very new right, and they seek this innovation not from a legislative body elected by the people, but
from unelected judges. Faced with such a request, judges have cause for both caution and humility.
The family is an ancient and universal human institution. Family structure reflects the characteristics of a
civilization, and changes in family structure and in the popular understanding of marriage and the family can have
profound effects. Past changes in the understanding of marriage-for example, the gradual ascendance of the idea that
romantic love is a prerequisite to marriage-have had far-reaching consequences. But the process by which such
consequences come about is complex, involving the interaction of numerous factors, and tends to occur over an
extended period of time.
We can expect something similar to take place if same-sex marriage becomes widely accepted. The long-term
consequences of this change are not now known and are unlikely to be ascertainable for some time to come2 There
789
are those who think that allowing same-sex marriage will seriously undermine the institution of marriage. See, e.g., S.
Girgis, R. Anderson, & R. George, What is Marriage? Man and Woman A Defense 53-58 (2012); Finnis, Marriage : A
Basic and Exigent Good, 91 The Monist 388, 398 (2008) 990 Others think that recognition of same-sex marriage will
fortify a now-shaky institution. See, e.g., A. Sullivan, Virtually Normal : An Argument About Homosexuality 202-203
(1996); J. Rauch, Gay Marriage : Why It Is Good for Gays, Good for Straights, and Good for Amer-ica 94 (2004).
At present, no one-including social scientists, philosophers, and historians-can predict with any certainty what the
long-term ramifications of widespread acceptance of same-sex marriage will be. And judges are certainly not equipped
to make such an assessment. The Members of this Court have the authority and the responsibility to interpret and
apply the Constitution. Thus, if the Constitution contained a provision guaranteeing the right to marry a person of the
same sex, it would be our duty to enforce that right. But the Constitution simply does not speak to the issue of same-
sex marriage. In our system of government, ultimate sovereignty rests with the people, and the people have the right
to control their own destiny. Any change on a question so fundamental should be made by the people through their
elected officials.
111
In my view, the approach that Windsor and the United States advocate is misguided. Our equal protection frame-
work, upon which Windsor and the United States rely, is a judicial construct that provides a useful mechanism for
analyzing a certain universe of equal protection cases. But that framework is ill suited for use in evaluating the
constitutionality of laws based on the traditional understanding of marriage, which fundamentally turn on what
marriage is.
Underlying our equal protection jurisprudence is the central notion that "[a] classification 'must be reasonable, not
arbitrary, and must rest upon some ground of difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the
legislation, so that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike. Reed V. Reed, 404 U.S. 71, 76 (1971)
(quoting F.S. Royter Guano Co. V. Virginia, 253 U.S. 412, 415 (1920)). The modern tiers of scrutiny-on which
Windsor and the United States rely so heavily- are a heuristic to help judges determine when classifications have that
"fair and substantial relation to the object of the legislation." Reed, supra, at 76.
So, for example, those classifications subject to strict scrutiny-i.e., classifications that must be "narrowly tailored"
to achieve a "compelling" government interest, Parents Involved in Community Schools V. Seattle School Dist. No. 1,
551 U.S. 701, 720 (2007) (internal quotation marks omitted)-are those that are "SO seldom relevant to the
achievement of any legitimate state interest that laws grounded in such considerations are deemed to reflect prejudice
and antipathy." Cleburne V. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 440 (1985); cf. id., at 452-453 (Stevens, J.,
concurring) ("It would be utterly irrational to limit the franchise on the basis of height or weight; it is equally invalid to
limit it on the basis of skin color. None of these attributes has any bearing at all on the citizen's willingness or ability
to exercise that civil right").
In contrast, those characteristics subject to so-called intermediate scrutiny- i.e., those classifications that must be
'substantially related' to the achievement of "important governmental objective[s],' United States V. Virginia, 518
U.S. 515, 524 (1996); id., at 567 (Scalia, J., dissenting)-are those that are sometimes relevant considerations to be
taken into account by legislators, but "generally provid[e] no sensible ground for different treatment," Cleburne,
supra, at 440. For example, the Court has held that statutory rape laws that criminalize sexual intercourse with a
woman under the age of 18 years, but place no similar liability on partners of underage men, are grounded in the very
real distinction that "young men and young women are not similarly situated with respect to the problems and the
risks of sexual intercourse." Michael M. V. Superior Court, Sonoma City., 450 U.S. 464, 471 (1981) (plurality opinion).
The plurality reasoned that "[o]nly women may become pregnant, and they suffer disproportionately the profound
physical, emotional, and psychological consequences of sexual activity." Ibid. In other contexts, however, the Court
has found that classifications based on gender are "arbitrary," Reed, supra, at 76, and based on "outmoded notions of
the relative capabilities of men and women," Cleburne, supra, at 441, as when a State provides that a man must
always be preferred to an equally qualified woman when both seek to administer the estate of a deceased party, see
Reed, supra, at 76-77.
Finally, so-called rational-basis review applies to classifications based on "distinguishing characteristics relevant to
interests the State has the authority to implement." Cleburne, supra, at 441. We have long recognized that "the equal
protection of the laws must coexist with the practical necessity that most legislation classifies for one purpose or
another, with resulting disadvantages to various groups or persons." Romer V. Evans, 517 U.S. 620, 631 (1996) As a
result, in rational-basis cases, where the court does not view the classification at issue as "inherently suspect,"
Adarand Constructors, Inc. V. Pea, 515 U.S. 200, 218 (1995) (internal quotation marks omitted), "the courts have
been very reluctant, as they should be in our federal system and with our respect for the separation of powers, to
closely scrutinize legislative choices as to whether, how, and to what extent those interests should be pursued."
Cleburne, supra, at 441-442.
In asking the Court to determine that 3 of DOMA is subject to and violates heightened scrutiny, Windsor and the
United States thus ask us to rule that the presence of two members of the opposite sex is as rationally related to
marriage as white skin is to voting or a Y-chromosome is to the ability to administer an estate.
That is a striking request and one that unelected judges should pause before granting. Acceptance of the argument
would cast all those who cling to traditional beliefs about the nature of marriage in the role of bigots or superstitious
fools.
By asking the Court to strike down DOMA as not satisfying some form of heightened scrutiny, Windsor and the
United States are really seeking to have the Court resolve a debate between two competing views of marriage.
The first and older view, which I will call the "traditional" or "conjugal" view, sees marriage as an intrinsically
opposite-sex institution. BLAG notes that virtually every culture, including many not influenced by the Abrahamic
religions, has limited marriage to people of the opposite sex. Brief for Respondent BLAG (merits) 2 (citing Hernandez
V. Robles, 7 N. Y. 3d 338, 361, 855 N. E. 2d 1, 8 (2006) ("Until a few decades ago, it was an accepted truth for almost
everyone who ever lived, in any society in which marriage existed, that there could be marriages only between
participants of different sex")). And BLAG attempts to explain this phenomenon by arguing that the institution of
marriage was created for the purpose of channeling heterosexual intercourse into a structure that supports child
rearing. Brief for Respondent BLAG 44-46, 49. Others explain the basis for the institution in more philosophical terms.
They argue that marriage is essentially the solemnizing of a comprehensive, exclusive, permanent union that is
intrinsically ordered to producing new life, even if it does not always do SO. See, e.g., Girgis, Anderson, & George,
What is Marriage? Man and Woman : A Defense, at 23-28. While modern cultural changes have weakened the link
between marriage and procreation in the popular mind, there is no doubt that, throughout human history and across
many cultures, marriage has been viewed as an exclusively opposite-sex institution and as one inextricably linked to
procreation and biological kinship.
The other, newer view is what I will call the "consent-based" vision of marriage, a vision that primarily defines
marriage as the solemnization of mutual commitment-marked by strong emotional attachment and sexual attraction-
between two persons. At least as it applies to heterosexual couples, this view of marriage now plays a very prominent
role in the popular understanding of the institution. Indeed, our popular culture is infused with this understanding of
marriage. Proponents of same-sex marriage argue that because gender differentiation is not relevant to this vision, the
exclusion of same-sex couples from the institution of marriage is rank discrimination.
The Constitution does not codify either of these views of marriage (although I suspect it would have been hard at
the time of the adoption of the Constitution or the Fifth Amendment to find Americans who did not take the traditional
view for granted). The silence of the Constitution on this question should be enough to end the matter as far as the
judiciary is concerned. Yet, Windsor and the United States implicitly ask us to endorse the consent-based view of
marriage and to reject the traditional view, thereby arrogating to ourselves the power to decide a question that
philosophers, historians, social scientists, and theologians are better qualified to explore791. Because our constitutional
order assigns the resolution of questions of this nature to the people, I would not presume to enshrine either vision of
marriage in our constitutional jurisprudence."
4. The dissent clearly highlights the points which would satisfy the inquiries under Article 14, 19 and 21 of the
Indian Constitution as well.
5. Further, it is important to note certain other cases from other jurisdictions. The following is an illustrative table
highlighting numerous international judgments which denied to recognise same sex marriages under their respective
jurisdictions and in fact, specifically referred to power of the legislative bodies to deal with such issues:
S. No
COUNTRY
DECISION
1.
New Zealand
Joslin and ors V New Zealand, Merits, Communication No 902/1999, UN Doc
CCPR/C/75/D/902/1999 (2002) 10 IHRR 40, IHRL 1719 (UNHRC 2002), 17th July
2002, United Nations [UN]; Human Rights Committee [CCPR]
The relevant portion of the said opinion is as under:
"Consideration of the merits
8.1 The Human Rights Committee has considered the present communication in the
light of all the information made available to it by the parties, as provided in article 5,
paragraph 1 of the Optional Protocol.
8.2 The authors' essential claim is that the Covenant obligates States parties to confer
upon homosexual couples the capacity to marry and that by denying the authors this
capacity the State party violates their rights under articles 16, 17, 23, paragraphs
1
and 2, and 26 of the Covenant. The Committee notes that article 23, paragraph 2, of
the Covenant expressly addresses the issue of the right to marry.
Given the existence of a specific provision in the Covenant on the right to marriage,
any claim that this right has been violated must be considered in the light of this
provision. Article 23, paragraph 2, of the Covenant is the only substantive provision in
the Covenant which defines a right by using the term "men and women", rather than
"every human being", "everyone" and "all persons". Use of the term "men and
women", rather than the general terms used elsewhere in Part 111 of the Covenant,
has been consistently and uniformly understood as indicating that the treaty
obligation of States parties stemming from article 23, paragraph 2, of the Covenant is
to recognize as marriage only the union between a man and a woman wishing to
marry each other.
8.3 In light of the scope of the right to marry under article 23, paragraph 2, of the
Covenant, the Committee cannot find that by mere refusal to provide for marriage
between homosexual couples, the State party has violated the rights of the authors
under articles 16, 17, 23, paragraphs 1 and 2, or 26 of the Covenant.
9. The Human Rights Committee, acting under article 5, paragraph 4, of the Optional
Protocol, is of the view that the facts before it do not disclose a violation of any
provision of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights."
It may be noted that there are other opinions of the HCC taking a different view on
the issue.
2.
Thailand
Constitutional Court Ruling No. 20/2564-It upheld Section 1448 of the Civil and
Commercial Code which permitted marriage only between a man and woman. It held
this was in accordance with the state of nature and Thai custom. It further held
further that sex means biological characteristics. The Court noted the purpose of
marriage was to create a family and that marriage between people with "gender
diversity" would not be able to create the same bond as traditional marriage. The
Court noted such persons were deserving of general protection but under special
marriage laws.
The Court held that the equality guarantee in the Thai Constitution applied to persons
with equal characteristics but people with differing essential characteristics would
have to be treated differently.
The Court held that marital benefits were based on spouses being of opposite sex.
Hence, conferring them to same sex couples would affect public order. Same sex
persons were free to have sexual relations with their partners and to dispose of their
property by civil agreement.
3.
Panama
Judgement No 1042-16-
The Supreme Court of Justice in 2023 rejected the right of same sex marriage,
holding that Panamanian laws conceived of marriage as a bond between a man and a
woman and the same could not be judicially rewritten by the Courts.
Although the Petitioners relied on a decision of the Inter American Court of Human
rights to claim that recognition of same sex marriage was an obligation, the Supreme
Court held that the Court could not adopt an international law interpretation which
was conflict with the country's internal law and that any such addition or expansion of
the right must be done with the consent of the State expressed through the
concerned agency, in this case the Legislature
The Court further held that since the right to marriage in Panamanian law was based
around the idea of one man and one woman, the right to equal marriage could not be
claimed as a fundamental right.
Crucially, the Court held : "De modo que, cada pais, desde su soberania,
institucionalidad y estructura juridica, podra ajustar o modifcar su legislacion {sea la
constitucional, sea la de menor jerarquial, para cobijar la modalidad gue les resulte
mas apta para regir las uniones entre individuos de iqual sexo, y, en consecuencia, la
serie de derechos, deberes y obligaciones gue de ellas puedan derivarse. Asf, a esta
altura, en varios confnes de la tierra el <<matrimonio igualitario o <<uniones del mismo
sexo, se han revestido de legalidad en varias naciones13 lo que, sin embargo,
todavfa no es representativo del colectivo mundial, como para atribuirle la
universalidad, inalienabilidad e irreversibilidad, propia de los derechos humanos en la
esfera de los Tratados Internacionales."
Translation.- So, each country, on the basis of its sovereignty, institutionality and
legal structure, may adjust or modify its legislation {be it constitutional, be it the
subordinate, to govern the modality that is most suitable for governing unions
between individuals of equal sex, and, consequently, the series of rights, duties and
obligations that may derive from them. Thus, at this point, in various parts of the
worlds, "equal marriage" or "same-sex unions" have become legal in several
nations13, which, however, is still not representative of the global collective, as to
attribute to it the universality, inalienability and irreversibility, typical of human rights
in the sphere of International Treaties
On the special nature of marriage, the Court held:
"Lo dicho, conduce al planteamiento siguiente : La Constituci6n Polftica de la
Republica de Panama, no reconoce el derecho al matrimonio ig ua / ita rio,
primordialmente, porque el derecho al matrimonio, Y, por ende, la instituci6n
matrimonial, como estan concebidos (dentro del marco normativo de protecci6n
y
preservacin de la familia), se erigen en un valor constitucional objetivo, superior, de
orden publico y de interes general (social), establecido para dirigir la vida en
sociedad.
Translation : What has been stated leads to the following conclusion : The Political
Constitution of the Republic of Panama does not recognize the "right to equal
marriage", primarily, because the "right to marriage", and, therefore, the matrimonial
institutions, as they are conceived (within the normative framework of protection and
preservation of the family), are have an objective, superior constitutional value, of
public order and of general (social) interest, to direct life in society.
The Court noted a doctrine as follows: "Precisa esta doctrinaria que
la union
matrimonial heterosexual es un valor positivo, mientras que la union homosexual es un
valor neutro; una manifestacion indiferente de la pareja que decide cohabitar segun
sus preferencias sexuales, pero que no puede pretender ni celebrar el acto de
matrimonio ni tampoco acceder al estado matrimonial que es un estado protegido por
el Derecho>>. Y anade que, en el caso de las uniones homosexuales no existe una
trascendencia social ni antropo/6qica o socia/izadora, gue es la esencia del matrimonio
y que justifca una mayor proteccion . Concluye asf que EI Estado puede priorizar una
union sobre otra, teniendo en cuenta el valor que le asigna. Asf, la preferencia del
Estado por la union matrimonial sabre la union homosexual tiene fundamentos
razonables gue la justifcan juridicamente e impidengue la distinci6n sea califcada de
discriminatoria (el enfasis es del Pleno)."
Translation.
the heterosexual marriage union is a positive value, while the
homosexual union is a neutral value; an indifferent manifestation of the couple who
decides to cohabit according to their sexual preferences, but who cannot claim or
celebrate the act of marriage or access the married state, which is a state protected by
Law". And he adds that, "in the case of homosexual unions there is no social,
anthropological or socializing transcendence, which is the essence of marriage and
which justifies greater protection". He thus concludes that The State can prioritize one
union over another, taking into account the value it assigns to it. Thus, the preference
of the State for the matrimonial union over the homosexual union has reasonable
grounds that legally justify it and prevent the distinction from being qualified as
discriminatory"
The Court summarised its findings a S follows : En conclusion; las normas que
disponen que el matrimonio debe concertarse voluntariamente entre un hombre y una
mujer, legalmente capaces para unirse, y hacer, y compartir, una vida en comun, y las
que, de manera concomitante, prohfen que contraigan matrimonio, entre sf, personas
del mismo sexo (artfculo 34, numeral 1 del C6digo de la Familia y 35 del C6digo de
Derecho Internacional Privado), estan objetiva y razonablemente justifcadas en el
interes general de dar prevalencia a aquellas uniones con el potencial de instauran
familias (en su concepcin original), dar continuidad a la especie humana, y, por ende,
a la sociedad; la diferencia de trato (que no discriminacin en el sentido peyorativo de
la palabra), viene sustentada en la fnalidad inmanente del institute matrimonial
clasico20, y no en las propensiones sexuales de las personas a quienes se les reconoce
(o no), el <<derecho al matrimonio.
Translation.- In conclusion; the rules stipulating that marriage must be entered into
voluntarily between a man and a woman, legally capable of uniting, and making, and
sharing, a life in common, and those which, concomitantly, prohibit the contracting of
marriage, between sf, persons of the same sex (article 34, numeral 1 of the C6digo of
the Family and 35 of the C6digo of Private International Law), are objectively and
reasonably justified in the general interest of giving precedence to those unions with
the potential to establish families (in their original conception), give continuity to the
human species, and, therefore, to society; The difference in treatment (which is not
discrimination in the pejorative sense of the word), is based on the immanent purpose
of the classical marriage institute20, and not on the sexual propensities of the people
to whom the "right to marriage" is recognized (or not).
4.
Peru
Judgement 191/2022-
The Court refused to recognise a marriage contracted abroad under the domestic laws
of Peru as the definition of Marriage in Peruvian law was confined to one man and one
woman. The Court further stated that widening the definition of marriage was a task
for the legislature.
It held as follows : nos atrs, el Congreso debati un proyecto de ley para introducir la
unin civil entre personas del mismo sexo, pero fue archivado el 2015 por decisin de
la mayora de los integrantes de la comisin dictaminadora. Si ahora se quiere ir an
ms lejos e incorporar el "matrimonio igualitario" al derecho peruano, debe hacerse
una reforma constitucional siguiendo el procedimiento establecido en el 6 de la propia
Constitucin..
24. Introducirlo por la ventana, a travs de una resolucin del Tribunal Constitucional,
implicara que los magistrados constitucionales usufructuemos y abusemos
indebidamente del puesto que temporalmente ocupamos. Nosotros estamos aqu no
para sustituir a los legisladores o constituyentes, sino solo para hacer cumplir la
Constitucin Poltica del Per.
25. Por lo antes expresado, la demanda es improcedente, al no existiren el Per
el
derecho constitucional almatrimonio entre personas del mismo sexo, siendo de
aplicacin el artculo 7, inciso 1 del Nuevo Cdigo Procesal Constitucional, aprobado por
la Ley 31307 (artculo 5, inciso 1 del anterior cdigo, vigente cuando se present la
demanda)
Translation.- A few years ago, Congress debated a bill to introduce civil unions
between people of the same sex, but was archived in 2015 by decision of the Majority
of the members of the Opinion Commission. If now you want to go still Further and
incorporating "equal marriage" into Peruvian law, A constitutional reform must be
carried out following the procedure established in Article 6 of the Constitution itself
Introducing it through the window, through a Constitutional Court resolution, would
imply that the constitutional magistrates usurp and unduly abuse the position we
temporarily occupy. We are here not to replace legislators or constituents, but only to
enforce the Political Constitution of Peru.
25. Based on the above, the claim is inadmissible, since there is no such system in
Peru, a constitutional right to marriage between persons of the same sex does not exist
in application of article 7, paragraph 1 of the New Constitutional Procedure Code,
approved by Law 31307 (article 5, paragraph 1 of the previous code, in force when the
claim was filed)
5.
Poland
11 OSK 1112/16
Supreme Administrative Court of Poland vide its judgment dt. 28.02.2018 held that
extension of rights of marriage to same sex partners refects own vision of role of
marriage in their societies which does not result from interpretation of Fundamental
Right. It held as under:
"In addition, it should be noted that the European Court of Human Rights, in its
judgment of 22 November 2016, [...], issued in the case of G. and A. V. Russia, stated
that "As regards Article 12 of the Convention, it is necessary in this regard, recall that
this article protects the fundamental right of a man and a woman to marry and found a
family"
(cf. LEX No. 2151572). A similar position was expressed by the ECtHR in its judgment
of June 24, 2010, [...], additionally noting that "Article 12 of the Convention does not
impose an obligation on the respondent government to grant same-sex couples
access to marriage" and recognizing that no violation of Art. 14 in conjunction with Art.
8 of the Convention. Furthermore, in its judgment of 13 November 2012, [...], the
ECtHR stated that "Article 12 of the Convention constitutes a lex specialis for the right
to marry. This article ensures the fundamental right of a man and a woman to marry
and found a family. Article 12 expressly leaves the regulation of marriage to national
law. Article 12 of the Convention protects the traditional concept of marriage between
a man and a woman. While it is true that some of the Contracting States have
extended marriage to same-sex partners, this action refaects their own vision of the
role of marriage in their societies, which does not result from the interpretation of this
fundamental right as adopted by the Contracting States in the 1950"
The court further observed that a person of cohabitant may be connected with another
person with emotional, physical and economic ties however cohabitant is not same as
marriage. It noted as under:
"It should also be noted that the resolution of the Supreme Court of November 28,
2012, 111 CZP 65/12 (LEX No. 1230043) and the resolution of 7 judges of the Supreme
Court of February 25, 2015, / KZP 20/15, referred to in the cassation appeal, concern
the issue of related to the term "cohabitant" used in the Civil Code and the Penal Code.
In both of these resolutions, the Supreme Court stated that such a person, connected
with another person by emotional, physical and economic ties, is also a person of the
same sex. The term "cohabitant" is not, however, the same as the term "marriage"
referred to in Art. 18 of the Constitution of the Republic of Poland and Art. 1  of the
Family and Guardianship Code. For this reason, the above-mentioned resolutions
cannot be relevant for the understanding of the term "marriage" formulated in Art"
6.
Philippines
Falcis V. Civil Registrar General, G.R. No. 217910
The Court held as follows :
-
"Our freedom to choose the way we structure our intimate relationships with our
chosen significant other in a large sense defines us as human beings. Even opposite-
sex couples continually adjust the day-to-day terms of their partnership as their
relationships mature. It is in the sanctuary of their spaces that we authentically evolve,
become better human beings, and thus contribute meaningfully within our society.
After all, the companionship and understanding that we inevitably discover with the
person we choose to spend the rest of our lives with provide the foundation for an ethic
of care that enriches a democracy. This Court sympathizes with the petitioner with his
obvious longing to find a partner. We understand the desire of same-sex couples to
seek, not moral judgment based on discrimination from any of our laws, but rather, a
balanced recognition of their true, authentic, and responsive choices.
Yet, the time for a definitive judicial fat may not yet be here. This is not the case that
presents the clearest actual factual backdrop to make the precise reasoned judgment
our Constitution requires. Perhaps, even before that actual case arrives, our
democratically-elected representatives in Congress will have seen the wisdom of acting
with dispatch to address the suffering of many of those who choose to love
distinctively, uniquely, but no less genuinely and passionately."
In a Separate Opinion Justice Peralta observed as follows :
"The right to marry is fundamental as a mater of history and tradition, but rights come
not from ancient sources alone. They rise, too, from a better informed understanding of
how constitutional imperatives define a liberty that remains urgent in our own era.
Many who deem same-sex marriage to be wrong reach that conclusion based on decent
and honorable religious or philosophical premises, and neither they nor their beliefs are
disparaged here. But when that sincere, personal opposition becomes enacted law and
public policy, the necessary consequence is to put the imprimatur of the State itself on
an exclusion that soon demeans or stigmatizes those whose own liberty is then denied.
Under the Constitution, same-sex couples seek in marriage the same legal treatment as
opposite-sex couples, and it would disparage their choices and diminish their
personhood to deny them this right.
In fine, the claim of alleged unconstitutionality of the Family Code provisions defining
marriage as a union between a man and a woman has no leg to stand on. It is not for
this Court to write into the law purported rights when they are not expressly or by clear
implication deemed available under the Fundamental Law. Same-sex marriage is
a
policy mater better left to the deliberations of the elected officials of the country."
6. It is submitted that therefore, to claim any universality, either legally, socially or politically, even within the
liberal democratic world, would be far from the truth. It is submitted that different societies and different countries are
grappling with this issue, often experimenting or allowing limited recognitions or "freedom" which their own societies
and values permit. The entirety of the globe, with its different social structures, is represented to the democratic
process, in the house of legislatures, who are the original custodian of the laws through which people would be
governed. A judicial intervention in the mater therefore, in absence of any social, political or legislative debate, would
be unprecedented even in the global liberal democratic context.
11. THE ISSUE OF CLASSIFICATION AND DISCRIMINATION
A. The intelligible differentia
7. The challenge to the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is completely misplaced either under Article 14, 15 or any other
Article of the Constitution of India. The said Act was enacted to provide for marriage between interfaith and inter-caste
heterosexual couples. An Act of Parliament can be challenged as violative of Article 14 on any of the following two
grounds:
a. the Government has provided for different mechanism for different classes of persons though these classes are
similar or vice versa; or
b. there is no reasonable nexus between the provisions of the Act and the object it seeks to achieve.
8. So far as the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is concerned, the said object of the Act is to allow-
a. Marriage of heterosexual persons;
b. Irrespective of their respective religions;
C. Irrespective of their respective castes.
9. The said Act fully achieves the object and there is no argument as to how there is discord between the said
object and the provisions of the Act.
10 The arguments of the petitioner challenging the Special Marriage Act, 1954 are unsustainable since no "class"
other than the class specified in the said Act can raise a grievance that that a particular "class" is not included in the
Act. Under the guise of challenging the validity of the said Act, the petitioners are seeking to not only add to object
[never conceived by the Parliament at the time of enactment but thereafter suitably restructure, re-engineer and re-
draft the said Act so as to include a completely new class not conceived at the time of enactment.
11. Both the classes being different requiring different provisions and separate and distinct statutory regime. It
cannot be argued that the classification is either unreasonable or manifestly arbitrary.
12. It is submitted that the question of discrimination on the basis of Article 14 on 15 does not arise in any case
where the question concerns granting of or limiting legal status to any social relationship. It is submitted that there
cannot be a fundamental right, either under Article 14 or 15, to seek recognition to all forms of social relationships. It
may be noted that the Legislature does not seek to give recognition or any special status to all forms of human
relationships.
13. It is submitted that as far as specific issues of discrimination under Article 15 are concerned, the same are
adequately tackled by the TG Act, 2019. Further, the classification here is not on the basis of sex or gender rather on a
nature of relationship and the vitality of the heterogenous institution of marriage as opposed to all other forms of
associations. It is submitted that therefore, no question under Article 15 arises in the present case.
14. It is submitted that over and above marriage, there are a whole host of human relationships which exist in
society [which may in some cases be even more valuable than marriage]. The statutory law, in any country in the
world, does not regulate other relationships in the nature of friendship, lovers, cousins and so on and so forth. The said
relationships may be extremely important from the perspective of life and liberty and the dignity attached to it and
may further even have a more profound impact on the life of a person, however, sans any legitimate state interest,
Legislatures across the world, have left a whole host of human relationships completely outside the legislative purview,
denying any legal recognition to the same.
15. It is submitted that the presumption, therefore, cannot be that the State is obliged to recognize all human
relationships, rather, the presumption has to be that the State has no business to recognize any personal
relationships, unless the State has a legitimate state interest in regulating the same. If the said premise is accepted
with regard to a complete freedom from State interference in personal relationships, it is crystal clear that non-
inclusion in any legally recognized socio legal institution would not per se attract the wrath of the Fundamental Rights
chapter of the Constitution.
16. It is submitted that any non-inclusion would not per se become unconstitutional and even more so if the State
can establish a clear discernible policy premised on an intelligible differentia with a rational object. In some ways,
from a fundamental right perspective the debate ought to be questioning State interference in personal relationships
and not seeking mandamus for the State to regulate or recognize relationships of a particular form. There is no
positive obligation for the State to regulate or recognize all forms of social relationships which may be dynamic in
nature and also in some cases be legislatively impossible to recognize or regulate.
17. It is submitted that the claim for discrimination in case of non-recognition of same sex Marriage is not
sustainable. It is submitted that there must be a distinction drawn between choice of partner and recognition of the
partnership. It is submitted that same sex couples may choose their partners freely and further protected under the
TG Act, 2019.
It is submitted that the question of marriage is a question of state sanction to the relationship. The State has no
obligation to recognise all personal relationships or further treat different personal relationships in the same manner.
Across the world, this right is exercised by States-Some chose to allow same sex marriage, some permit civil unions
but not adoption and some do not grant recognition at all and some still criminalise homosexual activity. It is
submitted that even in countries where Civil Unions are recognised, it should be noted that the very concept of Civil
Union exists because the status of Marriage could not be granted in the view of the country's Legislature.
18. It is submitted that for the purpose of recognition of marriage, heterosexual and Homosexual Couples
constitute two clearly distinct classes. The State therefore elects to give its recognition to that form of social
association by which its continued existence can be assured i.e. Heterosexual marriage.
19. It is submitted that there exists a clear intelligible differentia between same-sex relationships and they cannot
be
compared to traditional heterosexual marriage. The constituent units of the two are different therefore, in law, it is
open for the legislature to provide separate treatment to the two. The long-settled jurisprudence of this Hon'ble Court,
and including the recent cases from NALSA supra, Puttaswamy [9 judges] supra Navtej supra, Deepika supra, do not
in any way suggest that classification on the basis of such differentia cannot be made. In fact, the Legislature has
itself made the classification by enacting the TG Act, 2019 and provided protection from a wide variety of
discrimination by making a classification to protect only a limited set of individuals and not others. It is submitted that
the said exercise is itself a form of legislative classification on the basis of sexual orientation and specifically the
LGBTQIA+ community.
20. It is submitted that in an issue concerning succession and marriage, this Hon'ble Court in Madhu Kishwar V.
"6. With regard to the statutory provisions of the Act, he has proposed to the reading down of Sections 7 and 8 in
order to preserve their constitutionality. This approach is available from p. 36 (paras 47, 48) onwards of his judgment.
The words "male descendant" wherever occurring, would include "female descendants". It is also proposed that even
though the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and the Indian Succession Act, 1925 in terms would not
apply to the Scheduled Tribes, their general principles composing of justice, equity and fair play would apply to them.
On this basis it has been proposed to take the view that the Scheduled Tribe women would succeed to the estate of
paternal parent, brother or husband as heirs by intestate succession and inherit the property in equal shares with the
male heir with absolute rights as per the principles of the Hindu Succession Act as also the Indian Succession Act.
However much we may like the law to be so we regret our inability to subscribe to the means in achieving such
objective. If this be the route of return on the court's entering the thicket, it is far better that the court kept out of it.
It is not far to imagine that there would follow a beeline for similar claims in diverse situations, not stopping at tribal
definitions, and a deafening uproar to bring other systems of law in line with the Hindu Succession Act and the Indian
Succession Act as models. Rules of succession are indeed susceptible of providing differential treatment, not
necessarily equal. Non-uniformities would not in all events violate Article 14. Judge-made amendments to provisions,
over and above the available legislation, should normally be avoided. We are thus constrained to take this view, even
though it may appear to be conservative for adopting a cautious approach, and the one proposed by our learned
brother is, regretfully not acceptable to us."
21. It is submitted that even after the authoritative pronouncement in Shayara Bano V. Union of India reported in
established that Article 14 forbids class legislation but does not forbid classification. Permissible classification must be
founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left
out of the group, and the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in
question.
22. It is submitted that the presence of "twin test of classification" would give content to the otherwise
untrammelled expanse of "manifest arbitrariness". It is submitted that the "twin test of classification" was laid down
by bench of higher combinations than Shayara Bano supra. The "twin test of classification" states that Article 14
forbids class legislation but does not forbid classification. It is submitted that it postulates that permissible
classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped
together from others left out of the group, and the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be
achieved by the statute in question. It is submitted that the jurisprudence laid down in the initial years by this Hon'ble
Court, still holds the field on the subject and the 'doctrine of manifest arbitrariness' cannot exist outside the law
settled by numerous constitution benches of this Hon'ble Court.
23. It is submitted that the law on the same can be succinctly summarised by a decision of seven Hon'ble Judges
"71. There are numerous cases which deal with different facets of problems arising under Article 14 and which set
out principles applicable to questions which commonly arise under that article. Among those may be mentioned the
decisions in Budhan Choudhry V. State of Bihar [AIR 1955 SC 191 (1955) 1 SCR 1045], Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia V.
Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar [AIR 1958 SC 538 : 1959 SCR 279], C.I. Emden V. State of U.P., [AIR 1960 SC 548
(1960) 2 SCR 592], Kangsari Haldan V. State of West Bengal [AIR 1960 SC 457 (1960) 2 SCR 646], Jyoti Pershad V.
Administrator for Union Territory of Delhi, [AIR 1961 SC 1602 (1962) 2 SCR 125] and State of Gujarat V. Shri
mentioned case, "it would be an idle parade of familiar learning to review the multitudinous cases in which the
constitutional assurance of equality before the law has been applied". We have, therefore, confined our attention to
those cases only in which special tribunals or courts were set up or Special Judges were appointed for trying offences
or classes of offences or cases or classes of cases. The survey which we have made of those cases may be sufficient to
give a fair idea of the principles which ought to be followed in determining the validity of classification in such cases
and the reasonableness of special procedure prescribed for the trial of offenders alleged to constitute a separate or
distinct class.
72. As long back as in 1960, it was said by this Court in Kangsari Haldar that the propositions applicable to cases
arising under Article 14 "have been repeated so many times during the past few years that they now sound almost
platitudinous". What was considered to be platitudinous some 18 years ago has, in the natural course of
events,
become even more platitudinous today, especially in view of the avalanche of cases which have flooded this Court.
Many a learned Judge of this Court has said that it is not in the formulation of principles under Article 14 but in their
application to concrete cases that difficulties generally arise. But, considering that we are sitting in a larger Bench than
some which decided similar cases under Article 14, and in view of the peculiar importance of the questions arising in
this reference, though the questions themselves are not without a precedent, we propose, though undoubtedly at the
cost of some repetition, to state the propositions which emerge from the judgments of this Court insofar as they are
relevant to the decision of the points which arise for our consideration. Those propositions may be stated thus:
"(1) The first part of Article 14, which was adopted from the Irish Constitution, is a declaration of equality of the
civil rights of all persons within the territories of India. It enshrines a basic principle of republicanism. The
second part, which is a corollary of the first and is based on the last clause of the first Section of the Fourteenth
Amendment of the American Constitution, enjoins that equal protection shall be secured to all such persons in
the enjoyment of their rights and liberties without discrimination of favouritism. It is a pledge of the protection of
equal laws, that is, laws that operate alike on all persons under like circumstances.
(2) The State, in the exercise of its governmental power, has of necessity to make laws operating differently on
different groups or classes of persons within its territory to attain particular ends in giving effect to its policies,
and it must possess for that purpose large powers of distinguishing and classifying persons or things to be
subjected to such laws.
(3) The constitutional command to the State to afford equal protection of its laws sets a goal not attainable by the
invention and application of a precise formula. Therefore, classification need not be constituted by an exact or
scientific exclusion or inclusion of persons or things. The courts should not insist on delusive exactness or apply
doctrinaire tests for determining the validity of classification in any given case. Classification is justified if it is
not palpably arbitrary.
(4) The principle underlying the guarantee of Article 14 is not that the same rules of law should be applicable to all
persons within the Indian territory or that the same remedies should be made available to them irrespective of
differences of circumstances. It only means that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike both in
privileges conferred and liabilities imposed. Equal laws would have to be applied to all in the same situation, and
there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject-matter of the
legislation their position is substantially the same.
(5) By the process of classification, the State has the power of determining who should be regarded as a class for
purposes of legislation and in relation to a law enacted on a particular subject. This power, no doubt, in some
degree is likely to produce some inequality; but if a law deals with the liberties of a number of well defined
classes, it is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that it has no application to other
persons. Classification thus means segregation in classes which have a systematic relation, usually found in
common properties and characteristics. It postulates a rational basis and does not mean herding together of
certain persons and classes arbitrarily.
(6) The law can make and set apart the classes according to the needs and exigencies of the society and as
suggested by experience. It can recognise even degree of evil, but the classification should never be arbitrary,
artificial or evasive.
(7) The classification must not be arbitrary but must be rational, that is to say, it must not only be based on some
qualities or characteristics which are to be found in all the persons grouped together and not in others who are
left out but those qualities or characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the object of the legislation. In
order to pass the test, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (1) that the classification must be founded on an
intelligible differentia which distinguishes those that are grouped together from others and (2) that that
differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act.
(8) The differentia which is the basis of the classification and the object of the Act are distinct things and what is
necessary is that there must be a nexus between them. In short, while Article 14 forbids class discrimination by
conferring privileges or imposing liabilities upon persons arbitrarily selected out of a large number of other
persons similarly situated in relation to the privileges sought to be conferred or the liabilities proposed to be
imposed, it does not forbid classification for the purpose of legislation, provided such classification is not
arbitrary in the sense abovementioned.
(9) If the legislative policy is clear and definite and as an effective method of carrying out that policy a discretion is
vested by the statute upon a body of administrators or officers to make selective application of the law to certain
classes or groups of persons, the statute itself cannot be condemned as a piece of discriminatory legislation. In
such cases, the power given to the executive body would import a duty on it to classify the subject-matter of
legislation in accordance with the objective indicated in the statute. If the administrative body proceeds to
classify persons or things on a basis which has no rational relation to the objective of the legislature, its action
can be annulled as offending against the equal protection clause. On the other hand, if the statute itself does not
disclose a definite policy or objective and it confers authority on another to make selection at its pleasure, the
statute would be held on the face of it to be discriminatory, irrespective of the way in which it is applied.
(10) Whether a law conferring discretionary powers on an administrative authority is constitutionally valid or not
should not be determined on the assumption that such authority will act in an arbitrary manner in exercising the
discretion committed to it. Abuse of power given by law does occur; but the validity of the law cannot be
contested because of such an apprehension. Discretionary power is not necessarily a discriminatory power.
(11) Classification necessarily implies the making of a distinction or discrimination between persons classified and
those who are not members of that class. It is the essence of a classification that upon the class are cast duties
and burdens different from those resting upon the general public. Indeed, the very idea of classification is that of
inequality, so that it goes without saying that the mere fact of inequality in no manner determines the matter of
constitutionality.
(12) Whether an enactment providing for special procedure for the trial of certain offences is or is not discriminatory
and violative of Article 14 must be determined in each case as it arises, for, no general rule applicable to all
cases can safely be laid down. A practical assessment of the operation of the law in the particular circumstances
is necessary.
(13) A rule of procedure laid down by law comes as much within the purview of Article 14 as any rule of substantive
law and it is necessary that all litigants, who are similarly situated, are able to avail themselves of the same
procedural rights for relief and for defence with like protection and without discrimination."
24. It is submitted that the other principles reiterated in the said judgment are as under:
> that a law may be constitutional even though it relates to a single individual if on account of some special
circumstances or reasons applicable to him and not applicable to others, that single individual may be treated as
a class by himself;
> that there is always a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is upon him
who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the constitutional principles;
> that it must be presumed that the legislature understands and correctly appreciates the need of its own people,
that its laws are directed to problems made manifest by experience and that its discriminations are based on
adequate grounds;
> that the legislature is free to recognize degrees of harm and may confine its restrictions to those cases where the
need is deemed to be the clearest;
> that in order to sustain the presumption of constitutionality the court may take into consideration maters of
common knowledge, maters of common report, the history of the times and may assume every state of facts
which can be conceived existing at the time of legislation; and
> that while good faith and knowledge of the existing conditions on the part of a legislature are to be presumed, if
there is nothing on the fact of the law or the surrounding circumstances brought to the notice of the court on
which the classification may reasonably be regarded as based, the presumption of constitutionality cannot be
carried to the extent of always holding that there must be some undisclosed and unknown reasons for subjecting
certain individuals or corporations to hostile or discriminating legislation.
25. It is submitted that differential treatment does not per se constitute violation of Article 14. Thus, the legal
position aforementioned clearly establishes that any legislation may withstand challenge on the ground of
discrimination and violation of Art. 14 of the Constitution, in the event the classification created by it is founded on
any intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others and has a
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
26. Further, it is submitted that classifications are not perfect and may give birth to special treatment or singling
out and this may not involve breach of Article 14. It is settled law that a 'mathematical nicety or 'perfect equality' are
not required as per Article 14. Further, the constitutionality of a statute cannot be questioned on the basis of fortuitous
circumstances arising out of peculiar situations or specifically due to "under inclusions". In Kedar Nath Bajoria V. State
"7. Now it is well settled that the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution does not
mean that all laws must be general in character and universal in application and that the State is no longer to
have the power of distinguishing and classifying persons or things for the purposes of legislation. To put it simply
all that is required in class or special legislation is that the legislative classification must not be arbitrary but
should be based on an intelligible principle having a reasonable relation to the object which the legislature seeks
to attain. If the classification on which the legislation is founded fulfils this requirement, then the differentiation
which the legislation makes between the class of persons or things to which it applies and other persons or
things left outside the purview of the legislation cannot be regarded as a denial of the equal protection of the
law, for, if the legislation were all-embracing in its scope, no question could arise of classification being based on
intelligible differentia having a reasonable relation to the legislative purpose. The real issue, therefore, is whether
having regard to the underlying purpose and policy of the Act as disclosed by its title, preamble and provisions
as summarised above, the classification of the offences, for the trial of which the Special Court is set up and a
special procedure is laid down, can be said to be unreasonable or arbitrary and therefore, violative of the equal
protection clause.
9. Mr Chatterjee argues that the offences listed in the schedule do not necessarily involve the accrual of any
pecuniary gain to the offender or the acquisition of other property by him or any loss to any Government, and that the
classification cannot, therefore, be said to be based on that consideration. Counsel referred in particular to the offences
included in the fifth paragraph, namely, forgery, making and possessing counterfeit seals, falsification of accounts,
etc., as instances in point. It may, however, be observed that Section 9(1), which makes it obligatory on the Special
Court to impose on persons tried and convicted by it an additional compensatory fine of the kind mentioned above,
indicates that only those offences, which, either by themselves or in combination with others mentioned in the
schedule, are suspected to "have resulted in such pecuniary gain or other advantage and, therefore, to merit the
compensatory fine, are to be allotted to a Special Court for trial. It is well known that acts which constitute the
offences mentioned in para 5 are often done to facilitate the perpetration of the other offences specified in the
schedule, and they may well have been included as ancillary offences. Article 14 does not insist that legislative
classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete and we cannot accept the suggestion that the
classification made in the Act is based on no intelligible principle and is, therefore, arbitrary."
27. Further, it is submitted that the statutory laws, and especially concerning societal relations, are reflections of
societies themselves framed through elected representatives. Admittedly, while some societies and countries [largely
in the Western world] have accepted this form of "union" within the fold of "marriage", a vast majority of the world
[entirety of Asia, with the exception of Taiwan] has not recognised the same sex relationships, as "marriage".
Therefore, the question is essentially a societal one wherein the answer may vary from society to society and region to
region.
B. Classification not on the basis of sexuality - basis is honorific status of heterogenous institution of
marriage
28. klt is submitted that it is often alleged gender is a wholly "cultural invention, a social construction, and a self-
presentation
we enact in certain settings. 792 It is submitted that if that was true, it might be unjust to deny people
equal treatment for what is "socially bestowed, 793 for being what society made them. It was the said broad
argumentative theory that forms the basis of NALSA supra, Puttaswamy [9 judges] supra, Navtej supra, Deepika
supra. However, the said theory cannot extend itself is absolute terms and a completely absolute extension under this
theory society would result in approving all supposedly consensual sexual conduct, including adultery, bigamy,
polygamy, polyamorous marriage, marriage within prohibited degrees or other personal relationship inventions over
and above same sex relationships.
29. It is submitted that to state that sexuality is immutable and naturally occurring is not the complete side of the
story. Undeniably, the sexuality of LGBTQIA+ nature may indeed occur from the start [at puberty]. however, the
emerging body of evidence points that it may also be an acquired characteristic. Therefore, it is clear that society can
influence sexuality of person inhabiting the society. The evidence points towards that homosexual activity is more
common in societies that condone it than in societies that condemn it. 794 Further, even if sexual orientation is
purely
immutable, sexual conduct is would still be "an issue of choice. 795 It is important to note that as per scientific
studies,
children who had been exposed to homosexual experiences may be more likely in adulthood to identify as
homosexual. 796 It is stated that there is a heated debate on the issue and even scientific debates and studies are not
conclusive on either side, however, findings suggest that sexual preference and conduct are not strictly immutable or
purely genetic and may well also be a function of the society itself and how it treats homosexuality. The recent genetic
study of about half a million people suggests that genetics may have a limited contribution to sexual orientation
30. Therefore, it is submitted that that this Hon'ble Court, ought to approach the present question, not merely in
the linear reductionist sense, as sought to be portrayed by the Petitioner wherein an oversimplified approach is prayed
for. It is submitted that the present question seeks to unsettle a long-settled understanding of human relations,
naturally common in civilisations and societies across the world and recognised in a particular sense for particular
societal results. This institution of heterosexual marriage, being the natural building block of society itself, which in
turn is the basis of institution of family responsible for perpetuation of society and producing human resource to
further enrich and take the society forward [the argument on evolution of scientific techniques will be tackled
separately].
31. The rejection of intelligible differentia argument in Navtej supra for the purposes of Section 377 of IPC cannot
ipso facto be lifted and applied in the present context. What constitutes sufficient intelligible differentia in a given
case, depends on the classification made and object sought to be achieved. The intelligible differentia in the present
case is not the "natural" order or any claim of "unnaturality", rather it simply is the unique place that the
heterogeneous unit of marriage and family enjoys in the society being the primary reason behind its sustenance.
32. The classification is not on the basis of sexuality of the individuals involved, rather the classification is on the
basis of nature of the relationship. Further, the classification does not outlaw the same sex relationship or its existence
in society. It merely does not equate it with "marriage" as the society and civilization considers that pedestal to be
reserved on for heterogenous couples for reasons elaborated above.
33. In Why Same Sex Marriage is Unjust [Spiegel, James S] the position has been explained in detail. The Research
Paper and the arguments therein are worth quoting in extenso:
1. Heterosexual union is the indispensable means by which humans come into existence and therefore has special
social value (indeed, the greatest possible social value because it is the first precondition for the existence of
society as well as its continuation).
2. What has special value to human society deserves special social recognition and sanction.
3.
Civil ordinances which recognize same-sex marriage as comparable to heterosexual marriage constitute a
rejection of the special value of heterosexual unions.
4. To deny the special social value of what has special social value is unjust.
5. Therefore, same-sex marriage is unjust.
Now for some