(2022) 8 Supreme Court Cases 42 : (2022) 4 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, SURYA KANT AND VIKRAM NATH, JJ.)
OIL AND NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LIMITED
Appellant;
Versus
DISCOVERY ENTERPRISES PRIVATE LIMITED AND
ANOTHER
Respondents.
Civil Appeal No. 2042 of 2022 with TCs (C) Nos. 47-50 of 2016,
decided on April 27, 2022
A. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Ss. 8, 11, 7, 2(1)(h), 16 and
37 - Group of Companies Doctrine - Applicability of, to make a non-
signatory or non-party group company (i.e. a company who has not signed
the arbitration agreement) a party to arbitration proceedings
- Adjudication on claimant's application for discovery and inspection, to
establish/justify making a non-signatory group company (JDIL) a
party/respondent - Necessity of, prior to disposal of application under S.
16 filed by such group company seeking its deletion from the arbitral
proceedings
- Disputes having arisen, on 25-4-2008 ONGC invoked arbitration
against DEPL and JDIL - However, an application under S. 16 came to be
filed by JDIL seeking its deletion from the arbitral proceedings on the
ground that it was not a party to the arbitration agreement - ONGC also
filed an application for discovery and inspection to support its case that
DEPL is an alter ego of the Jindal Group of companies - By its interim award
dt. 27-10-2010, the Arbitral Tribunal held that it lacked the jurisdiction to
arbitrate on the claim against JDIL, which was not a party to the arbitration
agreement
- Held, the Arbitral Tribunal's failure to consider the application for
discovery and inspection of documents results in a situation where vital
evidence that could have assisted the Tribunal in its determination of the
challenge under S. 16 was shut out - Also, it emerged from the record that
no evidence was adduced by JDIL in support of its plea of the absence of
jurisdiction under S. 16 - Interim award of the first Arbitral Tribunal stood
vitiated because of the following reasons - (1) Failure of the Arbitral
Tribunal to decide upon the application for discovery and inspection filed by
ONGC - (2) Failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to determine the legal
foundation for the application of the group of companies doctrine - (3)
Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal that it would decide upon the applications
filed by ONGC only after the plea of jurisdiction was disposed of
- In the present case, appeal filed by ONGC under S. 37 against the
interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal dt. 27-10-2010 allowed and the
interim award set aside - Further, transferred cases remitted back to High
Court and hearing
of the transferred cases adjourned sine die so as to await the outcome of the
arbitral proceedings between ONGC and JDIL
- Corporate Laws - Company Law - Cross-company holdings/Holding
Company/Subsidiary company/Related party - Words and Phrases -
"Group of companies doctrine"
(Paras 69 to 74.3, 77.2 and 77.5)
B. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Ss. 8, 11, 7, 2(1)(h), 16 and
37 - Non-signatory or non-party to the arbitration agreement - Arbitration
against, or by - When may be invoked - Group of Companies Doctrine -
When applies - Explained
- In deciding whether a company within a group of companies which is
not a signatory to arbitration agreement would nonetheless be bound by it,
the law considers the following factors : (i) mutual intent of the parties; (ii)
relationship of a non-signatory to a party which is a signatory to the
agreement; (iii) commonality of the subject-matter; (iv) composite nature
of the transaction; and (v) performance of the contract - Further, consent
and party autonomy are undergirded in S. 7, however, a non-signatory may
be held to be bound on a consensual theory, founded on agency and
assignment or on a non-consensual basis such as estoppel or alter ego
- Corporate Laws - Company Law - Cross-company holdings/Holding
Company/Subsidiary company/Related party - Words and Phrases -
"Group of companies doctrine"
(Paras 40 and 41)
C. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Ss. 16 and 37(2)(a) - Appeal
against an order of Arbitral Tribunal accepting plea of absence of jurisdiction
- Restrictions on
- Parliament has not specifically constricted the powers of the court
while considering an appeal under S. 37(2)(a) by the grounds on which an
award can be challenged under S. 34 - If the Arbitral Tribunal accepts a
plea that it lacks jurisdiction, the order of the Tribunal is amenable to a
challenge in appeal under S. 37(2)(a) - However, in the exercise of the
appellate jurisdiction, the court must have due deference to the grounds
which have weighed with the Tribunal in holding that it lacks jurisdiction
having regard to the object and spirit underlying the statute which entrusts
the Arbitral Tribunal with the power to rule on its own jurisdiction
(Para 55)
There were two parallel proceedings arising out of the Constitution of two sets
of Arbitral Tribunals.
On 22-3-2006, ONGC awarded a contract to Discovery Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.
("DEPL"), the first respondent, which is a company belonging to the DP Jindal
Group, for operating a floating, production, storage and offloading vessel ("vessel").
Clause 37 of the contract between ONGC and DEPL provides for the settlement
of disputes of the parties through arbitration. On 25-4-2008, ONGC invoked
arbitration against DEPL and JDIL and claimed an amount of Rs 88 crores. An
Arbitral Tribunal consisting of K, MSR and V was constituted (the first Arbitral
Tribunal). In its statement of claim filed before the Arbitral Tribunal,
ONGC set up the case that DEPL and JDIL belonged to the DP Jindal Group of
Companies and since they constitute a single economic entity, the corporate veil
should be lifted to compel the non-signatory, JDIL, to arbitrate. According to ONGC,
DEPL was an alter ego and agent of JDIL.
An application under Section 16 of the 1996 Act was filed by JDIL seeking its
deletion from the arbitral proceedings on the ground that it is not a party to the
arbitration agreement. ONGC responded to the application. During the course of the
proceedings, ONGC filed an application on 5-1-2009 for discovery and inspection to
support its case that DEPL is an alter ego of the Jindal Group of companies. In
support of the application for discovery and inspection, ONGC pleaded that:
(1) DEPL and JDIL are group companies and that the former is an agent or
alter ego of the latter.
(2) There exists corporate and functional unity between them.
(3) DEPL is a corporate facade which has been created to promote and
extend the business of JDIL.
(4) JDIL is responsible for the acts of omission and commission of DEPL on
the basis of the group of companies doctrine.
(5) DEPL has been created by the Jindal Group to render services in the oil
and gas sector and each entity of the group is strategically formed to render
certain services.
(6) DEPL is working under the "fraternal hood" of the group based on the
admission on the corporate website of JDIL.
By its interim award dated 27-10-2010, the Arbitral Tribunal held that it lacked
the jurisdiction to arbitrate on the claim against JDIL, which was not a party to the
arbitration agreement. The conclusion of the Tribunal was that JDIL is not a
signatory of the arbitration agreement and hence could not be impleaded as a party
to the proceedings.
JDIL was accordingly struck off the array of parties. ONGC filed an appeal under
Section 37 before the High Court which was dismissed on 27-6-2012.
The judgment of the High Court was challenged by ONGC under Article 136 of
the Constitution. The Arbitral Tribunal delivered its final award dated 6-6-2013
("arbitral award in the first proceeding") and, while allowing the claim of ONGC, held
that it is entitled to recover an amount of Rs 87 crores and USD 1,756,197.50
together with interest at 9% p.a. and legal costs. The counterclaim filed by DEPL
was dismissed.
In the course of its interim award, the Arbitral Tribunal dealt with the applications
filed by ONGC on 5-1-2009 for discovery of documents and inspection. The Arbitral
Tribunal noted ONGC's contention that its application for discovery and inspection
should be heard and disposed of first on merits and that the application filed by JDIL
under Section 16 should be heard thereafter so that all relevant documents would
emerge before the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunal, however, directed that the
application for discovery and inspection filed by ONGC be "deferred until the issue of
the jurisdiction is decided".
Transferred cases arising out of the arbitration
During the pendency of the arbitration between ONGC and DEPL, ONGC withheld
a sum of US $14,772,408.54 towards recovery of its claim of Rs 64.88 crores
against four contracts with JDIL. By a letter dated 24-10-2007, JDIL sought the
release of the sum withheld together with interest failing which it stated that it
would exercise its right to take legal recourse. ONGC replied to the letter on 5-5-
2008 stating that they are withholding the dues as an adjustment against the dues
owed to ONGC by DEPL. Aggrieved by the deductions made by ONGC under its four
contracts for drilling services, JDIL invoked arbitration on 4-2-2010. An Arbitral
Tribunal consisting of M, S and MSR (MSR being a member of the first Arbitral
Tribunal as well), was constituted.
This second Arbitral Tribunal, by a common award dated 9-10-2013, ("arbitral
award in the second proceeding") directed ONGC to pay JDIL an amount of US
$14,772,495.55 together with interest at 4% p.a. calculated from the due date of
each invoice till the date of payment or realisation. The Arbitral Tribunal dealt with
the submission of ONGC that DEPL and JDIL belong to the same group thus entitling
ONGC to make the deductions.
Rejecting the contention of ONGC, the Arbitral Tribunal held:
"25. There is hardly any evidence to support the plea of the respondent that
DEPL and the Claimant are one and the same company.
The surest way t to legal research!"
DEPL was not a party to the above arbitral proceedings which were initiated by
JDIL. ONGC instituted petitions under Section 34 of the 1996 Act for challenging the
arbitral award in the second proceeding in respect of the four contracts of JDIL. The
petitions were dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court on 28-4-2015. ONGC
filed an appeal under Section 37 of the 1996 Act during the pendency of the special
leave petition arising from the interim award of the first Arbitral Tribunal dated 27-
10-2010, consisting of K, MSR and V. ONGC sought a transfer of the appeals
lodged before the High Court against the judgment of the Single Judge dismissing
the petitions under Section 34 for challenging the arbitral award in the second
proceeding. The transferred cases came up before Court together with the special
leave petition arising out of the interim award dated 27-10-2010.
The issue involved in these matters were:
(1) Whether there was a fundamental failure of the first Arbitral Tribunal to
address the plea raised by ONGC for attracting the group of companies doctrine
and whether failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to allow for discovery and inspection
went to the root of the process?
(2) Whether the interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal dated 27-7-2010 on
the plea raised by JDIL under Section 16 and the judgment of the Single Judge of
the High Court dated 27-6-2012 dismissing ONGC's appeal under Section 37
sustainable?
(3) Whether the dismissal by the Single Judge of the petition under Section
34 challenging the arbitral award dated 9-10-2013 in the second proceeding, in
favour of JDIL, sustainable?
Held :
Group of Companies Doctrine
Interpreting the expressions "through or under" in Section 45, the Supreme
normally would take place between the parties to the arbitration agreement, it
could take place between a signatory to an arbitration agreement and a third party
as well. The Supreme Court held that though the scope of the arbitration
agreement is limited to parties who have entered into it and those who claim under
or through them, courts under the English law have developed the group of
companies doctrine. In substance, the doctrine postulates that an arbitration
agreement which has been entered into by a company within a group of
companies, can bind its non-signatory affiliates or sister concerns if the
circumstances demonstrate a mutual intention of the parties to bind both the
signatory and affiliated, non-signatory parties.
(Para 25)
Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. V. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc., (2013) 1
referred to
The 2015 Amendment to Section 8 had brought it in line with Section 45 of the
1996 Act. Prior to the amendment, Section 8(1) of the 1996 Act provided that a
party to an arbitration agreement can make an application to seek a reference to
arbitration. The amended Section 8(1) clarified that a person claiming through or
under a party to the arbitration can also seek reference to arbitration
notwithstanding any judicial precedent.
(Para 28)
(Civ) 308; Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. V. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc.,
rendered before the evolution and application of the group of companies doctrine
(Para 29)
(Civ) 486, followed
397; Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. V. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc.,
The corporate veil can be pierced to bind non-signatories upon a construction of
the arbitration agreement, the intention at the time of entering the contract and the
performance of the underlying contract.
(Para 30)
(Civ) 486, followed
Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. V. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc., (2013) 1
(Civ) 453, referred to
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration, 5th Edn., p. 99, referred to
The doctrine provides that a non-signatory may be bound by an arbitration
agreement where the parent or holding company, or a member of the group of
companies is a signatory to the arbitration agreement and the non-signatory entity
on the group has been engaged in the negotiation or performance of the
commercial contract, or made statements indicating its intention to be bound by
the contract, the non-signatory will also be bound and benefitted by the relevant
contracts.
(Para 34)
Interim award in ICC Case No. 4131 of 1982, IX YB Comm Arb 131 (1984); Award
in ICC Case No. 5103 of 1988, 115 JDI (Clunet) 1206 (1988). Gary B. Born
:
International Commercial Arbitration, Vol. I, 2009, pp. 1170-1171, referred to
Commentators have noted that a signed written agreement to submit a present
or future dispute to arbitration does not exclude the possibility of an arbitration
agreement binding a third party. A non-signatory may be bound by the operation of
the group of companies doctrine as well as by the operation of the principles of
assignment, agency and succession. A party, which is not a signatory to a contract
containing an arbitration clause, may be bound by the agreement to arbitrate if it is
an alter ego of a party which executed the agreement. This constitutes a departure
from the ordinary principle of contract law that every company in a group of
companies is a distinct legal entity. A non-signatory may be bound by the
arbitration agreement where:
(i) There exists a group of companies; and
(ii) Parties have engaged in conduct or made statements indicating an
intention to bind a non-signatory.
(para 36)
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration, 5th Edn., 2.13, pp. 89-90, referred
to
The principal legal basis for holding that a non-signatory is bound (and benefited)
by an arbitration agreement
include both purely consensual theories (e.g.,
agency, assumption, assignment) and non-consensual theories (e.g. estoppel, alter
ego).
(Para 37)
Tepper Realty Co. V. Mosaic Tile Co., 259 F Supp 688 (SDNY 1966), referred to
Gary B. Born : International Commercial Arbitration, 2nd Edn., Vol. 1, at p. 1418;
John Fellas : "Compelling Signatories to Arbitrate with Non-Signatories", New
York Law Journal (28-3-2022), referred to
In deciding whether a company within a group of companies which is not a
signatory to arbitration agreement would nonetheless be bound bv it. the law
considers the following factors:
(i) The mutual intent of the parties;
(ii) The relationship of a non-signatory to a party which is a signatory to the
agreement;
(iii) The commonality of the subject-matter;
(iv) The composite nature of the transaction; and
(v) The performance of the contract.
(para 40)
Consent and party autonomy are undergirded in Section 7 of the 1996 Act.
However, a non-signatory may be held to be bound on a consensual theory,
founded on agency and assignment or on a non-consensual basis such as estoppel
or
alter ego. These principles would have to be understood in the context of the
present case, where ONGC's attempt at the joinder of JDIL to the proceedings was
rejected without adjudication of ONGC's application for discovery and inspection of
documents to prove the necessity for such a joinder.
(Para 41)
Gary Born : International Commercial Arbitration, 2nd Edn., Vol. 1, at p. 1418,
referred to
Standard for review of the interim arbitral award
The interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal is substantially premised on the fact
that JDIL is not a party to the contract dated 22-3-2006. The Tribunal held that the
agreement was only between ONGC and DEPL.
(Para 42)
The fundamental basis of the interim award is that in view of the provisions of
Section 7 and the definition of the expression "party" in Section 2(1)(h), the
provisions of the Act of 1996 could not be invoked or applied to a non-signatory to
an arbitration agreement. The Tribunal held that it has no jurisdiction to investigate,
enquire into or record any findings on the basis of ONGC's claim against JDIL.
(Para 44)
The Tribunal had, by its order dated 7-7-2009, specifically held that the
objections of JDIL to the production of documents sought by ONGC would be
decided when the application under Section 16 was resolved. Yet in the interim
award, ultimately, the Tribunal has directed that ONGC's application dated 5-1-
2009 would stand deferred until the issue of jurisdiction is decided. ONGC was
justified in submitting that its application for discovery and inspection should be
heard first and disposed of on merits after which appropriate orders as regards
joinder of parties could be issued to DEPL and JDIL.
(Para 45)
By failing to consider the application for discovery and inspection, the Tribunal
has foreclosed itself from inquiring into whether there was sufficient material to
establish the application of the group of companies doctrine. The application for
discovery and inspection was indeed relevant to the exercise which was being
carried out by the Tribunal.
(Para 46)
The Arbitral Tribunal has not considered whether the group of companies
doctrine would stand attracted. The Arbitral Tribunal precluded itself from deciding
as to whether the application for discovery and inspection should be allowed. The
Arbitral Tribunal effectively shut out material evidence which ONGC sought to bring
on the record.
(Para 47)
The failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to allow for discovery and inspection goes to
the root of the process inasmuch as it disabled ONGC from pursuing its
fundamental claim based on the application of the group of companies doctrine.
(Para 48)
Sub-section (1) of Section 37 provides for appeals to the court against orders
of the Arbitral Tribunal meeting one of the descriptions specified in clauses (a), (b)
and (c). Sub-section (2) provides that an appeal shall also lie to the court from an
order of the Arbitral Tribunal accepting a plea under sub-sections (2) or (3) of
Section 16 (of a want of jurisdiction) and for granting or refusing a measure under
Section 17. It is true that Parliament has not specifically constricted the powers of
the court while considering an appeal under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section
37 by the grounds on which an award can be challenged under Section 34.
The expression "arbitral award" is defined in Section 2(1)(c) to include an interim
award. The grounds of challenge to an arbitral award under Section 34 are specified
by the parameters which are spelt out in that provision. However, with regard to
challenges to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, Section 16 stipulates that where the
Tribunal rejects a plea of a lack of jurisdiction, it must continue with the arbitral
proceedings and make an award and the remedy of a challenge to the award would
lie under Section 34. However, if the Arbitral Tribunal accepts a plea that it lacks
jurisdiction, the order of the Tribunal is amenable to a challenge in appeal under
Section 37(2)(a). In the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction, the court must have
due deference to the grounds which have weighed with the Tribunal in holding that it
lacks jurisdiction having regard to the object and spirit underlying the statute which
entrusts the Arbitral Tribunal with the power to rule on its own jurisdiction. The
decision of the Tribunal that it lacks jurisdiction is not conclusive because it is
subject to an appellate remedy under Section 37(2)(a). However, in the exercise of
this appellate power, the court must be mindful of the fact that the statute has
entrusted the Arbitral Tribunal with the power to rule on its own jurisdiction with the
purpose of facilitating the efficacy of arbitration as an institutional mechanism for
the resolution of disputes.
(Para 55)
considered
In the earlier proceedings instituted by ONGC against both DEPL and JDIL, the
Arbitral Tribunal had by its interim award dated 27-10-2010 upheld JDIL's plea of a
lack of jurisdiction and held that JDIL could not be impleaded. In Para 31 of the
arbitral award in the second proceeding, dated 9-10-2013 between ONGC and
JDIL, the Arbitral Tribunal adverted to the interim award dated 27-10-2010 in the
first proceeding and agreed with those findings.
(Para 63)
It is important to note that in the arbitral award in the second proceeding, no
issue of jurisdiction arose since only JDIL and ONGC were parties and the claim of
JDIL arose under four distinct contracts of JDIL with ONGC. DEPL was not a party
to that proceeding. The examination-in-chief of ONGC's witness in the first
arbitration proceeding was treated as an affidavit in the subsequent arbitration
involving the claim by JDIL against ONGC.
(Para 64)
Essentially, the grounds on which ONGC opposed JDIL's application under
Section 16 in the first arbitral proceeding overlap with the basis on which ONGC
sought adjustment of the claims due to JDIL in the second arbitral proceeding.
There is thus a significant degree of overlap between the issues which arose before
the first Arbitral Tribunal in its interim award dated 27-10-2010 and those on which
the Arbitral Tribunal rendered its arbitral award dated 9-10-2013 in the second
proceeding.
(Para 65)
The applications for discovery and inspection which were crucial to ONGC's claim
that there existed functional, financial and economic unity between DEPL and JDIL
remained to be decided before the application under Section 16 was taken up.
There is merit in the submission which was been urged on behalf of the
ONGC that the application for discovery and inspection had to be decided before the
plea of jurisdiction was adjudicated upon. The application for discovery and
inspection was intended to facilitate ONGC in its plea that there existed functional,
financial and economic unity between the two companies. The failure of the first
Arbitral Tribunal to hear the application for discovery and inspection goes to the
root of its interim award dated 27-10-2010 holding an absence of jurisdiction qua
JDIL.
(Para 69)
The interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal in the first proceeding, dated 27-7-
2010 refers to the documents which were produced by ONGC and to the
submission that neither DEPL nor JDIL had led any evidence to controvert the
documentary and oral evidence adduced by ONGC.
(Para 70)
Reading the interim award dated 27-10-2010 of the first Arbitral Tribunal, the
unmistakable impression which emerges from the record is that the primary basis
for the determination of an absence of jurisdiction is that the arbitration agreement
was between ONGC and DEPL. The legal foundation of the group of companies
doctrine has not been evaluated, on facts or law.
(Para 72)
True enough, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Chloro Controls India (P)
factual and legal foundation for setting up a case in opposition to the plea of JDIL.
The first Arbitral Tribunal has made a fundamental error of law in not deciding the
application by ONGC on discovery and inspection of documents before it ruled on
jurisdiction. In doing so, the first Arbitral Tribunal's interim award dated 27-10-2010
goes against the principles of natural justice. The failure to consider the application
for discovery and inspection of documents results in a situation where vital evidence
that could have assisted the Tribunal in its determination of the challenge under
Section 16 was shut out. As a matter of fact, it emerged from the record that no
evidence was adduced by JDIL in support of its plea of the absence of jurisdiction
under Section 16. JDIL having taken the plea of absence of jurisdiction was required
to establish the grounds on which it set about to establish its plea.
(Para 73)
The interim award of the first Arbitral Tribunal stands vitiated because of:
(1) The failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to decide upon the application for
discovery and inspection filed by ONGC.
(2) The failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to determine the legal foundation for
the application of the group of companies doctrine.
(3) The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal that it would decide upon the
applications filed by ONGC only after the plea of jurisdiction was disposed of.
(para 74)
VN-D/68910/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case :
K.M. Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General [Somiran Sharma, K.R.
Sasiprabhu (Advocate-on-Record), Tushar Bhardwaj, Vishnu Sharma,
Vinayak Sharma and Vinayak Maini, Advocates], for the Appellant;
Shyam Divan, Senior Advocate [M/s Khaitan & Co. (Advocate-on-
Record), Advocate], for the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
60e-f, 72b, 72f, 87d-e
Discovery Enterprises (P) Ltd.
89c-d
Discovery Enterprises (P) Ltd.
89c-d
Crompton Greaves Ltd.
78e
Ssangyong Engg. & Construction Co. Ltd. V. NHAI
78e, 79a, 79b
Benckiser (India) (P) Ltd. V. Reynders Label
Printing (India) (P) Ltd.
71f-g
60e, 69e-f, 69f-g, 70c,
Cheran Properties Ltd. V. Kasturi & Sons Ltd.
71b, 71c, 71c-d, 72a,
87d-e
Ameet Lalchand Shah V. Rishabh Enterprises
69c, 69d-e
Felguera, S.A. V. Gangavaram Port Ltd.
71b-c, 71c-d, 71e, 71e-f
Discovery Enterprises (P) Ltd.
81f-g
Associate Builders V. DDA
79e-f
Drilling & Industries Ltd.
59d, 81f, 81g, 82a, 89d-e
ONGC Ltd. V. Western Geco International Ltd.
79c-d
Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. V. Severn Trent 69b-c, 69d-e, 69f, 71b,
Water Purification Inc.
71d, 71f, 72a, 87d-e
52c-d, 52e, 57a, 57e-f,
Discovery Enterprises (P) Ltd. (reversed)
59c, 81b-c, 84c-d, 84e,
88c, 89a
Indowind Energy Ltd. V. Wescare (I) Ltd.
61e, 66a, 66c-d, 66e,
66f, 66g, 69f, 77g-h
Subuthi Finance Ltd.
66c
The surest way t to legal research!
Power Co.
83a
19. 259 F Supp 688 (SDNY 1966), Tepper Realty Co.
V. Mosaic Tile Co.
75a-b
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J. This judgment has been divided into
sections to facilitate analysis. These are:
INDEX
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
A.
Facts
52
A.1.
Transferred cases arising out of the
58
arbitration
B.
Submissions of the counsel
59
C.
Analysis
65
C.1.
Group of Companies Doctrine
65
C.2.
Standard for review of the interim arbitral
75
award
D.
Conclusion
88
A. Facts
2. The appeal arises from a judgment dated 27-6-2012 1 of the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay by which an appeal under Section 37 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 ("the 1996 Act") has been
dismissed. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. ("ONGC") instituted an
appeal against an interim award dated 27-10-2010 ("interim award") of
the Arbitral Tribunal holding that the second respondent Jindal Drilling
and Industries Ltd. ("JDIL" or "the second respondent") was not a party
to the arbitration agreement and must be deleted from the array of
parties. The interim award was challenged in an appeal which was
dismissed by the impugned judgment1.
3. On 22-3-2006, ONGC awarded a contract to Discovery Enterprises
Pvt. Ltd. ("DEPL"), the first respondent, which is a company belonging
to the DP Jindal Group, for operating a floating, production, storage and
offloading vessel ("vessel"). Pursuant to the stipulation contained in
Clause 25.7.11 of the contract, a vessel called Crystal Sea was
imported on 11-5-2006. ONGC paid the customs duty in the amount of
Rs 55.78 crores on the understanding that the vessel would be re-
exported after work was complete under duty drawback whose
formalities would be completed by DEPL. The vessel left Indian
territorial waters and did not return. According to ONGC, DEPL failed to
complete the formalities for duty drawback and did not compensate
ONGC for customs duty and other expenses incurred in the amount of
Rs 88 crores.
4. Clause 37 of the contract between ONGC and DEPL provides for
the settlement of disputes of the parties through arbitration. On 25-4-
2008, ONGC invoked arbitration against DEPL and JDIL and claimed an
amount of Rs 88 crores. An Arbitral Tribunal consisting of Mr Justice
S.P. Kurdukar (Retd.), Mr Justice M.S. Rane (Retd.) and Mr S.
Venkateswaran (Senior Advocate) was constituted. In its statement of
claim filed before the Arbitral Tribunal,
ONGC set up the case that DEPL and JDIL belonged to the DP Jindal
Group of Companies and since they constitute a single economic entity,
the corporate veil should be lifted to compel the non-signatory, JDIL, to
arbitrate. According to ONGC, DEPL is an alter ego and agent of JDIL.
5. The statement of claim read thus:
"17. It is submitted Respondent 1 was awarded the contract by
relying on the fact that it is group company of DP Jindal group of
companies and that Respondent 2, M/s Jindal Drilling & Industries
Ltd. has a vital business interest in Respondent 1, which can be said
to be the alter ego of Respondent 2. In fact, Respondent 2 is the
ultimate beneficiary of the business of Respondent 1. [...] Presently,
they are having three valid existing contracts with ONGC. DEPL has
close corporate unity with Jindal Group and in fact the shareholders
are almost common. Respondent 1 has throughout represented that
they are group company of Jindal apart from their representation in
the bid they have been representing that through the letterheads
which clearly indicated that they belong to a single group of
companies, namely, DP Jindal Group of companies. M/s Jindal
Drilling has also acknowledged that the contractor M/s DEPL is a
group company of Jindal Group in their website in an article titled
'Key due diligence observations'. A copy of the said article is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure 8. Since Respondent 1 is
liable to compensate ONGC for the losses suffered by it, ONGC has
adjusted the said amount from the monies payable to Jindal Drilling
and Industries Ltd. as a security to satisfy the award to be passed in
this case.
18. As stated above, Respondent 2 was supplying vessels and rigs
to ONGC under various contracts, for last many years. It is a fact
that Respondent 1 was formed as a group company with the charter
of introducing cutting-edge technology and solutions to the oil and
gas market in India. Respondent 1 has represented itself as a part of
the DP Jindal group of companies as seen from the company's
website (www.discoveryepl.com) A copy of the relevant extract from
the website is attached herewith and marked as Annexure A-9. The
same web-based representation was made in categorical and
unequivocal manner by Respondent 1 in the bid submitted by them
in connection with the subject contract. The copy of the same is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure 10. The Directors of
Respondent 1 are Mr Manav Kumar and Mrs Shilpa Agarwal, son and
daughter in law of Shri Naresh Kumar who is the Managing Director
of Respondent 2 i.e. Jindal Drilling and Industries Ltd. The two
companies operate out of the same premises, same floor, same
building i.e. Keshav Building, Bandra Kurla Complex. Copies of the
letterhead of both the companies addressed to the claimant is
enclosed herewith and marked as Annexure A-11 (colly). More
significantly a prominent Jindal Drilling executive has taken an active
interest in the negotiations concerning the subject contract [...]. It
makes it abundantly clear that the activities of DEPL i.e. Respondent 1
contractor are an extension of the activities of Respondent 2 who has
set up Respondent 1 company as an agency to carry out its activities.
Therefore, it is submitted that the doctrine of group company can be
applied in this case - an arbitration agreement signed by one company
in a group of companies entitles (or obligates) other group non-
signatory companies, if the circumstances surrounding the negotiation,
execution of the agreement show that the mutual intention of all the
parties was to bind non-signatories. This group companies constitute
the same 'economic reality'. This is evident when veil-piercing is done.
Copies of documents evidencing close relationship between both the
companies are annexed herewith as indicated above.
19. In any case, Respondent 1 can be considered as an
agent/alter ego of Respondent 2 because of its deep and pervasive
family links, apart from the fact that Respondent 2 is the intended
third-party beneficiary of this contract. The Arbitral Tribunal has to
determine these questions in accordance with evidence and law.
Further, there is corporate unity and cross shareholdings in both the
companies by shareholders, common to both the companies.
*
*
*
21. It is submitted that this is a fit case where this Hon'ble
Tribunal has to pierce the corporate veil in order to see the
acknowledged realities of Respondent 1 being a group company of
DP Jindal Group. As submitted above, there is a clause 'corporate
unity' and applying the doctrine of group companies/alter
ego/ultimate beneficiary this Tribunal has to hold Respondent 2 also
liable to compensate ONGC for the dues of Respondent 1. The issue
preferred to Tribunal is within the arbitration agreement and under
law and this Hon'ble Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain and decide
the dispute."
6. An application under Section 16 of the 1996 Act was filed by JDIL
seeking its deletion from the arbitral proceedings on the ground that it
is not a party to the arbitration agreement. ONGC responded to the
application. During the course of the proceedings, ONGC filed an
application on 5-1-2009 for discovery and inspection to support its case
that DEPL is an alter ego of the Jindal Group of companies. In support
of the application for discovery and inspection, ONGC pleaded that:
6.1. DEPL and JDIL are group companies and that the former is an
agent or alter ego of the latter.
6.2. There exists corporate and functional unity between them.
6.3. DEPL is a corporate facade which has been created to promote
and extend the business of JDIL.
6.4. JDIL is responsible for the acts of omission and commission of
DEPL on the basis of the group of companies doctrine.
6.5. DEPL has been created by the Jindal Group to render services in
the oil and gas sector and each entity of the group is strategically
formed to render certain services.
6.6. DEPL is working under the "fraternal hood" of the group based
on the admission on the corporate website of JDIL.
7. ONGC stated that the documentary evidence demonstrates that
there is a "close corporate unity and functional unity existing between
these two companies" and hence it was necessary to discover the
documents set out in the schedule to the application. The documents of
which discovery was sought are tabulated below:
"SCHEDULE OF DOCUMENTS
1. Memorandum of association of Respondent 2.
2. Articles of association of Respondent 2.
3. Ledger account of Respondent 2 for Financial Years 2003-04,
2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07.
4. Employees salary register of Respondent 2 for Financial
Years 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07.
5. Titled document showing Respondent 1's rights/ownership
over the registered office premises at Suite 110, Tower-I, 70
Najafgarh Road, B-39, New Delhi-110 015.
6. Titled document showing Respondent 2's rights/ownership
over the office premises at 3rd Floor, Keshav Building, Banda-
Kurla Complex, Banda (East), Mumbai-400 051.
7. Documents showing grant of telephone connection of the
following telephone and fax numbers at the Delhi office of
Respondent 1 and the payment of the bills of the said telephone
and fax numbers by Respondent 1 from the calendar years 2003
to 2007. (i) Telephone No. 52531100, (ii) Fax No. 52531191.
8. Documents showing grant of telephone connection of the
following telephone and fax numbers at the Mumbai office of
Respondent 2 and the payment of the bills of the said telephone
and fax numbers by the respondents from the calendar years
2003 to 2007. (i) Telephone Nos. 26592889 & 55020047, (ii) Fax
No. 26592630.
9. List of the contract bagged from ONGC so far the inception of
Respondent 2.
10. List of crew members in the Drilling Unit "Noble Ed-Holt
awarded on 17-8-2006 and Noble Charlie Yester on 2-12-2006."
8. ONGC led evidence in support of the statement of claim. During
the course of the examination, ONGC's witness, Anindya Bhattacharya
who was working as Chief Manager (MM) of ONGC, produced documents
in support
of claim. The production of documents was objected to by JDIL on the
ground of relevance and admissibility. During the arbitral meeting on 7-
7-2009, the Tribunal recorded the following minutes:
"Per Tribunal
The documents produced by the witness Anindya Bhattacharya
(CW 1) along with his affidavit dated 26-6-2009 and Annexures 1 to
10 are taken on record. Mr Rahul Narichania, learned advocate for
Respondent 2 objects to these documents being taken on record on
the ground that the same are not relevant and admissible as far as
Respondent 2 is concerned. He further stated that he will cross-
examine the witness on the documents without prejudice to his
rights that the said documents were neither relevant nor admissible
in evidence and ought not to be marked as exhibits.
The rival contentions will be decided while disposing of the
application made under Section 16 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996. It is also made clear that merely because the witness has
been cross-examined on behalf of Respondent 2 on the documents,
the documents do not automatically stand exhibited.
Mr Rajiv Kumar objects to the procedure recorded above. The
claimants do not waive any rights in this behalf."
9. By its interim award dated 27-10-2010, the Arbitral Tribunal held
that it lacked the jurisdiction to arbitrate on the claim against JDIL,
which was not a party to the arbitration agreement. The Tribunal relied
on the judgment of this Court in Indowind Energy Ltd. V. Wescare (I)
Ltd. 2 ("Indowind"). The conclusion of the Tribunal was that JDIL is not a
signatory of the arbitration agreement and hence could not be
impleaded as a party to the proceedings. The Arbitral Tribunal held:
"20. After considering rival contentions, the Arbitral Tribunal is of
the opinion that it may not be permissible for it to go beyond the
ambit of Section 7 of the act. The word 'party' is defined under
Section 2(1)(h) means a party to an Arbitration Agreement and the
arbitration agreement has been defined under Section 7 of the Act.
[...] To put it differently, this Arbitral Tribunal lacks the jurisdiction to
investigate, enquire into and record any finding on the basis of claim
petition paras 17 to 21 against M/s Jindal Ltd./Respondent 2. The
Arbitral Tribunal is therefore of the opinion that the claim petition of
ONGC vis-à-vis M/s Jindal Ltd./Respondent 2 is untenable for want of
jurisdiction under the Act. The Arbitral Tribunal makes it clear that
the position of M/s Jindal Ltd./Respondent 2 considered only on the
basis of the provisions contained in Section 2(1)(h) and Section 7 of
the Act."
(emphasis supplied)
10. JDIL was accordingly struck off the array of parties. ONGC filed
an appeal under Section 37 before the Bombay High Court which was
dismissed on 27-6-2012 with the following observations : (ONGC
"16. As observed hereinabove, there is no evidence tendered
before Arbitral Tribunal that DEPL and JDIL had common
shareholders and common Board of Directors. Even if that had been
the case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Indowind Energy
Ltd. V. Wescare (I) Ltd. 2 case has held in terms that merely because
two companies have common shareholders and Directors, they do
not become a single entity. In the instant case also, the Arbitral
Tribunal has correctly held that merely because the two companies
may, at one point of time, have had a common address and
telephone number, it does not make them one economic unit. The
mere fact that the son and daughter-in-law of the Managing Director
of JDIL are directors in DEPL also does not and cannot establish that
these companies are one and the same. There is also no credible
evidence to show that because of the alleged nexus between the two
companies, ONGC awarded the said contract to DEPL. Even assuming
this to be correct, it does not take the case of ONGC any further.
JDIL is admittedly not a party to the contract and cannot be liable
under the said contract which is only between ONGC and DEPL. If
ONGC wanted to bind JDIL to the said contract, it should have asked
JDIL to be a party to the said contract. In fact, this Court inquired
from learned advocate appearing for ONGC as to why ONGC did not
insist on JDIL signing the said contract when admittedly there are
other contracts which are entered into between ONGC and JDIL.
However, the learned advocate appearing for ONGC had no answer to
the same. In response, he only submitted that ONGC has also filed
suit being No. 2947 of 2011 in this Court in which DEPL and JDIL
have been arrayed as the defendants."
11. The judgment1 of the High Court was challenged by ONGC under
Article 136 of the Constitution. The Arbitral Tribunal delivered its final
award dated 6-6-2013 ("Arbitral award in the first proceeding") and,
while allowing the claim of ONGC, held that it is entitled to recover an
amount of Rs 87 crores and USD 1,756,197.50 together with
interest at 9% p.a. and legal costs. The counterclaim filed by DEPL was
dismissed.
12. At this stage, it would also be necessary to note that in the
course of its interim award, the Arbitral Tribunal dealt with the
applications filed by ONGC on 5-1-2009 for discovery of documents and
&
inspection. The Arbitral Tribunal noted ONGC's contention that its
application for discovery and inspection should be heard and disposed
of first on merits and that the application filed by JDIL under Section 16
should be heard thereafter so that all relevant documents would
emerge before the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunal, however,
directed that the application for discovery and inspection filed by ONGC
be "deferred until the issue of the jurisdiction is decided".
A.1. Transferred cases arising out of the arbitration
13. During the pendency of the arbitration between ONGC and DEPL,
ONGC withheld a sum of US$14,772,408.54 towards recovery of its
claim of Rs 64.88 crores against four contracts with JDIL. By a letter
dated 24-10-2007, JDIL sought the release of the sum withheld
together with interest failing which it stated that it would exercise its
right to take legal recourse. ONGC replied to the letter on 5-5-2008
stating that they are withholding the dues as an adjustment against
the dues owed to ONGC by DEPL. Aggrieved by the deductions made by
ONGC under its four contracts for drilling services, JDIL invoked
arbitration on 4-2-2010. An Arbitral Tribunal consisting of Ms Justice
Sujata Manohar (Retd.), Mr Justice B.N. Srikrishna (Retd.), and Mr
Justice M.S. Rane (Retd.) was constituted. In the meanwhile, ONGC
instituted a declaratory suit against JDIL and DEPL before the Bombay
High Court which is presently pending. The Arbitral Tribunal, by a
common award dated 9-10-2013, ("arbitral award in the second
proceeding") directed ONGC to pay JDIL an amount of
US$14,772,495.55 together with interest at 4% p.a. calculated from
the due date of each invoice till the date of payment or realisation. The
Arbitral Tribunal dealt with the submission of ONGC that DEPL and JDIL
belong to the same group thus entitling ONGC to make the deductions.
14. Rejecting the contention of ONGC, the Arbitral Tribunal held:
"25. There is hardly any evidence to support the plea of the
respondent that DEPL and the claimant are one and the same
company. Both DEPL and the claimant are group companies of DP
Jindal group of companies. Although the Directors of DEPL are the
son and daughter-in-law of the managing director of the claimant,
and the two companies, for some time, shared a common office and
telephone numbers, that does not make the two companies one.
Both are subsidiaries of the main company and both have
independent legal existence. DEPL was incorporated in the year
2003. The claimant is a public limited company listed on the stock
exchange and was incorporated in the year 1983.
26. [...] The facts of the present case are totally different and do
not warrant lifting of corporate veil, assuming there is one. The
evidence in the present case does not justify the application of
"lifting the corporate veil". In respect of the contract which was
entered into by the respondent with DEPL, the tender was floated by
ONGC in 2005 and the contract was entered into in 2006. There is no
material to show that the respondent awarded the contract to DEPL
because it was in fact the claimant and/or was supported by the
claimant. The minutes of the meeting held by the respondents for
shortlisting of bidders in respect of the contract have not been
produced. The only witness produced by ONGC was not present at
the meetings held by the executive purchase committee when the
deliberations on the award of the contract recommended bidder took
place. [...] There
is no evidence to show that in order to secure the said contract, DEPL
represented that it was a part of the claimant group. [...]
27. There is no guarantee or letter of "comfort" from the claimant
to the respondent in respect of the liabilities, if any, of DEPL under
its contract with ONGC. [...]
*
*
*
30. In the present case the claimant and DEPL have throughout
maintained their separate legal character. There is no evidence to
indicate that they ever represented to the respondent that they are
one company or that the claimant will be liable under the contract of
the respondent with DEPL.
31. In the present case the respondent ONGC had earlier initiated
arbitration proceedings against both DEPL and the claimant before
an Arbitral Tribunal [...]. By its 'interim final award' dated 27-10-
2010, the Arbitral Tribunal held that in the dispute between the
respondent and DEPL, the claimant could not be impleaded. [...] The
findings of the earlier Arbitral Tribunal and the High Court in its
order of 27-6-20121 support our present conclusions, and we
respectfully agree with the same."
15. DEPL was not a party to the above arbitral proceedings which
were initiated by JDIL. ONGC instituted petitions 3 under Section 34 of
the 1996 Act for challenging the arbitral award in the second
proceeding in respect of the four contracts of JDIL. The petitions were
dismissed by a Single Judge of the Bombay High Court on 28-4-20154.
ONGC filed an appeal 5 under Section 37 of the 1996 Act during the
pendency of the special leave petition arising from the interim award of
the Arbitral Tribunal dated 27-10-2010, consisting of Mr Justice S.P.
Kurdukar (Retd.), Mr Justice M.S. Rane (Retd.) and Mr S.
Venkateswaran. ONGC sought a transfer of the appeals lodged before
the Bombay High Court against the judgment of the Single Judge
dismissing the petitions under Section 34 for challenging the arbitral
award in the second proceeding. The transferred cases6 have come up
before this Court together with the special leave petition arising out of
the interim award dated 27-10-2010.
B. Submissions of the counsel
16. Mr K.M. Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General ("ASG"), appearing
on behalf of ONGC submitted that:
16.1. The case of ONGC is that DEPL and JDIL constitute one single
commercial entity and that ONGC is hence entitled by law to compel
JDIL to participate in the arbitration proceedings so as to enforce the
award against it.
16.2. Though evidence was available with ONGC to buttress the
above claim, it filed an application for discovery and inspection to
secure material which was within the possession, control and custody of
JDIL. However, with the deletion of JDIL from the array of parties, the
application for discovery and inspection has been rendered otiose.
16.3. The Arbitral Tribunal has not enquired into the facts at all,
despite the contention of ONGC that JDIL is a necessary party.
16.4. The Arbitral Tribunal has merely held, on the basis of the legal
principle underlying Section 7 of the 1996 Act and privity of contract,
that JDIL which is not a signatory to the arbitration agreement cannot
be impleaded in the arbitral proceedings.
16.5. After the application for discovery and inspection was opposed
by JDIL, the Arbitral Tribunal deferred its decision until the issue of
jurisdiction was resolved on the application filed by JDIL under Section
16 of the 1996 Act.
16.6. The interim award did not consider or hear the application for
discovery and inspection under Section 16. The decision has been
rendered purely on the premise that a non-signatory to the arbitration
agreement cannot be impleaded as a party.
16.7. ONGC has been precluded from tendering evidence that JDIL
could be brought within the fold of arbitration on the basis of the group
of companies doctrine.
16.8. While the Arbitral Tribunal has relied on the decision of this
Court in Indowind ², the subsequent decisions of this Court have
accepted and applied the group of companies doctrine. These decisions
are:
(a) Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. V. Severn Trent Water
Purification Inc. 7 ["Chloro Controls"];
(b) Cheran Properties Ltd. V. Kasturi & Sons Ltd. 8 ["Cheran
Properties"]; and
(c) MTNL V. Canara Bank ["MTNL"]. and
16.9. The decision in Indowind is not good law in view of the
subsequent judgments of this Court. The Arbitral Tribunal ought to
have decided the jurisdictional issue after parties were permitted to
lead evidence, since the application of the group of companies doctrine
and the lifting of the corporate veil involves mixed questions of law and
fact. The issue of jurisdiction and merits are inextricably intertwined
and a ruling premised exclusively on the application of Section 7 of the
1996 Act was improper.
17. Controverting the above submissions, Mr Shyam Divan, Senior
Counsel appearing on behalf of the JDIL has indicated in the following
tabulation:
(i) ONGC's contentions;
(ii) JDIL's response;
(iii) Findings in the interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal; and
(iv) The order of the High Court.
18. The tabulated statement is reproduced below for convenience of
reference:
"ONGC
JDIL response
Interim award
High Court
contention
order
JDIL
has
None of these
Para 16, Page
Para 16 Page 14
substantial
assertions are
178 of SLP
of SLP
business
based on fact
Not a tickle of
There is no
interest
in
and
no
evidence
to
evidence
DEPL.
evidence led bvl show that JDIL tendered beforel
ONGC points to
ever played any
Arbitral Tribunal
towards this.
role
to
find
that DEPL and
itself
in
the
JDIL
had
Further JDIL is
contract
common
a publicly listed
between
DEPL
shareholders
company
at
and ONGC.
and
common
BSE
and
its
The
Board
of
annual
reports,
executives
of
Directors. Even
DEPL is an alter
etc.
are
in
JDIL
if that had been
ego of JDIL.
public
domain.
participated
in
the case, the
It can be seen
the
Hon'ble
that there is no
negotiations,
Supreme Court
benefit
being
etc. on behalf of
of
India
in
JDIL
is
the
derived by JDIL
DEPL as their
Indowind
ultimate
from DEPL.
signatures duly
Energy
Ltd.
V.
beneficiary
in
signify.
Wescare
(I)
the
business
Further, it was
The personal
Ltd. 2
case
has
with DEPL.
incorporated in
relationship
held
that
1983 and DEPL
between
the
merely because
was
directors
of
two companies
incorporated
DEPL and MD of
have common
way
later
in
JDIL is of no
shareholders
2003.
consequence.
and
Directors,
Clearly JDIL is
they
do
not
No
Letter
of
not party to the
become a single
Guarantee
or
arbitration
DEPL has close
entity.
Letter
of
agreement.
corporate unity
Merely
Comfort
was
with JDIL.
because
the
issued by
JDIL
Para 20 Page
two
companies
on
behalf
of
180 of SLP
may,
at
one
DEPL in favour
None of the
point of time,
of ONGC.
documents on
have had
a
the
record
common
Shareholders of
JDIL is not a
would
satisfy
address
and
JDIL and DEPL
party
to
the
the requirement
telephone
are
almost
arbitration
of clauses a, b
number or that
common.
agreement and
& C of sub-
the son and
there is nothing
section 7.
daughter-in-law
on record to
of the Managing
show that there
Director of the
was intention
JDIL
are
Directors
in
DEPL,
on part of any
it
does
not
party to include
make them one
JDIL and this
economic unit.
was not a part
There is also
of a composite
no
credible
transaction
evidence
to
wherein
JDIL
show
that
had
even
a
because of the
minute part to
alleged nexus
play.
between
the
two companies,
ONGC
has
not
ONGC
awarded
shared
any
the
said
document such
contract
to
as
Minutes
of
DEPL.
Meeting, etc. to
JDIL
is
show
that
it
admittedly not
indeed awarded
a party to the
the contract to
contract.
DEPL
because
Further
the
of JDIL.
Hon'ble
Court
specifically
Further,
if
asked
the
ONGC
did
counsel
of
award
the
ONGC
whether
tender to DEPL
they
wanted to
because of JDIL
bind
JDIL
and
as alleged, this
did they not
clearly
shows
insist on JDIL
impropriety on
signing the said
the part of
contract, the
ONGC and such
counsel for
action
is
ONGC had no
against equity
answer.
and
natural
justice.
Through
DEPL is a part
letterheads,
of
DP
Jindal
articles on
the
Group
of
website
of
Companies
DEPL,
bid
which
is
an
documents
admitted
fact.
submitted
by
But
JDIL
and
DEPL to ONGC,
DEPL
are
two
has represented
separate
that it is a part
corporate
of the DP Jindal
entities.
There
Group of DEPL
is no relation
Companies.
between
the
two. There are
other
companies
of
DP Jindal Group
of
Companies
as
well
including
MSL,
Jindal
Pipes,
etc.
The directors of
There is no bar
DEPL
are
on
the
related to the
directorship
of
MD of JDIL (Son
any person
and
and daughter-in
this is not an
-law).
evidence on the
basis of which
doctrine
of
group
companies
can
be
invoked. This is
just
an
allegation
unfounded
in
law and fact.
It
was
a
separate
venture
started
by
Mr
Manav
Kumar
on
his
own.
An
Arbitration
There
are
no
agreement
underlying
signed by
one
contracts
company in a
wherein
JDIL
group
of
has
any
companies
interest.
JDIL
binds other non
was
never
a
-signatory
party
or
had
companies,
any
benefits
when
the
arising from the
underlying
contract
contract
is
between
DEPL
intended
to
and ONGC.
benefit the non-
signatory as in
ONGC and JDIL
the
instant
have
four
case.
separate
contracts which
are a part of TC
47-50 of 2016
proceedings.
JDIL and DEPL
A
lot
of
have offices in
businesses
the
same
have
common
building/same
business
premises.
address
(e.g.
Tata
Companies).
Just on the
basis of the
same,
it
certainly cannot
be
said
that
they are one
and the same.
Especially
todays' time of
co-working
spaces, a lot of
companies
operate out of
the
same
premises."
19. The following submissions have been urged by Mr Shyam Divan,
Senior Counsel behalf of the respondent:
19.1. There is no disputing the factual position that DEPL is a part of
the DP Jindal Group, yet JDIL has no shareholding in DEPL. There is
neither any cross shareholding nor any common Directors.
19.2. In 2010, DEPL ceased to be a part of the DP Jindal Group.
However, JDIL continues to be a part of the DP Jindal Group of
companies together with other group entities such as Maharashtra
Seamless Ltd. and Jindal Pipes Ltd.
19.3. JDIL is not a party to the arbitration agreement as required
under Section 7 of the 1996 Act and cannot be held liable for claims
against DEPL since there is no evidence that JDIL was a beneficiary of
the contract between ONGC and DEPL. No letter of guarantee or of
comfort was issued by JDIL on behalf of DEPL in favour of ONGC.
19.4. The Bombay High Court has correctly held that no evidence
was tendered before the Arbitral Tribunal that DEPL and JDIL had
common shareholders or common Directors.
19.5. The arbitral award has discussed ONGC's claim that DEPL and
JDIL belong to the same group of companies and came to the
conclusion that there is not "a tickle of evidence" that JDIL played any
role in the negotiations leading up to the contract or that thereafter
JDIL participated in the execution of the contract on behalf of the DEPL.
Hence, the group of companies doctrine cannot be invoked to indict
JDIL for the alleged acts and omissions of DEPL.
19.6. Under Section 7 of the 1996 Act, there must be an agreement
between the parties to submit to arbitration. The expression "party" is
defined in Section 2(1)(h). The key words in both the provisions are
"party to an arbitration agreement" and an agreement by the party to
submit to arbitration. JDIL and DEPL are separate entities. DEPL was
incorporated in 2003. JDIL was incorporated in 1983. Its shares are
listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange. Though DEPL belonged to the DP
Jindal Group of Companies, it ceased to remain a part of the group in
2010. The fact that DEPL and JDIL shared a common office is of no
relevance. ONGC's witness asserted that he came to know that Mr G.D.
Sharma (who signed on behalf of DEPL) is an employee of JDIL only
after the signing of the contract. Hence there was no representation
that JDIL was bidding for the contract. The association of the executive
of JDIL was to render assistance to DEPL and nothing more.
19.7. ONGC's witness has no knowledge of the facts since he was
not:
(a) Involved in the shortlisting of bidders;
(b) A part of the decision-making process for the award of the
contract;
(c) A party to the deliberations by the tender committee for the
award of the contract;
(d) Present at the time when the approval was given for the
award of the contract; and
(e) Party to the deliberations within ONGC.
The witness stated that he has accessed the website of DEPL for the
first time in June 2008, after the award of the contract on 22-3-2006.
Hence it is not open to ONGC to claim that DEPL or JDIL represented to
ONGC that DEPL was a group company of JDIL or that ONGC awarded
the contract because of any representation by JDIL on its website.
C. Analysis
C.1. Group of Companies Doctrine
20. Section 710 provides for an arbitration agreement. For the
purpose of Part I of the Act of 1996, an arbitration agreement is defined
to mean an agreement by the parties to submit disputes between them
in respect of a defined legal relationship, to arbitration. An arbitration
agreement may either be in the form of an arbitration clause in a
contract or take the form of a separate agreement. An arbitration
agreement has to be in writing but it may be contained in:
(i) A document signed by the parties;
(ii) An exchange of communication; and
(iii) An exchange of a statement of claim and defence in which an
allegation that there exists an arbitration agreement is not denied by
the other party.
21. Sub-section (5) of Section 7 stipulates that the reference in a
contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an
arbitration agreement if:
(i) The contract is written; and
(ii) The reference is such as to make the arbitration clause a part
of the contract.
22. The expression "party" is defined in Section 2(1)(h) to mean a
party to an arbitration agreement. The interpretation of the term
"parties" vis-à-vis an arbitration agreement under Section 7 has been
dealt with by this Court in
Indowind in the context of an application for the appointment of an
arbitrator under Section 11(6). In that case, the second respondent
company was the promoter of Indowind. The first and second
respondent had entered into an agreement of sale. In the agreement,
the seller was described to include the first respondent and its
subsidiaries. The second respondent was described as the buyer and as
the promoter of Indowind. Under the agreement, the seller agreed to
transfer business assets for a consideration which was partly payable in
money and partly by the issuance of shares. The sale agreement also
incorporated a clause to arbitrate any dispute. The Board of Directors of
the first and second respondent approved of the agreement, but there
was no approval by the Board of Indowind. After a dispute arose, the
first respondent instituted a petition under Section 11(6) against both
the second respondent and Indowind for the appointment of an
arbitrator. Indowind resisted the petition on the ground that it was not
a party to the agreement between the first and second respondent. The
application was allowed11 by the Chief Justice of the Madras High Court
by observing that prima facie Indowind was a party after lifting the
corporate veil and noticing Indowind's intention to be bound by the sale
agreement. Two issues were framed by this Court for consideration :
"10.
(i) Whether an arbitration clause found in a document
(agreement) between two parties, could be considered as a binding
arbitration agreement on a person who is not a signatory to the
agreement;
(ii) Whether a company could be said to be a party to a contract
containing an arbitration agreement, even though it did not sign the
agreement containing an arbitration clause, with reference to its
subsequent conduct"
23. R.V. Raveendran, J. speaking for the two-Judge Bench in
Indowind 2 held that if Indowind had acknowledged or confirmed in any
correspondence, agreement or document that it was a party to the
arbitration agreement between the first and second respondent or that
it was bound by the arbitration agreement contained in that contract, it
could have been possible to say that Indowind is a party to the
arbitration agreement. That however was not the position. The decision
in Indowind was in the context of an application under Section 11(6).
A party which was not a signatory to the arbitration agreement had
raised an objection on the ground that the agreement to arbitration did
not operate in relation to it.
24. The Court refused to pierce the corporate veil and relied on a
pp. 313-14 & 316, paras 17-18, 20 & 24)
"17. It is not in dispute that Subuthi and Indowind are two
independent companies incorporated under the Companies Act,
1956. Each company is a separate and distinct legal entity and the
mere fact that the two
companies have common shareholders or common Board of Directors,
will not make the two companies a single entity. Nor will the existence
of common shareholders or Directors lead to an inference that one
company will be bound by the acts of the other. If the Director who
signed on behalf of Subuthi was also a Director of Indowind and if the
intention of the parties was that Indowind should be bound by the
agreement, nothing prevented Wescare insisting that Indowind should
be made a party to the agreement and requesting the Director who
signed for Subuthi also to sign on behalf of Indowind.
18. The very fact that the parties carefully avoided making
Indowind a party and the fact that the Director of Subuthi though a
Director of Indowind, was careful not to sign the agreement as on
behalf of Indowind, shows that the parties did not intend that
Indowind should be a party to the agreement. Therefore the mere
fact that Subuthi described Indowind as its nominee or as a
company promoted by it or that the agreement was purportedly
entered by Subuthi on behalf of Indowind, will not make Indowind a
party in the absence of a ratification, approval, adoption or
confirmation of the agreement dated 24-2-2006 by Indowind.
*
*
*
20. Wescare referred to several acts and transactions as also the
conduct of Indowind to contend that an inference should be drawn
that Indowind was a party to the agreement or that it had affirmed
and approved the agreement or acted in terms of the agreement. An
examination of the transactions between the parties to decide
whether there is a valid contract or whether a particular party owed
any obligation towards another party or whether any person had
committed a breach of contract, will be possible in a suit or
arbitration proceeding claiming damages or performance. But the
issue in a proceeding under Section 11 is not whether there was any
contract between the parties or any breach thereof. A contract can
be entered into even orally. A contract can be spelt out from
correspondence or conduct. But an arbitration agreement is different
from a contract. An arbitration agreement can come into existence
only in the manner contemplated under Section 7. If Section 7 says
that an arbitration agreement should be in writing, it will not be
sufficient for the petitioner in an application under Section 11 to
show that there existed an oral contract between the parties, or that
Indowind had transacted with Wescare, or Wescare had performed
certain acts with reference to Indowind, as proof of arbitration
agreement.
*
*
*
24. It is no doubt true that if Indowind had acknowledged or
confirmed in any correspondence or other agreement or document,
that it is a party to the arbitration agreement dated 24-2-2006 or
that it is bound by the arbitration agreement contained therein, it
could have been possible to say that Indowind is a party to the
arbitration agreement. But that would not be under Section 7(4)(a)
but under Section 7(4)(b) or Section 7(5). Be that as it may. That is
not the case of Wescare. In fact, the delivery notes/invoices
issued by Wescare do not refer to the agreement dated 24-2-2006. Nor
does any letter or correspondence sent by Indowind refers to the
agreement dated 24-2-2006, either as an agreement executed by it or
as an agreement binding on it."
(emphasis supplied)
25. Subsequently, in Chloro Controls², a three-Judge Bench of this
Court dealt with the provisions of Section 45, which falls in Part II of
the Act of 1996 dealing with the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards.
Section 45 postulates that notwithstanding anything contained in Part
I, a judicial authority, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of
which the parties have made an agreement in writing for arbitration
shall at the request of one of the parties "or any person claiming
through or under him" refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds
that the agreement is void, inoperative or incapable of being
performed. Interpreting the expressions "through or under" in Section
45, this Court held that though an arbitration normally would take place
between the parties to the arbitration agreement, it could take place
between a signatory to an arbitration agreement and a third party as
well. This Court held that though the scope of the arbitration agreement
is limited to parties who have entered into it and those who claim under
or through them, courts under the English law have developed the
group of companies doctrine. In substance, the doctrine postulates that
an arbitration agreement which has been entered into by a company
within a group of companies, can bind its non-signatory affiliates or
sister concerns if the circumstances demonstrate a mutual intention of
the parties to bind both the signatory and affiliated, non-signatory
parties.
26. Elaborating on the concept, the Court held : (Chloro Controls
"71. Though the scope of an arbitration agreement is limited to
the parties who entered into it and those claiming under or through
them, the courts under the English law have, in certain cases, also
applied the "group of companies doctrine". This doctrine has
developed in the international context, whereby an arbitration
agreement entered into by a company, being one within a group of
companies, can bind its non-signatory affiliates or sister or parent
concerns, if the circumstances demonstrate that the mutual
intention of all the parties was to bind both the signatories and the
non-signatory affiliates. This theory has been applied in a number of
arbitrations so as to justify a Tribunal taking jurisdiction over a party
who is not a signatory to the contract containing the arbitration
agreement. [Russell on Arbitration (23rd Edn.)]
72. This evolves the principle that a non-signatory party could be
subjected to arbitration provided these transactions were with group
of companies and there was a clear intention of the parties to bind
both, the signatory as well as the non-signatory parties. In other
words, "intention of the parties" is a very significant feature which
must be established before
the scope of arbitration can be said to include the signatory as well as
the non-signatory parties."
27. Noting that this would only be in exceptional cases, the Court in
Chloro Controls7 held that these exceptions would be examined on the
touchstone of:
(i) A direct relationship to the party signatory to the arbitration
agreement;
(ii) Direct commonality of the subject-matter; and
(iii) Whether the agreement is of a composite transaction where
the performance of a mother agreement may not be feasible without
the execution or performance of a subsidiary or ancillary agreement.
28. The principle for binding non-signatories as laid down in Chloro
Controls was applied in the context of a domestic arbitration in Ameet
Lalchand Shah V. Rishabh Enterprises ¹². A two-Judge Bench of this
Court, in the context of the application of the then amended ("the
13
2015 Amendment") provisions of Section 8 of the 1996 Act, observed
that the 2015 Amendment to Section 8 had brought it in line with
Section 45 of the 1996 Act. Prior to the amendment, Section 8(1) of
the 1996 Act provided that a party to an arbitration agreement can
make an application to seek a reference to arbitration. The amended
Section 8(1) clarified that a person claiming through or under a party to
the arbitration can also seek reference to arbitration notwithstanding
any judicial precedent. In Ameet Lalchand12, the Court did not explicitly
invoke the group of companies doctrine to bind a non-signatory, rather
it relied on Chloro Controls to hold that a non-signatory would be
bound by the arbitration clause in the mother agreement, since it is a
party to an inter-connected agreement, executed to achieve a common
commercial goal.
29. In Cheran a three-Judge Bench of this Court
interpreted and applied the group of companies doctrine in the context
of the enforcement of a domestic arbitration award against a non-
signatory to the arbitration agreement. The Court observed that the
decision by a two-Judge Bench in Indowind was rendered before the
evolution and application of the group of companies doctrine by a three
433, para 23)
"23. As the law has evolved, it has recognised that modern
business transactions are often effectuated through multiple layers
and agreements. There may be transactions within a group of
companies. The circumstances in which they have entered into them
mav reflect an intention to bind both
signatory and non-signatory entities within the same group. In holding
a non-signatory bound by an arbitration agreement, the court
approaches the matter by attributing to the transactions a meaning
consistent with the business sense which was intended to be ascribed
to them. Therefore, factors such as the relationship of a non-signatory
to a party which is a signatory to the agreement, the commonality of
subject-matter and the composite nature of the transaction weigh in
the balance. The group of companies doctrine is essentially intended to
facilitate the fulfilment of a mutually held intent between the parties,
where the circumstances indicate that the intent was to bind both
signatories and non-signatories. The effort is to find the true essence of
the business arrangement and to unravel from a layered structure of
commercial arrangements, an intent to bind someone who is not
formally a signatory but has assumed the obligation to be bound by the
actions of a signatory."
30. This Court in Cheran Properties also analysed academic
literature that scrutinised adjudicatory trends across the world. It noted
that the written intention to arbitrate between parties can extend to
bind non-signatories with the aim to target the creditworthy member of
the group of companies. However, the principle of separate legal
personalities of companies also has to be balanced. The corporate veil
can be pierced to bind non-signatories upon a construction of the
arbitration agreement, the intention at the time of entering the contract
para 25)
"25. Does the requirement, as in Section 7, that an arbitration
agreement be in writing exclude the possibility of binding third
parties who may not be signatories to an agreement between two
contracting entities? The evolving body of academic literature as well
as adjudicatory trends indicate that in certain situations, an
arbitration agreement between two or more parties may operate to
bind other parties as well. Redfern and Hunter explain the theoretical
foundation of this principle:
The requirement of a signed agreement in writing, however,
does not altogether exclude the possibility of an arbitration
agreement concluded in proper form between two or more parties
also binding other parties. Third parties to an arbitration
agreement have been held to be bound by (or entitled to rely on)
such an agreement in a variety of ways : first, by operation of the
"group of companies" doctrine pursuant to which the benefits and
duties arising from an arbitration agreement may in certain
circumstances be extended to other members of the same group
of companies; and, secondly, by operation of general rules of
private law, principally on assignment, agency, and
succession
14,
The group of companies doctrine has been applied to pierce the corporate veil to
locate the "true" party in interest, and more significantly, to target the creditworthy
member of a group of companies¹5. Though the extension of this doctrine is met
with resistance on the basis of the legal imputation of corporate personality, the
application of the doctrine turns on a construction of the arbitration agreement and
the circumstances relating to the entry into and performance of the underlying
contract. 16,,
31. This Court in Cheran Properties also distinguished the principle
laid down in Chloro Controls from its application in the context of
Section 11(6) in Duro Felguera, S.A. V. Gangavaram Port Ltd. 17 ["Duro
Felguera"]. In Duro Felguera¹7, a two-Judge Bench of this Court refused
to direct a joint arbitration in five different contracts between sister
concerns of one of the parties of the original arbitration agreement, by
respecting the conscious intention of the parties to subject themselves
to separate arbitration agreements under their individual contracts. This
Court in Cheran Properties8 distinguished the factual situation in Duro
Felguera¹7 by discerning the mutual intention of the parties and
para 34)
"34.
The principle which underlies Chloro Controls is that an
arbitration agreement which is entered into by a company within a
group of companies may bind non-signatory affiliates, if the
circumstances are such as to demonstrate the mutual intention of
the parties to bind both signatories and non-signatories. In applying
the doctrine, the law seeks to enforce the common intention of the
parties, where circumstances indicate that both signatories and non-
signatories were intended to be bound. In Duro¹ the case was held
to stand on a different footing since all the five different packages as
well as the corporate guarantee did not depend on the terms and
conditions of the original package nor on the memorandum of
understanding executed between the parties. The judgment in
Duro17 does not detract from the principle which was enunciated in
Chloro Controls ²."
32. The group of companies doctrine was subsequently applied by a
two-Judge Bench of this Court in Reckitt Benckiser (India) (P) Ltd. V.
Reynders Label Printing (India) (P) Ltd. 18 for determining if a non-
signatory foreign company, within the same group of companies, could
be impleaded in a domestic arbitration. This Court noted the principles
formulated by this Court
in Chloro Controls and Cheran Properties 8 and noted its inapplicability
after assessing the following:
32.1. The alleged common employee between the two companies in
the same group was factually established as having no connection with
the foreign company.
32.2. A mere existence of an indemnity by the foreign company, in
the absence of any other factors, would not signify its intention to be
bound by the arbitration agreement and/or of deriving benefits from
the performance of the underlying contract.
33. In MTNL9, a two-Judge Bench of this Court was considering a
situation in which MTNL had floated certain bonds to Canbank Financial
Services Ltd. ("Canfina") through a memorandum of understanding.
The bond amount was placed in an FD by MTNL with Canfina. Canfina
paid back a part of the amount of the FD while the rest was not paid to
MTNL. As a consequence, MTNL did not service the interest of the
bonds. Canfina was a wholly owned subsidiary of Canara Bank. Canfina
had transferred the bonds to Canara Bank. Subsequently, all three
parties had participated in a meeting where the minutes indicated their
view to take recourse to arbitration. A sole arbitrator was appointed to
resolve the dispute and notice was issued in the arbitration to MTNL,
Canara Bank and Canfina. A dispute was raised on whether Canfina
could be joined as a party to the arbitral proceedings. In this backdrop,
this Court while dealing with the joinder of Canfina in the arbitration
"10.3. A non-signatory can be bound by an arbitration agreement
on the basis of the "group of companies" doctrine, where the conduct
of the parties evidences a clear intention of the parties to bind both
the signatory as well as the non-signatory parties. Courts and
Tribunals have invoked this doctrine to join a non-signatory member
of the group, if they are satisfied that the non-signatory company
was by reference to the common intention of the parties, a necessary
party to the contract."
34. While elucidating the circumstances in which the group of
companies doctrine could be invoked to bind the non-signatory, the
"10.5. The group of companies doctrine has been invoked by
courts and Tribunals in arbitrations, where an arbitration agreement
is entered into by one of the companies in the group; and the non-
signatory affiliate, or sister, or parent concern, is held to be bound
by the arbitration agreement, if the facts and circumstances of the
case demonstrate that it was the mutual intention of all parties to
bind both the signatories and the non-signatory affiliates in the
group. The doctrine provides that a non-signatory may be bound by
an arbitration agreement where the parent or holding company,
or a member of the group of companies is a signatory to the arbitration
agreement and the non-signatory entity on the group has been
engaged in the negotiation or performance of the commercial contract,
or made statements indicating its intention to be bound by the
contract, the non-signatory will also be bound and benefitted by the
relevant contracts. 19
10.6. The circumstances in which the "group of companies"
doctrine could be invoked to bind the non-signatory affiliate of a
parent company, or inclusion of a third party to an arbitration, if
there is a direct relationship between the party which is a signatory
to the arbitration agreement; direct commonality of the subject-
matter; the composite nature of the transaction between the parties.
A "composite transaction" refers to a transaction which is interlinked
in nature; or, where the performance of the agreement may not be
feasible without the aid, execution, and performance of the
supplementary or the ancillary agreement, for achieving the common
object, and collectively having a bearing on the dispute.
10.7. The group of companies doctrine has also been invoked in
cases where there is a tight group structure with strong
organisational and financial links, so as to constitute a single
economic unit, or a single economic reality. In such a situation,
signatory and non-signatories have been bound together under the
arbitration agreement. This will apply in particular when the funds of
one company are used to financially support or restructure other
20"
members of the group.
(emphasis supplied)
35. On the facts, the Court held that Canfina was set up as a wholly
owned subsidiary of Canara Bank. The dispute arose out of the
subscription by Canfina of the bonds floated by MTNL which were
subsequently transferred by Canfina to its holding company, Canara
Bank. MTNL had contended that it was constrained to cancel the
allotment due to the non-payment of the sale consideration by Canfina.
Hence, this Court held that it would be futile to decide the dispute only
between MTNL and Canara Bank in the absence of Canfina since
indisputably, the original transaction emanated from the agreement
between MTNL and Canfina and there was "a clear and direct nexus"
between the issuance of the bonds, their subsequent transfer by
Canfina to Canara Bank and the cancellation of allotment by MTNL.
Canfina was held to be a proper party to the proceedings.
36. Commentators have noted that a signed written agreement to
submit a present or future dispute to arbitration does not exclude the
possibility of an arbitration agreement binding a third party. A non-
signatory may be bound by the operation of the group of companies
doctrine as well as by the operation of the principles of assignment,
agency and succession²¹. A party, which is not
a signatory to a contract containing an arbitration clause, may be
bound by the agreement to arbitrate if it is an alter ego of a party
which executed the agreement. This constitutes a departure from the
ordinary principle of contract law that every company in a group of
companies is a distinct legal entity. A non-signatory may be bound by
the arbitration agreement where:
(i) There exists a group of companies; and
(ii) Parties have engaged in conduct or made statements
indicating an intention to bind a non-signatory.
37. Gary B. Born in his treatise on International Commercial
Arbitration indicates that:
"The principal legal basis for holding that a non-signatory is
bound (and benefited) by an arbitration agreement include both
purely consensual theories (e.g., agency, assumption, assignment)
and non-consensual theories (e.g. estoppel, alter ego)22."
38. Explaining the application of the alter ego principle in
arbitration, Born also notes:
"Authorities from virtually all jurisdictions hold that a party who
has not assented to a contract containing an arbitration clause may
nonetheless be bound by the clause if that party is an 'alter ego' of
an entity that did execute, or was otherwise a party to, the
agreement. This is a significant, but exceptional, departure from the
fundamental principle that each company in a group of companies
(a relatively modern concept) is a separate legal entity possessed of
separate rights and liabilities²³.
*
*
*
"the group of companies doctrine is akin to principles of agency or
implied consent, whereby the corporate affiliations among distinct
legal entities provide the foundation for concluding that they were
intended to be parties to an agreement, notwithstanding their formal
status as non-signatories ²4. "
39. Recently, John Fellas elaborated on the principle of binding a
non-signatory to an arbitration agreement from the lens of the doctrine
of estoppel. He situated the rationale behind the application of the
principle of direct estoppel against competing considerations of party
autonomy and consent in interpreting arbitration agreements. Fellas
observed that non-signatory parties can be bound by the principle of
direct estoppel to prohibit such a party from deriving the benefits of a
contract while disavowing the obligations to arbitrate under the same:
"There are at least two distinct types of estoppel doctrine that
apply in the non-signatory context: "the direct benefits" estoppel
theory
and the "intertwined" estoppel theory. The direct benefits theory bears
the hallmark of any estoppel doctrine-prohibiting a party from taking
inconsistent positions or seeking to "have it both ways" by "rely[ing] on
the contract when it works to its advantage and ignor[ing] it when it
25
works to its disadvantage." Tepper Realty Co. V. Mosaic Tile Co. .
The
direct benefits doctrine reflects that core principle by preventing a party
from claiming rights under a contract but, at the same time,
disavowing the obligation to arbitrate in the same contract.
*
*
*
By contrast, the intertwined estoppel theory looks not to whether
any benefit was received by the non-signatory, but rather at the
nature of the dispute between the signatory and the non-signatory,
and, in particular whether "the issues the non-signatory is seeking to
resolve in arbitration are intertwined with the agreement that the
estoppel [signatory party] has signed the intertwined estoppel
theory has as its central aim the perseveration of the efficacy of the
arbitration process is clear when one looks at the typical fact pattern
of an intertwined estoppel case. 122
(emphasis supplied)
40. In deciding whether a company within a group of companies
which is not a signatory to arbitration agreement would nonetheless be
bound by it, the law considers the following factors:
(i) The mutual intent of the parties;
(ii) The relationship of a non-signatory to a party which is a
signatory to the agreement;
(iii) The commonality of the subject-matter;
(iv) The composite nature of the transaction; and
(v) The performance of the contract.
41. Consent and party autonomy are undergirded in Section 7 of the
1996 Act. However, a non-signatory may be held to be bound on a
consensual theory, founded on agency and assignment or on a non-
consensual basis such as estoppel or alter ego22. These principles would
have to be understood in the context of the present case, where
ONGC's attempt at the joinder of JDIL to the proceedings was rejected
without adjudication of ONGC's application for discovery and inspection
of documents to prove the necessity for such a joinder.
C.2. Standard for review of the interim arbitral award
42. The interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal is substantially
premised on the fact that JDIL is not a party to the contract dated 22-3
-2006. The Tribunal held that the agreement was only between ONGC
and DEPL. Adverting to Section 7 of the 1996 Act, the Tribunal held
that there must be a written
agreement between the parties to submit to arbitration or in the
specific manner envisaged under the provision. Before the Arbitral
Tribunal, it was urged by ONGC that:
(i) There is a commonality of interest in the business between
DEPL and JDIL;
(ii) DEPL is a corporate facade created by JDIL for their extended
business;
(iii) The executives of JDIL were actively associated in the bidding
process; and
(iv) The office of DEPL or JDIL were situated in the same building.
43. The Arbitral Tribunal rejected the above submissions by holding
that there was not a "tickle" of evidence on record to show that JDIL,
which is a distinct corporate legal entity, "ever played any role to find
itself in the contract between JDIL and ONGC". The participation of JDIL
in the execution of the contract was held to be on behalf of DEPL and
that the fact that the Directors of DEPL are the son and daughter-in-law
of the MD of JDIL was held not to be of relevance.
44. The fundamental basis of the interim award is that in view of the
provisions of Section 7 and the definition of the expression "party" in
Section 2(1)(h), the provisions of the Act of 1996 could not be invoked
or applied to a non-signatory to an arbitration agreement. The Tribunal
held that it has no jurisdiction to investigate, enquire into or record any
findings on the basis of ONGC's claim against JDIL.
45. The Tribunal had, by its order dated 7-7-2009, specifically held
that the objections of JDIL to the production of documents sought by
ONGC would be decided when the application under Section 16 was
resolved. Yet in the interim award, ultimately, the Tribunal has directed
that ONGC's application dated 5-1-2009 would stand deferred until the
issue of jurisdiction is decided. ONGC was justified in submitting that
its application for discovery and inspection should be heard first and
disposed of on merits after which appropriate orders as regards joinder
of parties could be issued to DEPL and JDIL.
46. By failing to consider the application for discovery and
inspection, the Tribunal has foreclosed itself from inquiring into whether
there was sufficient material to establish the application of the group of
companies doctrine. The application for discovery and inspection was
indeed relevant to the exercise which was being carried out by the
Tribunal. ONGC's primary submissions for impleading JDIL were that:
46.1. DEPL has been created by the DP Jindal Group with a definite
purpose to render services to the oil and gas sector.
46.2. There is a close corporate and functional unity between DEPL
and JDIL.
46.3. The executives of JDIL had been closely associated with the
negotiation of the agreement.
46.4. The bid as well as the contract with DEPL were signed by G.D.
Sharma who was an employee of JDIL.
46.5. G.D. Sharma was signing letters on behalf of DEPL as their
authorised signatory as well as on behalf of JDIL.
46.6. Mohan Ramanathan, who was the General Manager of JDIL,
used to visit the witness who deposed on behalf of the ONGC in
connection with the subject contract.
46.7. Naresh Kumar, the Managing Director of JDIL, had negotiated
with the owners of the vessel in connection with the same tender.
47. Moreover, it was stated in the course of the evidence by ONGC's
witness that almost all the senior officers of JDIL, including its
Managing Director, actively participated in matters relating to the hiring
of the vessel, its deployment, performance and related issues. At a kick
-off meeting held on 21-11-2005 between ONGC and DEPL, Mohan
Ramanathan (General Manager, JDIL) was stated to have been in
attendance on behalf of the DEPL. It was in this backdrop that ONGC
sought to assert that there exists corporate, financial and functional
unity between DEPL and JDIL. The Arbitral Tribunal has not considered
whether the group of companies doctrine would stand attracted. The
Arbitral Tribunal precluded itself from deciding as to whether the
application for discovery and inspection should be allowed. The Arbitral
Tribunal effectively shut out material evidence which ONGC sought to
bring on the record.
48. In this backdrop, the failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to allow for
discovery and inspection goes to the root of the process inasmuch as it
disabled ONGC from pursuing its fundamental claim based on the
application of the group of companies doctrine.
49. During the course of his submissions, Mr Shyam Divan, Senior
Counsel urged that:
49.1. JDIL's application under Section 16 was decided by the
Arbitral Tribunal after evidence was adduced.
49.2. The witness for ONGC deposed and the Tribunal has evaluated
the evidence and documentary material on record.
49.3. The Tribunal has entered a finding of fact that there is nothing
to indicate the existence of a single economic unit comprising JDIL and
DEPL.
49.4. No directions could have been issued by the Tribunal on
ONGC's application for discovery and inspection unless the Tribunal
were to rule on the challenge to its jurisdiction which had to be decided
first and hence the Tribunal was justified in concluding that the
application filed by ONGC for discovery and inspection would be
considered subsequently.
49.5. The decision in Indowind continues to hold the field.
The
group of companies doctrine is only an exception to the principle that a
party who is not a signatory of the agreement cannot be subjected to
arbitration.
49.6. The broad approach of the court under Section 34 which is of
non-interference with the arbitral award, must also govern an appeal
under Section 37; and the same standard must apply to the latter as it
applies to the former. The Arbitral Tribunal has ruled on its jurisdiction,
pursuant to the application filed by JDIL under sub-section (1) of
Section 16. Under sub-section (5), if the Arbitral Tribunal rejects such a
plea, it must continue with the arbitral proceedings to make an arbitral
award. Under sub-section (6), a party aggrieved by the arbitral award
may make an application for setting aside the award under Section 34.
50. The Arbitral Tribunal has held that it does not have jurisdiction
to entertain the claim against JDIL. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal
that it lacks jurisdiction is subject to an appeal under Section 37(2)(a).
Under sub-section (1) of Section 37, an appeal lies to the court [as
defined under Section 2(1)(e)] only from the following orders, namely:
(i) An order refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under
Section 8;
(ii) An order granting or refusing to grant any measure under
Section 9; and
(iii) An order setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral
award under Section 34.
Sub-section (2) of Section 37 stipulates that an "appeal shall also lie"
to the court from an order of the Arbitral Tribunal, inter alia, on the
ground of the Arbitral Tribunal accepting the plea referred to in sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of Section 16. Hence, an appeal lies to
the court from the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal that it lacks
jurisdiction.
51. Mr Shyam Divan, relied upon two recent decisions of this Court
in Ssangyong Engg. & Construction Co. Ltd. V. NHAI2 27 ("Ssangyong
Engg."), and in Dyna Technologies (P) Ltd. V. Crompton Greaves Ltd. 28
Both these decisions define the standard of review under Section 34.
These decisions indicate that a challenge to an arbitral award must be
adjudicated within the confines of Section 34. Clause (b) (ii) of sub-
section (2) of Section 34 stipulates that an arbitral award mav be set
aside only if the court finds that it conflicts with the public policy of
India. Prior to its substitution by Act 3 of 2016, the Explanation
stipulated that without prejudice to the generality of sub-clause (ii), an
award is in conflict with the public policy of India if the making of the
award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation
of Section 75 or Section 81. As a result of the substitution of the
Explanation by Act 3 of 2016, Parliament has stipulated that an award
conflicts with the public policy of India only if one of three conditions is
fulfilled, namely:
(i) The making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or
corruption or was in violation of Section 75 or Section 81;
(ii) The award is in contravention with the fundamental policy of
Indian law; or
(iii) The award conflicts with the most basic notions of morality or
justice.
52. In Ssangyong Engg. this Court held that the expression
"public policy of India" in Section 34 would mean "the fundamental
policy of Indian law" as explained in Associate Builders V. DDA²9. Sub-
section (2-A) to Section 34, which was introduced by the amending Act
of 2016, provides for an additional ground of challenge in the case of a
domestic award, namely, the existence of a patent illegality apparent
on the face of the award. R.F. Nariman, J. speaking for the two-Judge
paras 34 & 41)
"34. What is clear, therefore, is that the expression "public policy
of India", whether contained in Section 34 or in Section 48, would
now mean the "fundamental policy of Indian law" as explained in
paras 18 and 27 of Associate Builders29 i.e. the fundamental policy
of Indian law would be relegated to "Renusagar" understanding of
30
this expression. This would necessarily mean that Western Geco
expansion has been done away with. In short, Western Geco 30 as
explained in paras 28 and 29 of Associate Builders would no
longer obtain, as under the guise of interfering with an award on the
ground that the arbitrator has not adopted a judicial approach, the
Court's intervention would be on the merits of the award, which
cannot be permitted post amendment. However, insofar as principles
of natural justice are concerned, as contained in Sections 18 and 34
(2)(a)(iii) of the 1996 Act, these continue to be grounds of challenge
of an award, as is contained in para 30 of Associate Builders
*
*
*
41. What is important to note is that a decision which is perverse,
as understood in paras 31 and 32 of Associate Builders while no
longer being a ground for challenge under "public policy of India",
would certainly amount to a patent illegality appearing on the face of
the award. Thus, a finding based on no evidence at all or an award
which ignores vital evidence in arriving at its decision would be
perverse and liable to be set aside on the ground of patent illegality.
Additionally, a finding based on documents taken behind the back of
the parties by the arbitrator would also qualify as a decision based
on no evidence inasmuch as such decision is not based on evidence
led by the parties, and therefore, would also have to be characterised
as perverse."
(emphasis supplied)
53. In this backdrop, it has been held that:
53.1. A mere contravention of substantive law is not a ground to set
aside an award.
53.2. The court while exercising the power of judicial review should
not reappreciate evidence.
53.3. The construction of a contract is essentially a matter for the
Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
53.4. An award can be construed to be perverse only if it is based on
no evidence or has ignored vital evidence.
53.5. The illegality of an award must be of such a nature or
character so as to go to the root of the award.
53.6. Judicial intervention under Section 34 would not be warranted
only because an alternative view on facts or the construction of the
award is available.
54. Mr K.M. Nataraj, ASG, urged that when an appeal arises under
Section 37(2)(a) against an order of the Arbitral Tribunal accepting the
plea under Section 16 that it has no jurisdiction, the parameters for the
exercise of the appellate jurisdiction of the court would not be
constricted by the principles which apply to a challenge to an arbitral
award under Section 34. The ASG submitted that this is for a valid
reason, which is that upon the acceptance of a plea that there is a lack
of jurisdiction, the matter goes out of the fold of arbitration. Such a
determination cannot be subject to the governing principles which
apply to a challenge to an arbitral award under Section 34.
55. Sub-section (1) of Section 37 provides for appeals to the court
against orders of the Arbitral Tribunal meeting one of the descriptions
specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c). Sub-section (2) provides that an
appeal shall also lie to the court from an order of the Arbitral Tribunal
accepting a plea under sub-sections (2) or (3) of Section 16 (of a want
of jurisdiction) and for granting or refusing a measure under Section
17. It is true that Parliament has not specifically constricted the powers
of the court while considering an appeal under clause (a) of sub-section
(2) of Section 37 by the grounds on which an award can be challenged
under Section 34. The expression "arbitral award" is defined in Section
2(1)(c) to include an interim award. The grounds of challenge to an
arbitral award under Section 34 are specified by the parameters which
are spelt out in that provision. However, with regard to challenges to
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, Section 16 stipulates that where the
Tribunal rejects a plea of a lack of jurisdiction, it must continue with the
arbitral proceedings and make an award and the remedy of a challenge
to the award would lie under Section 34. However, if the Arbitral
Tribunal accepts a plea that it lacks jurisdiction, the order of the
Tribunal is amenable to a challenge in appeal under Section 37(2)(a).
In the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction, the court must have due
deference to the grounds which have weighed with the Tribunal in
holding that it lacks jurisdiction having regard to the object and spirit
underlying the statute which entrusts the Arbitral Tribunal with the
power to rule on its own jurisdiction. The decision of the Tribunal that it
lacks jurisdiction is not conclusive because it is subject to an appellate
remedy under Section 37(2)(a). However, in the exercise of this
appellate power, the court must be mindful of the fact that the statute
has entrusted the Arbitral Tribunal
with the power to rule on its own jurisdiction with the purpose of
facilitating the efficacy of arbitration as an institutional mechanism for
the resolution of disputes.
56. Now it is in this backdrop that the Court must approach the task
at hand. In the present batch of cases, there are two parallel
proceedings arising out of the Constitution of two sets of Arbitral
Tribunals. In the first proceeding, the Arbitral Tribunal consisted of Mr
Justice S.P. Kurdukar, Mr Justice M.S. Rane and Mr S. Venkateswaran.
Both DEPL and JDIL were made parties by ONGC, which is the claimant.
The application filed by JDIL under Section 16 was allowed by the
Arbitral Tribunal by its interim award dated 27-10-2010. The appeal
filed by ONGC was dismissed by the Bombay High Court on 27-6-
20121 In pursuance of the arbitration proceedings, the Arbitral
Tribunal made a final award on 6-6-2013 in favour of ONGC against
DEPL.
57. The second set of proceedings involved four agreements
between ONGC and JDIL which are tabulated below:
SI.
Date of the
Particulars
Nos.
agreement
1.
23-12-2003
Agreement for Charter Hire of Drilling Unit NCY
2.
9-12-2004
Agreement for hiring of 2 sets of steerable
downhole mud motors Equipment, Drilling jars
and directional drilling services
3.
2-12-2006
Agreement for Charter Hire of Drilling Unit NCY
4.
17-8-2006
Agreement for Charter Hire of Drilling Unit
"Noble Ed-Holt"
58. JDIL invoked the arbitration on 4-2-2010 and an Arbitral
Tribunal consisting of Ms Justice Sujata Manohar, Mr Justice B.N.
Srikrishna and Mr Justice M.S. Rane was constituted. The Arbitral
Tribunal rendered a final award on 9-10-2013 (the arbitral award in the
second proceeding) in favour of JDIL and accepted its claim amounting
to US $14,772,495.55 together with interest of 4% p.a. from the date
of the invoice until payment or realisation. ONGC instituted proceedings
under Section 34 before the Bombay High Court. By a judgment dated
28-4-20154, a Single Judge of the Bombay High Court upheld the
arbitral award. The appeals against the judgment of the Single Judge
under Section 37 were pending when ONGC applied for transfer of the
appeals to this Court. By an order dated 1-9-2016 31 , the appeals have
been transferred to this Court on the ground that "there is some
connection" between the special leave petition arising from the
judgment of the Bombay High Court affirming the decision of the
Arbitral Tribunal that it lacked jurisdiction on the claim against JDIL.
59. Now at this stage, it would be material to note that the Single
Judge of the Bombay High Court, while considering the challenge to the
arbitral award
Bom para 40)
"40. In my view the Arbitral Tribunal has considered the evidence
led by the parties in the impugned award independently and have
rendered findings of facts that : (i) the petitioners had failed to
prove that the said DEPL and the respondents herein were one and
the same company; (ii) both the companies had independent legal
existence; (iii) the petitioners had failed to produce any evidence to
prove that the petitioners had awarded the said contract to DEPL
because it was in fact the respondents herein and/or was supported
by the respondents; (iv) there was no evidence to show that in order
to secure the said contract, DEPL had represented that it was a part
of the respondents group; (v) the witness examined by the
petitioners was not present in the meeting held by the Executive
Purchase Committee and did not produce minutes of meeting held
by the said Committee for short listing of the bidders; (vi) the
respondents herein had not issued any guarantee or letter of comfort
from the respondents to the petitioners in respect of the liabilities, if
any, of DEPL under its contract with the petitioners and (vii) the
petitioners had failed to provide any particulars of the alleged fraud
or that the said DEPL was incorporated in order to defraud the
creditors. In my view, all the aforesaid findings rendered by the
Arbitral Tribunal are based on the pleadings, documents and the
evidence led by the parties and are not perverse and thus no
interference with such findings of facts is permissible under Section
34 of the Arbitration Act."
60. The Single Judge noted that ONGC had not denied the claims
which were made by JDIL (the original claimant). The only defence of
ONGC was that it was entitled to adjust the amount which was claimed
by JDIL under the four contracts against ONGC's claim qua DEPL. In the
course of the arbitral award in the second proceeding, the Arbitral
Tribunal has also observed that the claims of JDIL were not disputed by
ONGC. The award of the Arbitral Tribunal noted that:
"The above claims of the claimant are not denied by the
respondent ONGC. The defence of ONGC to the claims made by the
claimant in these arbitration proceedings is essentially to the effect
that the respondent is entitled to appropriate the sums payable by it
to the claimant under these 4 contracts against the claim of the
respondent against DEPL under its contract with DEPL."
61. The basis on which ONGC claimed the above adjustment was
that DEPL and JDIL constitute one economic entity and that DEPL is a
group company of JDIL. The Arbitral Tribunal rejected the submission of
ONGC, observing thus:
"It is contended by Mr Rajiv Kumar, learned Senior Counsel for
the respondent that the corporate veil should be lifted in order to
treat the two companies as one because throughout, it was the
claimant which acted on behalf of DEPL. The respondent has placed
strong reliance on
State of U.P. V. Renusagar Power Co. 3 The Supreme Court has
observed that in the expanding horizon of modern jurisprudence, lifting
of corporate veil is permissible if two associated companies are so
inextricably mixed as to constitute one entity. Its frontiers are
unlimited. It must, however, depend primarily on the realities of the
situation. It held on the facts of that case that at no point of time had
the respondent Renusagar showed any independent volition and had
been controlled fully by Hindalco which controlled even day-to-day
affairs of the respondent. Even the profits of the respondent had been
treated as the profits of Hindalco. The Court held that the respondent
and Hindalco can be treated as one concern. The facts of the present
case are totally different and do not warrant lifting of corporate veil,
assuming there is one. The evidence in the present case does not
justify the application of 'lifting the corporate veil'. In respect of the
contract which was entered into by the respondent with DEPL, the
tender was floated by ONGC in 2005 and the contract was entered into
in 2006. There is no material to show that the respondent awarded the
contract to DEPL because it was in fact the claimant and/or was
supported by the claimant. The minutes of the meeting held by the
respondents for shortlisting of bidders in respect of that contract have
not been produced. The only witness produced by ONGC was not
present at the meetings held by the executive purchase committees
when deliberations on the award of the contract to the recommended
bidder took place (of answer to Question 39 in the cross-examination of
the same witness in the first arbitration between ONGC and DEPL relied
upon in this arbitration). There is no evidence to show that in order to
secure the said contract, DEPL represented that it was a part of the
claimant group. The respondent contends that an employee of the
claimant, namely, Mr Mohan Ramanathan attended the pre-bid meeting
and customs hearing in connection with their contract with DEPL. The
claimant in the evidence of its witness CW 2 Ms Dalvi has stated that
Mr Ramanathan had attended the pre-bid meeting and customs hearing
at the request of DEPL and as a representative of DEPL on account of
his expertise in these areas. She has also stated that she was asked by
Mr Ramanathan to attend the customs duty hearing on behalf of DEPL.
The claimant has also pointed out that Mr G.D. Sharma, an employee of
the claimant attended certain meetings and signed letters, etc. only on
behalf of DEPL and has signed these expressly on behalf of DEPL."
62. The Tribunal also observed that JDIL had not furnished any
guarantee or letter of comfort to ONGC in respect of the liabilities of
DEPL. The emails addressed by the Managing Director of JDIL to the
owners of the vessel were not from an official email address but from
personal email addresses. The Arbitral Tribunal held that there was no
basis for the allegation that DEPL was incorporated to defraud the
creditors. Thus, the Tribunal observed that JDIL and DEPL maintained a
separate legal character throughout.
In the earlier proceedings instituted by ONGC against both DEPL
and JDIL, the Arbitral Tribunal had by its interim award dated 27-10-
2010 upheld JDIL's plea of a lack of jurisdiction and held that JDIL
could not be impleaded.
In Para 31 of the arbitral award in the second proceeding, dated 9-10-
2013 between ONGC and JDIL, the Arbitral Tribunal adverted to the
interim award dated 27-10-2010 in the first proceeding and agreed
with those findings. The relevant extract reads as follows:
"31. In the present case the respondent ONGC had earlier
initiated arbitration proceedings against both DEPL and the claimant
before an Arbitral Tribunal consisting of Justice Kurudukar (presiding
arbitrator), Justice Rane and Mr Venkateshwaran, Senior Advocate.
By its 'interim final award' dated 27-10-2010 the Arbitral Tribunal
held that in the dispute between the respondent and DEPL, the
claimant could not be impleaded. It rejected the contention of ONGC
that the claimant was liable under the said contract between ONGC
and DEPL. The arguments advanced before us were also advanced
before it. In fact the evidence of the respondents witness Anindya
Bhattarcharya is common in both the arbitrations. That Arbitral
Tribunal rejected the contention of the respondent and directed that
the name of claimant should be deleted from the said proceedings.
The order has been upheld by the High Court in the petition filed by
ONGC under Section 16 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996
by its order dated 27-6-20121. We are informed that an SLP is
pending. There is now a final award dated 6-6-2013 given by the
aforesaid Arbitral Tribunal in the arbitration proceedings between the
respondent and DEPL where the respondents have been held entitled
to recover from DEPL a sum of Rs 6387.37 lakhs as well as US dollars
1756197.50 with interest at 9% p.a. as set out therein and have
been granted other reliefs as set out therein. After the claimant took
out the present arbitration proceedings, ONGC has filed a suit in the
High Court being Suit Number 2947/2011 against the claimant and
DEPL. The findings of the earlier Arbitral Tribunal and the High Court
in its order of 27-6-2012 support our present conclusions, and we
respectfully agree with the same."
(emphasis supplied)
64. It is important to note that in the arbitral award in the second
proceeding, no issue of jurisdiction arose since only JDIL and ONGC
were parties and the claim of JDIL arose under four distinct contracts of
JDIL with ONGC. DEPL was not a party to that proceeding. The
examination-in-chief of ONGC's witness in the first arbitration
proceeding was treated as an affidavit in the subsequent arbitration
involving the claim by JDIL against ONGC. This Court has been
informed that the cross-examination of the witness in the first arbitral
proceeding leading up to the interim award dated 27-10-2010 was also
treated as a cross-examination in the subsequent arbitration. JDIL also
led evidence, inter alia, of its manager in support of its assertion that
there were neither any common Directors between JDIL and DEPL nor
did JDIL hold any shares in DEPL.
65. The above narration indicates that the batch of cases which has
been transferred to this Court arises from a claim in arbitration by JDIL
against ONGC under four contracts. The Arbitral Tribunal by its award
dated 9-10-2013 (the arbitral award in the second proceeding) allowed
the
claim. ONGC did not plead any defence to the claim on merits.
However, ONGC asserted a right to adjust the amounts which were due
to JDIL against the claims which ONGC had against DEPL under a
distinct contract. ONGC asserted that JDIL and DEPL form one common
economic entity and that the group of companies doctrine would apply.
Thus essentially, the grounds on which ONGC opposed JDIL's
application under Section 16 in the first arbitral proceeding overlap with
the basis on which ONGC sought adjustment of the claims due to JDIL
in the second arbitral proceeding. There is thus a significant degree of
overlap between the issues which arose before the first Arbitral Tribunal
in its interim award dated 27-10-2010 and those on which the Arbitral
Tribunal rendered its arbitral award dated 9-10-2013 in the second
proceeding.
66. As we have seen above, arbitral award in the second proceeding
relied on the findings contained in the interim award of the first Arbitral
Tribunal dated 27-10-2010. In opposing JDIL's application under
Section 16 before the Arbitral Tribunal consisting of Mr Justice S.P.
Kurdukar, Mr Justice M.S. Rane and Mr S. Venkateswaran, ONGC
invoked the group of companies doctrine. In the course of its statement
of claim, ONGC pleaded that DEPL was awarded the contract by relying
on the fact that it is a group company of the DP Jindal Group of
Companies and that JDIL has a vital business interest in DEPL, which
can be said to be an alter ego of JDIL.
67. ONGC pleaded that it had a continuing business relationship
with JDIL for the past several years and this was a major factor which
weighed with ONGC while deciding to award the contract in favour of
the DEPL. On the date of the submission of the claim, ONGC had three
subsisting contracts with JDIL. ONGC claimed that DEPL has a close
corporate unity with the Jindal Group of Companies and that it has
consistently represented that they are a group company within the DP
Jindal Group of Companies. According to ONGC, besides the letterheads
of DEPL which indicate that it belongs to the DP Jindal Group of
Companies, JDIL has also acknowledged this position on its website.
ONGC also indicated that since DEPL is liable to compensate ONGC for
the loss suffered by it, ONGC has adjusted the monies payable to JDIL
as security to satisfy the award. ONGC led the evidence of its Chief
Manager (MM), Anindya Bhattacharya. The witness for ONGC deposed
that:
67.1. At the pre-bid conference which was held on 7-10-2005, DEPL
was represented by Mohan Ramanathan together with two other
persons and he is an employee of JDIL.
67.2. In response to the second expression of interest dated 17-10-
2005, DEPL submitted its offer which was signed by G.D. Sharma on
behalf of DEPL.
67.3. G.D. Sharma holds the position of Manager (Commercial and
Development) with JDIL.
67.4. In response to ONGC's invitation for sealed bids from
shortlisted parties on 31-10-2005, DEPL submitted its bid under a
cover letter dated 4-11-2005. The annexure to the letter contained a
resume of DEPL declaring that it is a part of the DP Jindal Group of
Companies which has a
strong presence in the oil and gas sector and is engaged in offshore
drilling for oil and gas.
67.5. Both DEPL and JDIL shared a common addresses and
telephone numbers.
67.6. DEPL was created by the Jindal Group with the definite
purpose of rendering a particular service to the oil and gas sector and
DEPL has indicated on the website that it works under the "fraternal
hood of the said group".
67.7. DEPL is promoted and managed by the son and daughter-in
law of the Managing Director of JDIL.
67.8. The bid submitted by DEPL was signed by G.D. Sharma as an
authorised signatory who is an employee of JDIL.
67.9. The Managing Director of JDIL, Mr Naresh Kumar, had
negotiated with the owners of the vessel for hiring on behalf of DEPL.
67.10. DEPL was incorporated in 2003.
67.11. Mohan Ramanathan who attended the office of ONGC in
connection with the subject contract was the General Manager of JDIL.
67.12. Almost all senior officers of JDIL including its Managing
Director actively took part in matters relating to the hiring of the vessel,
its deployment, performance and related issues. Therefore, a corporate,
financial and functional unity exists between DEPL and JDIL.
68. At the hearing before the first Arbitral Tribunal on 7-7-2009, the
documents which were produced by ONGC's witness were taken on the
record. Counsel for JDIL objected to these documents on the ground of
relevance and admissibility but stated that he would cross-examine the
witness without prejudice to those contentions. The first Arbitral
Tribunal observed that the rival contentions would be decided while
disposing of the application under Section 16. ONGC also filed an
application for discovery and inspection before the first Arbitral Tribunal
and the annexure to the application contained a schedule indicating the
disclosures which were sought. The order of the first Arbitral Tribunal
notes the submission of ONGC that the applications for discovery and
inspection must be decided first and it is only on the completion of the
process that JDIL's challenge to jurisdiction under Section 16 could be
addressed.
69. The first Arbitral Tribunal deferred a decision on the two
applications until the issue of jurisdiction was decided. The net result is
that the applications for discovery and inspection which were crucial to
ONGC's claim that there existed functional, financial and economic
unity between DEPL and JDIL remained to be decided before the
application under Section 16 was taken up. There is merit in the
submission which was been urged on behalf of the ONGC that the
application for discovery and inspection had to be decided before the
plea of jurisdiction was adjudicated upon. The application for discovery
and inspection was intended to facilitate ONGC in its plea that there
existed functional, financial and economic unity between the two
companies. The failure of the first Arbitral Tribunal to hear the
application for discovery and inspection goes to the root of its interim
award dated 27-10-2010 holding an absence of jurisdiction qua JDIL.
70. The interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal in the first proceeding,
dated 27-7-2010 refers to the documents which were produced by
ONGC and to the submission that neither DEPL nor JDIL had led any
evidence to controvert the documentary and oral evidence adduced by
ONGC. The first Arbitral Tribunal upheld the plea of jurisdiction that
JDIL is neither a party to the contract nor had it submitted a bid to
ONGC which resulted in the formation of the contract. The Tribunal held
that the agreement was only between ONGC and DEPL and that in
terms of Section 7, an agreement to arbitrate is between the parties to
the agreement.
71. While observing that the arbitration agreement was only
between DEPL and ONGC, the Tribunal held that neither was there an
arbitration agreement between ONGC and JDIL nor was JDIL a
signatory to the agreement between ONGC and DEPL. After noting the
documents which were relied upon by ONGC, the Tribunal held that
there was "no tickle of evidence to indicate that JDIL", a distinct
incorporated legal entity, ever played any role to find itself in the
contract between JDIL and ONGC. The executives of JDIL who
participated in the contractual dealing were held to be representatives
of DEPL.
72. Reading the interim award dated 27-10-2010 of the first Arbitral
Tribunal, the unmistakable impression which emerges from the record
is that the primary basis for the determination of an absence of
jurisdiction is that the arbitration agreement was between ONGC and
DEPL. The legal foundation of the group of companies doctrine has not
been evaluated, on facts or law.
73. True enough, the judgment of this Court in Chloro Controls is of
2013, Cheran Properties Superscript(2) 8 is of 2018 and MTNL 9 came in 2020. However,
ONGC had clearly laid out the factual and legal foundation for setting
up a case in opposition to the plea of JDIL. The first Arbitral Tribunal
has made a fundamental error of law in not deciding the application by
ONGC on discovery and inspection of documents before it ruled on
jurisdiction. In doing so, the first Arbitral Tribunal's interim award
dated 27-10-2010 goes against the principles of natural justice. The
failure to consider the application for discovery and inspection of
documents results in a situation where vital evidence that could have
assisted the Tribunal in its determination of the challenge under
Section 16 was shut out. As a matter of fact, it emerged from the
record that no evidence was adduced by JDIL in support of its plea of
the absence of jurisdiction under Section 16. JDIL having taken the
plea of absence of jurisdiction was required to establish the grounds on
which it set about to establish its plea.
74. Based on the above discussion, the interim award of the first
Arbitral Tribunal stands vitiated because of:
74.1. The failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to decide upon the
application for discovery and inspection filed by ONGC.
74.2. The failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to determine the legal
foundation for the application of the group of companies doctrine.
74.3. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal that it would decide upon
the applications filed by ONGC only after the plea of jurisdiction was
disposed of.
D. Conclusion
75. For all the above reasons we have come to the conclusion that
there was a fundamental failure of the first Arbitral Tribunal to address
the plea raised by ONGC for attracting the group of companies doctrine.
Moreover, by leaving the application filed by ONGC for discovery and
inspection unresolved, the first Arbitral Tribunal failed to allow evidence
which may have had a bearing on the issue of whether JDIL could be
considered to have an economic unity with DEPL and could hence be
made a party to the arbitral proceedings.
76. For the above reasons, we are of the view that:
76.1. The interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal dated 27-7-2010 on
the plea raised by JDIL under Section 16 has to be set aside.
76.2. The judgment of the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court
dated 27-6-2012 dismissing ONGC's appeal under Section 37 would
have to be set aside.
76.3. The plea by JDIL that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction
would have to be decided afresh. In this regard, this Court was
informed that one of the three arbitrators has died and that the Arbitral
Tribunal cannot be reconstituted. We accordingly direct that ONGC and
JDIL shall each nominate their arbitrators within a period of two weeks
from the date of this judgment while the two arbitrators shall nominate
and appoint the third arbitrator. The Arbitral Tribunal so reconstituted
shall decide afresh upon the plea of JDIL in regard to the absence of
jurisdiction after furnishing to the parties the opportunity of leading any
further evidence or seeking the production of further documentary
material on the record. The evidence and documentary evidence which
has been already adduced before the earlier Arbitral Tribunal shall
however form part of the record of the newly constituted Tribunal.
76.4. As regards the cases which have been transferred to this
Court, we would order and direct that these cases be remitted back to
the Bombay High Court. The decision on those appeals which arose
from the dismissal by the Single Judge of the petition under Section 34
challenging the arbitral award dated 9-10-2013 in the second
proceeding, in favour of JDIL, shall be held in abeyance and remain
adjourned sine die until the Arbitral Tribunal which is reconstituted in
terms of the above directions rules on its jurisdiction and in the event
that it rejects the plea challenging its jurisdiction, until the arbitral
award is delivered in relation to ONGC's claim against JDIL.
76.5. During the pendency of these proceedings, ONGC was directed
to deposit the amount due under the arbitral award in the second
proceeding dated 9-10-2013, which was permitted to be withdrawn by
JDIL subject to furnishing a bank guarantee which shall be kept alive
during the pendency of the proceedings before the Bombay High Court.
The bank guarantee furnished by JDIL shall be kept alive to the
satisfaction of the Prothonotary and Senior Master of the Bombay High
Court.
77. For the above reasons, we issue the following directions:
77.1. The judgment of the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court
dated 27-6-2012 in ONGC Ltd. V. Discovery Enterprises (P) Ltd. 1 is set
aside.
77.2. The appeal filed by ONGC under Section 37 of the 1996 Act
against the interim award of the Arbitral Tribunal dated 27-10-2010 is
allowed and the interim award of the Tribunal dated 27-10-2010 shall
stand set aside.
77.3. A fresh Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted by ONGC and
JDIL each nominating their arbitrators within a period of two weeks
from the date of this judgment and the two arbitrators thereafter will
jointly appoint the third arbitrator.
77.4. The present judgment will not have any bearing on the arbitral
award dated 6-6-2013 passed in favour of ONGC against DEPL.
77.5. The transferred cases shall stand remitted back to the Bombay
High Court. The hearing of the transferred cases is adjourned sine die
so as to await the outcome of the arbitral proceedings between ONGC
and JDIL in terms of sub-para 77.3 above.
77.6. In pursuance of the interim orders of this Court, ONGC was
directed to deposit the amount due to JDIL under the arbitral award
in the second proceeding dated 9-10-2013 which was permitted 34 to be
withdrawn by JDIL subject to furnishing a bank guarantee. The bank
guarantee furnished by JDIL shall be kept alive to the satisfaction of the
Prothonotary and Senior Master of the Bombay High Court pending the
disposal of the arbitration appeals against the judgment of the Single
Judge
dated 28-4-2015 4 dismissing the petition under Section 34
challenging the arbitral award dated 9-10-2013.
77.7. Upon the reconstitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, the plea of
JDIL under Section 16 shall be decided afresh. All the rights and
contentions in that regard are kept open to be decided by the Arbitral
Tribunal. The oral and documentary evidence which was produced
before the earlier Arbitral Tribunal shall form part of the proceedings
before the fresh Arbitral Tribunal to be constituted in pursuance of the
above directions. ONGC would be at liberty to pursue its application for
discovery and inspection and to seek further directions before the
Arbitral Tribunal. Parties would be at liberty to apply for leading further
evidence before the Arbitral Tribunal if they are so advised.
78. The appeal is allowed in the above terms. The transferred cases
are remitted back to the Bombay High Court for disposal in the light of
the above directions.
79. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in ONGC Ltd. V. Discovery Enterprises (P) Ltd., 2012
2012) [Reversed]
1
3
Arbitration Petitions Nos. 587, 767, 768 and 1045 of 2014
4
5
Arbitration Appeals Nos. 446 to 449 of 2015
6
Transferred Cases (Civil) Nos. 47, 48, 49 and 50 of 2016
7
8
9
10
"7. Arbitration agreement.- (1) In this Part, "arbitration agreement" means an
agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or
which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual
or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in
the form of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in-
(a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication
including communication through electronic means which provide a record of the
agreement; or
(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the
agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes
an arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to make
that arbitration clause part of the contract."
13 Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
14
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration, 5th Edn., p. 99.
15 Id, 2.40, p. 100
16 Id, 2.41, p. 100
18
19
Interim award in ICC Case No. 4131 of 1982, IX YB Comm Arb 131 (1984); Award in ICC
Case No. 5103 of 1988, 115 JDI (Clunet) 1206 (1988). See also Gary B. Born, International
Commercial Arbitration, Vol. I, 2009, pp. 1170-1171.
20
ICC Case No. 4131 of 1982, ICC Case No. 5103 of 1988.
21
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration, 5th Edn., 2.13, pp. 89-90
22
Gary Born, International Commercial Arbitration, 2nd Edn., Vol. 1, at p. 1418.
23 Id, p. 1432
24
Id, p. 1450
25
Tepper Realty Co. V. Mosaic Tile Co., 259 F Supp 688 (SDNY 1966)
26
John Fellas, "Compelling Signatories to Arbitrate with Non-Signatories", New York Law
Journal (28-3-2022)
27
(Civ) 213
28
29
30
31
33
34