In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE AJAY RASTOGI AND C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.)
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ANOTHER
.
Appellants;
Versus
DR MAROTI s/o KASHINATH PIMPALKAR
Respondent.
Criminal Appeal No. 1874 of 2022 ¹, decided on November 2, 2022
A. Crimes Against Women and Children - Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 - Ss. 19 and 21 - Object - Strict compliance
intended - Person on coming to know about commission of offence under
Pocso Act, held, is obliged to promptly report the same to the specified
authorities - Failure to do so must be regarded as a serious offence even
though punishment prescribed under S. 21 is not severe - Supreme Court
under parens patriae jurisdiction has duty to give directions for compliance
with provisions of the Pocso Act - Constitution of India, Art. 142
B. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - S. 482 - Quashing of FIR and
charge-sheet - Power should be exercised by High Court sparingly ex
debito justitiae - Quashment on basis of statements of victims and other
witnesses recorded under S. 161 CrPC unjustified and would result in
miscarriage of justice - Power can be exercised if FIR and final report filed
under S. 173(2) CrPC along with materials collected do not disclose
ingredient to constitute alleged offence(s) and a prima facie case against
accused
Pursuant to a telephonic message received from the Hostel Superintendent of a
school under control of the Integrated Tribal Development Project, informing that
two minor girls studying in 3rd and 5th standards of the school were not keeping
well, the Assistant Project Officer immediately visited the rural hospital where they
were admitted. The respondent being the medical practitioner appointed for
treatment of girls admitted to the said girls' hostel, the victim girls were taken to
him. The investigation revealed that the respondent had knowledge about the
incidents that occurred, from the victims themselves as the victim girls revealed in
their statements recorded under Section 161 CrPC about their divulgation of sexual
assault on them to the respondent. In fact, some of the victims had specifically
revealed it in their statements recorded under Section 164 CrPC. However, the
respondent did not provide such information either to the Special Juvenile Police
Unit or the local police.
The Assistant Project Officer later received a letter informing that the students
were shifted to General Hospital where a medical certificate was issued expressing a
suspicion of sexual abuses. Thereupon the Project Officer authorised him to lodge
the complaint and accordingly, it was laid on the basis of which FIR was registered
for the offences under Section 376-AB of the Penal Code, 1860; Sections 4 and 6
of the Pocso Act; Sections 3(1)(w) and 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and Section 3 of the
Maharashtra Prevention and Eradication of Human Sacrifice and other Inhuman, Evil
and Aghori Practices and Black Magic Act, 2013.
During investigation, the Hostel Superintendent and four others were arrested
and arraigned as accused in the crime. The respondent was arraigned as Accused 6
for his failure to report regarding the commission of offence under the Pocso Act. A
charge-sheet was filed. The respondent's application for anticipatory bail was
rejected by the Sessions Judge but allowed by the High Court. The respondent then
filled an application under Section 482 CrPC for quashing the FIR and the charge-
sheet to the extent they are against him.
The High Court quashed the FIR and the charge-sheet qua the respondent,
taking the view that the statements of the victims indicated that the present
respondent "had examined the victims. Their condition was deteriorating. Therefore,
they were sent to General Hospital, Chandrapur. There is no material on record to
show that the applicant was made aware about the sexual assault committed on
the victims. On the contrary, from the statement of the teacher of victims it
appears that the sexual assault was detected only in General Hospital, Chandrapur.
Therefore, we are of the view that there is no evidence to implicate the applicant in
the said crime. Therefore, the continuation of proceedings against the applicant
would amount to abuse of process of court".
Allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court
Held :
Recognising the constitutional obligation under Article 39(f) and keeping in view
the fundamental concept under Article 15 of the Constitution and also realising that
sexual offences against children are not adequately addressed by the existing laws,
the Pocso Act was enacted. The provisions thereunder would reveal that it also
aims to ensure that such offenders are not spared and should be properly booked.
To achieve the avowed purpose, a legal obligation under Section 19 of the Pocso
Act, is cast upon on a person to inform the relevant authorities specified thereunder
when he/she has knowledge that an offence under the Act had been committed or
has apprehension that an offence under this Act is likely to be committed. Besides
casting such legal obligation the legislature thought it expedient to make failure to
discharge the obligation thereunder as punishable, under Section 21 thereof. Such
provisions are included with a view to ensure strict compliance of the provisions
under the Pocso Act and thereby to ensure that the tender age of children is not
being abused and their childhood and youth is protected against exploitation.
(Paras 11 and 12)
Articles 3(2) and 34 of the United Nations Convention on Rights of Children,
which was ratified by India on 11-12-1992, have placed a specific duty on the State
to protect the child from all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse. Although
making failure to discharge the obligation under Section 19(1) punishable only with
imprisonment for a short duration viz. six months, but that by itself is not the test
of seriousness or otherwise of an offence of failure to discharge the legal obligation
under Section 19, punishable under Section 21 of the Pocso Act. The prompt and
proper reporting of the commission of offence under the Pocso Act is of utmost
importance and its failure on coming to know about the commission of any offence
thereunder would defeat the very purpose and object of the Act. Prompt reporting
of the commission of an offence under the Pocso Act would
enable immediate examination of the victim concerned and at the same time, if it
was committed by an unknown person, it would also enable the investigating
agency to commence investigation without wasting time and ultimately to secure
the arrest and medical examination of the culprit. In relation to sexual offences
medical evidence has much corroborative value. Medical examination of the victim
as also the accused would give many important clues in a case that falls under the
Pocso Act. Section 27(1) of the Pocso Act and Section 53-A CrPC are relevant in
this context.
(Paras 13, 15, 16 and 18)
The FIR carries suspicion of commission of sexual assault and the charge-sheet
reveals prima facie against the respondent in relation to non-reporting of such an
offence under the Pocso Act. The very case of the appellant is that some among
the seventeen victims have given statements under Section 161 CrPC and some
others under Section 164 CrPC, specifically stating that the respondent was
informed of the sexual assault on them. Non-reporting of sexual assault against a
minor child despite knowledge is a serious crime and more often than not, it is an
attempt to shield the offenders of the crime of sexual assault and in view of the
position obtained from a conjoint reading of Sections 19(1) and 21 of the Pocso
Act, such persons are also liable to be proceeded with, in accordance with law. The
Supreme Court under parens patriae jurisdiction has a duty to give directions for
compliance of the provisions under the Pocso Act.
(Paras 28 and 30)
Exercise of power under Section 482 CrPC. which the respondent sought to
invoke for quashing the FIR and the charge-sheet, is an exception and not the rule
and it is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the
administration of which alone courts exist. If FIR and the materials collected disclose
a cognizable offence and the final report filed under Section 173(2) CrPC on
completion of investigation based on it would reveal that the ingredients to
constitute an offence under the Pocso Act and a prima facie case against the
persons named therein as accused, the truthfulness, sufficiency or admissibility of
the evidence are not matters falling within the purview of exercise of power under
Section 482 CrPC and undoubtedly they are matters to be done by the trial court at
the time of trial. While considering the question of quashing of FIR the High Court
would not be entitled to appreciate by way of sifting the materials collected in
course of investigation including the statements recorded under Section 161 CrPC.
Statements recorded under Section 161 CrPC are inadmissible in evidence and its
use is limited for the purposes as provided under Sections 145 and 157 of the
Evidence Act, 1872. As a matter of fact, statement recorded under Section 164
CrPC can also be used only for such purposes.
(Paras 7, 21, 22 and 24)
R.P. Kapur V. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866; State of Haryana V. Bhajan Lal,
The High Court arrived at the finding of absence of evidence to implicate the
respondent by going through the statements of victims/witnesses cited by the
prosecution. The High Court should not have embarked upon an enquiry, especially
by looking into the statements of the victims recorded as also their teacher to form
an opinion regarding the availability of evidence to connect the respondent with the
crime.
(Paras 29 and 35)
distinguished
The Supreme Court would not have perused the statements of some of the
victims recorded under Sections 161/164 CrPC, recorded much prior to the
impugned judgment of the High Court. But this has been done solely to verify the
verity of the finding of the High Court to the effect that such statements do not
disclose anything suggesting knowledge of the respondent about the commission of
the crime. In the light of the circumstances available as above and in the light of
Section 59 of the Evidence Act, the High Court was not justified in bringing abrupt
termination of the proceedings qua the respondent. There is prima facie case
against the respondent for the offence referred above and hence, the appeal is
liable to succeed.
(Para 36)
Therefore, the impugned judgment resulting in quashment of the stated FIR and
the charge-sheet throttling the prosecution at the threshold, without allowing the
materials in support of it to see the light of the day, cannot be said to be as an
exercise done to secure interests of justice whereas it can only be stated that such
exercise resulted in miscarriage of justice.
(Para 37)
R-D/69579/CVR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Sanjay Kharde, Siddharth Dharmadhikari and Aaditya Aniruddha
Pande (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates, for the Appellants;
Sachin Shanmukham Pujari (Advocate-on-Record), Advocate, for the
Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
M.L. Bhatt V. M.K. Pandita
308a, 309b-c, 311b-c
Madanlal Choudhary V. Union of India
305h, 306d
Maharashtra (reversed)
308e-f, 308f-g, 309b,
309g-h, 311a-b, 311d,
311d-e
Kourav V. Baisahab
308a-b, 309c, 311b-c
302a-b
Shankar Kisanrao Khade V. State of Maharashtra
306a, 306a, 309f
V. Radhika
304e
Monica Kumar V. State of U.P.
304e
Krishnan V. State of Kerala
g
M.P. V. Awadh Kishore Gupta
304d-e
State of Haryana V. Bhajan Lal
304c
12. AIR 1960 SC 866, R.P. Kapur V. State of Punjab
304b-c
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.- Leave granted. This Court in Shalu Ojha V.
"1.
this is an unfortunate case where the provisions of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 are rendered
simply a pious hope of Parliament and a teasing illusion for the
appellant."
Even while borrowing those words, we may say, we are not peeved, but
certainly pained, as a legitimate prosecution under another Act viz. the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for short "the
Pocso Act"), has been throttled at the threshold by the exercise of
power under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
short "CrPC"), without permitting the materials in support to it to see
the light of the day in respect of misprision of sexual assault against
minor tribal girls in a girls' hostel.
2. As per the impugned judgment, the High Court of Judicature at
Bombay, Nagpur Bench in Maroti V. State of Maharashtra² dated 20-4-
2021 quashed FIR No. 185 of 2019 dated 12-4-2019 of Rajura Police
Station and the final report filed thereon under Section 173(2) CrPC
qua the respondent. The raison d'étre for the said opening remarks
would be unravelled by the factual narration and the legal analysis to
be made hereinafter.
3. The stated charge-sheet was laid on investigation in FIR No. 185
of 2019 registered at Rajura Police Station, District Chandrapur, for the
offences under Section 376-AB of the Penal Code, 1860; Sections 4 and
6 of the Pocso Act; Sections 3(1)(w) and 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and
Section 3 of the Maharashtra Prevention and Eradication of Human
Sacrifice and other Inhuman, Evil and Aghori Practices and Black Magic
Act, 2013. We may hasten to add that it was filed under those sections
against the first five accused and in fact, the respondent herein was
arraigned as the 6th accused thereunder, essentially for the failure to
report the commission of the offence under the Pocso Act (then, of
course by unknown persons), in compliance with the legal obligation
under Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act, punishable under Section (1)
thereof.
4. The stated FIR came to be registered against unidentified person
(s) on the accusation of commission of sexual offences against minor
tribal girls who were students of Infant Jesus English Public High
School, Rajura residing in its girls' hostel. The complaint was lodged by
one Rajesh Tulsidas Dhotkar, Assistant Project Officer, Integrated Tribal
Development Project, Chandrapur. According to the appellant, on 6-4-
2019 the said officer received a telephonic information from Chhaban
Pandurang Pachare, the Superintendent of the
said hostel which is under the control of the Integrated Tribal
Development Project, Chandrapur that one girl studying in the 3rd
standard and another studying in the 5th standard, of the said school
were not keeping well. Immediately, he visited the hospital where they
were admitted. Later, he received Letter No. 3392/2019 dated 10-2-
2019 revealing that the students were shifted from Rural Hospital
Rajura to General Hospital. Chandrapur owing to their deterioratina
health condition. From General Hospital, Chandrapur a medical
certificate was issued to the effect that there is suspicion of sexual
abuse. Thereupon, the Project Officer, Integrated Tribal Development
Project, Chandrapur authorised him to lodge the complaint and
accordingly, it was laid. We may state at this juncture that going by
Criminal Application (APL) No. 841 of 2019, filed along with the present
appeal as Annexure P-3, the parents of the victims were not happy with
the investigation in the crime and they filed Criminal Writ Petition No.
342 of 2019 and subsequently, Final Report/Charge-Sheet No. 43/2019
dated 8-6-2019 was filed.
5. Now, reverting to the case of the appellant, it is to the effect that
during the investigation, Superintendent of the aforementioned hostel
and four others, namely, Narendra Laxmanrao Virulkar, Sau Neeta alias
Kalpana Mahadeo Thakare, Sau Lata Madhukar Kannake, Venkateswami
Bondaiyaa Jangam were arrested and arraigned as accused in the
crime. During the investigation, it was found that 17 minor girls were
abused by the accused and on their medical examination rupture of
hymen was found. The respondent herein is the medical practitioner
appointed for treatment of girls admitted to the said girls' hostel and
the victim girls were taken to him. The investigation revealed that the
respondent had knowledge about the incidents that occurred, from the
victims themselves as the victim girls revealed in their statements
recorded under Section 161 CrPC about their divulgation of sexual
assault on them to the respondent. In fact, some of the victims had
specifically revealed it in their statements recorded under Section 164
CrPC. The respondent who was under a legal obligation, in terms of the
provisions under Section 19(1) of the Pocso Act upon getting the
knowledge about committing of an offence under the Pocso Act, to
provide such information either to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the
local police remained silent and did not provide such information to
help the accused, is the gist of the allegation against him. As already
stated, after investigation a charge-sheet was also filed. The
respondent has been arraigned as Accused 6 in the aforesaid crime.
6. Apprehending arrest in connection with the said crime, the
respondent herein filed an anticipatory bail application before the
learned Sessions Judge on 10-6-2019 and the same was rejected on 25
-6-2019. The said order was challenged before the High Court and the
High Court allowed the appeal and granted him protection from arrest.
Thereafter, the respondent herein filed Criminal Application (APL) No.
841 of 2019 under Section 482 CrPC seeking quashment of the FIR
dated 12-4-2019 and the charge-sheet dated 8-6-2019 to the extent
they are against him. The High Court passed the impugned judgment
and quashed the FIR as also the charge-sheet qua the respondent.
Hence, this appeal.
7. Before considering the merits of the challenge against the
impugned judgment2 whereby and whereunder the stated FIR and the
charge-sheet were quashed, we think it appropriate to refer to certain
aspects and also the position with respect to scope of exercise of power
under Section 482 CrPC. Exercise of power under Section 482 CrPC is
an exception and not the rule and it is to be exercised ex debito
justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of
which alone courts exist. This position has been stated and reiterated
by this Court time and again.
8. This Court in the decision in R.P. Kapur V. State of Punjab³, held
that the High Court could not embark upon an enquiry as to whether
the evidence is reliable or not while exercising the power under Section
482 CrPC. In State of Haryana V. Bhajan Lal, at para 102 this Court
held that quashing may be appropriate where the allegations made in
the first information report or the complaint, even if taken at their face
value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute any
offence or make out a case against the accused and where the
allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying
an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code
except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155
(2) of the Code.
9. In the decision in State of M.P. V. Awadh Kishore Gupta5 this
Court held that the High Court could not embark upon an enquiry as to
whether the evidence is reliable or not as that would be the function of
the trial court. In Monica Kumar V. State of U.P. this Court held that
the inherent power under Section 482 CrPC should not be exercised to
stifle a legitimate prosecution.
10. In Shiji V. Radhika ², a two-Judge Bench of this Court held thus :
"18.
plenitude of the power under Section 482 CrPC by itself,
makes it obligatory for the High Court to exercise the same with
utmost care and caution. The width and the nature of the power
itself demands that its exercise is sparing and only in cases where
the High Court is, for reasons to be recorded, of the clear view that
continuance of the prosecution would be nothing but an abuse of the
process of law. It is neither necessary nor proper for us to enumerate
the situations in which the exercise of power under Section 482 may
be justified. All that we need to say is that the exercise of power
must be for securing the ends of justice and only in cases where
refusal to exercise that power may result in the abuse of the process
of law."
11. Having made such a short survey on authorities on the exercise
of power under Section 482 CrPC as above, we will now refer to the
object and purposes of the POCSO Act. Article 15 of the Constitution,
inter alia confers powers upon the State to make special provisions for
children and Article 39(f) provides not only that the State shall direct
its policy towards securing that the children are given opportunities to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity
but also to ensure that their childhood and youth are protected against
exploitation and against moral and material abandonment. Recognising
the constitutional obligation and keeping in view the fundamental
concept under Article 15 of the Constitution and also realising that
sexual offences against children are not adequately addressed by the
existing laws, the Pocso Act was enacted. The provisions thereunder
would reveal that it also aims to ensure that such offenders are not
spared and should be properly booked.
12. To achieve the avowed purpose, a legal obligation for reporting
of offence under the Pocso Act is cast upon on a person to inform the
relevant authorities specified thereunder when he/she has knowledge
that an offence under the Act had been committed. Such obligation is
also bestowed on person who has apprehension that an offence under
this Act is likely to be committed. Besides casting such a legal
obligation under Section 19, the legislature thought it expedient to
make failure to discharge the obligation thereunder as punishable,
under Section 21 thereof. True that under Section 21(1), failure to
report the commission of an offence under sub-section (1) of Section
19 or Section 20 or failure to report such offence under sub-section (2)
of Section 19 has been made punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.
Sub-section (2) of Section 21 provides that any person who being in-
charge of any company or an institution (by whatever name called) who
fails to report the commission of an offence under sub-section (1) of
Section 19 in respect of a subordinate under his control, shall be
punishable with imprisonment with a term which may extend to one
year or with fine. Certainly, such provisions are included in with a view
to ensure strict compliance of the provisions under the Pocso Act and
thereby to ensure that the tender age of children is not being abused
and their childhood and youth is protected against exploitation.
13. Looking at the penal provisions referred above, making failure to
discharge the obligation under Section 19(1) punishable only with
imprisonment for a short duration viz. six months, one may think that it
is not an offence to be taken seriously. However, according to us that
by itself is not the test of seriousness or otherwise of an offence of
failure to discharge the legal obligation under Section 19, punishable
under Section 21 of the POCSO Act. We are fortified in our view, by the
decisions of a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Vijay Madanlal
Choudhary V. Union of India and a two-Judge Bench in Shankar
Kisanrao Khade V. State of Maharashtra ².
14. In the decision in Shankar Kisanrao Khade case9 a two-Judge
Bench of this Court in paras 77.5 and 77.6 issued certain directions for
"77.
77.5. If hospitals, whether government or privately-owned
or medical institutions where children are being treated come to
know that children admitted are subjected to sexual abuse, the same
will immediately be reported to the nearest Juvenile Justice
Board/SJPU and the Juvenile Justice Board, in consultation with
SJPU, should take appropriate steps in accordance with the law
safeguarding the interest of the child.
77.6. The non-reporting of the crime by anybody, after having
come to know that a minor child below the age of 18 years was
subjected to any sexual assault, is a serious crime and by not
reporting they are screening the offenders from legal punishment
and hence be held liable under the ordinary criminal law and prompt
action be taken against them, in accordance with law."
15. In Vijay Madanlal Choudhary case8, this Court observed that the
length of punishment is not only the indicator of the gravity of offence
and it is to be judged by a totality of factors, especially keeping in mind
the background in which the offence came to be recognised by the
legislature in the specific international context. In this context, it is also
relevant to note that the United Nations Convention on Rights of
Children, which was ratified by India on 11-12-1992, requires the State
parties to undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral
measures to prevent the inducement or coercion of child to engage in
any unlawful sexual activity, the exploitative use of children in
prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices, etc. Articles 3(2) and 34
of the Convention have placed a specific duty on the State to protect
the child from all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse.
16. Prompt and proper reporting of the commission of offence under
the Pocso Act is of utmost importance and we have no hesitation to
state that its failure on coming to know about the commission of any
offence thereunder would defeat the very purpose and object of the Act.
We say so taking into account the various provisions thereunder.
Medical examination of the victim as also the accused would give many
important clues in a case that falls under the Pocso Act. Section 27(1)
of the Pocso Act provides that medical examination of a child in respect
of whom any offence has been committed under the said Act, shall,
notwithstanding that a first information report or complaint has not
been registered for the offence under the Act, be conducted in
accordance with Section 164-A CrPC, which provides the procedures for
medical examination of the victim of rape.
17. In this contextual situation, it is also relevant to refer to Section
53-A CrPC that mandates for examination of a person accused of rape
by a medical practitioner. It is also a fact that clothes of the parties
would also offer very reliable evidence in cases of rape.
18. We refer to the aforesaid provisions only to stress upon the fact
that a prompt reporting of the commission of an offence under the
Pocso Act would enable immediate examination of the victim concerned
and at the same time, if it was committed by an unknown person, it
would also enable the investigating agency to commence investigation
without wasting time and ultimately to secure the arrest and medical
examination of the culprit. There can be no two views that in relation to
sexual offences medical evidence has much corroborative value.
19. Bearing in mind the position with respect to the exercise of
power under Section 482 CrPC, the provisions, penal and procedural,
under the POCSO Act, we will proceed to consider the case on hand.
20. The FIR registered in the case on hand would reveal that it came
to be registered on coming to know about the suspected commission of
sexual offence against minor tribal girl(s) against unidentified person
(s). Failure to report regarding the commission of the offence under the
Pocso Act despite knowledge about the same is the accusation against
the respondent revealed from the charge-sheet. The FIR reveals the
ingredients of an offence under the Pocso Act and the real magnitude
of the same was revealed during the investigation, as stated above. On
completion of the investigation, based on the materials collected, the
Officer-in-Charge of the police station concerned formed an opinion that
a cognizable offence as mentioned therein, appears to have been
committed and that the persons named therein, including the
respondent herein, appear to have committed the offences specified
against them and filed final report under Section 173(2) for prosecuting
them. It is the stated FIR dated 12-4-2019 and the stated charge-
sheet dated 8-6-2019 which were sought to be quashed and
consequently quashed as per the impugned judgment².
21. If FIR and the materials collected disclose a cognizable offence
and the final report filed under Section 173(2) CrPC on completion of
investigation based on it would reveal that the ingredients to constitute
an offence under the POCSO Act and a prima facie case against the
persons named therein as accused, the truthfulness, sufficiency or
admissibility of the evidence are not matters falling within the purview
of exercise of power under Section 482 CrPC and undoubtedly they are
matters to be done by the trial court at the time of trial. This position is
evident from the decisions referred supra.
22. In the decision in M.L. Bhatt V. M.K. Pandita¹0, this Court held
that while considering the question of quashing of FIR the High Court
would not
be entitled to appreciate by way of sifting the materials collected in
course of investigation including the statements recorded under Section
161 CrPC.
23. In the decision in Rajeev Kourav V. Baisahab11 11 a two-Judge
Bench of this Court dealt with question as to the matters that could be
considered by the High Court in quashment proceedings under Section
482 CrPC. It was held therein that statements of witnesses recorded
under Section 161 CrPC being wholly inadmissible in evidence could not
be taken into consideration by the Court while adjudicating a petition
filed under Section 482 CrPC. In that case, this Court took note of the
fact that the High Court was aware that one of the witnesses mentioned
that the deceased victim had informed him about the harassment by
the accused, which she was not able to bear and hence wanted to
commit suicide. Finding that the conclusion of the High Court to quash
the criminal proceedings in that case was on the basis of its
assessment of the statements recorded under Section 161 CrPC, it was
held that statements thereunder, being wholly inadmissible in evidence
could not have been taken into consideration by the Court while
adjudicating a petition filed under Section 482 CrPC. It was also held
that the High Court committed an error in quashing the proceedings by
assessing the statements recorded under Section 161 CrPC.
24. There can be no dispute with respect to the position that
statements recorded under Section 161 CrPC are inadmissible in
evidence and its use is limited for the purposes as provided under
Sections 145 and 157 of the Evidence Act, 1872. As a matter of fact,
statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC can also be used only for
such purposes.
Bom para 11 of the impugned judgment 2 would undoubtedly reveal the
fact that the High Court had formed an opinion on perusal of the
statement of a teacher of the victims and also the statements of the
victims that sexual assault was detected only from General Hospital,
Chandrapur and then arrived at the conclusion that the respondent was
not made aware of sexual assault committed on the victims and there
is no evidence to implicate him in the said crime.
26. Para 11 of the impugned judgment reads thus : (Maroti case²,
"11. In the above backdrop, we have gone through the
statements of victims which have been referred by the prosecution.
The statements show that the applicant had examined the victims.
Their condition was deteriorating. Therefore, they were sent to
General Hospital, Chandrapur. There is no material on record to show
that the applicant was made aware about the sexual assault
committed on the victims. On the contrary, from the statement of
the teacher of victims it appears that the sexual assault was
detected only in General Hospital, Chandrapur. Therefore, we are of
the view that there is no evidence to implicate the applicant in the said
crime. Therefore, the continuation of proceedings against the applicant
would amount to abuse of process of Court."
OnLine Bom para 11 of the impugned judgment would reveal that the
High Court had gone through the statements of victims/witnesses cited
by the prosecution, to arrive at the conclusion as to the existence or
otherwise of evidence against the respondent. In view of the provisions
referred above and also plethora of decisions including the decisions in
M.L. Bhatt case10 and in Rajeev Kourav case¹¹, statements recorded
under Section 161 CrPC are inadmissible in evidence and, therefore,
could not have been made the basis for arriving at such conclusions.
28. As noted above, the FIR carries suspicion of commission of
sexual assault and the charge-sheet reveals prima facie against the
respondent in relation to non-reporting of such an offence under the
Pocso Act. The very case of the appellant is that some among the
seventeen victims have given statements under Section 161 CrPC and
some others under Section 164 CrPC, specifically stating that the
respondent was informed of the sexual assault on them.
29. When that be the position, we have no doubt that the High Court
should not have embarked upon an enquiry, especially by looking into
the statements of the victims recorded as also their teacher to form an
opinion regarding the availability of evidence to connect the respondent
with the crime.
30. True that the FIR and the charge-sheet still remain in fact in
respect of the other accused. But then, non-reporting of sexual assault
against a minor child despite knowledge is a serious crime and more
often than not, it is an attempt to shield the offenders of the crime of
sexual assault. Be that as it may in view of the decision in Shankar
Kisanrao Khade case holding non-reporting of such a crime as serious
and in view of the position obtained from a conjoint reading of Sections
19(1) and 21 of the POCSO Act, such persons are also liable to be
proceeded with, in accordance with law. In this context, it is also
relevant to refer to an observation made by this Court in the said case
that this Court under parens patriae jurisdiction has a duty to give
directions for compliance of the provisions under the Pocso Act.
31. The learned counsel for the respondent attempted to support
and get sustained the impugned judgment 2 contending that it was
rendered relying on the decision of this Court in A.S. Krishnan V. State
of Kerala¹2 and that going by the said decision, the respondent could
not have been accused of having
failed to report the commission of the offence of sexual assault under
the Pocso Act despite possessing knowledge about its commission.
Upon going through the judgment, we have no hesitation to hold that
the said decision is totally inapplicable in the facts and circumstances
of this case, for more than one reason.
32. Firstly, a bare perusal of A.S. Krishnan case¹2 would reveal that
the question of knowledge was considered by this Court not at the
stage of looking into the correctness or otherwise of a finding on
knowledge and the consequential quashment of proceedings under
Section 482 CrPC. As a matter of fact, it was so considered in an appeal
against conviction of the appellants therein under Sections 471, 420
read with Section 34 IPC.
33. This Court was considering the expression "knows or has reason
to believe" occurring under Section 471 IPC and while explaining the
meanings of the words "knowledge" and "reason to believe" this Court
"9. Under IPC, guilt in respect of almost all the offences is
fastened either on the ground of "intention" or "knowledge" or
"reason to believe". We are now concerned with the expressions
"knowledge" and "reason to believe". "Knowledge" is an awareness
on the part of the person concerned indicating his state of mind.
"Reason to believe" is another facet of the state of mind. "Reason to
believe" is not the same thing as "suspicion" or "doubt" and mere
seeing also cannot be equated to believing. "Reason to believe" is a
higher level of state of mind. Likewise "knowledge" will be slightly on
a higher plane than "reason to believe". A person can be supposed to
know where there is a direct appeal to his senses and a person is
presumed to have a reason to believe if he has sufficient cause to
believe the same. Section 26 IPC explains the meaning of the words
"reason to believe" thus:
'26. "Reason to believe".-A person is said to have "reason to
believe" a thing, if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing
but not otherwise.' "
(emphasis supplied)
34. In the contextual situation, it is also worthy to refer the following
583)
"8.
Whether the accused knew or had reason to believe the
document in question to be forged has to be adjudicated on the
basis of materials and the finding recorded in that regard is
essentially factual."
35. In the case on hand, the High Court arrived at the finding of
absence of evidence to implicate the respondent in the crime in
question upon going through the statements of the victims and also the
statement of the teacher of the victims, which recourse is absolutely
impermissible.
36. There is yet another reason to decline the aforesaid contention of
the respondent. We would not have even perused Annexures A-1 to A-
8, which
are statements of some of the victims recorded under Sections 161/164
CrPC, recorded much prior to the impugned judgment dated 20-4-
20212 viz. in the year 2019 itself. We do so solely to verify the verity of
the finding of the High Court to the effect that such statements do not
disclose anything suggesting knowledge of the respondent about the
commission of the crime. In troth, those statements did mention about
divulgation of sexual assault on them by victims to the respondent. We
may hasten to add, at the risk of repetition, that such statements
recorded under Sections 161/164 CrPC are inadmissible in evidence, as
held in M.L. Bhatt case10 and in Rajeev Kourav case¹¹. In the light of
the circumstances available as above and in the light of Section 59 of
the Evidence Act, the High Court was not justified in bringing abrupt
termination of the proceedings qua the respondent. The position
revealed from the discussion above constrains us to hold that there is
prima facie case against the respondent for the offence referred above
and hence, the appeal is liable to succeed.
37. In the light of the decisions and the provisions referred above,
the
impugned
judgment resulting in quashment of the stated FIR and
the charge-sheet throttling the prosecution at the threshold, without
allowing the materials in support of it to see the light of the day, cannot
be said to be as an exercise done to secure interests of justice whereas
it can only be stated that such exercise resulted in miscarriage of
justice.
38. In the result, the impugned judgment 2 of the High Court
is
set
aside and the appeal is, accordingly allowed. Pending applications, if
any, are disposed of.
+
Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 718 of 2022. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
Order in Maroti V. State of Maharashtra (Bombay High Court, Criminal Application No. 841 of
2019, dt. 20-4-2021) [Reversed]
1
(Cri) 826
2
3
R.P. Kapur V. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866
4
5
6
7
9
402
10
SC 89
12