In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE M.R. SHAH AND B.V. NAGARATHNA, JJ.)
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LIMITED
Appellant;
Versus
NCC LIMITED
Respondent.
Civil Appeals No. 341 of 2022 with Nos. 342 of 2022 , 344 of
2022+ 343 of 2022+ and 345 of 2022 #t decided on July 20,
2022
A. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Ss. 11, 8 and 16
-
Arbitrability - Accord and Satisfaction - Plea of claims being barred by
accord and satisfaction i.e. being an excepted claim under the contract in the
present case - Adjudication of, by Arbitral Tribunal, as opposed to by Court
exercising jurisdiction under S. 11, in cases of debatable and disputable
facts and existence of good reasonably arguable case
- Though the aspect with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the
claims may/can be considered by the Court at the stage of deciding S. 11
application, held, it is always advisable and appropriate that in cases of
debatable and disputable facts, good reasonably arguable case, the same
should be left to the Arbitral Tribunal
- It was inter alia the case on behalf of the petitioner that, there being
"accord and satisfaction" for the claim, being an "excepted claim", it was
not open for the respondent to invoke the arbitration agreement and
request for appointment of an arbitrator - Held, the issue/aspect with
regard to "accord and satisfaction" of claims was seriously disputed and
was debatable - Further, whether, in view of the acceptance of Rs
4,53,04,021 by the respondent NCCL which was released by IOCL on the
offer/letter made by the respondent NCCL dt. 2-11-2016 there was an
instance of "accord and satisfaction" of the claims was a good and
reasonably arguable case and it could not be said to be an open and shut
case - Though specifically observing and holding that aspects with regard to
"accord and satisfaction" of the claims can be considered by the Court at
the stage of deciding S. 11(6) application, in the facts and circumstances of
the case, held, High Court did not commit any
error in observing that aspects with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the
claims or where there is a serious dispute will have to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal
(Paras 90 to 93)
B. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Ss. 11, 8, 7 and 16 -
Arbitrability - Excepted or excluded disputes - Non-arbitrability of -
Contractual terms regarding adjudication on excepted disputes, as in the
present case decision of the General Manager on non-notified excluded
claims - Bindingness of - Parties to the contract, held, may agree to the
exclusion of matters from the purview of arbitration - Further, unless the
effect of such agreement results in performance of an unlawful act, an
agreement, which is otherwise legal, cannot be held to be void and is binding
between the parties
- The contract in the present case provided that - (i) Only the notified claims
of the contractor included in the final bill of the contractor in accordance with the
provisions of CI. 6.6.3.0 shall have to be referred to arbitration - (ii) Whether or
not a claim sought to be referred to arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim
or not, the arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction at all - (iii)
Whether or not a claim is a notified claim or not shall have to be decided by the
General Manager and that too, prior to arbitration proceeding with or proceeding
further with the reference
- Thus, held, once the General Manager, on the basis of the material on record
takes a conscious decision that a particular claim sought to be referred to
arbitration is not a notified claim, such a claim thereafter cannot be referred to
arbitration - In the present case, held, the High Court misread and misinterpreted
Cls. 9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0 and seriously erred in holding that where there is
contestation or the decision rendered by the General Manager leaves scope for
argument as to whether the claims alleged by the contractor can be categorised as
notified claim, it is best left to the Arbitral Tribunal - Held, the dispute whether the
claim is a notified claim or not is specifically excluded from the scope, purview and
ambit of the arbitration agreement - Therefore, once such a dispute falls within the
"excepted matters", any decision by the General Manager on the issue of notified
claims cannot be the subject-matter of arbitration proceeding
(Paras 94 to 99)
Appellant, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. ("IOCL") floated a tender. The respondent
herein NCC Ltd. ("NCCL") was declared the successful bidder. After issuance of the
letter of acceptance dated 17-3-2010, a formal agreement was executed between
the parties dated 28-4-2010.
According to NCCL, NCCL in its final bill dated 5-8-2016 made a specific
reference to the notified claims. There were correspondences between the Engineer
-In-Charge and Thyssenkrupp Industrial Solutions India (P) Ltd. ("TKIS") pending
settlement of the final bill and the request for extension of time ("EOT"). NCCL
responded to the communication dated 1-11-2016 by the TKIS, vide its response
dated 2-11-2016. NCCL conveyed to TKIS that if its request for EOT were
considered favourably and if price adjustment does not exceed 4%, then,
all its extra/additional claims including notified claims submitted by it through various
communications and the final bill should be treated as withdrawn.
The TKIS having received the aforesaid communication from NCCL, made its
recommendations vis-à-vis the request for EOT made by NCCL. It appears that
thereafter, TKIS in its communication dated 13-1-2017, informed NCCL that it had
approved EOT for the period between 3-10-2011 to 3-11-2015, however, without
price discount as per Clause 4.4.0.0 of the General Conditions of Contract ("GCC")
and that for the period falling between 4-11-2015 to 28-12-2015 which covered
the period of 55 days, it had concluded that the delay was attributable to NCCL.
Accordingly, TKIS conveyed to NCCL that for the later period, as per Clause 4.4.2.0
of GCC, a price adjustment discount of 4% would be applicable.
Subsequently and after a period of 6 1/2 months (after the settlement of the
claim) and after receiving the final bill payment 8 days earlier, on 8-5-2017, vide
communication dated 16-5-2017, NCCL reneged on the letter of 2-11-2016 and
alleged that it was made to withdraw its claim under coercion and it had withdrawn
its notified claims as TKIS vide its communication dated 1-11-2016, had indicated
that the review of the final bill and request for EOT would be considered only if it
gave up its insistence on its notified claims being considered.
NCCL approached the High Court by way of Arbitration Petitions Nos. 115, 356,
116, 407 and 406 of 2018. By the impugned judgment and orders, the High Court
allowed all the respective applications under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 ("the Arbitration Act") and by different impugned judgment
and orders, appointed the sole arbitrator.
The issue involved in these appeals was whether impugned judgment and order
passed by High Court in exercise of powers under Section (6) of the Arbitration
Act, liable to be set aside?
i.e. (i) Whether the claims were not arbitrable having been settled?
(ii) Whether the claims are rendered non-arbitrable when the General
Manager finds that the claims are not notified claims?
Held :
It cannot be disputed that both the parties are governed by GCC. GCC are the
part of the agreements/contracts between the parties. Under GCC, the parties
have agreed to resolve the dispute between them only in terms of the relevant
clauses of GCC. The parties have agreed that certain specified disputes alone will be
the subject of arbitration.
(Para 63)
An arbitration clause is required to be strictly construed. Any expression in the
clause must unequivocally express the intent of arbitration. It can also lay the
postulate in which situations the arbitration clause cannot be given effect to. If a
clause stipulates that under certain circumstances there can be no arbitration and
they are demonstrably clear then the controversy pertaining to appointment of
arbitrator has to be put to rest.
(Para 64)
The contract is to be interpreted giving the actual meaning to the words
contained in the contract and it is not permissible for the Court to make a new
contract, however reasonable, if the parties have not made it themselves.
(Para 67)
Once the parties have decided that certain matters are to be decided by the
Superintending Engineer and his decision would be final, the same cannot be the
subject-matter of arbitration.
(Para 68)
The jurisdiction of the Court under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act is primarily
to find out whether there existed a written agreement between the parties for
resolution of the dispute and whether the aggrieved party has made out a prima
facie arguable case, limited jurisdiction, however, does not denude the Court of its
judicial function to look beyond the bare existence of an arbitration clause to cut
the deadwood. With a view to prevent wastage of public and private resources, the
Court may conduct "prima facie review" at the stage of reference to weed out any
frivolous or vexatious claims.
(Para 73)
The surest way t to legal research!"
Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. V. Coastal Marine Constructions & Engg. Ltd., (2019) 9
651; Keir V. Leeman, (1846) 9 QB 371 : 115 ER 1315; Soilleux V. Herbst,
(1801) 2 Bos & P 444 : 126 ER 1376; Wilson V. Wilson, (1848) 1 HL Cas 538;
Cahill V. Cahill, (1883) LR 8 AC 420 (HL), cited
It is the case on behalf of the petitioner IOCL that IOCL had settled the claim of
respondent NCCL accepting NCCL's offer to grant extension of time; not to give
price adjustment of over 4% of the total contract value and consequently IOCL
condoned the delay of 1493 days and granted extension of time without applying
any price discount. Further for the delay of 65 days, IOCL applied the price discount
of Rs 6,44,40,021 i.e. 4% of the total value of contract and thereafter IOCL
released the payment of Rs 4,53,04,021 against NCCL's final bill (adjusting price
discount of Rs 6.4 crores as against Rs 14.8 crores) and also returned NCCL's bank
guarantee which came to be fully accepted by the respondent NCCL. It is the case
of IOCL that thereafter, it was not open for the respondent to raise any further
claim. Therefore, it is the case on behalf of the petitioner that, there being "accord
and satisfaction" for the claim, being an "excepted claim", it was not open
for the respondent to invoke the arbitration agreement and request for
appointment of an arbitrator. It is also the case on behalf of the petitioner IOCL that
in view of the specific decisions by the General Manager, on "notified claims", in
view of Clause 9.0.2.0, for the same claims which are not held to be "notified
claims" by the General Manager, the matter cannot be referred to the arbitrator in
view of the clause pertaining to excluded matters.
(Para 87)
On the other hand, it is the case on behalf of the respondent that acceptance of
the amount of Rs 4,53,04,021 was under duress and coercion. It is also the case
on behalf of the respondent that earlier offer dated 2-11-2016 was a conditional
one and was in the nature of an offer and subsequently when the offer was partially
allowed, the respondent without any delay communicated that the decision to
partially allow its application for EOT is unacceptable as the same is not in
accordance with the conditional offer given by the respondent.
(Para 88)
Now, so far as the General Manager's decision on notified claims is concerned, it
is the case on behalf of the respondent that even the decision of the General
Manager on the notified claims will always be subject to the decision of the Arbitral
Tribunal.
(Para 89)
On accord and satisfaction
The issue/aspect with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of claims is seriously
disputed and is debatable. Whether, in view of the acceptance of Rs 4,53,04,021 by
the respondent NCCL which was released by IOCL on the offer/letter made by the
respondent NCCL dated 2-11-2016 there is an instance of "accord and satisfaction"
of the claims is a good and reasonably arguable case. It cannot be said to be an
open and shut case. Therefore, even when it is observed and held that such an
aspect with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the claims may/can be
considered by the Court at the stage of deciding Section 11 application, it is always
advisable and appropriate that in cases of debatable and disputable facts, good
reasonably arguable case, the same should be left to the Arbitral Tribunal.
(Para 90)
relied on
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, though it is specifically
observed and held that aspects with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the
claims can be considered by the Court at the stage of deciding Section 11(6)
application, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has not
committed any error in observing that aspects with regard to "accord and
satisfaction" of the claims or where there is a serious dispute will have to be left to
the Arbitral Tribunal.
(Para 91)
Though the Arbitral Tribunal may have jurisdiction and authority to decide the
disputes including the question of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability, the same can
also be considered by the Court at the stage of deciding Section 11 application if
the facts are very clear and glaring and in view of the specific clauses in the
agreement binding between the parties, whether the dispute is non-arbitrable
and/or it falls within the excepted clause. Even at the stage of deciding Section 11
application, the Court may prima facie consider even the aspect with regard to
"accord and satisfaction" of the claims.
(Para 93)
On notified claims
On a fair reading of Clause 9.0.0.0, only the dispute arising out of a notified
claim of the contractor included in the final bill in accordance with the provisions of
Clause 6.6.3.0 shall be referred to arbitration, that too, subject to Clause 9.0.2.0
and any dispute/matter falling within Clause 9.0.2.0 shall have to be first decided by
the General Manager, including, whether or not a claim sought to be referred to
arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim. Therefore, if the claim is not a
notified claim, as per Clause 6.6.1.0 and the same is not included in the final bill,
such a claim is outside the purview of the arbitration agreement. Whether or not a
claim sought for arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim or any such
matter/dispute is specifically excluded from the scope, purview and ambit of
arbitration agreement, such matter/dispute shall have to be first decided by the
General Manager prior to the arbitral proceeding with or proceeding further with the
reference. Thus, unless there is a decision by the General Manager on whether or
not a claim sought to be referred to arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim
or not, the arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction to entertain such
a dispute.
(Para 85)
In Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022
Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the respective parties on the decision
of the General Manager on notified claims in Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022 arising
out of SLP (C) No. 13161 of 2019 is concerned, the General Manager has
decided/declared that the claims are not arbitrable since they had been settled and
the arbitration agreement has been discharged under Clause 6.7.2.0 of GCC and no
longer existed/subsisted. The claims had been settled or not is a debatable and
disputable question, which is to be left to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.
Therefore, matters related to the notified claims in the facts and circumstances of
the case also shall have to be left to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal as in the fact
situation the aspect of "accord and satisfaction" and "notified claims" both are
interconnected and interlinked.
(Para 94)
In Civil Appeal No. 342 of 2022
Now, so far as Civil Appeal No. 342 of 2022 arising out of SLP (C) No. 13816 of
2019 is concerned, the General Manager in exercise of powers under Clause
9.0.2.0 had declared that none of the claims of the respondent is a notified claim.
From the communication dated 22-6-2018, it appears that the General Manager,
after elaborately dealing with all the alleged notified claims of the respondent has
thereafter found that none of the claims made by the respondent is a notified claim.
On a conjoint reading of the relevant clauses of GCC viz. Clauses 9.0.1.0 and
9.0.2.0, the dispute arising out of notified claims only, which is included in the final
bill of the contractor can be referred to arbitration. However, as per Clause 9.0.2.0,
any dispute or difference on whether or not a claim sought to be referred to
arbitration bv the contractor is a notified claim falls within the excluded matters and
the arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction and/or authority with
respect thereto. The dispute or difference whether or not a claim sought to be
referred to arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim shall not and cannot form
the subject-matter of any reference or submission to arbitration.
(Para 95)
Therefore, on a fair and conjoint reading of Clauses 9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0, it can
safely be concluded that:
(i) only the notified claims of the contractor included in the final bill of the
contractor in accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 shall have to be
referred to arbitration;
(ii) whether or not a claim sought to be referred to arbitration by the
contractor is a notified claim or not, the arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal shall have
no jurisdiction at all;
(iii) whether or not a claim is a notified claim or not shall have to be decided
by the General Manager and that too, prior to arbitration proceeding with or
proceeding further with the reference.
Therefore, once the General Manager, on the basis of the material on record takes
a conscious decision that a particular claim sought to be referred to arbitration is
not a notified claim, such a claim thereafter cannot be referred to arbitration. The
language used in Clauses 9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0 is very clear and unambiguous.
(para 96)
Parties to the contract are free to agree on applicability of:
(1) proper law of contract,
(2) proper law of arbitration agreement and
(3) proper law of the conduct of arbitration.
Parties to the contract also may agree for matters excluded from the purview of
arbitration. As observed by this Court in a catena of decisions, unless the effect of
agreement results in performance of an unlawful act, an agreement, which is
otherwise legal, cannot be held to be void and is binding between the parties.
(para 97)
:
The dispute whether the claim is a notified claim or not is specifically excluded
from the scope, purview and ambit of the arbitration agreement. Therefore, once
such a dispute falls within the "excepted matters", any decision by the General
Manager on the issue of notified claims cannot be the subject-matter of arbitration
proceeding.
(Para 99)
Civil Appeals Nos. 342 of 2022, 343 of 2022 and 345 of 2022
The High Court has erred in referring the dispute to arbitration and appointing a
sole arbitrator to adjudicate on the dispute with respect to the claims which as such
are held to be not notified claims by the General Manager. Therefore, Civil Appeal
No. 342 of 2022 arising out of SLP (C) No. 13408 of 2019 as well as Civil Appeals
Nos. 343 of 2022 and 345 of 2022 arising out of SLPs (C) Nos. 13813 of 2019
and 13816 of 2019 respectively deserve to be allowed and the impugned judgment
and orders passed by the High Court in respective arbitration petitions deserve to
be quashed and set aside.
(Para 100)
Civil Appeal No. 344 of 2022
So far as Civil Appeal No. 344 of 2022 arising out of SLP (C) No. 13815 of 2019
arising out of the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC,
declared that only one claim of the respondent was/is a notified claim, the said
appeal is to be allowed partly by observing that the claim which is declared by the
General Manager as a notified claim only shall have to be referred to arbitration and
the learned arbitrator shall have no jurisdiction to adjudicate the disputes with
respect to other claims which as such are not declared as notified claims by the
General Manager.
(Para 101)
In Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022
The learned arbitrator shall first decide the aspect with regard to "accord and
satisfaction" of the claims and arbitrability of the disputes with regard to such claims
by deciding an application under Section 16 of the Arbitration Act, which is reported
to be pending. The learned arbitrator shall first decide the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal and the arbitrability of the claims within a period of three months from the
date of first sitting which shall be within a period of one month from today. All the
contentions and/or defences which may be available to the respective parties are
kept open to be considered by the learned arbitrator in accordance with law and on
its own merits and considering the relevant clauses of the contract and the material
on record.
(Para 102.1)
OnLine Del 9562; IOT Infrastructure & Energy Service Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn.
785; Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Ltd. V. Northern Coal Field Ltd.,
Swiss Timing Ltd. V. Commonwealth Games 2010 Organising Committee, (2014)
:
:
VN-D/69200/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General and Ranjith Kumar, Senior
Advocate [V.N. Koura, Ms Paramjeet Benipal, Shirish Kumar, Avneesh
Arputham and Praveen Kr. Singh (for M/s Arputham Aruna & Co.)
(Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the Appellant;
K. Parameshwar (Advocate-on-Record), Amit George, Ms A.
Sregurupriya and Prasad Hegde, Advocates, for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
DLF Home Developers Ltd. V. Rajapura Homes
(P) Ltd.
572g
Hospitality (P) Ltd. V. Oravel Stays (P) Ltd.
566c-d
Prakash V. Seema Kukreja
565c
V. Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd.
565c, 573b-c, 573c
Electricals (P) Ltd. V. Galaxy Infra & Engg. (P)
Ltd.
565c
Drolia V. Durga Trading Corpn.
b, 565c-d, 565d-e, 569f
-g, 570a, 570d-e, 572a,
573a, 573b, 573b-c,
573c, 573c-d, 578d-e
Guha Builders (India) Co. V. ONGC Ltd.
559b, 568g
Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Ltd. V.
Northern Coal Field Ltd.
565b-c
Pipeline Bureau India (P) Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn.
Ltd.
559e-f
Pipeline Bureau V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
559c, 559e
Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. V. Coastal Marine
Constructions & Engg. Ltd.
557g-h, 558a-b, 571d
Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd. V. Pradyuat Deb Burman
564g, 565a, 573c-d
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Antique Art
Exports (P) Ltd.
564f
Oil Corpn. Ltd.
581b-c, 581c-d, 582c,
582c-d
Oil Corpn. Ltd. (reversed)
581b-c, 582b, 582b-c
Oil Corpn. Ltd. (reversed)
581b-c, 582a
Oil Corpn. Ltd. (reversed)
581b-c, 582b, 582b-c
Oil Corpn. Ltd.
d, 567c-d, 577d-e,
581b-c, 581e
Refinery V. Buildworth (P) Ltd.
559d-e
V. NCC Ltd.
567b
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Hyundai Engg.
& Construction Co. Ltd.
557f, 571d
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Narbheram Power &
Steel (P) Ltd.
558a, 567e-f, 571d-e
Felguera, S.A. V. Gangavaram Port Ltd.
564d-e, 573c-d
Centrotrade Minerals & Metal Inc. V. Hindustan
Copper Ltd.
556f-g, 568a
Ltd. V. Indian Oil Foundation
559c-d, 559e
Ltd. V. Indian Oil Foundation
559d, 559e-f
& Energy Service Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
559d-e
Geoinformatics (P) Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
559d
Harsha Constructions V. Union of India
559b, 569a-b
Swiss Timing Ltd. V. Commonwealth Games 2010
Organising Committee
565d-e
Rajasthan State Industrial Development &
Investment Corpn. V. Diamond & Gem
Development Corpn. Ltd.
568d-e
Allen & Hamilton Inc. V. SBI Home Finance Ltd.
570a
Kalathia & Co. V. State of Gujarat
566a-b
Universal Ltd. V. Town & Country Planning Deptt.,
Haryana
568c-d
BSNL V. Motorola India (P) Ltd.
566c-d
National Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Boghara Polyfab
(P) Ltd.
566c-d
Union of India
566a-b
572a-b, 573d
Finance Ltd.
567a
Ltd. V. Meena Vijay Khetan
571a-b
Sreekanth Transport
559a-b, 580c
42. (1883) LR 8 AC 420 (HL), Cahill V. Cahill
571c-d
43. (1848) 1 HL Cas 538, Wilson V. Wilson
571c-d
44. (1846) 9 QB 371 : 115 ER 1315, Keir V. Leeman
571c
45. (1801) 2 Bos & P 444 : 126 ER 1376, Soilleux V.
Herbst
571c-d
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
M.R. SHAH, J. As common questions of law and facts arise in this
group of appeals and as such between the same parties and with
respect to similar contracts/agreements, all these appeals are decided
and disposed of together by this common judgment and order.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment
and orders1 2, 3, 4, 5
passed by the High Court of Delhi, New Delhi in
respect of arbitration petitions by which, in exercise of powers under
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter
referred to as "the Arbitration Act"), the High Court has allowed the
said petitions and has appointed the learned arbitrator by referring the
dispute between the parties for arbitration, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
has preferred the present appeals.
3. For the sake of convenience, Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022 arising
out of Special Leave Petition No. 13161 of 2019 arising out of the order
passed by the High Court in Arbitration Petition No. 115 of 2018 is
treated as the lead matter.
4. The facts leading to the present appeal in a nutshell are as
under : That, the appellant, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter
referred to as "IOCL") floated a tender in respect of the works described
as "Civil, Structural & Associated UG piping works of VGOHDT, DHDT &
HCDS Units (EPCM-2) for Paradip Refinery Project". The respondent
herein NCC Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "NCCL") was declared the
successful bidder. After issuance of the letter of acceptance dated 17-3-
2010, a formal agreement was executed between the parties dated 28-
4-2010.
5. The relevant clauses of the agreement which may have a bearing
on the issues involved in the present appeals are as under:
"1.21.0.0
"Notified claim" shall mean a claim of the contractor
notified in accordance with the provisions of Clause
6.6.1.0 hereof.
*
*
*
CLAIMS BY THE CONTRACTOR
6.6.1.0
Should the contractor consider that he is entitled to any
extra payment or compensation in respect of the works
over and above the amounts due in terms of the
contract as specified in Clause 6.3.1.0 hereof or should
the contractor dispute the validity of any deductions
made or threatened by the owner from any running
account bills, the contractor shall forthwith give notice
in writing of his claim in this behalf to the Engineer-in-
Charge and the Site Engineer within 10 (ten) days from
the date of the issue of orders or instructions relative to
any works for
which the contractor claims such additional payment or
compensation or of the happening of other event upon
which the contractor bases such claim, and such notice
shall give full particulars of the nature of such claim,
grounds on which it is based, and the amount claimed.
The owner shall not anywise be liable in respect of any
claim by the contractor unless notice of such claim shall
have been given by the contractor to the Engineer-in-
Charge and the Site Engineer in the manner and within
the time aforesaid and the contractor shall be deemed
to have waived any and all claims and all his rights in
respect of any claim not notified to the Engineer-in-
Charge and the Site Engineer in writing in the manner
and within the time aforesaid.
6.6.2.0
The Engineer-in-Charge and/or the Site Engineer shall
be under no obligation to reply to any notice of claim
given or claim made by the contractor within the
provisions aforesaid or otherwise or to reject the same
and no omission or failure on the part of the Engineer-
in-Charge or Site Engineer to reject any claim made or
notified by the contractor or delay in dealing therewith
shall be deemed to be an admission by the owner of
the validity of such claim or waiver by the owner of any
of its rights in respect thereof, with the intent that all
such claims otherwise valid within the provisions of
Clause 6.6.1.0 read with Clauses 6.6.3.0 and 6.6.3.1
shall be dealt with/considered by the owner at the time
of submission of the final bill.
6.6.3.0
Any claims of the contractor notified in accordance with
the provision of Clause 6.6.1.0 hereof as shall remain at
the time of preparation of final bill by the contractor
shall be separately included in the final bill prepared by
the contractor in the form of a statement of claims
attached thereto, giving particulars of the nature of the
claim, grounds on which it is based, and the amount
claimed and shall be supported by a copy(ies) of the
notice(s) sent in respect thereof by the contractor to
the Engineer-in-Charge and Site Engineer under Clause
6.6.1.0 hereof. Insofar as such claim shall in any
manner or particular be at variance with the claim
notified by the contractor within the provision of Clause
6.6.1.0 hereof, it shall be deemed to be a claim
different from the notified claim with consequence in
respect thereof indicated in Clause 6.6.1.0 hereof, and
with consequences in respect of the notified claim as
indicated in Clause 6.6.3.1 hereof.
6.6.3.1
The owner shall not anywise be liable in respect of any
notified claim not specifically reflected in the final bill in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof
and any and all notified claims not specifically reflected
and included in the final bill in accordance with the
provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof shall be deemed to
have been waived by the contractor. Further the owner
shall have no liability in respect thereof and the
contractor shall not be entitled to raise or include in the
final bill any claim(s) other than a notified claim
conforming in all respects and in accordance with the
provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof.
6.6.4.0
No claim(s) shall on any account be made by the
contractor after the final bill, with the intent the final
bill prepared by the contractor shall reflect any and all
notified claims whatsoever of the contractor against the
owner arising out of or in connection with the contract
or work performed by the contractor thereunder or in
relation thereto, and the contractor shall
notwithstanding any enabling provision under any law
or contract and notwithstanding any right of claim in
quantum meruit that the contractor could have in
respect thereof, be deemed to have waived any and all
such claims not included in the final bill and to have
absolved and discharged the owner from and against
the same, even if in not including the same as
aforesaid, the contractor shall have acted under a
mistake of law or fact.
6.6.5.0
Notwithstanding the existence of any claim by the
contractor in terms hereof or otherwise, the contractor
shall continue and be bound to continue and perform
the works to completion in all respects according to the
contract (unless the contract or works be priorly
determined by the owner in terms hereof) and shall
remain liable and bound in all respects under the
contract.
6.6.6.0
The payment of any sum on account to the contractor
during the performance of any work or item of work in
respect of which a claim has been notified by the
contractor in terms of Clause 6.6.1.0 hereof or the
making or negotiation of any interim arrangements in
respect of the performance of such work or item of work
by the owner, shall not be deemed to be an acceptance
of the related claim by the owner, or any part or portion
thereof with the intent that any such payment shall
constitute merely an interim facility or interim
assistance to the contractor, and not an obligation upon
the owner.
6.7.0.0
DISCHARGE OF OWNER'S LIABILITY
6.7.1.0
The acceptance by the contractor of any amount paid
by the owner to the contractor in respect of the final
dues of
the contractor under the final bill upon condition that
the said payment is being made in full and final
settlement of all said dues to the contractor shall,
without prejudice to the notified claims of the
contractor included in the final bill in accordance with
the provisions under Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof and
associated provisions thereunder, be deemed to be in
full and final satisfaction of all such dues to the
contractor notwithstanding any qualifying remarks,
protest or condition imposed or purported to be
imposed by the contractor relative to the acceptance of
such payment, with the intent that upon acceptance by
the contractor of any payment made as aforesaid, the
contract (including the arbitration clause) shall, subject
to the provisions of Clause 6.8.2.0 hereof, stand
discharged and extinguished except in respect of the
notified claims of the contractor included in the final bill
and except in respect of the contractor's entitlement to
receive the unadjusted portion of the security deposit in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.8.3.0 hereof
on successful completion of the defect liability period.
6.7.2.0
The acceptance by the contractor of any amount paid
by the owner to the contractor in respect of the notified
claims of the contractor included in the final bill in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof
and associated provisions thereunder, upon the
condition that such payment is being made in full and
final settlement of all the claims of the contractor shall,
subject to the provisions of Clause 6.7.3.0 hereof, be
deemed to be in full and final satisfaction of all claims
of the contractor notwithstanding any qualifying
remarks, protest or condition imposed or purported to
be imposed by the contractor relative to the acceptance
of such payment with the intent that upon acceptance
by the contractor of any payment made as aforesaid,
the contract (including the arbitration clause) shall
stand discharged and extinguished insofar as relates to
and/or concerns the claims of the contractor.
6.7.3.0
Notwithstanding anything provided in Clause 6.7.1.0
and/or Clause 6.7.2.0 hereof the contractor shall be and
remain liable for defects in terms of Clause 5.6.0.0
hereof and for the indemnity to the owner in terms of
Clause 6.8.2.0, and shall be and remain entitled to
receive the unadjusted balance of the Security Deposit
remaining in the hands of the owner in terms of Clause
6.8.3.0 hereof.
*
*
*
9.0.0.0
ARBITRATION
9.0.1.0
Subject to the provisions of Clauses 6.7.1.0, 6.7.2.0
and 9.0.2.0 hereof, any dispute arising out of a notified
claim of the contractor included in the final bill of the
contractor in accordance with the provisions of Clause
6.6.3.0 hereof, if the contractor has not opted for the
Alternative Dispute Resolution Machinery referred to in
Clause 9.1.1.0 hereof, and any dispute arising out of
any claim(s) of the owner against the contractor shall
be referred to the arbitration of a sole arbitrator
selected in accordance with the provisions of Clause
9.0.1.1 hereof. It is specifically agreed that the owner
may prefer its claim(s) against the contractor as
counterclaims if a notified claim of the contractor has
been referred to arbitration. The contractor shall not,
however, be entitled to raise as a set-off defence or
counterclaim any claim which is not a notified claim
included in the contractor's final bill in accordance with
the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof.
9.0.1.1
The sole arbitrator referred to in Clause 9.0.1.0 hereof
shall be selected by the contractor out of a panel of 3
(three) persons nominated by the owner for the
purpose of such selection, and should the contractor fail
to select an arbitrator within 30 (thirty) days of the
panel of names of such nominees being furnished by
the owner for the purpose, the sole arbitrator shall be
selected by the owner out of the said panel.
9.0.2.0
Any dispute(s) or difference(s) with respect to or
concerning or relating to any of the following matters
are hereby specifically excluded from the scope,
purview and ambit of this arbitration agreement with
the intention that any dispute or difference with respect
to any of the said following matters and/or relating to
the arbitrator's or Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction with
respect thereto shall not and cannot form the subject-
matter of any reference or submission to arbitration,
and the arbitrator or the Arbitral Tribunal shall have no
jurisdiction to entertain the same or to render any
decision with respect thereto, and such matter shall be
decided by the General Manager prior to the arbitrator
proceeding with or proceeding further with the
reference. The said excluded matters are:
(i) With respect to or concerning the scope or existence
or otherwise of the arbitration agreement;
(ii) Whether or not a claim sought to be referred to
arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim;
(iii) Whether or not a notified claim is included in the
contractor's final bill in accordance with the provisions
of Clause 6.6.3.0 hereof.
(iv) Whether or not the contractor has opted for the
alternative dispute resolution machinery with respect to
any notified claim included in the contractor's final bill.
9.0.3.0
The provisions of the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 and any re-enactment(s) and/or modification
(s) thereof and of the Rules framed thereunder shall
apply to arbitration proceedings pursuant hereto
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The arbitrator shall give his award separately in
respect of each claim and counterclaim; and
(b) The arbitrator shall not be entitled to review any
decision, opinion or determination (howsoever
expressed) which is stated to be final and/or binding on
the contractor in terms of the contract documents."
6. As per the contract entered into between the parties, the
designated date for commencement of the project was the date of
issuance of FOA i.e. 3-3-2010, and that the scheduled date of
completion was 2-10-2011. It appears that the execution of the project
was delayed, as a result of which the project was completed only on 28
-12-2015. NCCL was issued a completion certificate by IOCL indicating
the date of completion of the project as 28-12-2015. In view of the
delay in completion of the project beyond the scheduled date, NCCL
made a request for extension of time vide the communication dated 23-
5-2016. While the EOT requests were pending with IOCL, NCCL
submitted its final bill dated 5-8-2016 to the Engineer-In-Charge
appointed under the contract between the parties.
7. According to NCCL, NCCL in its final bill dated 5-8-2016 made a
specific reference to the notified claims. There were correspondences
between the Engineer-In-Charge and Thyssenkrupp Industrial Solutions
India (P) Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "TKIS") pending settlement of
the final bill and the request for extension of time ("EOT"). NCCL
responded to the communication dated 1-11-2016 by the TKIS, vide its
response dated 2-11-2016. It appears that NCCL conveyed to TKIS that
if its request for EOT were considered favourably and if price
adjustment does not exceed 4%, then, all its extra/additional claims
including notified claims submitted by it through various
communications and the final bill should be treated as withdrawn.
8. The TKIS having received the aforesaid communication from
NCCL, made its recommendations vis-à-vis the request for EOT made
by NCCL. It appears that thereafter, TKIS in its communication dated
13-1-2017,
informed NCCL that it had approved EOT for the period between 3-10-
2011 to 3-11-2015, however, without price discount as per Clause
4.4.0.0 of the General Conditions of Contract (hereinafter referred to as
"GCC") and that for the period falling between 4-11-2015 to 28-12-
2015 which covered the period of 55 days, it had concluded that the
delay was attributable to NCCL. Accordingly, TKIS conveyed to NCCL
that for the later period, as per Clause 4.4.2.0 of GCC, a price
adjustment discount of 4% would be applicable.
9. It is the case on behalf of NCCL that being aggrieved, it wrote to
IOCL on 23-1-2017 to reconsider its decision and accord EOT up to the
date of completion i.e. 28-12-2015 without making any adjustment
towards price as indicated in the communication dated 13-1-2017.
10. That, thereafter, IOCL released a sum of Rs 4,53,04,021, the
amount calculated as per the communication dated 13-1-2017, after
making due adjustments towards taxes, etc.
11. It appears that subsequently and after a period of 6 1/2 months
(after the settlement of the claim) and after receiving the final bill
payment 8 days earlier, on 8-5-2017, vide communication dated 16-5-
2017, NCCL reneged on the letter of 2-11-2016 and alleged that it was
made to withdraw its claim under coercion and it had withdrawn its
notified claims as TKIS vide its communication dated 1-11-2016, had
indicated that the review of the final bill and request for EOT would be
considered only if it gave up its insistence on its notified claims being
considered.
12. That IOCL sent its response vide communication dated 6-6-
2017, wherein it stated that none of the claims mentioned in the final
bill were notified claims.
13. In the above backdrop, NCCL invoked the arbitration clause
contained in the agreement on 1-7-2017. That, IOCL, in accordance
with Clause 9.0.2.0 referred the matter regarding arbitrability of NCCL's
claims to the General Manager on 12-7-2017.
14. Vide the communication/letter dated 10-11-2017, the General
Manager held that the claims cannot be referred to arbitration and that
the arbitration agreement itself does not survive on account of NCCL
withdrawing its notified claims. The General Manager held that
therefore there exists no dispute to be referred to arbitration.
15. Thereafter the respondent NCCL approached the Delhi High
Court by filing Arbitration Petition No. 115 of 2018 under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration Act for appointment of sole arbitrator. The said
petition was opposed by IOCL on a number of grounds. However, by
overruling all the objections raised on behalf of the appellant IOCL, by
the impugned judgment and order1, the High Court has allowed the
said arbitration petition and appointed the sole arbitrator.
16. Impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court dated
8-2-2019 in NCC Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 1 is the subject-matter of
present Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022 (arising out of Special Leave
Petition No. 13161 of 2019).
17. With respect to other four contracts between the same parties
and with same arbitration clauses, NCCL's claims were sent to the
General Manager under Clause 9.0.2.0 of GCC. So far as the civil appeal
arising out of SLP No. 13408 of 2019 is concerned, NCCL did not
approach the General Manager but the arbitration petition filed before
the High Court was forwarded by IOCL to the General Manager for its
determination under Clause 9.0.2.0 of GCC. That, in all the remaining
four cases (Civil Appeals Nos. 342 of 2022 to 345 of 2022), the General
Manager declared that none of the claims were notified claims.
18. Thereafter NCCL approached the High Court by way of
Arbitration Petitions Nos. 115, 356, 116, 407 and 406 of 2018. By the
impugned judgment and orders1 2, 3, 4, 5 the High Court has allowed
all the respective applications under Section (6) of the Arbitration
Act and by different impugned judgment and orders, has appointed the
sole arbitrator. Impugned judgment and orders passed by the High
Court is the subject-matter of Civil Appeals Nos. 341 of 2022 to 345 of
2022.
19. Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General has appeared on
behalf of the appellant IOCL and Shri Ranjith Kumar, learned Senior
Advocate has appeared on behalf of the respondent NCCL.
20. Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General appearing on
behalf of IOCL has vehemently submitted that in the present case both
the parties are governed by the terms of the contract entered into
between the parties viz. GCC. That in fact, both the parties are
governed by the procedure to be followed in case of dispute between
the parties, more particularly contained in GCC and the arbitration
clause.
21. It is further submitted by the learned Attorney General that
party autonomy is the backbone of arbitration and the terms of the
contract have to be interpreted in the way the parties wanted and
intended them to be. In this regard reliance is placed upon the decision
of this Court in Centrotrade Minerals & Metal Inc. V. Hindustan Copper
22. It is submitted by the learned Attorney General that there are
three categories of contracts which could arise for consideration, which
can be summarised as under:
22.1. Where no arbitration agreement exists at all. As the arbitration
agreement itself is an independent contract and is consensual in
nature, it is left
to the parties to include an arbitration agreement in the underlying
contract, or not to include it. If no arbitration agreement exists in a
contract, the only option if a dispute arises for either party is to go by
way of a suit.
22.2. An arbitration agreement can exist in the underlying contract
or outside the contract, which is absolute in terms. This is the standard
arbitration clause, and would be in the nature of "where any dispute
arises between the parties in relation to the interpretation or
implementation of this contract, it shall be referred to arbitration under
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 " This would be an
UNRESTRICTED or ABSOLUTE arbitration clause. In such a case, in the
background of Section 11(6-A), no question of the Court declining to
refer the matter to arbitration would arise, if it finds out that the
arbitration agreement exists and is valid. In such a case, every dispute
between the parties has to be referred to arbitration because Section 11
(6-A) would mandate this.
22.3. The third category would be where the parties agree to have
an arbitration clause but also consensually agree that certain specified
disputes alone will be the subject of arbitration. This would mean that
no arbitration clause exists in regard to all other disputes, and no
arbitration clause would exist in regard to the "excepted" or "excluded"
disputes. In such a case, Section 11 (6-A) itself cannot be invoked as no
arbitration clause exists in regard to these other disputes. This would
be a RESTRICTED arbitration clause.
23. It is further submitted by the learned Attorney General that
when all the conditions mentioned in GCC are satisfied and the
procedure is followed and only with respect to the restricted arbitration
clauses and with respect to the notified claims only the dispute
between the parties can be referred to the arbitration.
24. It is submitted that there are umpteen number of examples of
restricted arbitration clauses. Reliance is placed on the decision of this
Court in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Hyundai Engg. &
Construction Co. Ltd. wherein the arbitration clause expressly stated
that where a claim is made against the insurer and the insurer denies
its liability, no reference to arbitration can take place. In support of the
above submission, reliance is placed on the following decisions of this
Court:
(2) Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. V. Coastal Marine Constructions &
(3) Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Narbheram Power & Steel (P)
25. It is submitted by the learned Attorney General that in the
aforesaid decisions, this Court had occasion to consider the applicability
of Section 11(6-A) and its impact.
26. It is submitted that in Garware9 it is observed and held that
where the underlying contract including the arbitration clause is not
stamped, in such a case, the arbitration clause exists in fact but DOES
NOT EXIST IN LAW. That in other words, Section 11(6-A) will not be a Bar
for the Court holding that as the arbitration clause does not cover the
particular dispute, Section 11(6-A) will not apply as there is no
arbitration clause in that regard and therefore, no reference to
arbitration can be made.
27. It is submitted that in Vidya Drolia8, this Court had considered
various aspects with respect to the restricted arbitration clause. But in
the case of unrestricted clauses, all issues raised by the contracting
parties will have to be referred to arbitration, because of Section 11(6-
A). However, the instant case is a case of a restricted arbitration clause
that specifically excludes certain issues from arbitration, as a result of
which, no arbitration clause exists for those "other" or "excepted"
disputes and hence, the question of referring those disputes would not
arise. That in Vidya Drolia 8, the arbitration agreement itself sets out
what is excluded from arbitration. Therefore, it was held that Section 11
(6-A) would not stand in the way of making a reference.
28. It is further submitted by the learned Attorney General that in
the present case the respondent NCCL received the amount of final bill
in full settlement of their claims. That in the present case the
arbitration clause itself states that where the final bill amount has been
received by the party, or where a sum has been received on account of
notified claims, the arbitration clause itself stands extinguished.
Therefore, the fact that amount of final bill having been received in full
settlement cannot be the subject-matter of reference by any specific
stipulation in the contract.
29. The learned Attorney General has taken us to the relevant
clauses of GCC, more particularly Clauses 1.21.0.0, 6.6.0.0, 6.6.1.0,
6.6.2.0, 6.6.3.0, 6.6.3.1, 6.6.4.0, 6.6.5.0, 6.6.6.0, 6.7.0.0, 6.7.1.0,
6.7.2.0, 6.7.3.0, 9.0.0.0, 9.0.1.0, 9.0.1.1, 9.0.2.0 and 9.0.3.0. It is
contended that as per Clause 9.0.1.0, the only matter to which a
reference to arbitration can be sought is a "notified claim" included in
the final bill and to no other dispute. That all disputes other than
notified claims included in the final bill, have to be pursued by way of a
suit. The expression, "notified claim" is defined in Clause 1.21.0.0 of
GCC.
30. It is urged that only those notified claims which are notified in
accordance with provisions of Clause 6.6.1.0, can be referred to
arbitration.
31. It is submitted that the parties are at liberty to provide within
the contract a departmental machinery for resolution of certain matters,
the determination of which will be outside the scope of arbitration. That
such departmental machinery, being the will of the parties as embodied
in the
contract, must be respected and given effect to. In support of the
above submissions, reliance is placed on the following decisions of this
Court:
24, 26, 30
32. The learned Attorney General has also relied upon the following
decisions of the Delhi High Court and Gauhati High Court dealing with
identical clause in cases where IOCL was a party and in which the Delhi
High Court and the Gauhati High Court have expressly interpreted the
very Clauses 9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0.
14
(i) China Petroleum Pipeline Bureau V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
(ii) Srico Projects (P) Ltd. V. Indian Oil Foundation15 along with
order dated 3-7-2017 16
(iii) Institute of Geoinformatics (P) Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.¹7
(iv) IOT Infrastructure & Energy Service Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn.
Ltd.
18
(v) Bongaigaon Refinery V. Buildworth (P) Ltd.19 before the
Gauhati High Court.
33. It is submitted that the special leave petitions against the
decision in China Petroleum Pipeline Bureau and Srico Projects 15 have
been dismissed- 20 by this Court.
34. It is further submitted by the learned Attorney General that in
the present case the final bill payment had been made to the
respondent and accepted by it pursuant to an understanding between
the parties by which the respondent expressly waived its notified
claims. It is submitted that the arbitration clause itself is subject to
Clauses 6.7.1.0 and 6.7.2.0. It is submitted that Clause 6.7.2.0 dealing
with "notified claims" expressly declares that the acceptance of any
amount by the contractor in respect of the notified claims shall result in
full and final satisfaction of the claims by the contractor in respect of
the notified claims and hence, the contract, including the arbitration
clause, shall stand discharged and extinguished. This is as per Clause
6.7.2.0 itself, notwithstanding any qualifying remarks, protest or
condition imposed or
purported to be imposed by the contractor relative to the acceptance of
such payment.
35. It is submitted that applying these principles to the present
case, NCCL's express statement dated 2-11-2016 is required to be
appreciated and/or considered. That pursuant to the said statement by
NCCL, IOCL (petitioner) levied a price adjustment of only 4% as
opposed to 10%; and the respondent expressly withdrew its notified
claims. It is submitted that IOCL also paid the dues as per the final bill.
The notified claims, having been withdrawn, therefore, could not more
be the subject-matter of any reference to arbitration. It is submitted
that as a result of the acceptance by NCCL of the amount paid pursuant
to its final bill, and the notified claims having been withdrawn, and the
result of Clauses 6.7.1.0 and 6.7.2.0, the contract, including the
arbitration clause stands discharged and extinguished and therefore,
subsequently, no reference to arbitration could be made.
36. It is submitted that it is only 6 1/2 months later, on 16-5-2017
and after receiving the final bill payment 8 days earlier on 8-5-2017,
that NCCL reneged on its letter withdrawing its demand in regard to
notified claims. It is submitted that the reason why NCCL withdrew
their demand for payment of the full amount of final bill including
notified claims is that if 10% has been deducted due to the delay, an
amount of Rs 14.8 crores would have been deducted from the payment
of NCCL. It is submitted that having received Rs 151 crores against the
contract of Rs 148 crores, NCCL was well aware that in such an
eventuality, it would have received no amount against the final bill and
its bank guarantee would also have been invoked. That in fact by
withdrawing the demand, the respondent was now able to get Rs 4.53
crores as well as the return of the bank guarantee of Rs 14.8 crores.
37. It is further submitted that Clause 9.0.2.0 of GCC specifically
excludes certain matters, such as disputes concerning the scope of the
arbitration agreement viz.:
(i) whether or not a claim is a notified claim;
(ii) whether or not a notified claim is included in the contractor's
bill, etc.; from the scope, purview and ambit of the arbitration
agreement.
It is submitted that under sub-clause (iii) thereof, a notified claim
covered by a decision of the General Manager is specifically an excluded
matter. It is submitted that in the present case the General Manager
rejected the demand of NCCL in regard to the notified claims,
particularly as the demand in regard to "notified claims" had been
specifically withdrawn by NCCL. It is submitted therefore that viewed
from any angle, as no arbitration clause existed so far as NCCL is
concerned, the High Court has committed a serious error in referring
the dispute between the parties to arbitrator and appointing the
arbitrator.
38. Now, so far as the other four cases are concerned, the learned
Attorney General has submitted that in those four cases the claims
were referred/sent to the General Manager under Clause 9.0.2.0 of
GCC. That in all the remaining cases the General Manager declared that
none of the claims of NCCL was a
notified claim. Therefore, the claims which are found by the General
Manager not to be notified claims are not arbitrable and are outside the
scope and purview of the arbitration agreement. It is submitted that in
that view of the matter, the High Court ought to have dismissed the
applications/petitions filed by NCCL under Section 11 of the Arbitration
Act.
39. Making above submissions and relying upon decisions, it is
prayed to allow the present appeals and set aside the respective orders
passed by the High Court referring the dispute between the parties to
arbitration and appointing the sole arbitrator.
40. The present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Ranjith
Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent
NCCL.
41. Shri Ranjith Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
respondent NCCL has made the following submissions pointing out the
relevant facts which, according to him, are relevant for deciding the
dispute in present appeals:
41.1. That, the parties herein had entered into an agreement,
whereby the respondent NCCL was tasked with the job of completing
the civil, structural and associated UG piping works for Paradip
Refinery.
41.2. Due to certain reasons attributable to IOCL, there was a delay
in completion of the works.
41.3. In accordance with GCC, NCCL on 23-5-2016, applied for
extension of time and submitted its final bill on 5-8-2016.
41.4. On 29-7-2016, NCCL issued the no-dues certificate, however,
it also made it clear that the said certificate would not include final bill
amount, service tax amount and the notified claims due from IOCL.
41.5. The Engineer-in-charge vide letter dated 1-1-2016, expressly
acknowledged the presence of "notified claims" in the final bill and
coerced NCCL to take back its notified claims in order to process its
application for EOT.
41.6. Under duress, NCCL was constrained to issue a letter on 2-11-
2016 withdrawing its notified claims on the twin condition that the
application for EOT is considered favourably and the price discount does
not exceed 4% of the contract value.
41.7. That, the letter dated 2-11-2016 was clearly conditional and
was in the nature of an offer and not an acceptance.
41.8. Vide letter dated 13-1-2017, IOCL informed NCCL that they
had only partially allowed the application for EOT and a price discount
of 4% was applied to the period for which the application for EOT was
not allowed. Therefore, it is clear that IOCL did not positively respond to
both the conditions stated by NCCL in its letter dated 2-11-2016.
41.9. That, aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, NCCL without any
delay, on 23-1-2017, communicated that the decision to partially allow
its application for EOT is unacceptable as the same is not in accordance
with the conditional
offer given by NCCL and also since the delay was caused due to reasons
attributable to IOCL.
41.10. Disregarding the aforesaid letter, IOCL on 8-5-2017,
unilaterally released the payment against the final bill, after adjusting
the price discount.
41.11. That, NCCL on 16-5-2017 i.e. within 10 days from the release
of the amount, informed IOCL that the application for price discount is
misplaced and its "notified claims" still hold good as the conditional
offer of NCCL was not accepted.
41.12. Since IOCL miserably failed to provide an appropriate
response within a reasonable period of time, NCCL invoked the
arbitration clause i.e. Clause 9.0.1.0 of GCC and submitted its claims to
IOCL.
41.13. It is submitted that as per Clause 9.0.1.0 read with Clause
9.0.2.0 of GCC, IOCL had to refer the claims of NCCL to its General
Manager and then the General Manager was to issue a declaration
pursuant to which the arbitration could commence.
41.14. It is submitted that in the claims concerned in four of the
petitions, the determination was made by the General Manager in an
inordinately belated manner. It is submitted that in 3 out of 5 petitions,
the determination by the General Manager was made after NCCL filed
the arbitration petitions before the High Court. It is submitted that in a
completely mala fide and deceptive manner, IOCL claims to have made
a reference to the General Manager who determined the nature of
claims after filing of the counter-affidavit by NCCL before this Court.
41.15. It is submitted that therefore, as such, IOCL is attempting to
scuttle the respondent's contractual right to pursue arbitration by
bringing on record a document nearly two years after the respondent
invoked the arbitration clause.
41.16. It is submitted that the General Manager's decision which is
relevant in SLPs Nos. 13161 and 13183 of 2019 was based on the
ground that there was full and final settlement between the parties. It
is submitted that as the decision of the General Manager on "notified
claims" was erroneous, mala fide and on technical grounds, NCCL
rightly approached the High Court of Delhi under Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration Act seeking the relief of appointment of arbitrator. It is
submitted that therefore the High Court is absolutely justified in
appointing the arbitrator.
42. Shri Ranjith Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appearing for NCCL
has supported the impugned orders passed by the High Court by
making the following broad submissions:
42.1. As per the agreement entered into between the parties, the
General Manager is not permitted to decide if a claim is barred by virtue
of there being accord and satisfaction or a claim being an excepted
claim.
42.2. Under Section 11(6-A) of the Arbitration Act, at the stage of
appointment of an arbitrator, the scope of intervention by the courts is
confined to the examination of the existence of an arbitration
agreement.
42.3. At the stage of appointment of the arbitrator, the Court cannot
look into whether there has been accord and satisfaction between the
parties.
42.4. At the stage of appointment of arbitrator, the Court cannot
look into whether a claim is an excepted claim or not.
42.5. Contractual clauses cannot be read in a manner that abridges
statutory rights and the doctrine of mutuality, to confer the power to
unilaterally determine arbitrability of a dispute upon one of the parties.
42.6. As per the doctrine of election, the present proceedings ought
to be dismissed since IOCL has preferred an application under Sections
16(2) and 16(5) challenging the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.
43. On an interpretation of the clauses of GCC, Shri Ranjith Kumar,
learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent NCCL has
submitted that a bare perusal of the relevant clauses of GCC would
indicate that the General Manager of IOCL is neither entitled to examine
whether a "notified claim" is an "excepted claim" nor can he look into
the issue whether there is accord and satisfaction between the parties.
44. It is submitted that Clause 9.0.1.0 is subject to Clauses 6.7.1.0,
6.7.2.0 and 9.0.2.0. Further, Clause 9.0.2.0 creates a machinery
whereby IOCL has unbridled power conferred upon its General Manager
to certify if a claim is capable of being referred to arbitration. The said
clause, according to IOCL vests the sole discretion of deciding the
arbitrability of claims on the General Manager. It is submitted that, as
such, the interpretation of the clause as suggested by IOCL, is in
derogation of not only the arbitrator's power to decide arbitrability, but
also the Court's power under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.
45. It is submitted that the said clause would indicate that the
General Manager is only supposed to see if the claim raised by the
respondent is:
(i) a notified claim as defined under Clause 1.21.0.0 r/w Clause
6.6.1.0; and
(ii) whether the notified claim is included in the final bill in
accordance with Clause 6.6.3.0.
That the General Manager is not empowered under the said clause to
state that a claim is not arbitrable due to full and final settlement
between the parties or due to a claim being an excepted claim.
46. It is submitted that in the present case, IOCL has admitted that
the claims raised by the respondent are "notified claims" and this fact
has never been disputed by IOCL or its General Manager. It is
submitted that even the second condition is also fulfilled as the
respondent's final bill includes its notified claims. It is submitted that
thus the only logical conclusion which follows is that the notified claims
raised by the respondent should have been referred to arbitration.
However, the General Manager of IOCL, in two cases, denied referring
the notified claims to arbitration on the ground that there was full and
final settlement between the parties, and in other three cases the
General Manager has denied referring the notified claims to arbitration
on the ground that they are "excepted claims".
47. It is submitted that as per GCC, the General Manager is not
entitled to resist the reference of a notified claim to arbitration on the
ground of accord and satisfaction. That the aspect pertaining to full and
final settlement between the parties, forms part of Clauses 6.7.1.0 and
6.7.2.0 and not of Clause 9.0.2.0. That, in fact, Clause 6.7.1.0
expressly provides that upon payment of sums under the final bill,
there shall be full and final settlement, without prejudice to the notified
claims of the contractor included in the final bill. It is submitted that
therefore, even after the payment of money on 8-5-2017, notified
claims are neither settled nor is there full and final settlement in
respect of notified claims. It is submitted that insofar as "excepted
claims" are concerned, as per Clause 9.0.2.0, once the General Manager
comes to a decision that a claim is a notified claim and the same is
included in the final bill, he is duty-bound to refer the claim to
arbitration. It is submitted that therefore the reasoning behind the
decision rendered by the General Manager that the claims are not
notified claims is not only unsustainable, but is also ex facie contrary to
Clause 9.0.2.0. It is submitted that Clause 9.0.2.0 does not render the
decision of the General Manager final.
48. It is further submitted that vide the Amendment Act, 2015,
Section 11(6-A) has been inserted by virtue of which, the scope of
intervention at Section 11 stage is very narrow. Reliance is placed upon
the decision of this Court in Duro Felguera, S.A. V. Gangavaram Port
Ltd. 21 It is submitted that after insertion of Section 11 (6-A), the scope
of intervention by the Court at the stage of appointment of arbitrator is
narrowed down and the Courts may have to now only examine the
existence of a valid arbitration agreement. That in the aforesaid
decision it is held that the legislative purpose is essentially to minimise
the Court's intervention at the stage of appointment of arbitrator and
that the intention as incorporated in Section 11(6-A) ought to be
respected is the submission.
49. It is submitted that despite the above binding decision, in the
subsequent decision in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Antique Art
Exports (P) Ltd. 22 , a coordinate Bench of this Court took the view that
once a claim is settled, it leaves no arbitral dispute subsisting under
the agreement to be referred to the arbitrator.
50. It is submitted that the conflicting decisions were considered
and the issue has now been settled by a three-Judge Bench of this
Court in a subsequent decision rendered in Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd. V.
Pradyuat Deb Burman23 That after considering in detail the 246th Law
Commission Report; the report of the High-Level Committee regarding
institutionalisation of arbitration in India and the Statement of Objects
and Reasons of the 2015 Amendment Bill, it is held that post-2015, the
scope of the Courts' powers at the stage of appointment of arbitrator is
confined to the examination of the existence of the arbitration
agreement. It is submitted that the decision of this Court in Mayavati
Trading20 has been subsequently followed by this Court in a recent
decision in Vidya Drolia .
51. Shri Ranjith Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of the respondent has also relied upon the following decisions of
this Court in support of his submissions of applicability of Section 11 (6-
A) and a very limited jurisdiction of the Courts while considering an
application of Section 11(6-A) of the Arbitration Act post-2015:
(1) Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Ltd. V. Northern Coal
Field Ltd. 24
(2) BSNL V. Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd. 25
(3) Pravin Electricals (P) Ltd. V. Galaxy Infra & Engg. (P) Ltd. 26
(4) Sanjiv Prakash V. Seema Kukreja²7.
52. It is further submitted that although the 2019 Amendment to
the Arbitration Act has deleted Section 11(6-A), this Court in Vidya
Drolia 8 has clarified that the rationale behind the insertion of Section 11
(6-A) of the Arbitration Act would continue to apply and guide the
Courts on its scope of jurisdiction at stage one, that is, the pre-
arbitration stage.
53. It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocate appearing
for the respondent NCCL that as held by this Court in Vidya Drolia 8 as
well as in Swiss Timing Ltd. V. Commonwealth Games 2010 Organising
Committee²8, the role of a Court is to assist and support arbitration and
leave a substantive part of the adjudication to the Arbitral Tribunal. It
is submitted, therefore, that at the stage of an application filed under
Section 11, the Court is only supposed to look as to, whether, a valid
arbitration agreement exists. It is submitted that therefore the scope of
intervention by the Court is restricted at the stage of appointment of
arbitrator and it can neither examine whether certain claims are
"excepted" nor can it look into the issue of whether there is "accord and
satisfaction".
54. It is further submitted by the learned Senior Advocate appearing
for the respondent NCCL that in cases where the claims are rejected by
the General Manager on the ground that there was "accord and
satisfaction" between the parties and hence, not referable to
arbitration, in the instant case the respondent has disputed petitioner's
contention on "accord and satisfaction" even before the payment of
final bill. It is submitted that therefore the issue whether "accord and
satisfaction" existed between the parties is virtual in nature and
examination of the same would require detailed perusal of the evidence
by the Arbitral Tribunal. That in any event, pursuant to the introduction
of
Section 11 (6-A), the Court has to restrict itself to the issue of existence
of the arbitration agreement at Section 11 stage and cannot delve into
the issue of "accord and satisfaction" is the submission.
55. Relying upon the decisions of this Court in Ambica Construction
V. Union of India²9 and R.L. Kalathia & Co. V. State of Gujarat30 , it is
submitted that as observed by this Court in the aforesaid two decisions,
in many instances, contractors are coerced to issue a no-dues
certificate, without which no amount would be released. It is submitted
that in the aforesaid decision it is observed that merely because the
contractor has issued "no-dues certificate", if there is an acceptable
claim, the Court cannot reject the same on the ground of issuance of
"no-dues certificate".
56. It is further submitted that the question whether a notified claim
is an "excepted claim", is within the exclusive domain of the arbitrator
to be answered. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in BSNL
V. Motorola India (P) Ltd. 31 and National Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Boghara
Polyfab (P) Ltd. 32 (even prior to 2015 Amendment to the Arbitration
Act) as well as in Zostel Hospitality (P) Ltd. V. Oravel Stays (P) Ltd. 33
57. It is further submitted that Section 11 of the Arbitration Act
expressly confers powers upon the Courts to determine the existence of
an arbitration agreement and subsequently appoint an arbitrator. It is
submitted that Section 8 confers upon the Courts and judicial
authorities the power to refer the parties to arbitration when there is an
arbitration agreement. Similarly, Section 16 of the Arbitration Act
categorically recognises and empowers the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on
any objection raised as against its jurisdiction. It is submitted that
therefore the petitioner's interpretation of Clause 9.0.2.0 of GCC qua
the purported finality of the determination of its General Manager,
seeks to usurp the statutory powers of the Courts as enshrined under
Sections 8 and 11 and the statutory power of an Arbitral Tribunal as
enshrined under Section 16.
58. It is further submitted that insofar as the claims concerned in
other four petitions (except the lead matter), the determination was
made after an inordinate delay. That in 3 out of 5 petitions, the
determination by the General Manager was made after the respondent
filed the arbitration petitions before the High Court. That in SLP No.
13408 of 2019, even no reference to the General Manager was made
until the filing of the arbitration petition before the High Court. That
therefore the General Manager's decision in the aforesaid four SLPs is
inefficacious as the determination has been made not only thirty days
after the submission of the claim, but also after the arbitration petitions
were filed before the High Court. Reliance is placed upon the decisions
18 and 19.
59. It is further submitted by Shri Ranjith Kumar, learned Senior
Advocate appearing for respondent NCCL that in the present case, the
petitioner had filed an application challenging the jurisdiction of the
Arbitral Tribunal under Sections 16(2) and 16(5) of the Arbitration Act
before the Arbitral Tribunal on 10-6-2019, which is, after filing of the
present petition and before the issuance of notice by this Court on 3-7-
2019 35 That the petitioner has not disclosed the same and has
suppressed this factum of pursuing two remedies simultaneously. It is
submitted that therefore as the petitioner has elected to pursue the
proceeding before the Arbitral Tribunal and as per the doctrine of
election of remedies, the petitioner ought not to be permitted to
continue the present proceedings before this Court.
60. Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the
present appeals.
61. We have heard the learned Senior Advocates appearing for the
respective parties at length.
62.
By
the
impugned
orders
1,
2,
3,
4,
5
the
,
High
Court
in
exercise
of
powers under Section 11 (6) of the Arbitration Act has appointed the
arbitrators to adjudicate and resolve the disputes between the parties
arising out of the respective contracts. The respective orders passed by
the High Court appointing the arbitrator in applications under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration Act are the subject-matter of the present
appeals.
It cannot be disputed that both the parties are governed by
GCC. GCC are the part of the agreements/contracts between the
parties. Under GCC, the parties have agreed to resolve the dispute
between them only in terms of the relevant clauses of GCC referred to
hereinabove. The parties have agreed that certain specified disputes
alone will be the subject of arbitration.
64. In Narbheram Power & Steel10 it is observed and held that the
parties are bound by the clauses enumerated in the policy and the
Court does not transplant any equity to the same by re-writing a
clause. It is further observed and held that an arbitration clause is
required to be strictly construed. Any expression in the clause must
unequivocally express the intent of arbitration. It can also lay the
postulate in which situations the arbitration clause cannot be given
effect to. It is further observed that if a clause stipulates that under
certain circumstances there can be no arbitration and they are
demonstrably clear then the controversy pertaining to appointment of
arbitrator has to be put to rest (paras 10-23).
65. In Centrotrade Minerals & Metal Inc. 6 this Court had an occasion
to consider the concept of party autonomy and it is observed and held
that party autonomy is virtually the backbone of arbitration. It is
further observed and held that party autonomy being the brooding and
guiding spirit in arbitration, the parties are free to agree on the
application of three different laws governing their entire contract:
(1) proper law of contract;
(2) proper law of arbitration agreement and
(3) proper law of the conduct of arbitration.
It is further observed in the said decision that the parties to an
arbitration agreement have the autonomy to decide not only on the
procedural law to be followed but also the substantive law. The choice
of jurisdiction is also left to the contracting parties.
66. In DLF Universal Ltd. V. Town & Country Planning Deptt.,
Haryana³6, it is observed and held that the contract is to be interpreted
according to its purpose. The purpose of a contract is the interest,
objective, values, policy that the contract is designed to actualise. It
comprises the joint intent of the parties. It is observed that it is not an
intent of a single party; it is the joint intent of both the parties and the
joint intent of the parties is to be discovered from the entirety of the
contract and the circumstances surrounding its formation (para 13).
67. In Rajasthan State Industrial Development & Investment Corpn.
V. Diamond & Gem Development Corpn. Ltd. 37 , it is observed and held
that a party cannot claim anything more than what is covered by the
terms of the contract, for the reason that the contract is a transaction
between two parties and has been entered into with open eyes and by
understanding the nature of contract. It is further observed that thus
the contract being a creature of an agreement between two or more
parties has to be interpreted giving literal meanings unless there is
some ambiguity therein. The contract is to be interpreted giving the
actual meaning to the words contained in the contract and it is not
permissible for the Court to make a new contract, however reasonable,
if the parties have not made it themselves. It is further observed that
the terms of the contract have to be construed strictly without altering
the nature of a contract as it may affect the interest of either of the
parties adversely (para 23).
13
68. In Mitra Guha Builders (India) Co. while interpreting the
clause by which the parties agreed that the decision of the
Superintending Engineer in levying compensation is final and the same
is an "excepted matter" and the determination shall be only by the
Superintending Engineer and the correctness of his decision cannot be
called in question in the arbitration proceedings and the remedv. if anv.
will arise in the ordinary course of law, the three-Judge
Bench of this Court after referring to and considering the earlier
decisions on the point observed and held that once the parties have
decided that certain matters are to be decided by the Superintending
Engineer and his decision would be final, the same cannot be the
subject-matter of arbitration.
69. In Harsha Constructions12, while interpreting the clause in the
agreement by which some of the disputes were specifically not
arbitrable and in relation to the said disputes the contractor had to
negotiate with the Engineer concerned and if the contractor was not
satisfied with the rate determined by the Engineer, the contractor was
required to follow the procedure mentioned in the said clause and in
p. 251)
"18. Arbitration arises from a contract and unless there is a
specific written contract, a contract with regard to arbitration cannot
be presumed. Section 7(3) of the Act clearly specifies that the
contract with regard to arbitration must be in writing. Thus, so far as
the disputes which have been referred to in Clause 39 of the contract
are concerned, it was not open to the arbitrator to arbitrate upon the
said disputes as there was a specific clause whereby the said
disputes had been "excepted". Moreover, when the law specifically
makes a provision with regard to formation of a contract in a
particular manner, there cannot be any presumption with regard to a
contract if the contract is not entered into by the mode prescribed
under the Act.
19. If a non-arbitrable dispute is referred to an arbitrator and
even if an issue is framed by the arbitrator in relation to such a
dispute, in our opinion, there cannot be a presumption or a
conclusion to the effect that the parties had agreed to refer the issue
to the arbitrator. In the instant case, the respondent authorities had
raised an objection relating to the arbitrability of the aforestated
issue before the arbitrator and yet the arbitrator had rendered his
decision on the said "excepted" dispute. In our opinion, the
arbitrator could not have decided the said "excepted" dispute. We,
therefore, hold that it was not open to the arbitrator to decide the
issues which were not arbitrable and the award, so far as it relates to
disputes regarding non-arbitrable disputes is concerned, is bad in
law and is hereby quashed."
70. At this stage, a recent decision of this Court in Vidya Drolia 8,
which, as such, is post-insertion of Section 11(6-A) of the Arbitration
Act, is required to be referred to. In the said decision it is observed and
held that the issue of non-arbitrability of a dispute is basic for
arbitration as it relates to the very jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.
An Arbitral Tribunal may lack jurisdiction for several reasons and non-
arbitrability has multiple meanings. After referring to another decision
of this Court in Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. V. SBI Home
para 15)
"15. '(i) Whether the disputes are capable of adjudication and
settlement by arbitration? That is, whether the disputes, having
regard to their nature, could be resolved by a private forum chosen
by the parties (the Arbitral Tribunal) or whether they would
exclusively fall within the domain of public fora (courts).
(ii) Whether the disputes are covered by the arbitration
agreement? That is, whether the disputes are enumerated or
described in the arbitration agreement as matters to be decided by
arbitration or whether the disputes fall under the "excepted matters"
excluded from the purview of the arbitration agreement.
(iii) Whether the parties have referred the disputes to arbitration?
That is, whether the disputes fall under the scope of the submission
to the Arbitral Tribunal, or whether they do not arise out of the
statement of claim and the counterclaim filed before the Arbitral
Tribunal. A dispute, even if it is capable of being decided by
arbitration and falling within the scope of an arbitration agreement,
will not be "arbitrable" if it is not enumerated in the joint list of
disputes referred to arbitration, or in the absence of such a joint list
of disputes, does not form part of the disputes raised in the
pleadings before the Arbitral Tribunal.' "
71. After referring to and considering in detail the earlier decisions
on the point, more particularly, with respect to non-arbitrability and the
"excepted matters", it is ultimately concluded in para 76 as under :
"76. In view of the above discussion, we would like to propound a
fourfold test for determining when the subject-matter of a dispute in
an arbitration agreement is not arbitrable:
76.1. (1) When cause of action and subject-matter of the dispute
relates to actions in rem, that do not pertain to subordinate rights in
personam that arise from rights in rem.
76.2. (2) When cause of action and subject-matter of the dispute
affects third-party rights; have erga omnes effect; require
centralised adjudication, and mutual adjudication would not be
appropriate and enforceable.
76.3. (3) When cause of action and subject-matter of the dispute
relates to inalienable sovereign and public interest functions of the
State and hence mutual adjudication would be unenforceable.
76.4. (4) When the subject-matter of the dispute is expressly or
by necessary implication non-arbitrable as per mandatory statute(s).
76.5. These tests are not watertight compartments; they dovetail
and overlap, albeit when applied holistically and pragmatically will
help and
assist in determining and ascertaining with great degree of certainty
when as per law in India, a dispute or subject-matter is non-arbitrable.
Only when the answer is affirmative that the subject-matter of the
dispute would be non-arbitrable.
76.6. However, the aforesaid principles have to be applied with
care and caution as observed in Olympus Superstructures (P) Ltd.39
:
`35.
Reference is made there to certain disputes like criminal
offences of a public nature, disputes arising out of illegal agreements
and disputes relating to status, such as divorce, which cannot be
referred to arbitration. It has, however, been held that if in respect
of facts relating to a criminal matter, say, physical injury, if there is
a right to damages for personal injury, then such a dispute can be
referred to arbitration (Keir V. Leeman40). Similarly, it has been held
that a husband and a wife may refer to arbitration the terms on
which they shall separate, because they can make a valid agreement
between themselves on that matter (Soilleux V. Herbst41, Wilson V.
Wilson 42 and Cahill V. Cahill43). "
72. On the question, who decides on non-arbitrability of the dispute,
after referring to and considering the earlier decisions on the point,
more particularly, the decisions in Garware Wall Ropes : Hyundai Engg.
& Construction Co. 1 and Narbheram Power & Steel10, it is observed and
held that the question of non-arbitrability relating to the inquiry,
whether the dispute was governed by the arbitration clause, can be
examined by the courts at the reference stage itself and may not be left
unanswered, to be examined and decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.
Thereafter, in para 153, it is observed and held that the expression,
"existence of arbitration agreement" in Section 11 of the Arbitration
Act, would include aspect of validity of an arbitration agreement, albeit
the Court at the reference stage would apply the prima facie test. It is
further observed that in cases of debatable and disputable facts and,
good reasonably arguable case, etc. the Court would force the parties to
abide by the arbitration agreement as the Arbitral Tribunal has the
primary jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes including the
question of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability. Ultimately
in para 154, the proposition of law is crystallised as under : (Vidya
"154. Discussion under the heading "Who decides Arbitrability?"
can be crystallised as under:
154.1. Ratio of the decision in Patel Engg. Ltd. on the scope of
judicial review by the court while deciding an application under
Sections 8 or 11 of the Arbitration Act, post the amendments by Act
3 of 2016 (with retrospective effect from 23-10-2015) and even post
the amendments vide Act 33 of 2019 (with effect from 9-8-2019), is
no longer applicable.
154.2. Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court under
Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act is identical but extremely
limited and restricted.
154.3. The general rule and principle, in view of the legislative
mandate clear from Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 2019, and the
principle of severability and competence-competence, is that the
Arbitral Tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine and
decide all questions of non-arbitrability. The court has been
conferred power of "second look" on aspects of non-arbitrability post
the award in terms of sub-clauses (i), (ii) or (iv) of Section 34(2)(a)
or sub-clause (i) of Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act.
154.4. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at the Section
8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie certain that the
arbitration agreement is non-existent, invalid or the disputes are non
-arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-arbitrability would, to
some extent, determine the level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The
restricted and limited review is to check and protect parties from
being forced to arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably "non-
arbitrable" and to cut off the deadwood. The court by default would
refer the matter when contentions relating to non-arbitrability are
plainly arguable; when consideration in summary proceedings would
be insufficient and inconclusive; when facts are contested; when the
party opposing arbitration adopts delaying tactics or impairs conduct
of arbitration proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to enter
into a mini trial or elaborate review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal but to affirm and uphold integrity and efficacy
of arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism."
73. In the recent decision of this Court in DLF Home Developers Ltd.
V. Rajapura Homes (P) Ltd. in which this Court also had an occasion
to consider Section 11 (6-A) of the Arbitration Act and ultimately has
observed, after referring to and considering the decision of the three-
Judge Bench of
this Court in Vidya Drolia 8 that the jurisdiction of the Court under
Section 11 of the Arbitration Act is primarily to find out whether there
existed a written agreement between the parties for resolution of the
dispute and whether the aggrieved party has made out a prima facie
arguable case, it is further observed that limited jurisdiction, however,
does not denude the Court of its judicial function to look beyond the
bare existence of an arbitration clause to cut the deadwood. In the said
decision, this Court had taken note of the observations made in Vidya
Drolia 8 that with a view to prevent wastage of public and private
resources, the Court may conduct "prima facie review" at the stage of
reference to weed out any frivolous or vexatious claims.
74. In Nortel Networks25 this Court had an occasion to consider the
decision in Vidya Drolia8 and in paras 46, 47 and 53.2, it is observed
"46. The upshot of the judgment in Vidya Drolia 8 is affirmation of
the position of law expounded in Duro Felguera²1 and Mayavati
Trading23 which continue to hold the field. It must be understood
clearly that Vidya Drolia8 has not resurrected the pre-amendment
position on the scope of power as held in SBP & Co. V. Patel Engg.
44
Ltd.
47. It is only in the very limited category of cases, where there is
not even a vestige of doubt that the claim is ex facie time-barred, or
that the dispute is non-arbitrable, that the court may decline to
make the reference. However, if there is even the slightest doubt,
the rule is to refer the disputes to arbitration, otherwise it would
encroach upon what is essentially a matter to be determined by the
tribunal.
*
*
*
53.2. In rare and exceptional cases, where the claims are ex facie
time-barred, and it is manifest that there is no subsisting dispute,
the Court may refuse to make the reference."
75. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid
decisions, let us consider the relevant clauses of GCC governing the
parties and the procedure to be followed in case of disputes between
the parties to the contract on non-payment of alleged dues may be on
account of extra payment or compensation in respect of the works over
and above the amounts due in terms of the contract and/or the dispute
on the validity of any deductions made or threatened by the owner.
76. Clause 1.21.0.0 defines "notified claims". It means a claim of
the contractor notified in accordance with the provisions of Clause
6.6.1.0. As per Clause 6.6.1.0, the contractor shall have to give notice
in writing of his claim
with respect to any extra payment or compensation in respect of the
works over and above the amounts due in terms of the contract or on
the validity of any deductions made or threatened by the owner from
any running account bills, by giving notice in writing of his claim in this
behalf to the Engineer-in-Charge and the Site Engineer within ten days
from the date of issue of the orders or instructions relative to any works
for which the contractor claims such additional payment , etc. Such
notice shall give full particulars of the nature of such claim, grounds on
which it is based and the amount claimed. It also further provides that
the owner shall not in any way be liable to in respect of any claim by
the contractor unless notice of such claim shall have been given by the
contractor to the Engineer-in-Charge and the Site Engineer. It also
further provides that a contractor shall be deemed to have waived any
and all claims and all his rights in respect of any claim not notified to
the Engineer-in-Charge and the Site Engineer in writing in the manner
and within the time (ten days from the date of issue of the orders or
instructions). It further provides that all such claims otherwise valid
within the provisions of Clause 6.6.1.0 read with Clauses 6.6.3.0 and
6.6.3.1 shall have to be dealt with/considered by the owner at the time
of submission of the final bill and that any action on the part of the
owner (Engineer-in-Charge or Site Engineer) to reject any claim made
or notified by the contractor or delay in dealing therewith shall be
deemed to be an admission by the owner of the validity of such claim
or waiver by the owner of any of its rights in respect thereof.
77. As per Clause 6.6.3.0, any claims of the contractor notified in
accordance with the provision of Clause 6.6.1.0 and remain due at the
time of preparation of final bill by the contractor, shall have to be
separately included in the final bill prepared by the contractor in the
form of a statement of claims attached thereto, giving particulars of the
nature of the claim, grounds on which it is based, and the amount
claimed and shall be supported by a copy of the notice sent in respect
thereof by the contractor to the Engineer-in-Charge and the Site
Engineer under Clause 6.6.1.0. It further provides that any variance
with the claim notified by the contractor within the provision of Clause
6.6.1.0 shall be deemed to be a claim different from the notified claim
with consequence in respect thereof indicated in Clauses 6.6.1.0 and
6.6.3.1.
78. Clause 6.6.3.1 further provides that the owner (IOCL) shall not
in any way be liable in respect of any notified claim not specifically
reflected in the final bill in accordance with the provisions of Clause
6.6.3.0. It further provides that in and all notified claims not
specifically reflected and included in the final bill in accordance with the
provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 shall be deemed to have been waived by
the contractor and the owner (IOCL) shall have no liability in respect
thereof and the contractor shall not be entitled to raise or include in the
final bill any claims other than a notified claim conforming in all
respects and in accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0.
79. Clause 6.6.4.0 provides that no claim shall on any account be
made by the contractor after the final bill. It further provides that any
such claim shall be deemed to have been waived and with respect to all
such claims not
included in the final bill, the owner (IOCL) is absolved and discharged,
even if not including the same, the contractor shall have acted under
the mistake of law or fact.
80. Thus, on a fair reading of the aforesaid provisions, it can be seen
that only those claims which are notified after following the procedure
as referred to hereinabove shall be considered as "notified claim" and in
respect of any claim other than the notified claim, the owner is not
liable to pay and as such is absolved and discharged under the said
clauses.
81. The next important clause is Clause 6.7.0.0 with respect to the
discharge of owner's liability. As per Clause 6.7.1.0, the acceptance by
the contractor of any amount paid by the owner to the contractor in
respect of the final dues of the contractor under the final bill upon
condition that the said payment is being made in full and final
settlement of all said dues to the contractor shall, without prejudice to
the notified claims of the contractor included in the final bill in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0, be deemed to be in
full and final satisfaction of all such dues to the contractor
notwithstanding any qualifying remarks, protest or condition imposed
or purported to be imposed by the contractor relative to the acceptance
of such payment.
82. Clause 6.7.2.0 provides that the acceptance by the contractor of
any amount paid by the owner (IOCL) to the contractor in respect of
the notified claims of the contractor included in the final bill in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 and associated
provisions thereunder, upon the condition that such payment is being
made in full and final settlement of all the claims of the contractor
shall, subject to the provisions of Clause 6.7.3.0, be deemed to be in
full and final satisfaction of all claims of the contractor notwithstanding
any qualifying remarks, protest or condition imposed or purported to be
imposed by the contractor relative to the acceptance of such payment
with the intent that upon acceptance by the contractor of any payment
made, the contract (including the arbitration clause) shall stand
discharged and extinguished insofar as relates to and/or concerns the
claims of the contractor.
83. The next important clause to be considered would be Clause
9.0.0.0. The said clause is for Alternative Dispute Resolution Machinery.
As per Clause 9.0.1.0, subject to the earlier clauses, namely, Clauses
6.7.1.0, 6.7.2.0 and 9.0.2.0, any dispute arising out of a notified claim
of the contractor included in the final bill of the contractor in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 and if the contractor
has not opted for the Alternative Dispute Resolution Machinery referred
to in Clause 9.1.1.0 and any dispute arising out of any claim of the
owner against the contractor shall be referred to the arbitration of a
sole arbitrator. It also further provides that the owner may prefer its
claims against the contractor as counterclaims if a notified claim of the
contractor has been referred to arbitration. It also further provides that
the contractor shall not, however, be entitled to raise as a set-off,
defence or counterclaim any claim which is not a notified claim included
in the contractor's final bill in accordance with the provisions of Clause
6.6.3.0.
84. Clause 9.0.2.0 is an exclusion clause by which, certain matters
are specifically excluded from the scope, purview and ambit of the
arbitration agreement. It provides that disputes or differences with
respect to or concerning or relating to any of the matters
mentioned/specified in Clause 9.0.2.0 are excluded from the scope,
purview and ambit of the arbitration agreement. It further provides that
any such matter which is specifically excluded viz.:
(i) with respect to or concerning the scope or existence or
otherwise of the arbitration agreement;
(ii) whether or not a claim sought to be referred to arbitration by
the contractor is a notified claim;
(iii) whether or not a notified claim is included in the contractor's
final bill in accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0; and
(iv) whether or not the contractor has opted for the alternative
dispute resolution machinery with respect to any notified claim
included in the contractor's final bill shall have to be decided by the
General Manager prior to the arbitration proceeding with or
proceeding further with the reference and the arbitrator or the
Arbitral Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction to entertain the same or to
render any decision with respect to such matters.
85. Thus, on a fair reading of Clause 9.0.0.0, only the dispute arising
out of a NOTIFIED CLAIM of the contractor included in the FINAL BILL in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.6.3.0 shall be referred to
arbitration, that too, subject to Clause 9.0.2.0 and any dispute/matter
falling within Clause 9.0.2.0 shall have to be first decided by the
General Manager, including, whether or not a claim sought to be
referred to arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim. Therefore, if
the claim is not a notified claim, as per Clause 6.6.1.0 and the same is
not included in the final bill, such a claim is outside the purview of the
arbitration agreement. Whether or not a claim sought for arbitration by
the contractor is a notified claim or any such matter/dispute is
specifically excluded from the scope, purview and ambit of arbitration
agreement, such matter/dispute shall have to be first decided by the
General Manager prior to the arbitral proceeding with or proceeding
further with the reference. Thus, unless there is a decision by the
General Manager on whether or not a claim sought to be referred to
arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim or not, the arbitrator or
Arbitral Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction to entertain such a dispute.
86. The aforesaid clauses of GCC are part of the contract between
the parties herein and both the parties are bound by the aforesaid
claims.
87. It is the case on behalf of the petitioner IOCL that IOCL had
settled the claim of respondent NCCL accepting NCCL's offer to grant
extension of time; not to give price adjustment of over 4% of the total
contract value and consequently IOCL condoned the delay of 1493 days
and granted extension of time without applying any price discount.
Further for the delay of 65 days, IOCL applied the price discount of Rs
6,44,40,021 i.e. 4% of the total value of contract and thereafter IOCL
released the payment of Rs 4,53,04,021 against
NCCL's final bill (adjusting price discount of Rs 6.4 crores as against Rs
14.8 crores) and also returned NCCL's bank guarantee which came to
be fully accepted by the respondent NCCL. It is the case of IOCL that
thereafter, it was not open for the respondent to raise any further
claim. Therefore, it is the case on behalf of the petitioner that, there
being "accord and satisfaction" for the claim, being an "excepted
claim", it was not open for the respondent to invoke the arbitration
agreement and request for appointment of an arbitrator. It is also the
case on behalf of the petitioner IOCL that in view of the specific
decisions by the General Manager, on "notified claims", in view of
Clause 9.0.2.0, for the same claims which are not held to be "notified
claims" by the General Manager, the matter cannot be referred to the
arbitrator in view of the clause pertaining to excluded matters.
88. On the other hand, it is the case on behalf of the respondent
that acceptance of the amount of Rs 4,53,04,021 was under duress and
coercion. It is also the case on behalf of the respondent that earlier
offer dated 2-11-2016 was a conditional one and was in the nature of
an offer and subsequently when the offer was partially allowed, the
respondent without any delay communicated that the decision to
partially allow its application for EOT is unacceptable as the same is not
in accordance with the conditional offer given by the respondent.
89. Now, so far as the General Manager's decision on notified claims
is concerned, it is the case on behalf of the respondent that even the
decision of the General Manager on the notified claims will always be
subject to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal. By the impugned
judgment and order1 the High Court concluded and summed up as
"136. Having regard to the foregoing discussion hereinabove my
conclusions can be summed as follows:
(I) Where there is contestation or the decision rendered by the
General Manager leaves scope for argument as to whether the
claims lodged by a contractor can be categorised as notified
claims is best left to the Arbitral Tribunal. In other words, except
for the situation where there is no doubt that the claims were not
lodged with the Engineer and the Site Engineer as required under
Clause 6.6.1.0 68 read with 6.6.3.0 69, the matter would have to
be left for resolution by Arbitral Tribunal.
(II) Aspects with regard to accord and satisfaction of the
claims or where there is a dispute will also have to be left to the
Arbitral Tribunal. The position in law in this regard remains the
same both pre and post amendment brought about in the 1996
Act after 23-10-2015.
(III) After the insertion of sub-section (6-A) in Section 11 of
the 1996 Act the scope of inquiry by the Court in a Section 11
petition, (once it is satisfied that it has jurisdiction in the matter)
is confined to ascertaining as to whether or not a binding
arbitration agreement exists qua the parties before it which is
relatable to the disputes at hand.
(IV) The space for correlating the dispute at hand with the
arbitration agreement is very narrow. Thus, except for an open
and shut case which throws up a circumstance indicative of the
fact that a particular dispute does it not fall within the four
corners of the arbitration agreement obtaining between the
parties the matter would have to be resolved by an Arbitral
Tribunal. In other words, if there is contestation on this score, the
Court will allow the Arbitral Tribunal to reach a conclusion one way
or another. This approach would be in keeping with the doctrine of
Kompetenz Kompetenz; a doctrine which has statutory
recognition under Section 16 of the 1996 Act."
90. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective
parties and in the facts and circumstances of the case, the issue/aspect
with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of claims is seriously disputed
and is debatable. Whether, in view of the acceptance of Rs 4,53,04,021
by the respondent NCCL which was released by IOCL on the offer/letter
made by the respondent NCCL dated 2-11-2016 there is an instance of
"accord and satisfaction" of the claims is a good and reasonably
arguable case. It cannot be said to be an open and shut case.
Therefore, even when it is observed and held that such an aspect with
regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the claims may/can be considered
by the Court at the stage of deciding Section 11 application, it is always
advisable and appropriate that in cases of debatable and disputable
facts, good reasonably arguable case, the same should be left to the
Arbitral Tribunal. Similar view is expressed by this Court in Vidya
Drolia 8
91. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, though it
is specifically observed and held that aspects with regard to "accord
and satisfaction" of the claims can be considered by the Court at the
stage of deciding Section 11(6) application, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the High Court has not committed any error
in observing that aspects with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the
claims or where there is a serious dispute will have to be left to the
Arbitral Tribunal.
92. However, at the same time, we do not agree with the conclusion
arrived at by the High Court that after the insertion of sub-section (6-
A) in Section 11 of the Arbitration Act, scope of inquiry by the Court in
Section 11 petition is confined only to ascertain as to whether or not a
binding arbitration agreement exists qua the parties before it, which is
relatable to the disputes at hand.
93. We are of the opinion that though the Arbitral Tribunal may have
jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes including the question
of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability, the same can also be considered by
the Court at the stage of deciding Section 11 application if the facts are
very clear and glaring and in view of the specific clauses in the
agreement binding between the parties, whether the dispute is non-
arbitrable and/or it falls within the excepted clause. Even at the stage
of deciding Section 11 application, the Court may prima facie consider
even the aspect with regard to "accord and satisfaction" of the claims.
94. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the respective parties
on the decision of the General Manager on notified claims in Civil
Appeal No. 341 of 2022 arising out of SLP (C) No. 13161 of 2019 is
concerned, the General Manager has decided/declared that the claims
are not arbitrable since they had been settled and the arbitration
agreement has been discharged under Clause 6.7.2.0 of GCC and no
longer existed/subsisted. As observed hereinabove, the claims had
been settled or not is a debatable and disputable question, which is to
be left to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. Therefore, matters related
to the notified claims in the facts and circumstances of the case also
shall have to be left to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal as in the fact
situation the aspect of "accord and satisfaction" and "notified claims"
both are interconnected and interlinked.
95. Now, so far as Civil Appeal No. 342 of 2022 arising out of SLP
(C) No. 13816 of 2019 is concerned, the General Manager in exercise of
powers under Clause 9.0.2.0 had declared that none of the claims of
the respondent is a notified claim. From the communication dated 22-6
-2018, it appears that the General Manager, after elaborately dealing
with all the alleged notified claims of the respondent has thereafter
found that none of the claims made by the respondent is a notified
claim. On a conjoint reading of the relevant clauses of GCC viz. Clauses
9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0, the dispute arising out of notified claims only,
which is included in the final bill of the contractor can be referred to
arbitration. However, as per Clause 9.0.2.0, any dispute or difference
on whether or not a claim sought to be referred to arbitration by the
contractor is a notified claim falls within the excluded matters and the
arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction and/or authority
with respect thereto. The dispute or difference whether or not a claim
sought to be referred to arbitration by the contractor is a notified claim
shall not and cannot form the subject-matter of any reference or
submission to arbitration.
96. Therefore, on a fair and conjoint reading of Clauses 9.0.1.0 and
9.0.2.0, it can safely be concluded that:
(i) only the notified claims of the contractor included in the final
bill of the contractor in accordance with the provisions of Clause
6.6.3.0 shall have to be referred to arbitration;
(ii) whether or not a claim sought to be referred to arbitration by
the contractor is a notified claim or not, the arbitrator or Arbitral
Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction at all;
(iii) whether or not a claim is a notified claim or not shall have to
be decided by the General Manager and that too, prior to arbitration
proceeding with or proceeding further with the reference.
Therefore, once the General Manager, on the basis of the material on
record takes a conscious decision that a particular claim sought to be
referred to arbitration is not a notified claim, such a claim thereafter
cannot be referred
to arbitration. The language used in Clauses 9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0 is very
clear and unambiguous.
97. As observed hereinabove, parties to the contract are free to
agree on applicability of:
(1) proper law of contract,
(2) proper law of arbitration agreement and
(3) proper law of the conduct of arbitration.
Parties to the contract also may agree for matters excluded from the
purview of arbitration. As observed by this Court in a catena of
decisions, unless the effect of agreement results in performance of an
unlawful act, an agreement, which is otherwise legal, cannot be held to
be void and is binding between the parties.
98. At this stage, the decision of this Court in Sreekanth Transport11
is required to be referred to. In the case before this Court, the contract
provided for exclusion of some matters from the purview of arbitration.
A senior officer of the department was given the authority and power to
adjudicate the same. One of the clauses provided that the decision of
the Senior Officer, being the adjudicator, shall be final and binding
between the parties. This Court considered the same as "excepted
matters". In the aforesaid decision, it is observed and held in para 3 as
"3. "Excepted matters" obviously, as the parties agreed, do not
require any further adjudication since the agreement itself provides a
named adjudicator - concurrence to the same obviously is
presumed by reason of the unequivocal acceptance of the terms of
the contract by the parties and this is where the courts have found
out lacking in their jurisdiction to entertain an application for
reference to arbitration as regards the disputes arising therefrom and
it has been the consistent view that in the event of the claims arising
within the ambit of excepted matters, the question of assumption of
jurisdiction of any arbitrator either with or without the intervention of
the court would not arise; The parties themselves have decided to
have the same adjudicated by a particular officer in regard to these
matters : what these exceptions are however are questions of fact
and usually mentioned in the contract documents and forms part of
the agreement as such there is no ambiguity in the matter of
adjudication of these specialised matters and being termed in the
agreement as the excepted matters."
99. In that view of the matter, the High Court has misread and
misinterpreted Clauses 9.0.1.0 and 9.0.2.0 and has seriously erred in
holding that where there is contestation or the decision rendered by the
General Manager leaves scope for argument as to whether the claims
alleged by the contractor can be categorised as notified claim is best
left to the Arbitral
Tribunal. The dispute whether the claim is a notified claim or not is
specifically excluded from the scope, purview and ambit of the
arbitration agreement. Therefore, once such a dispute falls within the
"excepted matters", any decision by the General Manager on the issue
of notified claims cannot be the subject-matter of arbitration
proceeding.
100. Therefore, the High Court has erred in referring the dispute to
arbitration and appointing a sole arbitrator to adjudicate on the dispute
with respect to the claims which as such are held to be not notified
claims by the General Manager. Therefore, Civil Appeal No. 342 of 2022
arising out of SLP (C) No. 13408 of 2019 as well as Civil Appeals Nos.
343 of 2022 and 345 of 2022 arising out of SLPs (C) Nos. 13813 of
2019 and 13816 of 2019, respectively deserve to be allowed and the
impugned judgment and orders1, 2, 3, 4, 5 passed by the High Court in
respective arbitration petitions deserve to be quashed and set aside.
101. So far as Civil Appeal No. 344 of 2022 arising out of SLP (C)
No. 13815 of 2019 arising out of the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
3
is
concerned, as the General Manager himself has declared that only one
claim of the respondent was/is a notified claim, the said appeal is to be
allowed partly by observing that the claim which is declared by the
General Manager as a notified claim only shall have to be referred to
arbitration and the learned arbitrator shall have no jurisdiction to
adjudicate the disputes with respect to other claims which as such are
not declared as notified claims by the General Manager.
102. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the
following order is passed:
102.1. Civil Appeal No. 341 of 2022 arising out of the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V. Indian Oil
Corpn. Ltd. is hereby dismissed. However, it is observed that the
learned arbitrator shall first decide the aspect with regard to "accord
and satisfaction" of the claims and arbitrability of the disputes with
regard to such claims by deciding an application under Section 16 of
the Arbitration Act, which is reported to be pending. The learned
arbitrator shall first decide the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and
the arbitrability of the claims within a period of three months from the
date of first sitting which shall be within a period of one month from
today. All the contentions and/or defences which may be available to
the respective parties are kept open to be considered by the learned
arbitrator in accordance with law and on its own merits and considering
the relevant clauses of the contract and the material on record.
102.2. Civil Appeal No. 342 of 2022 arising out of the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V. Indian Oil
Corpn. Ltd. is hereby allowed. The impugned judgment and order
2
passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 2
referring the dispute between the parties to arbitration and appointing
the arbitrator is hereby quashed and set aside.
102.3. Similarly, Civil Appeal No. 343 of 2022 arising out of the
impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V.
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 4 and Civil Appeal No. 345 of 2022 arising out of
the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC
Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 5 are allowed and consequently, the
impugned judgments and orders passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd.
V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 4 and NCC Ltd. V. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 5 are
hereby quashed and set aside.
102.4. So far as Civil Appeal No. 344 of 2022 arising out of the
impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V.
Indian
Oil Corpn. Ltd. 3 is concerned, the same is partly allowed. The
impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in NCC Ltd. V.
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. 3 is hereby modified to the extent and it is
directed that only one claim of the respondent which is declared by the
General Manager as a notified claim shall have to be referred to
arbitration and the learned arbitrator shall adjudicate only that claim
which is declared by the General Manager as a notified claim and the
learned Arbitral Tribunal shall not have any jurisdiction to adjudicate on
any other claims which as such are not declared as notified claims.
103. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no
order as to costs.
+
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 13161 of 2019. Arising from the Judgment and Order in NCC Ltd.
dt. 8-2-2019) [Affirmed]
# Arising out of SLP (C) No. 13408 of 2019. Arising from the Judgment and Order in NCC Ltd.
dt. 8-2-2019) [Reversed]
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 13815 of 2019. Arising from the Judgment and Order in NCC Ltd.
dt. 8-2-2019) [Partly allowed]
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 13813 of 2019. Arising from the Judgment and Order in NCC Ltd.
dt. 8-2-2019) [Reversed]
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 13816 of 2019. Arising from the Judgment and Order in NCC Ltd.
V.
dt. 8-2-2019) [Reversed]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
12
13
16
18
14653
SC 1421
22
23
(Civ) 441
24
26
27
30
(Civ) 117
625
34
35
36
37
Rajasthan State Industrial Development & Investment Corpn. V. Diamond & Gem
38
(Civ) 781
39
40 Keir V. Leeman, (1846) 9 QB 371 : 115 ER 1315
41
Soilleux V. Herbst, (1801) 2 Bos & P 444 : 126 ER 1376
42 Wilson V. Wilson, (1848) 1 HL Cas 538
43 Cahill V. Cahill, (1883) LR 8 AC 420 (HL)
45
OnLine SC 781