In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE A.M. KHANWILKAR, DINESH MAHESHWARI AND C.T. RAVIKUMAR, JJ.)
NOEL HARPER AND OTHERS
Petitioners;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER
Respondents.
Writ Petitions (C) No. 566 of 2021+ with Nos. 634 and 751 of 2021,
decided on April 8, 2022
A. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - Ss. 7, 12(1-A), 12-A
and 17(1) (as amended by Act 33 of 2020) - Prohibition on transfer of
foreign contribution to third parties by way of amendment - Constitutional
validity of, affirmed - Amended provisions, held, are not irrational and
arbitrary - Object, reasons and purpose of amended provisions, to
eradicate misuse and abuse of foreign contributions - Explained in detail
- Held, there is no fundamental right vested in anyone to receive foreign
contribution (donation) or foreign exchange
- Held, prohibition brought about by the amended provisions is a just and
proper method to fix accountability of recipient organisation mandating maximum
utilisation by itself for permitted purposes - Same is procedure established by law
- It can neither be said to be arbitrary nor discriminatory much less manifestly
arbitrary within meaning of Art. 14 or impinging upon Art. 21 of the Constitution
- Parliamentary institutions, political associations and academic and other
voluntary organisations as well as individuals working in important areas of national
life should function in a manner consistent with values of a sovereign democratic
republic without being influenced by foreign contributions or foreign hospitality -
The Act makes it clear that regulation of acceptance and utilisation of foreign
contribution is for purpose of protecting "national interests" and to prohibit
organisations of a political nature from receiving foreign contributions
- Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Rules, 2011 - R. 24 - Deletion of, held,
valid, as it enabled transfer of foreign contribution to third parties, which now stands
prohibited under amended provisions of the 2010 Act, validity of which has been
affirmed herein - Constitution of India, Arts. 14 and 21
B. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - S. 7 (as amended by
Act 33 of 2020) - Amended S. 7, held, cannot be regarded as
discriminatory or vague or irrational as it prohibits transfer of foreign
contribution to third parties - Furthermore, there is no lack of rational
nexus of amended S. 7 with object sought to be achieved by principal Act
- Restriction incorporated in amended S. 7, held, applies to a class of persons
who are permitted to accept foreign donation for being utilised by themselves for
definite purposes, without any discrimination and it is so done to uphold objective of
principal Act - Thus, there is clear intelligible differentia with a direct nexus sought
to be achieved with intent of principal Act - Such strict regime had become
inevitable because of experience gained by authorities concerned over a period of
time, including about abuse of earlier dispensation under unamended provision -
Amended S. 7, thus, held, is neither capricious, irrational nor lacking in determining
principle, nor suffers from vice of excessiveness - Amended S. 7 is constitutionally
valid - Constitution of India, Art. 14
C. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - S. 7 (as amended by
Act 33 of 2020) - Prohibition on transfer of foreign contribution to third
parties - Held, such restriction is a reasonable restriction on rights
protected under Arts. 19(1)(c) and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution
- Held, the said prohibition is a reasonable restriction as it does not hinder right
of forming associations as well as to engage in business of charity - "Foreign
exchange" and more so "foreign contribution" can be received or brought within
territory of India only as per dispensation provided for in municipal law - There can
be no absolute right in that regard - Restriction or complete prohibition on transfer
of the foreign contribution or its proceeds to third parties, held, does not prevent
acceptance of foreign contribution and utilisation thereof in manner permitted for
definite purposes, such as cultural, economic, educational or social programmes -
Such a provision must be understood as being procedure established by law in
interests of general public and in interests of sovereignty and integrity of country,
including public order - Resultantly, there is no infraction even of Art. 19(1)(c) or
Art. 19(1)(g) of the Constitution including Arts. 14 and 21 of the Constitution -
Constitution of India, Arts. 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g), 14 and 21
D. Statute Law - Amending Act/Amendment - Scope of enquiry into
validity of amendment(s) - Principles clarified - Whenever challenge
is
made to amended provisions, scope of enquiry, inter alia, held, ought to be
as to whether same is in consonance with principal Act, whether they
achieve object and purpose of principal Act and are otherwise just, rational
and reasonable - In present case, held, the amended provisions (of the
FCRA, 2010) met these tests, and hence, held, valid
- Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - Ss. 7, 12(1-A), 12-A and 17
(1) (as amended by Act 33 of 2020) - Held, valid
E. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - S. 7 (as amended by
Act 33 of 2020) - Prior to the amendment, transfer of foreign contribution
to third parties was permitted - However, the same prohibited by the
amendment - Held, that by itself cannot be basis to challenge validity of
amended provision - For, it is open to Parliament to change benchmark of
restriction from higher standard to lower standard or vice versa on basis of
exigencies and experience gained during implementation of applicable
provision at relevant time
&
F. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - S. 2(1)(h) - "Foreign
contribution" - Meaning
- By its very nature, foreign contribution is a donation accepted from a foreign
source purportedly for definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social
programme and to serve cause of humanity - Words and Phrases - "Foreign
contribution"
G. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - S. 7 (as amended by
Act 33 of 2020) - "Transfer" - Meaning
- "Transfer" has not been defined in Act - Meaning of expression "transfer" in
subject enactment would presuppose giving away of foreign contribution in whole
or in part to third person without retaining any control thereon - Such change of
hands is obviously without offering any services in return, namely, free of costs -
Words and Phrases - "Transfer"
H. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - S. 7 (as amended by
Act 33 of 2020) - "Utilisation" - Meaning
- "Utilisation" has not been defined in Act - Ordinary meaning of expression
"utilisation" must be understood in context of purpose for which a certificate of
registration or prior permission under Act has been granted by Central Government
- Words and Phrases - "Utilisation"
I. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - Ss. 2(1)(h), 3, 5, 7, 8
and 11 r/w Ss. 3, 8 and 9 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
- Foreign contribution - Receiving of - Extent and Manner in which
permissible - Principles clarified
- Receiving "foreign exchange" is itself made subject to the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 - Conjoint reading of provisions of 1999 Act and
regulatory mechanism provided for in 2010 Act, held, clearly establishes the strict
regime to be followed by all concerned for allowing inflow of "foreign
contribution" (donation) only in the manner prescribed and its utilisation only for
definite purposes permitted by competent authority
J. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - Ss. 17(1) and 12(1-A)
(as inserted by Act 33 of 2020) - Foreign contribution - Receiving of - S.
17(1) making it mandatory to open primary FCRA account in SBI, NDMB
(New Delhi Main Branch) only - Amended S. 17(1), held, not discriminatory
on this ground so as to be violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution - Nor does
such a requirement violate Arts. 19(1)(c) and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution
- Constitutional validity of amended S. 17(1), affirmed
- Amended S. 17(1) mandates that FCRA accounts of all registered
persons/organisations are required to be opened in one particular branch in country
The surest way't to legal research!"
providing for essential information and fields, thereby ensuring a complete and
transparent check on inflow and utilisation of foreign contribution towards a single
point source on real-time basis - Despite requirement of opening FCRA account in
designated bank, it is open to organisation to utilise amount so received in FCRA
account through multiple accounts in scheduled branches - In that sense, it is a
balanced approach - Provisions are only for effective regulatory measures
concerning and limited to foreign contribution, in larger public interests, public order,
and more particularly for safeguarding sovereignty and integrity of country
- Fact that earlier FCRA account could be opened in any scheduled bank,
cannot preclude Parliament from legislating a law which requires inflow of foreign
contribution in some other manner specified by law - Merely because framework
of acceptance of foreign contribution had been changed cannot be basis to question
validity of amended provisions - Introducing change for betterment of governance
is prerogative and wisdom of Parliament
- Such requirement, being a matter of security of State, public order and in
interests of general public, it is not open to question validity of such a law on
touchstone of Art. 19(1)(c) or 19(1)(g) of the Constitution - It is not requirement
which completely prohibits forming of associations or engaging in business of
charity as such - It is a regulatory measure and a reasonable restriction
- Constitution of India - Art. 14 - Constitution of India, Arts. 19(1)(c) & (g)
and Arts. 19(4) & (6)
K. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - Ss. 17(1) and 12(1-A)
(as inserted by Act 33 of 2020) - Foreign contribution - Receiving of - S.
17(1) making it mandatory to open primary FCRA account in SBI, NDMB
(New Delhi Main Branch) only - Such requirement, held, cannot be assailed
on ground of inconvenience - Statute Law - Validity of a Statute or
Statutory Provision/Judicial review
L. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 - Ss. 12-A (as inserted
by Act 33 of 2020), 11, 12 and 16 - Requirement of provision of Aadhaar
card or passport or OCI card details of all office-bearers, Directors and key
functionaries of the organisation concerned - Validity of, affirmed
- Underlying purpose of this requirement is merely to identify key functionaries
of registered association so that they can be made accountable for violations, if any
- As passport in case of a foreigner is accepted as sufficient identification
document, there is no reason why such passport of Indian national cannot be relied
upon for same purpose - Provision needs to be construed as permitting furnishing
of Indian passport of key functionaries of applicant who are Indian nationals, for
purpose of their identification - That shall be regarded as substantial compliance of
mandate in S. 12-A concerning identification
Held :
Whenever the challenge is there to the amended provisions, the scope of
enquiry, inter alia, ought to be as to whether the same is inconsonance with the
The surest way legal research!"
principal Act, achieve the object and purpose of the principal Act and are otherwise
just, rational and reasonable. Further, there is no fundamental right vested in
anyone to receive foreign contribution (donation) or foreign exchange; and that is
the
purport of the principal Act and the impugned amendments are only to provide a
regulatory framework and not one of complete prohibition.
(Para 83)
Indisputably, serious concern about the impact of widespread inflow of foreign
contribution on the values of a sovereign democratic republic had been repeatedly
expressed at different levels including in Parliament. To that end, the Bill was
introduced in Parliament in 1973. The legislative intent behind the enactment of the
1976 Act has remained unchanged even to this day-nay it has become more
relevant now. In that, the experience gained aftermath implementation of the 1976
Act revealed that more stringent dispensation was needed to minimise the negative
impact owing to the surge in the inflow of foreign donation and for upholding the
values of a sovereign democratic republic, for which the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 2010 ("the 2010 Act") came to be enacted. In that, even the
amendment effected in 1985 to the 1976 Act was found to be insufficient to deal
with the shortcomings in the law in force, for regulating the inflow and sustained
moderate utilisation of foreign contribution. For that reason, Parliament eventually
decided to replace the regulatory dispensation by enacting a new law (the 2010
Act) to address the mischief.
(Para 84)
In due course of time, however, it was realised that the dispensation enunciated
in the 2010 Act was also not yielding the desired result. This impelled Parliament to
amend the 2010 Act (vide the 2020 Act) to make it more stringent and effective to
subserve the cause and intent of the principal Act-not only in regard to the
modality of acceptance of foreign contribution in the prescribed manner but also
making it imperative for the recipient of foreign contribution to utilise the same
"itself" for the designated or specified purposes for which it was so permitted.
(Para 85)
To eradicate misuse and abuse of foreign contribution in the past, despite the
firm regime in place in terms of the 2010 Act, Parliament in its wisdom has now
(vide the Amendment Act of 2020) adopted the path of moderation by making it
mandatory for all to accept foreign contribution only through one channel and to
utilise the same "itself" for the purposes for which permission has been accorded.
Undeniably, the sovereignty and integrity of India ought to prevail and the rights
enshrined in Part III of the Constitution must give way to the interests of general
public much less public order and the sovereignty and integrity of the nation. It must
be borne in mind that the legislation under consideration must be understood in the
context of the underlying intent of insulating the democratic polity from the adverse
influence of foreign contribution remitted by foreign sources.
(Para 87)
Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Amendment Act of 2020 makes it
amply clear that the annual inflow of foreign contribution had almost doubled
between the years 2010 and 2019 and many recipients of foreign contribution had
not utilised the same for the purposes for which they were registered or granted
prior permission under the Act. Further, many recipients had also failed to adhere to
and fulfil the statutory compliances-which resulted in cancellation of as many as
19,000 certificates of persons/organisations concerned during the stated period,
including initiation of criminal investigation concerning outright misappropriation or
misutilisation of foreign contribution. It was increasingly reported that some of the
NGOs were primarily involved in routing of foreign contribution accepted by them
and not utilising the same itself for the purposes
for which certificate of registration was issued. Such transfer created several
operational issues bordering on malpractices impacting the very intent of the
principal Act. For, routing of foreign contribution entails in diverting it to another
area of activity including misuse thereof. There had been cases of successive
transfers and creation of a layered trail of money making it difficult to trace the flow
and final utilisation.
(Para 88)
By its very nature, foreign contribution is a donation accepted from a foreign
source purportedly for definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social
programme and to serve the cause of humanity. The expression "foreign
contribution" has been defined in Section 2(1)(h) of the 2010 Act to mean
donation, which can be in the form of delivery or transfer made by any foreign
source of any article, currency, security, etc.
(Para 89)
When the 1976 Act was enacted, Parliament had discussed about three options.
The first was of outright prohibition; the second being acceptance subject to prior
permission of the Government; and the third-acceptance subject to intimation
being given to the Government. Parliament opted for the second option and that
continues to this day in the form of the 2010 Act, as amended in 2020. At the
same time, from the experience gained aftermath implementation of the
dispensation predicated for regulating the inflow of foreign contribution from foreign
source and its utilisation, the need to make it more stringent was felt. The
amendments vide the 2020 Act, are the product of that experience and Parliament,
for accomplishing the objectives of the principal Act and to uphold the sovereignty
and integrity of the nation as well as public order and in the interests of the general
public, introduced the regime requiring acceptance of foreign contribution from
foreign source only through one channel and utilising the same by the recipient itself
for the activities for which prior permission has been granted to him in that regard.
(Para 91)
Considering the legislative history and the need for Parliament to periodically
intervene to arrest the increasing influence on the polity of the nation due to the
high volume of inflow of foreign contribution and large-scale improper utilisation and
misappropriation thereof, as noticed by the authorities and keeping in mind the
objective of the principal enactment being to uphold the values of sovereign
democratic republic, the dispensation as altered to make it more strict compliance
mechanism for ensuring that the foreign funds are accepted in the prescribed
manner and utilised by the recipient itself and more so, for the purposes for which it
was allowed to be received by that person, the amended provisions ought to pass
the muster of reasonable restriction. Certainly, such a change cannot be labelled as
irrational much less manifestly arbitrary, especially when it applies uniformly to a
class of persons without any discrimination.
(Para 92)
followed
Amended Section 7 of the 2010 Act postulates complete prohibition on the
transfer of foreign contribution to other person-not even to a person having
certificate of registration under the Act. In other words, a person who is registered
and granted a certificate or has obtained prior permission under the Act to receive
foreign contribution will henceforth be required to utilise the amount "itself" and not
through any other person.
(Para 100)
As per the scheme of the 2010 Act, a certificate of registration is not granted for
acting as an intermediary between the donor (foreign source) and the grassroot
level organisation. The amended provision, therefore, completely rules out such
transfer of foreign contribution by the person who has received/accepted the same
in the first place. That does not prevent the recipient from utilising the foreign
contribution "itself" for the purposes for which he has been granted a certificate of
registration or obtained prior permission under the 2010 Act.
(Para 106)
Expression "transfer" has not been defined in the 2010 Act. The meaning of
expression "transfer" in the subject enactment would presuppose giving away of
the foreign contribution in whole or in part to third person without retaining any
control thereon; and such change of hands is obviously without offering any
services in return, namely, free of costs.
(Para 107)
Even the expression "utilisation" has not been defined in the 2010 Act. The
ordinary meaning of the expression "utilisation" must be understood in the context
of the purpose for which a certificate of registration or prior permission under the
2010 Act has been granted by the Central Government.
(Para 109)
Transfer within the meaning of Section 7 of the 2010 Act, therefore, would be a
case of per se (simpliciter) transfer by the recipient of foreign contribution to third
party without requiring to engage in the definite activities of cultural, economic,
educational or social programme of the recipient of foreign contribution, for which
the recipient had obtained a certificate of registration from the Central Government.
On this interpretation, it must follow that the argument regarding amended Section
7 of the 2010 Act, being ultra vires, must fail.
(Para 109)
It was contended that since the transferee would also possess certificate of
registration and bound by the provisions of the 2010 Act, it would serve no
legitimate purpose by prohibiting transfer of foreign contribution to such person.
Accepting this argument would be completely glossing over the legislative intent for
which the amendment has been effected. The legislative intent is to introduce strict
dispensation qua the recipient of foreign contribution to utilise the same "itself" for
the purposes for which it has been permitted as per the certificate of registration or
permission granted under the Act by the Central Government. In addition, by the
same Amendment Act, utilisation of foreign contribution for administrative purpose
by the recipient has been lowered to twenty per cent only with a view to ensure
maximum spending on the purposes for which the foreign contribution has been
accepted by the recipient having certificate of registration.
(Para 112)
Fact that earlier transfer of foreign contribution was permitted as per the
unamended provision that by itself cannot be the basis to challenge the validity of
the amended provision. For, it is open to Parliament to change the benchmark of
restriction from higher standard to lower standard or vice versa on the basis of the
exigencies and experience gained during the implementation of the applicable
provision at the relevant time.
(Para 114)
Receiving "foreign exchange" is itself completely prohibited and made subject to
exceptions provided for in terms of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
("the 1999 Act"). On conjoint reading of the provisions of the 1999 Act and the
regulatory mechanism provided for in the 2010 Act, it is a clear pointer to the strict
regime to be followed by all concerned for allowing inflow of "foreign
contribution" (donation) in the manner prescribed and its utilisation only for definite
purposes permitted by the competent authority.
(Para 118)
Amended Section 7 of the 2010 Act cannot be regarded as discriminatory or so
to say vague or irrational much less manifestly arbitrary. The restriction therein
applies to a class of persons who are permitted to accept foreign donation for being
utilised by themselves for the definite purposes, without any discrimination and it is
so done to uphold the objective of the principal Act. Thus, there is clear intelligible
differentia with a direct nexus sought to be achieved with the intent of the principal
Act. Such strict regime had become inevitable because of the experience gained by
the authorities concerned over a period of time, including about the abuse of the
earlier dispensation under the unamended provision.
(Para 119)
It is presumed that Parliament understands and reacts to the needs of its own
people as per the exigencies and experience gained in the implementation of the
law. Mere plea of inconvenience is not enough to attract the constitutional inhibition.
The courts ought not to adopt a doctrinaire approach in construing the amended
provisions and undermine the legislative intent of strengthening the regulatory
mechanism concerning foreign contribution. The legislature enjoys considerable
latitude while exercising its wisdom on the basis of inputs collated from different
quarters. There is intrinsic evidence to indicate that the change effected by the
amendments is to serve the legitimate government purpose and has a rational
nexus to the object of the principal Act and the amendments, and that the pre-
amendment dispensation (unamended Section 7 of the 2010 Act) was not
sufficient to effectively regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution
as predicated by the principal Act.
(Para 121)
Parliamentary institutions, political associations and academic and other
voluntary organisations as well as individuals working in the important areas of
national life should function in a manner consistent with the values of a sovereign
democratic republic without being influenced by foreign contributions or foreign
hospitality. Long title of the 2010 Act makes it clear that the regulation of
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution is for the purpose of protecting
"national interests" and to prohibit organisations of a political nature from receiving
foreign contributions.
(Para 123)
and affirmed
As Parliament took a well informed and conscious decision to alter that
position-to make it a strict regulatory regime of not permitting the recipient of
foreign contribution to transfer the funds to third party for the reasons weighed
with it, it must follow that the provision is in the interests of the sovereignty and
integrity of the country, public order and in the interests of the general public.
(Para 124)
"Foreign exchange" and more so "foreign contribution" can be received or
brought within the territory of India only as per the dispensation provided for in the
municipal law. There can be no absolute right in that regard. The fact that transfer
was permitted under the unamended Section 7 of the 2010 Act, it does not follow
that Parliament is not competent to amend that dispensation to make it more
stringent, including to completely prohibit the inflow of foreign contribution. The
amended provision is not to completely prohibit inflow of foreign contribution, but is
a regulatory measure to permit acceptance by registered persons or persons
having prior permission to do so with condition that they must themselves utilise
the entire contribution including for administrative expenses within the limits
provided under Section 8 of the 2010 Act.
(Para 125)
Thus understood, it is a reasonable restriction as it does not hinder with the right
of forming associations as well as to engage in business of charity.
(Para 126)
Restriction or complete prohibition on transfer to third party, by no standards
deprive acceptance of foreign contribution and utilisation thereof in the manner
permitted for definite purposes, such as cultural, economic, educational or social
programme. Such a provision must be understood as being procedure established
by law in the interests of the general public and in the interests of sovereignty and
integrity of the country, including public order. Resultantly, there is no infraction
even of Article 19(1)(c) or 19(1)(g) including Articles 14 and 21 of the
Constitution. Consistent with this view, challenge to the amended Section 7 of the
2010 Act on all counts must be rejected.
(Para 127)
For the same reason, the contention of the writ petitioners about lack of rational
nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the principal Act much less the
Amendment Act, must also fail. The rationale is of larger public interests and more
particularly to obviate adverse impact on the economy, public order, sovereignty
and integrity of the country. Such amendment has been necessitated because of
the past experience consequent to implementation of the unamended Section 7 of
the 2010 Act.
(Para 128)
To overcome the mischief and to enhance transparency and accountability
regarding acceptance and also utilisation of foreign contribution which is quite
substantial every financial year having proliferating effect on the economy of the
nation, it had become necessary to enact amended Section 7. In other words,
there is a clear rationale behind the amendment which is consistent with the
purpose of the principal Act and the object sought to be achieved under the
enactments. The fact that unamended provision was less restrictive, cannot be the
basis to test the constitutional validity of the provision on the touchstone of Article
19(1)(c) or 19(1)(g) or Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. The amended
Section 7 of the 2010 Act, being plain and clear and having nexus with the object
sought to be achieved and is necessitated because of sovereignty and integrity of
India or security of the State, public order and in the interests of the general public.
It is unfathomable as to how the amended provision can be regarded as
unconstitutional on any parameter.
(Para 128)
It was contended that Rule 24 of the 2011 Rules came to be deleted with effect
from 10-11-2020. This rule enabled the registered organisations to transfer foreign
contribution to any unregistered person in the manner provided therein. However,
in light of amendment to Section 7 of the 2010 Act prohibiting transfer of foreign
contribution to any person, the need for the dispensation predicated in Rule 24 had
become non-existent. In other words, as per amended Section 7, there is no need
to continue Rule 24 of the 2011 Rules on the statute book and its continuance for
some time would also make no difference in the wake of express prohibition in
amended Section 7 of the 2010 Act.
(Para 129)
Contention of the respondents that Section 17 of the 2010 Act came to be
amended aftermath realisation of clear and discernible lacunae had cropped in
due to the presence of FCRA accounts of scores of registered organisations, in
different scheduled banks across the country appreciated by the Supreme Court.
The challenge became more pronounced due to doubling of foreign contribution
inflow in the last decade which had impacted the efficiency of monitoring and
achieving the object of the principal Act. The amended provision now mandates that
FCRA accounts of all the registered persons/organisations are required to be
opened in one particular branch in the country providing for essential information
and fields, thereby ensuring a complete and transparent check on the inflow and
utilisation of foreign contribution towards a single point source on real-time basis.
(Para 132)
Fact that earlier FCRA account could be opened in any scheduled bank, cannot
preclude Parliament from legislating a law which requires inflow of foreign
contribution in some other manner specified by law. Merely because the framework
of
acceptance of foreign contribution had been changed cannot be the basis to
question the validity of the amended provisions. Introducing change for the
betterment of governance is the prerogative and wisdom of Parliament.
(Para 133)
Parliament must be credited with for having taken recourse to corrective
dispensation for eradicating the mischief, which any sovereign country can ill-afford.
Parliament is supreme and has a final say in matters of legislation when it reflects
on alternatives and choices with inputs from different quarters, with a check in the
form of democratic accountability and a further check by the courts which exercise
the power of judicial review. It had become necessary for Parliament to step in and
provide a stringent regime for effectively regulating the inflow and utilisation of
foreign contribution. Hence, there had been legitimate goal for amending the
subject provisions of acceptance of funds through one channel. Concededly, despite
the requirement of opening FCRA account in the designated bank, it is open to the
organisation to utilise the amount so received in the FCRA account through multiple
accounts in the scheduled branches. In that sense, it is a balanced approach.
(Para 134)
Opening of main FCRA account in the designated bank as per the law made by
Parliament in that regard, cannot be brushed aside on the specious argument of
some inconvenience being caused to the registered associations. Assuming that
some inconvenience is likely to be caused to few applicants, but the constitutionality
of a statute cannot be assailed on the basis of fortuitous circumstances and more
so when it being only a one-time exercise to ensure inflow of foreign contribution
through one channel only, being a precondition for grant of permission. There is no
restriction regarding utilisation of the funds only through that (primary) FCRA
account. For, it is open to the recipient to operate multiple accounts in other
scheduled banks for its utilisation.
(Para 135)
affirmed
As a matter of law, the validity of the amendments must be tested on the
touchstone of tenets underlying Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. The
permission is a precondition for acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution.
Such persons are a separate class and engage in specified activity. It cannot be
a usual or ordinary business for everyone and anyone wanting to accept foreign
contribution. Permitting inflow of foreign contribution, which is a donation, is a
matter of policy of the State backed by law. In present case, it is governed by the
2010 Act as amended. It is open to the State to have a regime which may
completely prohibit receipt of foreign donation, as no right inheres in the citizen to
receive foreign contribution (donation).
(Para 136)
The provision such as Sections 12(1-A) and 17(1) of the 2010 Act introduced
by the Amendment Act, is a holistic approach adopted by Parliament to provide for
strict regulatory measure and for ensuring transparency and accountability in the
matter of foreign contribution. Notably, there was unanimity amongst the members
of both the Houses cutting across party lines to have such a strict regime as
indiscriminate receipt/inflow and more so utilisation of foreign contribution had been
threatening the sovereignty and integrity of the country itself. Being a matter of
security of the State, public order and in the interests of the general public, it is not
open to question the validity of such a law on the touchstone of Article 19(1)(c) or
19(1)(g) of the Constitution. It is not a provision to completely prohibit forming of
the associations or engaging in business of charity as such. It is a provision for
regulating the manner of doing business more importantly, concerning foreign
contribution.
(Para 137)
Opening of main FCRA account in the designated bank, as has been rightly
contended by the respondents, is only a one-time exercise and for which
instructions and protocols have been issued by the competent authority, not to
insist for physical presence for complying with the formalities. Merely because the
registered association has been compelled to open FCRA account in the designated
bank at the centralised location for receipt/inflow of foreign contribution from
foreign source, it does not follow that such a requirement would be manifestly
arbitrary or unreasonable. It is only a one-time exercise to be complied with for
availing the permission accorded by the Central Government under the Act to be a
certified association or person given permission to receive foreign contribution as a
precondition.
(Para 138)
Having noted that the provision became necessary for efficient regulation of
foreign contribution on real-time basis, it can neither be said to be manifestly
arbitrary nor irrational much less without legitimate objective of the State.
Accordingly, there is no hesitation in negating the challenge to these provisions as
being violative of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
(Para 142)
Reverting to the challenge to the insertion of Section 12-A of the 2010 Act vide
the Amendment Act of 2020, it mandates that the person concerned who seeks
prior permission or prior approval under Section 11 of the 2010 Act, or makes an
application for arant of certificate under Section 12 of the 2010 Act. including for
renewal of certificate under Section 16 of the 2010 Act, to provide as identification
document, the Aadhaar number of all its office-bearers or Directors or other key
functionaries. It has a legitimate purpose and nexus sought to be achieved with the
objective underlying the principal Act and the subject amendment. It is not open to
argue that associations desirous of obtaining certificate of registration under this Act
need not furnish official identification document pertaining to its key functionaries.
(Para 145)
Regardless of the above, Section 12-A of the 2010 Act envisages that a copy of
the passport can also be provided as identification document of all its office-bearers
or Directors or other key functionaries or Overseas Citizen of India Card, in case of
a foreigner. The underlying purpose of this provision is merely to identify the key
functionaries of the registered association so that they can be made accountable
for violations, if any. As the passport in case of a foreigner is accepted as sufficient
identification document, there is no reason why such passport of Indian national
cannot be relied upon for the same purpose. Thus understood, the challenge to this
provision cannot be sustained. Provision (Section 12-A of the 2010 Act) needs to
be construed as permitting furnishing of the Indian passport of the key functionaries
of the applicant who are Indian nationals, for the purpose of their identification.
(Para 146)
Thus, it is declared that the amended provisions vide the 2020 Act, namely,
Sections 7, 12(1-A), 12-A and 17 of the 2010 Act are intra vires the Constitution
and the principal Act, for the reasons noted hitherto. As regards Section 12-A, it
must be construed as permitting the key functionaries/office-bearers of the
applicant (associations/NGOs) who are Indian nationals, to produce Indian passport
for the purpose of their identification. That shall be regarded as substantial
compliance of the mandate in Section 12-A of the 2010 Act concerning
identification.
(Para 149)
followed
RM-D/69401/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Senior Advocate [Abishek Jabaraj, Ms
Srishti Agnihotri (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Nupur Raut, Ms Ishita
Chowdhury, Ms Sanjana Grace Thomas, Gautam Jha (Advocate-on-
Record), Piyush Chhabra, Bripendra Singh and Praveen Swarup
(Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the Petitioners;
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor
General [Kanu Aggrawal, M.K. Maroria (Advocate-on-Record), Sanjay
Kapur (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Swarupama Chaturvedi (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Sanmaya Kapoor and Ms Himanshi Goel, Advocates], for
the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Manohar Lal Sharma V. Union of India
578e
568a
Supplies and Services During Pandemic, In re
562f-g
(INSAF) V. Union of India
577b, 611a
India
568c-d, 614e-f
India
562a, 572a, 579f, 610f-g
560c-d, 562a, 565f-g,
V. Union of India
577e, 578e, 579g-h,
610e-f
Singh Johar V. Union of India
562a
of India V. Indian Radiological & Imaging Assn.
568b-c
Teesta Atul Setalvad V. State of Gujarat
563a
568b-c
V. Union of India
572e-f
Shayara Bano V. Union of India
562a, 569e, 610b-c
573a
Waghmare V. Indore Municipal Corpn.
568b-c
College & Research Centre V. State of M.P.
562a
State of Kerala
572a
Singhal V. Union of India
578a-b, 610e-f
Sahara India Real Estate Corpn. Ltd. V. SEBI
573a
In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 2012
562a
The surest way't to legal research!
Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re
573a
State of M.P. V. Narmada Bachao Andolan
569a-b
H.P. Nizi Vyavsayik Prishikshan Kendra Sangh
568b-c
Council for Technical Education V. Surinder
Kumar Dhawan
566f-g, 615a
Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat
572a
Liberties V. State of T.N.
561b-c
People's Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India
572a
Basheer V. State of Kerala
570b-c
572a
State (UT of Chandigarh)
573a
570b
V. Union of India
572a
Foundation V. State of Karnataka
561g
570b, 610d-e
Union of India
569a-b
Kerala
572a
572a
of India
569a
Orissa
571f-g
T.N.
569a
State of A.P.
570b
Investment Co. Ltd. V. RBI
569a
1, Indra Sawhney V. Union of India
561g
Mohan Kumar Singhania V. Union of India
570b
Jan Mohammed Usmanbhai
571f-g
Garg V. Union of India
568f, 595g-h
U.P.
566f, 615a
Hasia V. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi
561g
India
561f-g, 579f
Stainislaus V. State of M.P.
563a
Gujarat
570b
V. State of M.P.
572f
Serajuddin V. State of Orissa
571f
571f
Divisional Magistrate
571f
570b
(Banks Nationalisation) V. Union of India
568e-f, 595g-h
Amritsar V. State of Punjab
571e-f
59. AIR 1964 SC 1501, Bira Kishore Deb V. State of
Orissa
570a-b
US 726 (1963), Ferguson V. C. Skrupa
568a-b
61. AIR 1963 SC 1047, Akadasi Padhan V. State of
Orissa
571e-f
62. AIR 1963 SC 812, O.K. Ghosh V. E.X. Joseph
571d-e
AIR 1963 SC 591, Khandige Sham Bhat V. ITO
570a-b
64. AIR 1962 SC 1796, Daya V. Controller of Imports
& Exports
571e-f
65. AIR 1961 SC 884, Babulal Parate V. State of
Maharashtra
571e-f
66. AIR 1958 SC 578, Express Newspaper (P) Ltd. V.
Union of India
570a-b
67. AIR 1958 SC 538, Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R.
Tendolkar
570a-b
68. AIR 1958 SC 232, P. Balakotaiah V. Union of India
570a-b
69. AIR 1955 SC 795, Kishan Singh V. Ther Singh
570a-b
70. AIR 1955 SC 367, Hans Muller of Nurenburg V.
Supt., Presidency Jail
570a
71. AIR 1955 SC 334, D.P. Joshi V. State of Madhya
Bharat
570a
72. AIR 1955 SC 191, Budhan Choudhry V. State of
Bihar
570a
73. AIR 1955 SC 166, Sakhawant Ali V. State of
Orissa
570a
74. AIR 1954 SC 728, Saghir Ahmad V. State of U.P.
571e-f
Singh V. RTA
570a
Shantaram More V. Bombay Housing Board
570a
Bajoria V. State of W.B.
570a
Gajapati Narayan Deo V. State of Orissa
561f-g
Mohamed V. State of Hyderabad
570a
569f-g
Bombay
569f-g
573a
Saurashtra
569f
569f
of India
569f
572f-g
576g-h
US 538 (1949), American Federation of Labor V.
American Sash & Door Co.
568a-b
US 144 (1938), United States V. Carolene
Products Co.
568a-b
US 379 (1937), West Coast Hotel Co. V. Parrish
568a-b
US 262 (1932), New State Ice Co. V. Liebmann
568a
US 45 (1905), Joseph Lochner V. People of the
State of New York
568a, 568a-b
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
A.M. KHANWILKAR, J. These petitions under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India primarily assail the constitutional validity of the
amendments to the provisions of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Act, 2010 (for short "the 2010 Act" or "the principal Act", as the case
may be) vide the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act,
2020 (for short "the 2020 Act" or "the Amendment Act", as the case
may be), which has come into effect on 29-9-2020, in particular,
Sections 7, 12(1-A), 12-A and 17(1), being manifestly arbitrary,
unreasonable and impinging upon the fundamental rights guaranteed
to the petitioners under Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
1. Re : Writ Petition (Civil) No. 566 of 2021
2. Petitioner 1 in this petition along with Carol Faison founded a trust
in the name of "The Care and Share Charitable Trust" in Vijayawada,
India (bearing Registration No. 242/1997), in the year 1997. It is the
case of the petitioners that the Trust is also registered with the Income
Tax Authorities and the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India
including under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (for
short "the 1976 Act") for receipt of foreign funds (FCRA No. 010260151
dated 8-12-1998 and renewed on 10-8-2016 under the 2010 Act).
Petitioner 1 is serving as one of the trustees of the said Trust and
Petitioner 2 (Nigel Mills) is a social worker and one of the trustees of
the stated Trust. The Trust is engaged in the social upliftment activity
such as helping children below the poverty line in Vijayawada (Andhra
Pradesh, India), street children, children of sex workers, physically
challenged kids, shelter orphans, abandoned babies and assisting
juveniles detained in the observation home (local reformatory). The
Trust has built and is running nine schools in different slums. It has
rescued over 1000 street children, 165 infants, HIV positive and AIDS
orphans of Vijayawada. The Trust also engages in daily milk programme
for 500 kindergarten children since year 2000. The Trust has been
awarded National Award for Child Welfare by the Government of India,
Ministry of Women and Child Development in the year 2007, for its
exceptional work and contribution in the field of child welfare.
3. Petitioners 3 and 4 are also trustees of National Worker Welfare
Trust ("NWWT"), which is registered under the Trusts Act, 1882 (for
short "the 1882 Act") in Secunderabad, Telangana on 17-5-2016. Even
this trust is registered with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of
India under the 2010 Act for receipt of foreign funds (FCRA Registration
No. 010230883). It is engaged in rehabilitation of migrant workers,
with International Labour Organisation ("ILO") and addresses the
concerns of women workers from the marginalised communities and
prospective migrant workers (inter-State and overseas), families of
migrants, communities, leaders of communities, returnees, women
organisations, trade unions, local panchayats, Mandal, district and State
department connected with labour and administration and governance
related to these workers. Both these trusts, it is urged, are dependent
upon foreign contributions to meet their day-to-day expenses.
However, with the amendments effected in year 2020 to the provisions
of the 2010 Act, a
new dispensation has been set forth, which in their opinion, is
manifestlv arbitrarv. For. it entails in cancellation of certificate of the
trust permitting receipt of foreign contributions for being utilised
towards the activities of the trust concerned. Similarly, the operational
"FCRA account" will be barred from receiving foreign contribution. The
petitioner Trusts and similarly placed persons2 (individuals/non-profit
organisations) shall mandatorily have to shift to new regime and open
FCRA account(s) in the specified branch on or before the designated
date. There is no tangible justification forthcoming for introducing such
a change in the dispensation.
4. The petitioners have referred to the Circular issued by Reserve
Bank of India ("RBI") dated 6-2-2012 in exercise of its power under
Section 36(1)(a) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, containing
detailed guidelines for implementation of the provisions of the 2010 Act
including the opening of FCRA accounts in all scheduled commercial
banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks/RRBs) throughout India. Public
notice dated 3-10-2020 issued by Respondent 2 after advent of the
changed dispensation owing to the amendment of the provisions of the
2010 Act in the year 2020 is, therefore, excessive and without
jurisdiction and, thus, unenforceable in law. Further, the amendment of
Section 7 of the 2010 Act prohibits the registered person from
transferring any foreign contribution irrespective of whether such
person is duly registered or not, which was otherwise permitted under
the unamended provision. This change is also arbitrary and directly
affects the implementation of the social upliftment schemes of the
Trusts through foreign contribution. It is a blanket ban on transfer of
foreign contributions, thus affecting the collaborations in developing
ecosystem(s), especially for smaller and less visible grassroot
organisations that may not meet the criteria or be able to
submit detailed proposals to get access to grants from foreign
countries. The grassroot organisations, in some cases, may not have
the track record or meet the eligibility criteria to obtain registration
under the Act and are entirely dependent on the funding/transfer by
foundations, such as the petitioner Trusts. The intermediary
organisations, which provide the necessary identification, monitoring
and capability building of the smaller non-profit organisations, which
would be completely jeopardised because of the changed dispensation.
Resultantly, Section 7 read with Section 17(1), as amended, is violative
of the rights guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(c) and 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India. These provisions also suffer from the vice of
ambiguity and overbreadth or over-governance, thereby violating
Article 14 as well.
5. The petitioners have also assailed the validity of Section 12-A,
whereby it is made mandatory to produce Aadhaar card details of the
office-bearers/functionaries/Directors of the societies/trusts
as
identification document for the purpose of seeking registration, even
though they are expected to file application for grant of certificate
under Section 12 or get their certificate renewed under Section 16. To
buttress this assail, the petitioners have relied upon the dictum of the
Constitution Bench of this Court in K.S. Puttaswamy (Aadhaar-5 J.) V.
Union of India ³.
6. The petitioners have also challenged the validity of Sections 17(1)
and 12(1-A) on the ground that the same suffer from the vice of
manifest unreasonableness, ambiguity, overbreadth and impose
unreasonable restrictions. Section 17(1) is also discriminatory, as it
mandates opening of "FCRA account" and receiving of foreign
contribution only at one bank at New Delhi i.e. New Delhi Main Branch
(for short "NDMB") of State Bank of India (for short "SBI"), 11, Sansad
Marg, New Delhi 110 001 on specious ground of logistical issues for
verification of accounts at different locations. Broadly on these
assertions, the petitioners have prayed for the following reliefs:
"(a) To hold and declare that the impugned Sections 7, 12-A, 12
(1-A) and 17 as inserted in the FCRA, 2010 by the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2020 are ultra vires
Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India and the same be
struck down as unconstitutional.
(b) A writ in the nature of certiorari and/or any other writ, order or
direction of like nature setting aside and quashing the impugned
public notice dated 13-10-2020 issued by Respondent 2 as illegal
and unconstitutional.
(c) To direct the respondents not to interfere with the acceptance
and utilisation of foreign contribution, operation of the existing bank
accounts in the scheduled banks and function of the petitioners and
its bona fide members, and
(d) Pass such other order/orders as your Lordships may deem fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case."
2. Re : Writ Petition (Civil) No. 751 of 2021
7. Petitioners 1 to 4 in this petition claim to be non-profit
organisations/Trusts from all over the country having registration under
the 2010 Act and Petitioner 5 is an individual. The petitioner Trusts are
voluntary organisations, duly registered under the unamended 2010
Act. They are engaged in carrying out social, educational and/or
religious charitable activities for persons across communities. Their
activities range from providing educational and vocational training and
food, clothing and medicine for the destitute, to support the disabled
and the aged, conducting AIDS awareness camps and taking care of
the needs of widows and orphaned children. They claim to have played
pivotal role in COVID-19 relief efforts. Reliance is placed on the dictum
of this Court in Public Union for Civil Liberties V. State of as to the
recognition by this Court regarding indispensable role played by non-
profit organisations.
8. Even these petitioners have assailed amended provisions of the
2010 Act, in particular, Section 17 of the Act being violative of Articles
14, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution of India insofar as it
requires opening of primary FCRA account in SBI, NDMB only. It is their
case that non-profit organisations and voluntary organisations such as
the petitioner organisations contribute enormously to India's GDP and
provide livelihood to millions of people through direct employment and
social welfare activities undertaken by them. Their role ranges from
service delivery and welfare activities and welfare works for community
development, promoting democracy, human rights, equitable
governance and citizens' participation. They focus their activities
particularly in low social sector spending in India by tapping into global
philanthropy. It is stated that foreign contributions have increased from
Rs 10,282 crores in 2009-2010 to Rs 16,343 crores in 2018-2019,
which is a significant contribution through foreign funds. The amended
provisions of the 2010 Act, however, have altered the compliance
procedure including the registration of the Trusts receiving foreign
contributions. That change, however, is manifestly arbitrary, irrational
and unreasonable. The purpose of provisions such as Section 17
(unamended) and the relevant Rules framed under the Act served the
cause of effective monitoring of foreign contribution received, in order
to prevent misutilisation of such funds. However, the amended
provision is excessive, irrational, arbitrary and falls foul of test of
proportionality. It suffers from the vice of disproportionate restrictions
and failure to provide fair procedure. To buttress the grounds of
challenge, reliance is placed on K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo V. State of
Orissa5. Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India6. Ajay Hasia V. Khalid Mujib
Sehravardi-; Indra Sawhney V. Union of India 8: T.M.A. Pai Foundation V.
State of Karnataka ²; Natural Resources Allocation,
In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 201210 ; Modern Dental College &
Research Centre V. State of M.P.¹ Shayara Bano V. Union of India-
Navtej Singh Johar V. Union of India ¹³ ; K.S. Puttaswamy3; Anuradha
Bhasin V. Union of India¹4. and Indian Social Action Forum (INSAF) V.
Union of India¹5 (for short "INSAF").
9. On such assertion, the petitioners have prayed for the following
reliefs:
"(a) A writ of mandamus or any other writ/order declaring that
Section 17 of the FCRA is violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g)
and 21 of the Constitution, insofar as it requires that the primary
FCRA account is to be opened exclusively in a branch of State Bank
of India, New Delhi, as notified by Respondent 1;
(b) A writ of certiorari or any other writ/order quashing MHA
Notification No. S.O. 3479(E) dated 7-10-2020 issued by
Respondent 1 as being violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g)
and 21 of the Constitution;
(c) A writ of certiorari or any other writ/order quashing the public
notice bearing F. No. II/21022/23/(35)/2019-FCRA-III dated 13-10-
2020 as being violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g) and 21 of
the Constitution;
(d) A writ of certiorari or any other writ/order quashing the public
notice bearing II/21022/36/(58)/2021-FCRA-III dated 18-5-2021 as
being violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the
Constitution.
(e) Any other orders as deemed fit in the interests of justice."
3. Re : Writ Petition (Civil) No. 634 of 2021
10. This petition is filed as public interest litigation under Article 32
of the Constitution, challenging the decision of the competent authority
in extending the timeline for registration and compliance as per the
amended provisions of the 2010 Act being unnecessary and in excess of
the authority. It is a counter-action filed by an individual for issuing
direction and peremptory writ of mandamus against Respondent 1
(Union of India) to desist from granting further extension to Non-
Governmental Organisations (for short "NGOs") for complying with the
provisions of the 2020 Act; and to maintain register of all NGOs
receiving funds from the foreign countries strictly as per the provisions
of amended 2010 Act. This petitioner is also relying upon the dictum in
INSAF15 ; adverting to the objective of the 2010 Act.
11. Reliance is also placed on the elucidation of this Court in
Distribution of Essential Supplies and Services During Pandemic, In
re 16, for issuing a peremptory writ. Also, reliance is placed on the
decision in Teesta Atul Setalvad
V. State of Gujarat17, to urge that in the past instances have come to
the fore regarding misappropriation of funds by NGOs. Lastly, reliance
is placed on Rev. Stainislaus V. State of M.P. 18
12. The principal relief claimed in this petition, however, does not
survive for consideration. For, the date of last extension granted by the
competent authority has expired; and no further extension had been
granted thereafter during the pendency of this writ petition.
Nevertheless, we reproduce the reliefs claimed in this writ petition,
which read thus:
"A. Issue a peremptory writ of mandamus directing Respondent 1
not to grant any further extension to the NGOs from complying with
the mandate of the FCRA (Amendment) Act, 2020.
B. Direct Respondent 1 and Respondent 2 to maintain a register
of all NGOs who are involved in the receiving of funds received under
FCRA, particularly during COVID times.
C. Direct Respondent 3 to place on record all information about
the steps taken by it with regard to the FCRA violation by NGOs, in
the context of child rights?
D. Pass such other order or directions as this Hon'ble Court may
deem fit in the facts and circumstances of the case for doing
complete justice in the matter."
4. Common reply of respondent Union of India
13. The respondents have filed a common affidavit in response to
the averments made in the three writ petitions. The thrust of their plea
is that the amendment does not bar any person to transact in foreign
contribution provided it is compliant with the parameters predicated in
the 2010 Act including concerning FCRA registration or prior
permission. The amendments were necessitated owing to past
experience of the executive and is a matter of legislative wisdom. The
amendments are intended to ensure effective regulatory measures
regarding inflow and utilisation of foreign funds. These are uniformly
applicable and do not discriminate any NGO receiving foreign
contribution from foreign donors and its utilisation. It is stated that the
amendments, in no manner, impact the fundamental rights, much less
under Articles 14, 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution, as
contended.
14. The 2010 Act lays down a clear legislative policy of strict control
in respect of foreign contributions and its utilisation for specified
activities in the country. This is so because the inputs from
stakeholders and duty-holders concerned made it evident that the
foreign contribution owing to its nature and vast expanse was being
abused by some registered organisations. Indisputably, no absolute
right inheres in any one, much less to receive foreign contribution
outside the framework delineated by Parliament and implemented
by the executive. Every person receiving foreign contribution is obliged
to comply with the regulatory and procedural preconditions. The
regulatory and procedural preconditions have been specified by law in
the form of the 2010 Act and amendments made thereto vide the 2020
Act. The same being quintessence are required to be fulfilled for
acceptance of foreign contribution and its utilisation.
15. Notably, in these petitions, no challenge is set forth in respect of
amended provisions, as obtained prior to coming into force of the 2020
Act. The same were complied with by all concerned without any demur.
16. The purpose behind the amendment of 2020, is to make
meaningful and effective regulatory arrangement and real-time
reporting of utilisation of the foreign contribution for the activity for
which it has been earmarked and permitted to be so used in terms of
the registration certificate or prior permission of the competent
authority.
17. The permission to receive foreign contribution is granted to
persons for a definite cultural, economic, educational or social
programme meant for the benefit of the society, as mandated in
Sections 11 and 12 of the 2010 Act. The dispensation envisaged in the
Act is to seek registration or prior permission of the competent
authority to receive and utilise foreign contribution. The person having
obtained such certificate of registration or prior permission, cannot
complain about the regulatory provisions regarding utilisation thereof
for the prescribed activities. For, the legislative intent behind
enactment of the 2010 Act is that foreign contribution cannot be
allowed unless it is tightly regulated and controlled.
18. The implementation of the 2010 Act increasingly revealed that
certain NGOs were involved primarily in routing of foreign contributions
only. They received and utilised foreign contribution by transferring it to
other NGOs, thereby establishing a principal-client relationship. To
overcome this mischief, it became necessary to amend the provisions
for effective regulatory and control measures in respect of receipt and
utilisation of foreign contribution. These amendments were necessitated
because of large-scale transfers of foreign contribution and sudden rise
in the inflow thereof in the recent past creating several operational
difficulties and malpractices, that threatened to defeat the very purpose
of the 2010 Act. The regulatory agencies were finding it difficult to
monitor the ultimate utilisation of foreign contribution by the
transferee. To stop such violations and malpractices and to fix
accountability, it was considered necessary to stop the transfer of
foreign contribution and thus ensure that the recipient of the foreign
contribution itself utilises the same.
19. The need to mandate the utilisation of foreign contribution by
the recipient NGO itself, is also on account of the purport of Sections 11
and 12 of the Act. The same predicate that FCRA registration be offered
to an
association19 having definite programme to spend the foreign
contribution on purposes useful to society. The NGOs merely indulging
in transfer of foreign contribution to other NGOs albeit registered or
persons having prior permission, is not the scheme of the 2010 Act. In
order to ensure that the purported legitimate activities of NGOs do not
result in foreign contribution being diverted from one area of activity to
other area leading to its misuse including threatening the sovereignty
and integrity of the country, Parliament opted the strict dispensation of
restricted utilisation of foreign contribution by the recipient NGOs itself
for the permitted activities. The amended provisions are intended to
remedy the mischief of endless chain of transfers of foreign contribution
from the recipient NGOs to other registered NGOs creating layered trail
of money making it difficult to trace the flow and legitimate utilisation
thereof.
20. The successive multiple chain of transfers not only create a
layered trail of money, but also lead to substantive portion of foreign
contribution being utilised as administrative expenditure by the entity
concerned by claiming it as its own allowance for administrative
expenditure to the extent of 50% of the receipt. The aggregate of such
administrative expenditure, if reckoned with the aggregate quantum of
inflow of funds by the original recipient, would, in a given situation, far
exceed the statutory bar of 50% of total contribution received by the
NGO from abroad. Further, the wisdom of Parliament was also in favour
of reducing the permissibility of administrative expenditure by limiting
it to 20%, so that maximum benefit is reaped by the society at large
due to its utilisation for permissible activities of the NGO.
21. The subject amendment became necessary also to obliterate the
mischief of foreign powers and foreign State and non-State actors
indulging in activities resulting in interference in the internal polity of
the country with ulterior designs. Resultantly, sub-section (1-A) has
been inserted in Section 12 of the 2010 Act, making it essential to
furnish details of FCRA account. This is in consonance with the manner
specified in Section 17 of the Act. In other words, insertion of sub-
section (1-A) was to infuse compatibility with other provisions of the
2010 Act. To that end, a new section, Section 12-A has also been
inserted requiring furnishing of Aadhaar card details in lieu of
identification document. It is urged that the petitioners have
misapplied the exposition of the Constitution Bench in K.S.
Puttaswamy3. The said decision
does not completely rule out the possibility of intrusion into the privacy
of a person, which is backed by a just law.
22. The core intent behind the provisions such as Section 12-A is to
facilitate proper identification of person and associations with which the
persons are connected and also purposeful real-time monitoring of
activities for ensuring that the same are not detrimental to the national
interest. As a matter of fact, the 2010 Act (unamended) itself
mandates that benami and fictitious activities are prohibited under the
Act. Thus, proper identification of person at the time of registration
would ensure proper identification of functionaries of FCRA/NGOs. Such
a provision ought to stand the test of legitimate aim and also
proportionality test.
23. The amended Section 17(1) specifies receipt of foreign
contribution in designated FCRA account in SBI, NDMB. An NGO is
required to open such account for the purpose of remittances of foreign
contribution. The proviso to Section 17(1) envisages that the FCRA
account-holder is free to add any FCRA account in any of the scheduled
bank of his choice for the purpose of receipt and utilisation of foreign
funds received in his FCRA account with the specified branch of SBI at
New Delhi i.e. SBI, NDMB. The operation of the FCRA account would be
controlled by the account-holder itself. The stipulation only requires the
inflow of foreign contribution through designated channel which is to
ensure effective implementation of proper regulatory and controlled
measures. Sufficient time was given to the FCRA account-holder to
comply with the formalities as per the new dispensation.
24. Initially, a public notice was issued on 13-10-2020 providing for
procedure and operation of the designated FCRA account, giving time
till 31-3-2021, which came to be extended from time to time until
December 2021. It is stated that Respondent 1 also informed all the
FCRA registered associations/organisations through SMS and email on
their registered mobile number and email address about the public
notice dated 13-10-2020. The competent authority also amended the
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Rules, 2011 (for short "the 2011
Rules"). It is urged that some individual hardship may be caused to the
registered associations on account of the change, but that cannot be
the basis to declare the law made by Parliament, vide the 2020 Act,
20
invalid. Reliance is placed on Laxmi Khandsari V. State of U.P. and
All
India Council for Technical Education V. Surinder Kumar Dhawan21,
wherein this Court held that the Court must refrain from interfering
with policy matters on the specious ground of individual hardship to
some persons.
25. It is further stated that the 2010 Act mandates the Ministry of
Home Affairs (for short "the MHA") to regulate the receipt and
utilisation of foreign contributions in the country. That process involves
multiple steps including audit, inspection and filing of annual return
and monitoring of fund flow. Accordingly, a systematic monitoring of
FCRA bank account is imperative part of the regulatory measures
provided in the Act and the Rules made
thereunder. It is elaborated that presently there are about 22,600
NGOs holding registration or prior permission for specific
project/programme. These NGOs used to receive foreign contribution in
an exclusive bank account of their choice in any bank in India. That
resulted in opening of multiple accounts in hundreds of branches
spread across the country. This inevitably caused enormous difficulty in
monitoring of inflow or outflow of amount from the respective accounts
and also during audit process. Even though the mandate of law obliges
the NGOs to file periodical annual return, however, the inflow and
outflow details at a particular point of time or on real-time basis,
association-wise, as well as, cumulatively, for all such organisations
was not forthcoming and monitoring thereof due to scattered
distribution of the FCRA accounts across the country seriously affected
the monitoring process. Notably, keeping in mind the convenience of
the registered associations, they have been given choice to open
another FCRA account in any scheduled bank/branch of their choice
after opening of FCRA account in SBI, NDMB, for receiving foreign
contribution from any foreign source. It is urged that the legislative
intent behind the 2010 Act and the object sought to be achieved is to
curb misuse of foreign contribution threatening the sovereignty and
integrity of the nation including impacting the polity. As aforesaid, the
amendments were necessitated on account of past experience and to
curb the mischief which was prevalent despite the tight regulatory
measures under the 2010 Act.
26. The legislative history has also been highlighted in the common
reply filed by the respondents. To address the scourge of foreign
contribution impacting the national interest was taken note of by way of
the 1976 Act. Certain changes were brought about to that Act in the
year 1985, making it more effective. The 2010 Act had been the
outcome of a bill drafted in 2006. The Statement of Objects and
Reasons, as mentioned in the said Bill titled as "Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Bill, 2006" recognised that significant developments had
taken place since 1984, such as change in internal security scenario, an
increased influence of voluntary organisations, spread of use of
communication and information technology, quantum jump in the
amount of foreign contribution being received and large-scale growth in
the number of registered organisations, necessitating comprehensive
legislative approach. The Bill was referred to the Department-related
parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs. Eventually, the
2010 Act was perceived. This legislative history has been taken note of
in INSAF15 The amendments effected in the year 2020 had become
necessary to ensure that the object of the Act is achieved efficiently.
27. It is urged that the 2010 Act cannot be equated with any other
general legislation. The object behind this Act is to insulate the
democratic polity and public institutions and individuals working in the
national democratic space from being unduly influenced with the aid of
foreign contribution or foreign hospitality received from foreign source.
The object behind the Act is to secure the sovereignty and integrity of
India including public order and public
interests. This wisdom of Parliament cannot be lightly brushed aside
being a legislative policy. Reliance is placed on Rajeev Suri V. DDA22 to
buttress this argument. Reliance is also placed on Joseph Lochner V.
People of the State of New York23. New State Ice Co. V. Liebmann24,
West Coast Hotel Co. V. Parrish25. United States V. Carolene Products
Co. ²6. American Federation of Labor V. American Sash & Door Co. 27,
and Ferguson V. C. Skrupa28 It is urged that the doctrine that
prevailed in Joseph23 that due process authorises courts to hold laws
unconstitutional whenever they believe the legislature has acted
unwisely - has long since been discarded.
28. After having said so, reliance is also placed on the decision of
this Court in State of H.P. V. H.P. Nizi Vyavsayik Prishikshan Kendra
Sangh29; Ravindra Ramchandra Waghmare V. Indore Municipal
Corpn.30 State of H.P. V. Satpal Saini³1. and Union of India V. Indian
Radiological & Imaging Assn. 32 , in support of the argument that Court
should be loath in interfering with the wisdom of the legislature
adopting a particular policy. Further, the Court cannot substitute such
wisdom in the guise of exercise of the power of judicial review. Reliance
is also placed on the enunciation in Ashwani Kumar V. Union of India 33
to contend that the Constitution predicates that legislature is supreme
and has a final say in matters of legislation when it reflects on
alternatives and choices with inputs from different quarters, with a
check in the form of democratic accountability and a further check by
the courts which exercise the power of judicial review. It is further held
in this decision that it is not for the Judges to seek to develop new all-
embracing principles of law in a way that reflects the stance and
opinion of the individual Judges when the society/legislature as a whole
are unclear and substantially divided on the relevant issues.
29. Reliance is also placed on Rustom Cavasjee Cooper (Banks
Nationalisation) V. Union of India ³4, restating the above principle and
observing that the Court will not sit in appeal over the policy of
Parliament in enacting a law. Reliance is also placed on R.K. Garg V.
Union of India 35, wherein it has been observed that the courts have
only the power of destroying and not to reconstruct. Further, in respect
of economic regulation being
replete with complexity, self-limitation needs to be exercised by the
courts, thereby following the path of judicial wisdom. Reliance is also
placed on Peerless General Finance & Investment Co. Ltd. V. RBI ³
Premium Granites V. State of T.N.³7; Delhi Science Forum V. Union of
India 38 ; BALCO Employees' Union V. Union of India 39, and State of M.P.
V.
Narmada Bachao Andolan40 Relying on the said decisions, it is urged
that the gravamen of grievance of the writ petitioners is essentially
about the operational inconvenience being caused to them. That cannot
be the basis to declare the amended provisions being violative of
fundamental rights and more so, because the same are necessitated to
overcome the misuse of foreign contribution from foreign sources
threatening the sovereignty of the nation.
30. Dealing with the plea regarding amended provisions being
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, it is urged that the
Constitution does not predicate that all laws must be general in
character and universal in application. On the other hand, it is open to
the legislature to distinguish and classify persons or things for the
purposes of legislation. Indeed, such discrimination and classification
should not be arbitrary and ought to be in conformity with the
intelligible differentia having a reasonable relation to the object sought
to be achieved by the law in question. The impugned amendments of
2020 are fully compliant. The amendments fulfil the "twin test of
classification" founded on the factum of classification between Indian
citizens and foreigners, so much so, Indian contribution and foreign
contribution. The amendments fulfil the permissible classification
principle and are founded on intelligible differentia and distinguish
contributions to be received by the NGO. In other words, if an NGO
intends to receive foreign contribution, it must fulfil the necessary
conditions and comply with the formalities specified therefor. Thus
understood, the exposition in Shayara Bano¹2 pressed into service by
the writ petitioners, will be of no avail. Whereas, classification by law is
not forbidden. It is not open to belittle the legislative intent behind the
amendments by giving it the colour of manifest arbitrariness. The
argument that the law suffers from the vice of manifest arbitrariness,
must be examined on the touchstone of the enunciation by this Court in
a series of judgments. Reliance is placed on Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri V.
Union of India41 State of Bombay V. F.N. Balsara42, Kathi Raning
Rawat V. State of Saurashtra43: Gurbachan Singh V. State of Bombay44;
State of Punjab V. Ajaib Singh45; Habeeb Mohamed V. State of
Hyderabad ; Kedar Nath Bajoria V. State of W.B. 47, Baburao
Shantaram More V. Bombay Housing Board48 ; Harman Singh V. RTA 49.
Sakhawant Ali V. State of Orissa50. Budhan Choudhry V. State of
Bihar51; D.P. Joshi V. State of Madhya Bharat Hans Muller of
Nurenburg V. Supt., Presidency Jail53. Kishan Singh V. Ther Singh 54. P.
Balakotaiah V. Union of India55; Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R.
Tendolkar56. Express Newspaper (P) Ltd. V. Union of India57, Khandige
Sham Bhat V. ITO58. Bira Kishore Deb V. State of Orissa59, Ganga Ram
V. Union of India60. Anant Mills Co. Ltd. V. State of Gujarat 61. ; Mohan
Kumar Singhania V. Union of India62; Venkateshwara Theatre V. State
of A.P. Ombalika Das V. Hulisa Shaw64; Dharam Dutt V. Union of
India65. and Basheer V. State of Kerala66.
31. In substance, it is the case of the respondents that during
implementation of the 2010 Act, it was experienced that there was
need to streamline the provisions, so as to achieve the desired
objective of the Act by improving the compliance mechanism,
enhancing transparency and accountability in the receipt and utilisation
of foreign contribution through effective monitoring and facilitating
genuine NGOs or associations working for the welfare of the society in
ensuring maximum benefit to the intended population. Indisputably, all
the registered associations have been treated equally in respect of
receipt of foreign contribution and its utilisation for the purpose for
which it is so received. The law permits utilisation of foreign
contribution by the recipient NGO itself and ensures that the spending
of administrative expenses should not exceed 20% of such receipts, so
that substantial portion of the foreign contribution is spent on the
activities for which it has been so received and benefits the targeted
population. The amendment mandating receipt of foreign contribution
only in a designated FCRA account with SBI, NDMB is to facilitate
access of data of foreign contribution from
one source for effective monitoring of fund flow received through
foreign contribution. This legislative intent, by no means, can be said to
be in conflict with the object of the principal Act and in any case,
cannot be labelled as manifestly arbitrary as well. This is also because
Section 17(1) of the 2010 Act would permit the registered NGOs to
open and operate another FCRA account in any scheduled bank/branch
of their choice in the country. Accordingly, it is urged that the
argument regarding amended provisions being violative of Article 14, is
devoid of merits.
32. While countering the challenge on the ground of Articles 19(1)
(c) and 19(1)(g), it is stated that there exists no right to seek a foreign
contribution without regulation. Further, the 2010 Act does not prohibit
the foreign contributions or the right to form the associations itself or
the right to practise any profession. Rather, it merely seeks to provide
efficacious regulatory regime regarding foreign contributions to be
received by such associations. The rights under Articles 19(1)(c) and
19(1)(g), therefore, remain unaffected. It is urged that right to form an
association and right to freedom of trade and profession do not include
right to receive unbridled and unregulated foreign contributions and
more so its utilisation for activities other than permissible activities. In
other words, the law in question is squarely covered by the exceptions
provided for within the meaning of Articles 19(4) and 19(6) of the
Constitution.
33. The challenge to the amendments made on the touchstone of
Article 19(1)(c), needs to be considered in light of the object of the
principal Act. It is an Act to protect umbrella terms of "sovereignty and
integrity of India" and "public order". Reliance is placed on O.K. Ghosh
V. E.X. Joseph67, wherein it has been noted that clause (4) of Article 19
refers to the restriction imposed in the interests of public order. The
restriction, proximate and direct, must have causal connection with
public order.
34. Reliance is also placed on exposition in the following decisions
:
Saghir Ahmad V. State of U.P. 68. ; Babulal Parate V. State of
Maharashtra69, Daya V. Controller of Imports & Exports Akadasi
Padhan V. State of Orissa71; Municipal Committee, Amritsar V. State of
Punjab72; Madhu Limaye V. Sub-Divisional Daruka & Co.
V. Union of India74: Mohd. Serajuddin V. State of Orissa75. Ahmedabad
Municipal Corpn. V. Jan Mohammed Usmanbhai76, Sushila Saw Mill V.
State of Orissa77; Laxmikant V. Union of
India 78 ; Krishnan Kakkanth V. State of Kerala 79. Indian Handicrafts
Emporium V. Union of India80; Om Prakash V. State of U.P. 81 ; People's
Union for Civil Liberties V. Union of India82; State of Gujarat V. Mirzapur
Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat83: Kerala Bar Hotels Assn. V. State of
Kerala84 and Anuradha Bhasin14.
35. It is urged that the impugned amendments are directly related
to the object sought to be achieved by the 2010 Act. The object behind
the principal Act is to secure the interests of sovereignty and integrity
of the country, public order and interests of general public. That
objective being consistent part of the legislative policy of the country
for the past five decades, is beyond judicial review. As the impugned
amendments have a direct and proximate relationship with the stated
object of the principal Act, they are fully protected within the meaning
of Articles 19(4) and 19(6).
36. It is further contended that right to life and liberty within the
meaning of Article 21 of the Constitution, cannot and does not include
the right to receive unregulated funds and contributions; misuse of
which inevitably threatens the polity and sovereignty and integrity of
the country. The amended provisions, by no stretch of imagination,
prohibit the inflow of foreign contributions or the right to form
associations itself or the right to practise any profession. The same
merely provide for tight regulatory mechanism to ensure that the
foreign contribution received from foreign source is utilised only for the
purpose by the recipient itself for which it has been so permitted, and
that restriction is only to secure the sovereignty and integrity of the
nation and public order. In any case, it (regulatory mechanism) being
procedural matter, would come within the purview of procedure
established by law. Being a reasonable restriction for accomplishing the
objectives of the principal Act and founded on intelligible differentia, it
must be regarded as rational and proportionate, and as furthering the
State interests.
37. The respondents have also placed reliance on K.S. Puttaswamy
(Privacy-9 J.) V. Union of India in support of the argument that the
amended provisions are in furtherance of the legitimate State interests
encompassed in the regulatory measures provided for in the principal
Act. Reliance is also placed on Gobind V. State of M.P. 86 , wherein this
Court had observed that even though privacy and dignity claims must
receive scrutiny with due care, but that claims will necessarily have to
go through a process of case-by-case developments. Reliance is also
placed on Chintaman Rao V. State of M.P. 87. ;
State of Madras V. V.G. Row 88 Teri Oat Estates (P) Ltd. V. State (UT of
Chandigarh)89, Ramlila Maidan Incident, In re90; Sahara India Real
Estate Corpn. Ltd. V. SEBI91 and Excel Crop Care Ltd. V. CCI° 92 to
contend that Article 21 is extremely wide.
38. Whereas, the prohibition on transfer of foreign contribution and
receipt of foreign contribution in the manner specified in the amended
provisions are intended to improve compliance mechanism, enhance
transparency and accountability in the receipt and utilisation thereof. In
that sense, it does not impinge upon the fundamental rights of the
petitioners, much less Article 21 of the Constitution. The regulation and
control are directly relatable to activities/programmes detrimental to
the sovereignty and integrity of India, public order and interests of
general public and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. It being a reasonable and proportionate restriction having clear
nexus with the object of the principal Act without impacting the right of
the registered associations to continue to receive foreign contribution
from foreign donors and also utilise the same by opening accounts in
different scheduled banks/branches of their choice in the country, by no
stretch of imagination, can be said to impinge upon the fundamental
rights of the registered associations or persons having prior permission
of the competent authority.
39. As regards the grievance of the writ petitioners being forced to
open and operate account in the designated bank and branch i.e. SBI,
NDMB, it is stated in the reply-affidavit that for outstation FCRA
organisations located in remote areas and for operational ease of any
FCRA organisation, MHA and SBI have put in place a system to enable
the associations/FCRA organisations/NGOs to open main bank account
in SBI, NDMB without any need to physically come to Delhi. It certainly
dispels and redresses the principal grievance of the writ petitioners
about they being forced to visit Delhi to open account in the designated
branch coupled with the enabling provision allowing the registered
associations to utilise and transact from any scheduled bank/branch of
their choice in the country. The fundamental basis of assail to the
amended provisions, therefore, falls to the ground.
40. The respondents have relied on the Standard Operating
Procedure ("SOP") issued by the appropriate authority in regard to the
opening of FCRA account in the designated branch (SBI, NDMB) to
receive the inflow of foreign contribution including to permit the
registered associations to open FCRA account in other scheduled
banks/branches of their choice across the country. Further, it is
asserted that until the filing of the common response in October 2021,
around 19,000 accounts were already opened in the designated branch
at New Delhi. That was possible even without physical visit of the
authorised persons of the associations concerned to New Delhi. This
facility of opening account in the designated bank and branch is
provided on free/gratis basis
without any bank charge on real-time basis by SBI on the instructions
of the recipient organisations through digital or internet banking. As
aforesaid, these arrangements are necessitated for the purposes of
effective enforcement and operational angle and to monitor the flow of
foreign contributions and information concerning the same on real-time
basis from one centralised location. This has reasonable nexus and
proximate relationship with the object sought to be achieved by the Act
and to ensure transparency and accountability of all concerned. The
registered associations/NGOs are not put to any undue hardship or
extra financial costs/compliance burden. The challenge to the amended
provisions, therefore, is based on tenuous assertions.
41. It is also asserted that application for effecting any change of
details furnished while opening the main account in the designated
branch (i.e. SBI, NDMB) is to be submitted only through online mode
on the FCRA web portal i.e. fcraonline@nic.in. It is highlighted that the
assertion made by the writ petitioners that there are close to 50,000
persons registered under FCRA, is false and misleading. In fact, the
FCRA website itself would reveal that out of close to 50,000 persons
registered under FCRA, registration certificates of less than 23,000 are
active. Further, registration of 20,600 non-compliant persons has
already been cancelled. Furthermore, following the changed
dispensation as per the amended provisions (of the 2020 Act), over
19,000 accounts have already been opened in the designated branch
(i.e. SBI, NDMB) until October 2021. It is, thus, urged that the
amended provisions are intended to further the object of the principal
Act and are regulatory in nature concerning the receipt and utilisation
of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by certain individuals or
associations or companies and incidental matters; and are consistent
with the underlying principles expounded in the principal Act.
42. After having said as above, the affidavit goes on to highlight that
none of the amended provisions even remotely permit or attempt to
oversee the banking functions. The amended provisions of the Act, as
well as, the Regulations, are intended to only bring out clarity on crucial
role assigned to the banks in respect of the implementation of the
principal Act of 2010. Similarly, the stated circular is only an
administrative guidance for better implementation of the provisions of
the 2010 Act.
43. The respondents have, thus, prayed for dismissal of the writ
petitions filed by the registered associations, consequently leaving
nothing for consideration in the writ petition filed by Vinay Vinayak
Joshi 94
5. Counter-affidavit filed by Respondent 3 SBI95
44. SBI has also filed counter-affidavit dated 20-10-2021 in Writ
Petition (C) No. 751 of 2021 sworn by one Anjana Tandon, Dy. General
Manager, SBI, New Delhi Main Branch. This affidavit essentially deals
with the issues concerning SBI. It is stated that SBI is the largest
public sector bank in India with network of 22,219 branches in India
and spread across the length and
breadth of the country, including rural and urban areas/branches. SBI
also has 223 foreign offices and about 230 overseas branches in around
40 countries.
45. It is stated that FCRA account is not a normal current/savings
account. The transactions effected in this account ought to be strictly
regulated, as predicated in the 2010 Act. SBI works in tandem with the
instructions issued by the Government of India in that regard. The
Government of India has issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
with regard to opening and operation of FCRA account. The information
in that regard has been disseminated to account-holders and is in
public domain, including by conducting Webinars from time to time.
The main branch of SBI has created a dedicated cell having over forty
officials to deal with all the FCRA accounts at SBI, NDMB. They
exclusively deal with FCRA accounts and have been provided with
requisite infrastructure. SBI has made internal arrangements regarding
sharing of details of 23,000 entities with branches of SBI all over India;
liaising with foreign offices of SBI for credential verification of the
overseas stakeholders; and have designated Nodal Officer up to the
rank of Assistant General Manager in 17 local Head Offices, spread all
over India for operating FCRA accounts. By this affidavit, SBI has
refuted the grievance of the writ petitioners/registered associations
about operational and other difficulties being faced by them in
transacting/opening account in the designated Branch at New Delhi.
46. It is emphatically stated that the entities, desirous of opening
FCRA account or for accessing funds, are not required to visit Delhi as
has been clearly indicated in the communication dated 9-6-2021. This
is also duly notified on the official website of the MHA. SBI has
streamlined the entire process for the convenience of the organisations
to open/operationalise FCRA accounts. It is stated that the entities can
do banking activities including internet banking activity anvwhere and
anytime, aided with the power and convenience of the internet. The
entities can avail CINB and may customise their authority matrix for
making any financial transactions. It is also open to the entities to open
and operate FCRA account (utilisation account) at one or more branches
of scheduled banks of their choice. Alternatively, they are free to use
their previous accounts as utilisation accounts, to which funds can be
transferred from the designated FCRA account at SBI, NDMB.
47. It is also asserted that the entities are not required to maintain
minimum balance in FCRA accounts. Further, they are free to operate
their account without physically approaching SBI Branch on regular
basis as in the case of any other normal account-holder, if they intend
to access internet banking facility. It is denied that the registered
associations/entities concerned are required to appoint a designated
person in New Delhi and make frequent trips for offline KYC verification
as alleged. Instead, they can approach the nearest SBI branch and get
the offline verification of document done at the said branch itself. In
other words, the argument of inconvenience put forth by the writ
petitioners and similarly placed persons has not only been refuted, but
information regarding sufficient logistical arrangements made by the
respondent Bank (SBI) to facilitate opening as well as operating of
FCRA account by authorised persons has been delineated in the
response filed before
this Court. The same is indicative of the fact that the services are
offered to the entities concerned at the local level itself without
requiring the FCRA account-holders to visit the main branch at New
Delhi.
48. This affidavit also reveals that SBI has more than two lakh
employees working in branches in different parts of the country with
network all over the country as well as abroad. It is stated that for the
purposes of operating 23,000 FCRA accounts, there is no need to incur
high administrative expenses. Instead, the Bank has augmented
additional infrastructure required for that purpose in the designated
Branch at New Delhi.
49. It is further stated that by the time the affidavit was filed, about
20,000 FCRA accounts have already been opened, out of approximately
23,000 active organisations, and that the remaining registered
associations were in the process of getting their accounts opened by
approaching the main branch at New Delhi. It is urged that the
respondent Bank (SBI) is offering all banking facilities as
requested/demanded by the account-holder concerned. SBI has denied
that there is any delay in the process of opening of account and
receiving of foreign remittances due to the volume of transactions or
that it does not have necessary infrastructural capacity to handle
queries from thousands of organisations, as alleged by the writ
petitioners. At the same time, it has been fairly accepted that during
the second phase of COVID-19, due to extraordinary situation, there
may have been delay in some cases, but all the accounts have been
made operational and are being accessed by the FCRA account-holders
concerned. The affidavit also mentions about the steps taken to
streamline the operational issues in respect of FCRA accounts. The
substance of this affidavit is to demonstrate that no inconvenience is
being caused to the FCRA account-holders, in any manner; and the
Bank is fully equipped to handle the logistical issues concerning FCRA
accounts in the main Branch as well as other branches across the
country.
6. Rejoinder-affidavit filed by the writ petitioners
50. The writ petitioners have filed rejoinder-affidavit whereby
assertions made in the writ petitions are reiterated. The emphasis is
essentially in respect of grounds to assail the validity of the amended
provisions of the 2010 Act, in particular Sections 7, 12(1-A), 12-A and
17(1). The rejoinder-affidavit also points out the reason for rejection of
application for registration and opening of bank account. Those matters,
however, cannot be the basis to test the validity of the provisions.
Hence, it is not necessary to elaborate the same. They are more in the
nature of inconvenience caused in respect of process of registration and
of operating the FCRA accounts.
7. Submissions of the writ petitioners
51. The registered associations/writ petitioners would urge that the
argument of legislative policy being inviolable cannot be countenanced.
For, this Court in A.K. Gopalan V. State of Madras96, noted that the
Court is obliged
to consider the effect of the law on the citizens and whether the same
impacts the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the
Constitution.
52. It is urged that this Court in INSAF 15 has already recognised the
right to receive foreign contribution. Thus, it is not open to contend that
no fundamental right exists to receive foreign contribution. The
amended provisions are arbitrary and overbroad restrictions on the
right to receive foreign funding, thus, it is violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution. Further, this Court in INSAF15a did not examine the effect
of the impugned provisions on the fundamental rights under Article 19
of the Constitution as there was no petitioner in individual capacity
before the Court. The amendments effected vide the 2020 Act are not
only hit by the vice of Article 14 of the Constitution, but also Articles 19
(1)(a), 19(1)(c) and 19(1)(g) as well as Article 21 of the Constitution.
53. As regards Section 7 of the Act, it is submitted that pre-
amendment, transfer of foreign contribution to other person duly
registered and had been granted the certificate or obtained the prior
permission under the 2010 Act was permissible. The proviso permitted
the transfer of foreign contribution by the recipient registered
association. This has been completely prohibited by the amended
provision, which is overbroad restriction. For, this prohibition would
inevitably impact the funding of the entities who were otherwise
allowed to receive foreign contribution. Having so permitted, the
regulatory measures at best can be to ensure that the foreign
contribution is eventually utilised for the purpose for which it has been
so permitted. The total prohibition in terms of the amended Section 7 is
manifestly arbitrary and has no causal connection with the object
sought to be achieved by the principal Act or the Amendment Act.
54. In support of this contention, reliance is placed on K.S.
Puttaswamy3. In that, being a case of total prohibition, it impacts the
very utilisation of foreign contribution by any organisation. The
expression "person" in Section 2(1)(m) of the Act posits an expansive
meaning. Thus, post amendment transfer of foreign contribution to
individual or organisation will be affected. Significantly, the word
"transfer" has not been defined. In other words, there is no clarity
about the manner of utilisation of foreign contribution by the registered
entities who had been allowed to receive the same for utilisation for
specified purposes. The ordinary meaning of expression "utilisation"
would include transfer of foreign contribution to another entity; and,
thus, there is apparent conflict between Section 7 and Section 8 of the
Act. As a result, amended Section 7 is not only absurd, but defeats the
very object of the principal Act, which allows regulated use of foreign
contribution. In the absence of any definition of expressions "transfer"
and "utilisation", use of foreign contribution by the entity would be
risking violation of the provisions of the Act.
55. It is urged that Section 7 is overbroad and vague. There is
ambiguity as to what constitutes various social or educational or
cultural or economic
or religious purpose under Section 11 (1) of the Act and at the same
time, Section 35 of the Act invites punishment for contravention of any
provision of the Act. For that reason, Section 7 suffers from the vice of
manifest arbitrariness and hit by Article 14 of the Constitution. To
buttress this argument, reliance is placed on the enunciation of this
Court in Shreya Singhal V. Union of India97. Further, the amended
Section 7 would not permit collaboration between registered non-profit
organisations to serve larger social needs across the country with any
other entity or person. That is bound to hamper work of grassroot
organisations which receive sub-grants in India from a consortium lead
partner in international development projects. Those projects will be
affected at the grassroot level where the registered organisations may
not be able to cater on its own.
56. It is then urged that even if the purpose of Section 7 is to
prevent misutilisation of funds, it violates the fundamental rights
guaranteed in Articles 19(1)(a), 19(1)(c) and 19(1)(g) under Part III of
the Constitution, being an unreasonable restriction. Such restriction
serves no legitimate government purpose. It has no rational nexus with
the object of the enactment, including the principal Act. The
unamended provision was less restrictive and was working very well,
serving the objective of the principal Act. Furthermore, being a case of
complete prohibition, the registered organisations would not be able to
continue collaboration with other entities at the grassroot level, even if
those entities are also duly registered under the Act. This is bound to
denude the recipient (registered organisation) of foreign contribution
from reaching out and undertaking specified activities at the grassroot
level through such entity. Such onerous restriction does not stand the
test of proportionality or being reasonable restriction as held in K.S.
Puttaswamy3.
57. Reliance is also placed upon a recent decision of this Court in
Manohar Lal Sharma V. Union of India98 to contend that the State had
failed to specifically establish national security issues to justify the
amendments to the 2010 Act. In the absence thereof, no omnibus
prohibition can be validated by the Court. It is urged that Section 7,
being manifestly arbitrary and lacking any determining principle, is
wholly unreasonable and, therefore, violative of Article 21 of the
Constitution.
58. On similar lines, Section 12(1-A) read with Section 17(1) has
been assailed, being manifestly arbitrary and unreasonable. The
challenge is limited to the stipulation of opening a bank account only at
one specific branch of SBI at New Delhi for all organisations across the
country receiving foreign contribution. Such a requirement is absurd,
irrational and serves no legitimate purpose under the 2010 Act or any
other law. It is urged that the challenge is not to the amended sub-
section (2) of Section 17 requiring reporting to the authority. That
being a Bank's obligation can be taken forward by the Bank. No
tangible logic is forthcoming to justify the need for Section 12(1-A)
read
with Section 17(1), as to how national interest would be jeopardised by
not adhering to that regime especially when all the scheduled banks are
regulated by Reserve Bank of India, including other Government-owned
public sector banks or even local branches of SBI. Each one of them is
obliged to report all such transactions within 48 hours to the MHA. Such
a provision, therefore, is simply absurd and irrational.
59. It is argued that the impact of amended provisions is to denude
the registered associations to have physical access to their primary
account at Delhi along with a host of other restrictions. It is further
urged that the amended provision does not stand the test of legitimate
goal for which such dispensation is necessary nor spells out the causal
connection for compelling the persons seeking foreign contribution to
open bank accounts only in specified branch at New Delhi and how it
would further the cause of the State interests. Even, the principle of
necessity has not been substantiated by the State, especially when
there are already existing restrictions and proper mechanism to achieve
the object of the principal Act whereunder each organisation is
mandated to open an FCRA account in a scheduled bank of its choice,
which account details were required to be reported to the MHA and
linked to the FCRA registration number of the organisations. All the
registered organisations were already complying with that requirement
and have been registered on an electronic portal known as "DARPAN"
having unique ID provided to them. Further, the registered
organisations were also obliged to submit regular returns as specified in
Section 18 read with Rule 17 of the 2011 Rules. The said dispensation
requires furnishing of necessary details and reporting within 48 hours
to the appropriate authority. The specious plea of national security
cannot be countenanced. The same has not been substantiated and
there can be no presumption in that regard in favour of the legislation.
60. Further, Respondent 3 SBI has admitted that only 40 personnel
are assigned with the work of operating FCRA accounts at the main
branch. It is unfathomable as to how such a low number of personnel
would be able to handle the workload of transaction of thousands of
persons for 23,000 registered organisations. Relying on the expositions
in Anuradha Bhasin14 and Maneka Gandhi°, it is urged that Section 12
(1-A) read with Section 17(1) is unconstitutional, being manifestly
arbitrary and irrational.
61. Even, the provision in the form of Section 12-A is violative of
fundamental rights guaranteed to the office-bearers of the registered
organisations as it requires mandatory disclosure of Aadhaar number as
an identity document for grant of FCRA certificate under Section 12, or
renewal under Section 16 or to open a bank account under Section 17.
Such a provision clearly falls foul of the test of proportionality as held in
K.S. Puttaswamy3. Inasmuch as, overseas citizens of India or foreign
nationals serving as office-bearers can provide an identity alternate to
the Aadhaar card for the same
purposes. There is no legitimate goal set forth for inserting Section 12-
A in the principal Act. It is urged that even this provision has no nexus
with the object sought to be achieved under the principal Act and
suffers from the vice of violation of Article 19 of the Constitution.
62. We have heard Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior
Counsel and Mr Gautam Jha, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr
Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General and Mr Sanjay Jain, learned
Additional Solicitor General for the respondents.
Legislative history
In the first place, we must advert to the legislative history
culminating with the 2010 Act, as amended in 2020. A Bill was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha in the year 1973 titled as "the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 1973". The Statement of Objects and
Reasons appended to the said Bill read thus:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
There has been widespread concern about the unregulated receipt
of funds from foreign agencies by individuals and organisations in
the country. The Bill seeks to regulate the acceptance and utilisation
of foreign contribution or hospitality with a view to ensuring that our
parliamentary institutions, political associations, academic and other
voluntary organisations as well as individuals working in important
areas of national life may function in a manner consistent with the
values of a sovereign democratic republic."
(emphasis supplied)
64. On 19-2-1974, the House referred the Bill to a Joint Committee
of the Houses consisting of 60 members, of whom 20 were to be
nominated from Rajya Sabha. While introducing the Bill, the Minister
outlined the contours of the regulatory measures felt essential in
respect of the foreign contributions. He adverted to three options. The
first of outright prohibition; the second being acceptance subject to
prior permission of the Government; and the third of acceptance
subject to intimation being given to the Government. He expressed that
the Government felt that it was an important measure and believed
that the deliberations in the Joint Committee of both the Houses would
enable formulation of a well-conceived Bill, on the basis of informed
representative public opinion desirous of securing the objectives, as
stated in the Bill. There was broad unanimity between the members
that the issue needed in-depth examination.
65. The then Minister of Home Affairs presented the
recommendation of the Rajya Sabha before the Lok Sabha on 25-3-
1974. The motion was duly adopted by the Lok Sabha and 40 members
of the said House were nominated to the Joint Committee of the
Houses.
66. The report of the Joint Committee on the Bill to regulate the
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or hospitality by
certain persons or associations and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto, was
presented before the Lok Sabha on 6-1-1976. Similarly, the report of
the Joint Committee of the Houses on the Bill was presented in the
Rajya Sabha on 6-1-1976.
67. The deliberations regarding the proposed Bill and the report of
the Joint Committee took place in the Lok Sabha on 29-3-1976. During
the discussion, there was unanimity amongst all members cutting
across party lines that the penetration of foreign money into country is
a serious threat and danger to the sovereignty of the country. The
members variously expressed concern about the unregulated inflow of
foreign contribution. It was noted that its penetration was so
widespread that generally, anyone interested in the sovereignty of our
country and in democracy was bound to feel concerned about the same.
The experience of other countries was also discussed by the members.
The members mentioned about the inflow of foreign contribution from
many countries and noted that sometimes it was being received
directly and sometimes indirectly, through other countries. It was
coming in many forms including receipt by religious organisations. It
was agreed that the foreign contribution can be permitted in regulated
manner without completely prohibiting the inflow thereof.
68. Eventually, to address the mischief of growing foreign influence
owing to influx of foreign donations in our country, the Bill was passed
which took the form of the Act i.e. the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976. This Act came into force on 5-8-1976 as
a
shield in our legislative armoury. The preamble of the 1976 Act reads
as under:
"An Act to regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign
contribution or foreign hospitality by certain persons or associations,
with a view to ensuring that parliamentary institutions, political
associations and academic and other voluntary organisations as well
as individuals working in the important areas of national life may
function in a manner consistent with the values of a sovereign
democratic republic, and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto."
(emphasis supplied)
69. Over the course of time, this Act came to be amended. One such
amendment was in 1985. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
stated amendment read thus:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976, seeks to
regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or
foreign hospitality by certain categories of persons or associations.
To remove certain inadequacies and practical difficulties in the
administration of the Act, a Bill to amend the Act was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha in May 1984. The Bill was passed by the Rajya
Sabha with certain amendments. But it could not be passed by the
Lok Sabha before it adjourned at the end of its Monsoon Session and
the Bill has now lapsed. As it was considered necessary to give effect
to the provisions of the Bill as passed by the Rajya Sabha urgently,
the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Ordinance, 1984, was
promulgated by the President on 20-10-1984. The said Ordinance, inter
alia, made the following amendments in the Act, namely-
(i) The definition of "foreign contribution", as contained in the
Act, included only the donation, delivery or transfer made by any
foreign source. It did not include donation or contribution received
by an organisation from another organisation from out of foreign
contribution received by the latter organisation. The definition was
enlarged to include such contributions also for the purpose of
tracing the utilisation of foreign contribution down the line.
(ii) The definition of "political party", as contained in the Act,
did not include political parties in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir and political parties which are not covered by the
Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968. The
Ordinance amended this definition to include such political parties
also.
(iii) Section 6(1) of the Act provided that every association
having a definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or
social programmes, may receive foreign contribution, but was
required to send intimation regarding such receipt to the Central
Government within such time and in such manner to be
prescribed by the rules made under the Act. It had been observed
that a number of associations had not sent such intimation. In
order to effectively monitor the receipt of foreign contribution, this
sub-section was amended to provide that associations referred to
therein shall accept foreign contribution only after they are
registered with the Central Government specifically for the
purpose and accept such contributions only through a specified
branch of a bank. They would, however, be required to give,
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed,
intimation to the Central Government as to the amount of foreign
contribution received by them, the source from which and the
manner in which such foreign contribution was received by them,
etc. Where any registered association does not accept foreign
contribution through the specified branch of a specified bank or
does not submit intimations, etc. in time, the Central Government
has been empowered to direct that such association shall not
accept foreign contribution without the prior permission of the
Central Government. A new sub-section (1-A) had also been
included in this section to provide that an association not so
registered with the Central Government shall obtain prior
permission of the Central Government before accepting any
foreign contribution and also give intimation to the Central
Government as to the amount of contribution received by it.
(iv) The Act only enabled the Central Government to inspect
the accounts of certain persons or associations. It did not provide
for any power to audit the accounts of any organisation if it is
considered necessary to do so. The Ordinance amended the Act by
inserting a new Section 15-A, to take specific power to audit the
accounts of certain persons, organisations or associations, if the
prescribed returns are not furnished in time by such persons,
organisations or associations or the
returns so furnished by them are not in accordance with law or their
scrutiny gives room for suspicion that the provisions of the Act have
been contravened.
(v) A new Section 25-A had also been inserted in the Act to
provide that where any person is convicted of an offence relating
to the acceptance or utilisation of foreign contribution for a second
time, he shall be prohibited from accepting any foreign
contribution for a period of three years from the date of the
second conviction.
2. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance."
(emphasis supplied)
70. After the coming into force of the 1976 Act including the
subsequent amendments thereto, the experience gained and the
significant developments having taken place since 1984 such as change
in internal security scenario, an increased influence of voluntary
organisations, spread of use of communication and information
technology, quantum jump in the amount of foreign contribution being
received and large-scale growth in the number of registered
organisations, a Bill known as "the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Bill, 2006" came to be introduced. The proposal in the Bill was to repeal
the 1976 Act and replace it with the provisions of the proposed Bill.
71. The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Bill are as under:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 was enacted to
regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or
hospitality with a view to ensuring that our parliamentary
institutions, political associations, academic and other voluntary
organisations as well as individuals working in important areas of
national life may function in a manner consistent with the values of a
sovereign democratic republic. The Act was amended in 1984 to
extend the provisions of the Act to cover second and subsequent
recipients of foreign contribution and to the members of higher
judiciary, besides introducing the system of grant of registration to
the associations receiving foreign contribution.
2. Significant developments have taken place since 1984 such as
change in internal security scenario, an increased influence of
voluntary organisations, spread of use of communication and
information technology, quantum jump in the amount of foreign
contribution being received, and large scale growth in the number of
registered organisations. This has necessitated large scale changes
in the existing Act. Therefore, it has been thought appropriate to
replace the present Act by a new legislation to regulate the
acceptance, utilisation and accounting of foreign contribution and
acceptance of foreign hospitality by a person or an association.
3. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 provides, inter
alia, to-
(i) consolidate the law to regulate, acceptance and utilisation of
foreign contribution or foreign hospitality and prohibit the same
for any activities detrimental to the national interests;
(ii) prohibit organisations of political nature, not being political
parties from receiving foreign contribution;
(iii) bring associations engaged in production or broadcast of
audio news or audio visual news or current affairs through any
electronic mode under the purview of the Bill;
(iv) prohibit the use of foreign contribution for any speculative
business;
(v) cap administrative expenses at fifty per cent of the receipt
of foreign contribution;
(vi) exclude foreign funds received from relatives living abroad;
(vii) make provision for intimating grounds for refusal of
registration or prior permission under the Bill;
(viii) provide arrangement for sharing of information on receipt
of foreign remittances by the agencies concerned to strengthen
monitoring;
(ix) make registration to be valid for five years with a provision
for renewal thereof, and also to provide for cancellation or
suspension of registration;
(x) make provision for compounding of certain offences.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects."
(emphasis supplied)
72. Finally, the Bill after being scrutinised by the Committee
appointed by the House, presented it in the Lok Sabha on 27-8-2010,
titled as "the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010". The
members expressed that India is an emerging economic power and the
Bill, as propounded, was a welcome step towards prohibiting
organisations with political agenda from destabilising the country
through foreign funding. The members shared their experience and
finally accepted the Bill which became the 2010 Act. This Act repealed
the 1976 Act. The introduction for the 2010 Act recognised that some
of the foreign countries were funding individuals, associations, political
parties, candidates for elections, correspondents, columnists, editors,
owners, printers or publishers of newspapers. They were also extending
hospitality.
73. The introduction of the Act reads thus:
"It had been noticed that some of the foreign countries were
funding individuals, associations, political parties, candidates for
elections, correspondents, columnists, editors, owners, printers or
publishers of newspapers. They were also extending hospitality. The
effects of such funding and hospitality were quite noticeable and to
have some control over such funding and hospitality and to regulate
the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign
hospitality by certain persons or associations, with a view to
ensuring that parliamentary institutions, political associations and
academic and other voluntary organisations as well as individuals
working in the important areas of national life may function in a
manner consistent with the values of a sovereign democratic republic
the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (49 of 1976) was
enacted. Since its enactment in 1976 several deficiencies had been
found and it was proposed to enact a fresh law on the subject by
repealing the Act 49 of 1976.
Accordingly the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill was introduced in
the Parliament."
(emphasis supplied)
74. It will be useful to advert to the preamble of the 2010 Act. The
same reads thus:
"An Act to consolidate the law to regulate the acceptance and
utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by certain
individuals or associations or companies and to prohibit acceptance
and utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality for any
activities detrimental to the national interest and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto."
75. The underlying reason discernible from the Statement of Objects
and Reasons and the concerns expressed by the members during the
debate in the Houses concerned, make it amply clear that there was
need to strictly regulate the inflow of foreign contribution in the manner
specified by the Act. Intrinsic in the regulatory provisions of the 2010
Act is to permit inflow of foreign contribution only in the manner
specified in the Act including its utilisation; and any activity
inconsistent with the 2010 Act was to visit with penal consequences.
The preamble of the 2010 Act restates the need to strictly regulate the
inflow of foreign contribution, as lack of it would inevitably affect the
national interests including the sovereignty and integrity of the country.
76. The 2010 Act came to be amended on two occasions until
recently, vide the Finance Act, 2016 (28 of 2016) and the Finance Act,
2018 (13 of 2018).
77. The Central Government in exercise of powers conferred by
Section 48 of the 2010 Act framed the 2011 Rules, which came into
force on 1-5-2011. Further, the Central Government also framed rules
known as "the Foreign Contribution (Acceptance or Retention of Gifts or
Presentations) Rules, 2012", which came into force on 17-6-2012. The
2011 Rules were amended by (Amendment) Rules, 2020. We shall
advert to these Rules including the amended provisions at the
appropriate place.
78. In the present cases, we are concerned with the challenge to the
latest amendment effected vide the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2020, which has come into effect from 29-9-2020.
Vide the 2020 Act, clause (c) in Section 3(1) came to be amended. The
amendment has been effected also to Sections 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16
and 17 of the 2010 Act. The assail is limited to the amended provisions
(vide Amendment Act of 2020) on the ground of abridgement of
fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed under Articles 14, 19
(1)(a), 19(1)(c), 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution of India.
79. Notably, we are called upon to deal with the validity only of
amendment concerning Sections 7, 12(1-A), 17 and insertion of
Section 12-A in the Act. The unamended Sections 7, 12 and 17 read
thus:
"7. Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to other
person. person who-
(a) is registered and granted a certificate or has obtained prior
permission under this Act; and
(b) receives any foreign contribution,
shall transfer such foreign contribution to any other person unless such other
person is also registered and had been granted the certificate or obtained the prior
permission under this Act:
Provided that such person may transfer, with the prior approval of
the Central Government, a part of such foreign contribution to any
other person who has not been granted a certificate or obtained
permission under this Act in accordance with the rules made by the
Central Government.
*
*
*
12. Grant of certificate of registration.-(1) - An application by
a person, referred to in Section 11 for grant of certificate or giving
prior permission, shall be made to the Central Government in such
form and manner and along with such fee, as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall, by an order, if the application is not in the
prescribed form or does not contain any of the particulars specified
in that form, reject the application.
(3) If on receipt of an application for grant of certificate or giving
prior permission and after making such inquiry as the Central
Government deems fit, it is of the opinion that the conditions
specified in sub-section (4) are satisfied, it may, ordinarily within
ninety days from the date of receipt of application under sub-section
(1), register such person and grant him a certificate or give him prior
permission, as the case may be, subject to such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case the Central Government does not grant,
within the said period of ninety days, a certificate or give prior
permission, it shall communicate the reasons therefor to the
applicant:
Provided further that a person shall not be eligible for grant of
certificate or giving prior permission, if his certificate has been
suspended and such suspension of certificate continues on the date
of making application.
(4) The following shall be the conditions for the purposes of sub-
section (3), namely-
(a) the person making an application for registration or grant of
prior permission under sub-section (1)-
(i) is not fictitious or benami;
(ii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for indulging in
activities aimed at conversion through inducement or force,
either directly or indirectly, from one religious faith to another;
(iii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for creating
communal tension or disharmony in any specified district or
any other part of the country;
(iv) has not been found guilty of diversion or misutilisation
of its funds;
(v) is not engaged or likely to engage in propagation of
sedition or advocate violent methods to achieve its ends;
(vi) is not likely to use the foreign contribution for personal
gains or divert it for undesirable purposes;
(vii) has not contravened any of the provisions of this Act;
(viii) has not been prohibited from accepting foreign
contribution;
(b) the person making an application for registration under sub
-section (1) has undertaken reasonable activity in its chosen field
for the benefit of the society for which the foreign contribution is
proposed to be utilised;
(c) the person making an application for giving prior
permission under sub-section (1) has prepared a reasonable
project for the benefit of the society for which the foreign
contribution is proposed to be utilised;
(d) in case the person being an individual, such individual has
neither been convicted under any law for the time being in force
nor any prosecution for any offence pending against him;
(e) in case the person being other than an individual, any of its
Directors or office-bearers has neither been convicted under any
law for the time being in force nor any prosecution for any offence
is pending against him;
(f) the acceptance of foreign contribution by the person
referred to in sub-section (1) is not likely to affect prejudicially-
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) the security, strategic, scientific or economic interest of
the State; or
(iii) the public interest; or
(iv) freedom or fairness of election to any legislature; or
(v) friendly relation with any foreign State; or
(vi) harmony between reliaious. racial. social. linquistic.
regional groups, castes or communities;
(g) the acceptance of foreign contribution referred to in sub-
section (1)-
(i) shall not lead to incitement of an offence;
(ii) shall not endanger the life or physical safety of any
person.
(5) Where the Central Government refuses the grant of certificate
or does not give prior permission, it shall record in its order the
reasons therefor and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant:
Provided that the Central Government may not communicate the
reasons for refusal for grant of certificate or for not giving prior
permission to the applicant under this section in cases where is no
obligation to give any information or documents or records or papers
under the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(6) The certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid for
a period of five years and the prior permission shall be valid for the
specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution proposed
to be received, as the case may be.
*
*
*
17. Foreign contribution through scheduled bank.-(1) Every
person who has been granted a certificate or given prior permission
under Section 12 shall receive foreign contribution in a single
account only through such one of the branches of a bank as he may
specify in his application for grant of certificate:
Provided that such person may open one or more accounts in one
or more banks for utilising the foreign contribution received by him:
Provided further that no funds other than foreign contribution
shall be received or deposited in such account or accounts.
(2) Every bank or authorised person in foreign exchange shall
report to such authority as may be specified-
(a) prescribed amount of foreign remittance;
(b) the source and manner in which the foreign remittance was
received; and
(c) other particulars,
in such form and manner as may be prescribed."
80. As aforementioned, the need to amend certain provisions of the
2010 Act was felt necessary, as is discernible from the Statement of
Objects and Reasons appended to Bill No. 123/2020, which finally
culminated in the Amendment Act of 2020. The same reads thus:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 was enacted to
regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or
foreign hospitality by certain individuals or associations or companies
and to prohibit acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or
foreign hospitality for any activities detrimental to the national
interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The said Act has come into force on the 1st day of May, 2011
and has been amended twice. The first amendment was made by
Section 236 of the Finance Act, 2016 and the second amendment
was made by Section 220 of the Finance Act, 2018.
3. The annual inflow of foreign contribution has almost doubled
between the years 2010 and 2019, but many recipients of foreign
contribution have not utilised the same for the purpose for which
they were registered or granted prior permission under the said Act.
Many of them were also found wanting in ensuring basic statutory
compliances such as submission of annual returns and maintenance
of proper accounts. This has led to a situation where the Central
Government had to cancel certificates of registration of more than
19,000 recipient organisations, including non-Governmental
organisations, during the period between 2011 and 2019. The criminal
investigations also had to be initiated against dozens of such non-
Governmental
organisations
which
indulged
in
outright
misappropriation or misutilisation of foreign contribution.
4. Therefore, there is a need to streamline the provisions of the
said Act by strengthening the compliance mechanism, enhancing
transparency and accountability in the receipt and utilisation of
foreign contribution worth thousands of crores of rupees every year
and facilitating genuine non-Governmental organisations
or
associations who are working for the welfare of the society.
5. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2020,
inter alia, seeks to provide for-
(a) amendment of clause (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 3 to
include "public servant" also within its ambit, to provide that no
foreign contribution shall be accepted by any public servant;
(b) amendment of Section 7 to prohibit any transfer of foreign
contribution to any association/person;
(c) amendment of sub-section (1) of Section 8 to reduce the
limit for defraying administrative expenses from existing "fifty per
cent" to "twenty per cent";
(d) insertion of a new Section 12-A empowering the Central
Government to require Aadhaar number, etc. as identification
document;
(e) insertion of a new Section 14-A enabling the Central
Government to permit any person to surrender the certificate
granted under the Act;
(f) amendment of Section 17 to provide that every person who
has been granted certificate or prior permission under Section 12
shall receive foreign contribution only in an account designated as
"FCRA Account" which shall be opened by him in such branch of
State Bank of India at New Delhi, as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify and for other consequential matters
relating thereto.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects."
(emphasis supplied)
81. When the Bill proposed for amendment to the said provisions
was being considered, the members expressed their concern about the
volume of inflow of foreign contribution. It was noted that NGOs have
been formed, who in turn receive foreign contribution and spend the
funds as per their own desire and the same is being misused,
threatening the security apparatus and sovereignty of the country.
82. Consequent to the 2020 Act, the relevant provisions including
the newly inserted clauses read thus:
"7. Prohibition to transfer foreign contribution to other
person.-N person who-
(a) is registered and granted a certificate or has obtained prior
permission under this Act; and
(b) receives any foreign contribution,
shall transfer such foreign contribution to any other person.
*
*
*
12. Grant of certificate of registration - (1) An application by
a person, referred to in Section 11 for grant of certificate or giving
prior permission, shall be made to the Central Government in such
form and manner and along with such fee, as may be prescribed.
(1-A) Every person who makes an application under sub-section
(1) shall be required to open "FCRA Account" in the manner
specified in Section 17 and mention details of such account in his
application.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall, by an order, if the application is not in the
prescribed form or does not contain any of the particulars specified
in that form, reject the application.
(3) If on receipt of an application for grant of certificate or giving
prior permission and after making such inquiry as the Central
Government deems fit, it is of the opinion that the conditions
specified in sub-section (4) are satisfied, it may, ordinarily within
ninety days from the date of receipt of application under sub-section
(1), register such person and grant him a certificate or give him prior
permission, as the case may be, subject to such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case the Central Government does not grant,
within the said period of ninety days, a certificate or give prior
permission, it shall communicate the reasons therefor to the
applicant:
Provided further that a person shall not be eligible for grant of
certificate or giving prior permission, if his certificate has been
suspended and such suspension of certificate continues on the date
of making application.
(4) The following shall be the conditions for the purposes of sub-
section (3), namely-
(a) the person making an application for registration or grant of
prior permission under sub-section (1)-
(i) is not fictitious or benami;
(ii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for indulging in
activities aimed at conversion through inducement or force,
either directly or indirectly, from one religious faith to another;
(iii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for creating
communal tension or disharmony in any specified district or
any other part of the country;
(iv) has not been found guilty of diversion or misutilisation
of its funds;
(v) is not engaged or likely to engage in propagation of
sedition or advocate violent methods to achieve its ends;
(vi) is not likely to use the foreign contribution for personal
gains or divert it for undesirable purposes;
(vii) has not contravened any of the provisions of this Act;
(viii) has not been prohibited from accepting foreign
contribution;
(b) the person making an application for registration under sub
-section (1) has undertaken reasonable activity in its chosen field
for the benefit of the society for which the foreign contribution is
proposed to be utilised;
(c) the person making an application for giving prior
permission under sub-section (1) has prepared a reasonable
project for the benefit of the society for which the foreign
contribution is proposed to be utilised;
(d) in case the person being an individual, such individual has
neither been convicted under any law for the time being in force
nor any prosecution for any offence pending against him;
(e) in case the person being other than an individual, any of its
Directors or office-bearers has neither been convicted under any
law for the time being in force nor any prosecution for any offence
is pending against him;
(f) the acceptance of foreign contribution by the person
referred to in sub-section (1) is not likely to affect prejudicially-
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) the security, strategic, scientific or economic interest of
the State; or
(iii) the public interest; or
(iv) freedom or fairness of election to any legislature; or
(v) friendly relation with any foreign State; or
(vi) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic,
regional groups, castes or communities;
(g) the acceptance of foreign contribution referred to in sub-
section (1)-
(i) shall not lead to incitement of an offence;
(ii) shall not endanger the life or physical safety of any
person.
(5) Where the Central Government refuses the grant of certificate
or does not give prior permission, it shall record in its order the
reasons therefor and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant:
Provided that the Central Government may not communicate the
reasons for refusal for grant of certificate or for not giving prior
permission to the applicant under this section in cases where is no
obligation to give any information or documents or records or papers
under the Right to Information Act, 2005.
(6) The certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid for
a period of five years and the prior permission shall be valid for the
specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution proposed
to be received, as the case may be.
*
*
*
12-A. Power of Central Government to require Aadhaar
number, etc. as identification document.-Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may require
that any person who seeks prior permission or prior approval under
Section 11, or makes an application for grant of certificate under
Section 12, or, as the case may be, for renewal of certificate under
Section 16, shall provide as identification document, the Aadhaar
number of all its office-bearers or Directors or other key
functionaries, by whatever name called, issued under the Aadhaar
(Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and
Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016), or a copy of the Passport or
Overseas Citizen of India Card, in case of a foreigner.
*
*
*
17. Foreign contribution through scheduled bank.-(1) Every
person who has been granted certificate or prior permission under
Section 12 shall receive foreign contribution only in an account
designated as "FCRA Account" by the bank, which shall be opened
by him for the purpose of remittances of foreign contribution in such
branch of the State Bank of India at New Delhi, as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf:
Provided that such person may also open another "FCRA Account"
in any of the scheduled bank of his choice for the purpose of keeping
or utilising the foreign contribution which has been received from his
"FCRA Account" in the specified branch of State Bank of India at
New Delhi:
Provided further that such person may also open one or more
accounts in one or more scheduled banks of his choice to which he
may transfer for utilising any foreign contribution received by him in
his "FCRA Account" in the specified branch of the State Bank of India
at New Delhi or kept by him in another "FCRA Account" in a
scheduled bank of his choice:
Provided also that no funds other than foreign contribution shall
be received or deposited in any such account.
(2) The specified branch of the State Bank of India at New Delhi
or the branch of the scheduled bank where the person referred to in
sub-section (1) has opened his foreign contribution account or the
authorised person in foreign exchange, shall report to such authority
as may be specified-
(a) the prescribed amount of foreign remittance;
(b) the source and manner in which the foreign remittance was
received; and
(c) other particulars,
in such form and manner as may be prescribed."
83. It is well-established that rights guaranteed under Part III of the
Constitution and Article 19 in particular, are not absolute rights. The
same are subject to reasonable restrictions, as predicated in clauses (2)
and (6) of Article 19. For, it is open to the State to make a law, so as to
impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of such right [under
Article 19(1)(a)] in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality or in relation to
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence; in case of
Article 19(1)(c)-in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
India, public order or morality; and in case of Article 19(1)(g)-in the
interests of the general public. It is rightly urged by the respondents
that whenever the challenge is to the amended provisions, the scope of
enquiry, inter alia, ought to be as to whether the same is in consonance
with the principal Act, achieve the object and purpose of the principal
Act and are otherwise just, rational and reasonable. Further, there is no
fundamental right vested in anyone to receive foreign contribution
(donation) or foreign exchange; and that the purport of the principal
Act and the impugned amendments are only to provide a regulatory
framework and not one of complete prohibition.
84. Indisputably, serious concern about the impact of widespread
inflow of foreign contribution on the values of a sovereign democratic
republic had been repeatedly expressed at different levels including in
Parliament. To that end, the Bill was introduced in Parliament in 1973.
The legislative intent behind the enactment of the 1976 Act has
remained unchanged even to this day-nay it has become more
relevant now. In that, the experience gained aftermath implementation
of the 1976 Act revealed that more stringent dispensation was needed
to minimise the negative impact owing to the surge in the inflow of
foreign donation and for upholding the values of a sovereign democratic
republic, for which the 2010 Act came to be enacted. In that, even the
amendment effected in 1985 to the 1976 Act was found to be
insufficient to deal with the shortcomings in the law in force, for
regulating the inflow and sustained moderate utilisation of foreign
contribution. For that reason, Parliament eventually decided to replace
the regulatory dispensation by enacting a new law (the 2010 Act) to
address the mischief.
85. In due course of time, however, it was realised that the
dispensation enunciated in the 2010 Act was also not yielding the
desired result. This impelled Parliament to amend the 2010 Act (vide
the 2020 Act) to make it more stringent and effective to subserve the
cause and intent of the principal Act-not only in regard to the modality
of acceptance of foreign contribution in the prescribed manner but also
making it imperative for the recipient of foreign contribution to utilise
the same "itself" for the designated or specified purposes for which it
was so permitted.
86. Philosophically, foreign contribution (donation) is akin to
gratifying intoxicant replete with medicinal properties and may work
like a nectar. However, it serves as a medicine so long as it is
consumed (utilised) moderately and discreetly, for serving the larger
cause of humanity. Otherwise, this artifice has the capability of
inflicting pain, suffering and turmoil as being caused by the toxic
substance (potent tool)-across the nation. In that, free and
uncontrolled flow of foreign contribution has the potentials of impacting
the sovereignty and integrity of the nation, its public order and also
working against the interests of the general public.
87. To eradicate misuse and abuse of foreign contribution in the
past, despite the firm regime in place in terms of the 2010 Act,
Parliament in its wisdom has now (vide the Amendment Act of 2020)
adopted the path of moderation by making it mandatory for all to
accept foreign contribution only through one channel and to utilise the
same "itself" for the purposes for which permission has been accorded.
Undeniably, the sovereignty and integrity of India ought to prevail and
the rights enshrined in Part III of the Constitution must give way to the
interests of general public much less public order and the sovereignty
and integrity of the nation. It must be borne in mind that the
legislation under consideration must be understood in the context of
the underlying intent of insulating the democratic polity from the
adverse influence of foreign contribution remitted by foreign sources.
88. The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Amendment Act
of 2020 makes it amply clear that the annual inflow of foreign
contribution had almost doubled between the years 2010 and 2019 and
many recipients of foreign contribution had not utilised the same for
the purposes for which they were registered or granted prior permission
under the Act. Further, many recipients had also failed to adhere to and
fulfil the statutory compliances-which resulted in cancellation of as
many as 19,000 certificates of persons/organisations concerned during
the stated period, including initiation of criminal investigation
concerning outright misappropriation or misutilisation of foreign
contribution. It was increasingly reported that some of the NGOs were
primarily involved in routing of foreign contribution accepted by them
and not utilising the same itself for the purposes for which certificate of
registration was issued. Such transfer created several operational issues
bordering on malpractices impacting the very intent of the principal
Act. For, routing of foreign contribution entails in diverting it to another
area of activity including misuse thereof. There had been cases of
successive transfers and creation of a layered trail of money making it
difficult to trace the flow and final utilisation. In this backdrop, to
strengthen the compliance mechanism and enhancing transparency and
accountability in the matter of acceptance and utilisation of foreign
contribution, Parliament had to once again step in to restructure the
dispensation, making it more meaningful and effective, so as to deal
with the increasing impact of foreign contribution.
89. It is unnecessary to underscore the distinction between foreign
contribution and foreign investment. By its very nature, foreign
contribution is a donation accepted from a foreign source purportedly
for definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social
programme and to serve the cause of humanity. The expression
"foreign contribution" has been defined in Section 2(1)(h) of the 2010
Act to mean donation, which can be in the form of delivery or transfer
made by any foreign source of any article, currency, security, etc.
90. It is open to a sovereign democratic nation to completely
prohibit acceptance of foreign donation on the ground that
it
undermines the constitutional morality of the nation, as it is indicative
of the nation being incapable of looking after its own affairs and needs
of its citizens. The third
world countries may welcome foreign donation, but it is open to a
nation, which is committed and enduring to be self-reliant and
variously capable of shouldering its own needs, to opt for a policy of
complete prohibition of inflow/acceptance of foreign contribution
(donation) from foreign source. This was the first option noted by
Parliament while considering the Bill concerning the 1976 Act.
91. When the 1976 Act was enacted, Parliament had discussed
about three options. The first was of outright prohibition; the second
being acceptance subject to prior permission of the Government; and
the third-acceptance subject to intimation being given to the
Government. Parliament opted for the second option and that continues
to this day in the form of the 2010 Act, as amended in 2020. At the
same time, from the experience gained aftermath implementation of
the dispensation predicated for regulating the inflow of foreign
contribution from foreign source and its utilisation, the need to make it
more stringent was felt. The amendments vide the 2020 Act, are the
product of that experience and Parliament, for accomplishing the
objectives of the principal Act and to uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of the nation as well as public order and in the interests of the
general public, introduced the regime requiring acceptance of foreign
contribution from foreign source only through one channel and utilising
the same by the recipient itself for the activities for which prior
permission has been granted to him in that regard. The permission to
be granted by the Central Government can be a general permission for
definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social programme
or a special permission in respect of particular activity in that regard. In
either case, it has to be a prior permission in the form of obtaining
certificate of registration from the Central Government or obtaining
prior permission of the Central Government for the specific purpose by
person not so registered.
92. Suffice it to observe that considering the legislative history and
the need for Parliament to periodically intervene to arrest the increasing
influence on the polity of the nation due to the high volume of inflow of
foreign contribution and large-scale improper utilisation and
misappropriation thereof, as noticed by the authorities and keeping in
mind the objective of the principal enactment being to uphold the
values of sovereign democratic republic, the dispensation as altered to
make it more strict compliance mechanism for ensuring that the foreign
funds are accepted in the prescribed manner and utilised by the
recipient itself and more so, for the purposes for which it was allowed to
be received by that person, the amended provisions ought to pass the
muster of reasonable restriction. Certainly, such a change cannot be
labelled as irrational much less manifestly arbitrary, especially when it
applies uniformly to a class of persons without any discrimination. We
need to remind ourselves the dictum of this Court in Rustom Cavasjee
Cooper (Banks Nationalisation)³4 and also R.K. Garg-that it is not for
the Court to consider relative merits of the different
political theories or economic policies including that an economic
legislation may be troubled with crudities, inequities, uncertainties or
the possibility of abuse cannot be the basis for striking it down.
93. It must follow that acceptance of foreign contribution is
otherwise prohibited by law and violation of such restriction has been
made an offence under Chapter VIII of the 2010 Act. Nothing prevents
the organisations interested in doing charitable work in raising
contribution within the country. In that sense, the 2010 Act deals with
a class of persons accepting foreign contribution from foreign source.
All such persons are treated equally and without any discrimination.
Relevant provisions of the 2010 Act as amended
94. We may now broadly delineate the contours of the provisions of
the 2010 Act before we proceed to examine the challenge specific to
the amended provisions vide the 2020 Act. Chapter I of the 2010 Act
deals with short title, extent, application and commencement of the Act
as well as definitions of certain expressions referred to therein.
95. Chapter II is about regulation of foreign contribution and foreign
hospitality. Section 3 100 deals with prohibition to accept foreign
contribution
by specified persons. Section 4 101 is to declare that nothing in Section
3
shall apply to the acceptance, by any person specified in that section,
of any foreign contribution where such contribution is accepted by him,
subject to the provisions of Section 10 in respect of matters provided
therein. Section 5 is about the procedure to notify an organisation of a
political nature. Section 6 deals with restriction on acceptance of
foreign hospitality. Section 7 is about prohibition on transfer of foreign
contribution to other persons. Section 8 102 is about restriction to utilise
foreign contribution for administrative purpose. Section 9 g103
speaks
about power of the Central Government to prohibit receipt
of foreign contribution and matters connected therewith. Section 10104
is about the power of the Central Government to prohibit payment of
currency received in contravention of the Act.
96. The provisions of Chapter III deal with the subject of
registration. Section 11 105 is about registration of certain persons with
the Central
Government. Section 12 is about grant of certificate of registration and
the procedure therefor. Section 12-A has been inserted vide the 2020
Act providing for power of the Central Government to require Aadhaar
number, etc. as identification document at the time of registration or
for renewal of certificate. Section 13 deals with situations where
certificate of registration can be suspended and Section 14 106 is about
cancellation of such certificate.
Section 15 deals with issues of management of foreign contribution of
person whose certificate has been cancelled and Section 16 107 is about
the process of renewal of certificate of registration.
97. We are not so much concerned with the other Chapters, namely,
Chapters IV to IX of the 2010 Act, except Section 17 (in Chapter IV)
which deals with foreign contribution through scheduled bank. The
other provisions in Chapter IV are about accounts, intimation, audit and
disposal of assets, etc.
98. As aforesaid, the 2010 Act is to regulate foreign contribution as
defined in Section 2(1)(h). As the petitioners are desirous of engaging
in definite cultural, economic, educational, religious or social
programme and for doing
so accept foreign contribution, they had to seek certificate of
registration from the Central Government in terms of Section 11. The
certificate of registration refers to definite activities which will be
undertaken by the organisation/trust concerned for utilisation of foreign
contribution. Having shown interest in obtaining such certificate of
registration or for renewal thereof, it is obligatory for the organisation to
comply with the formalities, including as specified in Sections 7, 12(1-
A) read with Section 17 or Section 12-A. We shall deal with this aspect
in detail a little later.
99. Besides complying with the formalities for registration under
Section 11, the persons interested in receipt/acceptance of foreign
contribution from foreign source after grant of such certificate of
registration, are obliged to do so only through the FCRA account which
is required to be opened under Section 17 being a precondition for
grant of certificate of registration or renewal thereof, in terms of Section
12(1-A) read with Section 17 of the 2010 Act. That apart, after grant of
certificate of registration and acceptance of foreign contribution from
foreign source through the specified account, the same is required to be
utilised by the recipient itself only for the purposes for which such
permission had been granted, with prohibition to transfer such foreign
contribution to any other person by virtue of Section 7 of the 2010 Act.
Validity of Section 7
100. Having said this, now we may revert to the grounds on which
Section 7, as amended vide the 2020 Act, has been challenged. It is
urged that the unamended provision though restricted the transfer of
foreign contribution, yet it did not completely prohibit the same unlike
the amended Section 7. The amended Section 7 postulates complete
prohibition on the transfer of foreign contribution to other person-not
even to a person having certificate of registration under the Act. In
other words, a person who is registered and granted a certificate or has
obtained prior permission under the Act to receive foreign contribution
will henceforth be required to utilise the amount "itself" and not
through any other person.
101. Be it noted that the proviso to the unamended Section 7
envisaged that if a part of foreign contribution was to be transferred to
some other person who had not been granted a certificate or obtained
prior permission under the 2010 Act, that could be made possible by
obtaining prior approval of the Central Government. Even that option is
done away with on account of the amended Section 7.
102. This plea has been countered by the respondents on the
argument that Parliament in its wisdom has decided to introduce a
strict regime in the backdrop of the experience gained from the
implementation of the unamended Section 7 of the 2010 Act; and to
eradicate the mischief which had unfolded. Hence, the new
dispensation became necessary to introduce a stricter regime
(amended Section 7). Indisputably, the new regime does not
completely prohibit the inflow of foreign contribution as such. Whereas,
it is a firm dispensation regarding utilisation of the funds so
accepted/received from foreign source only for the purposes for which
the recipient is registered and
granted a certificate or had been given prior permission under the Act
in that regard.
103. The expressions "foreign contribution"108 and "foreign
source"- ,109 have been defined in Sections 2(1)(h) and 2(1)(j) of the
2010 Act as amended.
104. Section 11 of the Act, as applicable vide the Amendment Act of
2020, is in one sense complete prohibition to receive foreign
contribution unless have obtained certificate of registration or prior
permission from the Central Government in that regard. Further,
Section 11 allows receipt or acceptance of foreign contribution only for
definite purposes such as cultural, economic, educational, religious or
social programme.
105. A person desirous of receiving/accepting foreign contribution
for such definite purposes had to seek a certificate of registration from
the Central Government even under the unamended provision. After
obtaining such certificate of registration, the recipient of foreign
contribution could transfer it to another person who is also registered
and had been granted a certificate or obtained prior permission under
the 2010 Act. However, that is not permissible under the new
dispensation (amended Section 7). For, the legislative intent is now one
of complete prohibition regarding transfer of foreign contribution to
third party.
106. Significantly, as per the scheme of the 2010 Act, a certificate of
registration is not granted for acting as an intermediary between the
donor (foreign source) and the grassroot level organisation. The
amended provision, therefore, completely rules out such transfer of
foreign contribution by the person who has received/accepted the same
in the first place. That does not prevent the recipient from utilising the
foreign contribution "itself" for the purposes for which he has been
granted a certificate of registration or obtained prior permission under
the Act.
107. The expression "transfer" has not been defined in the Act. The
meaning of expression "transfer" in the subject enactment would
presuppose giving away of the foreign contribution in whole or in part
to third person without retaining any control thereon; and such change
of hands is obviously without offering any services in return, namely,
free of costs. The third person would then be free to deal with such
transferred foreign contribution in the manner he chooses to do so,
whilst adhering to the conditions specified in his certificate of
registration or the conditions specified in the prior permission under the
Act, as the case may be. In this scenario, it had been possible that the
transferor (who had accepted the foreign contribution) may have
persuaded the foreign source to donate for one permitted purpose, but
without consulting the donor (foreign source) could transfer the whole
or part amount (foreign donation) to third person (transferee) for being
utilised for altogether another purpose, which in a given case may not
be acceptable to the donor. It, thus, paved way for misutilisation of
foreign contribution and the possibility of abuse thereof.
108. There is no restriction regarding utilisation of foreign
contribution, leave alone complete prohibition. The rationale of Section
7 as amended, inter alia, is that the donor (foreign source) is made
fully aware of the definite purposes already declared by the recipient
and permitted by the competent authority and corresponding obligation
upon the recipient regarding utilisation of the funds itself for stated
purposes and none else.
109. Indeed, even the expression "utilisation" has not been defined
in the Act. The ordinary meaning of the expression "utilisation" must be
understood in the context of the purpose for which a certificate of
registration or prior permission under the Act has been granted by the
Central Government. If the foreign contribution is utilised for such
definite purposes¹¹0, including
administrative expenses permissible under Section 8, even though it
may
theoretically entail in transfer of foreign contribution, it would not be a
case attracting the rigors of Section 7. In other words, Section 7 may
be attracted if the utilisation is not for the definite or permitted
purposes for which the certificate of registration or permission under
the Act has been granted by the competent authority. Indeed, if the
recipient of foreign contribution engages services of some third party or
outsources its certain activities to third person, whilst undertaking
definite activities itself and had to pay therefor, it would be a case of
utilisation. The transfer within the meaning of Section 7, therefore,
would be a case of per se (simpliciter) transfer by the recipient of
foreign contribution to third party without requiring to engage in the
definite activities of cultural, economic, educational or social
programme of the recipient of foreign contribution, for which the
recipient had obtained a certificate of registration from the Central
Government. On this interpretation, it must follow that the argument
regarding amended Section 7, being ultra vires, must fail.
110. Concededly, Section 8 permits the recipient of foreign
contribution to utilise only specified portion thereof for administrative
purposes, to the extent permissible. As per Section 8, the
administrative expenses qua foreign contribution received by the
registered person ought not to exceed twenty per cent (instead of fifty
per cent under the unamended provision) of such contribution in the
financial year concerned. The proviso to Section 8(1), however, enables
spending beyond twenty per cent towards administrative expenses with
prior approval of the Central Government. Be it noted, the validity of
amended Section 8 is not put in issue in these petitions.
111. On conjoint reading of Sections 7 and 8, as amended, the
legislative intent of mandating utilisation of foreign contribution by the
recipient itself for the purposes for which it had been permitted gets
reinforced. Additionally, Sections 12(4)(b) and 18 of the 2010 Act also
reinforce such a view-which predicates that the person who has been
granted certificate of registration or given prior approval under the Act,
is obliged to give intimation to the Central Government and such other
authorities as may be specified by the Central Government as to the
amount of each foreign contribution received by it, the source from
which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was received,
and the purposes for which, and the manner in which such foreign
contribution was utilised by him. This information may facilitate inquiry
mechanism and to reassure that the foreign contribution accepted by
the person has been utilised for definite purposes permitted by the
competent authority. Any breach of this stipulation may entail in penal
action under the Act.
112. It was vehemently urged before us that since the transferee
would also possess certificate of registration and bound by the
provisions of the 2010 Act, it would serve no legitimate purpose by
prohibiting transfer of foreign contribution to such person. Accepting
this argument would be completely glossing over the legislative intent
for which the amendment has been effected. The legislative intent is to
introduce strict dispensation qua the recipient of foreign contribution to
utilise the same "itself" for the purposes for which it has been
permitted as per the certificate of registration or permission granted
under the Act by the Central Government. In addition, by the same
Amendment Act, utilisation of foreign contribution for administrative
purpose by the recipient has been lowered to twenty per cent only with
a view to ensure maximum spending on the purposes for which the
foreign contribution has been accepted by the recipient having
certificate of registration.
113. Absent such stringent provision, some of the recipient
organisations were reportedly indulging in successive chain of transfers
to other organisations, thereby creating a layered trail of money and
also utilisation of funds towards administrative costs of successive
transfers up to fifty per cent leaving very little funds for spending on
the purposes for which it was permitted. Hence, providing complete
restriction on transfer simpliciter, was the just option to fix
accountability of the recipient organisation and maximise utilisation for
the permitted purposes. Such being the avowed objective and purpose
of the amendment, the challenge to the amended Section 7 must fail.
114. Be that as it may, the fact that earlier transfer of foreign
contribution was permitted as per the unamended provision, that by
itself cannot be the basis to challenge the validity of the amended
provision. For, it is open to Parliament to change the benchmark of
restriction from higher standard to lower standard or vice versa on the
basis of the exigencies and experience gained during the
implementation of the applicable provision at the relevant time.
115. Indubitably, foreign contribution is qualitatively different from
foreign investment. Receiving foreign donation cannot be an absolute or
even a vested right. By its very expression, it is a reflection on the
constitutional morality of the nation as a whole being incapable of
looking after its own needs and problems. The question to be asked
is:"in normal times", why developing or developed countries would
need foreign contribution to cater to their own needs and aspirations?
Indisputably, the aspirations of any country cannot be fulfilled on the
hope (basis) of foreign donation, but by firm and resolute approach of
its own citizens to achieve the goal by sheer dint of their hard work and
industry. Indeed, charitable activity is a business. Receiving
contribution within India to do charitable activity can be and is being
regulated differently. It is not possible to have a similar approach
relating to foreign contribution from foreign source. In short, no one
can be heard to claim a vested right to accept foreign donation, much
less an absolute right.
116. We say so because the theory of possibility of national polity
being influenced by foreign contribution is globally recognised. For,
foreign contribution can have material impact in the matter of socio-
economic structure and polity of the country. The foreign aid can create
presence of a foreign contributor and influence the policies of the
country. It may tend to influence or impose political ideology. Such
being the expanse of the effect of foreign contribution coupled with the
tenet of constitutional morality of the nation, the presence/inflow of
foreign contribution in the country ought to be at the minimum level, if
not completely eschewed. The influence may manifest in different ways,
including in destabilising the social order within the country. The
charitable associations may instead focus on donors within the country,
to obviate influence of foreign country owing to foreign contribution.
There is no dearth of donors within our country.
117. Pertinently, the 1976 Act came to be repealed by the 2010 Act,
as it had become necessary to do so because of the experience gained
that in the name of foreign contribution, attempts were made by
unscrupulous entities to disturb the economy and sovereignty of our
country. That being the underlying reason, it must follow that the
legislative intent behind the Act and constant effort of the Government
and of Parliament is to discourage foreign contribution generally, but
allow it for specific definite purposes mentioned in Section 11 of the
Act; and for which, the person receiving or accepting foreign
contribution is obliged to obtain a certificate of registration under the
Act or prior permission, as the case may be. Further, such person is
obligated to comply with all the stipulations attached to the certificate
of registration or prior permission, without any exception.
118. Apparently, receiving "foreign exchange" is itself completely
prohibited and made subject to exceptions provided for in terms of the
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (for short "the 1999 Act"). On
conjoint reading of the provisions of the 1999 Act and the regulatory
mechanism provided for in the 2010 Act, it is a clear pointer to the
strict regime to be followed by all concerned for allowing inflow of
"foreign contribution" (donation) in the manner prescribed and its
utilisation only for definite purposes permitted by the competent
authority.
119. We fail to understand as to how such a provision (amended
Section 7) can be regarded as discriminatory or so to say vague or
irrational much less manifestly arbitrary. The restriction therein applies
to a class of persons who are permitted to accept foreign donation for
being utilised by themselves for the definite purposes, without any
discrimination and it is so done to uphold the objective of the principal
Act. Thus, there is clear intelligible differentia with a direct nexus
sought to be achieved with the intent of the principal Act. Such strict
regime had become inevitable because of the experience gained by the
authorities concerned over a period of time, including about the abuse
of the earlier dispensation under the unamended provision.
120. The change not only completely prohibits transfer, but also
enhances the efficacy of the foreign contribution by mandating
utilisation thereof by the
person granted certificate of registration itself, for the purposes for
which it had been accepted in terms of the certificate of registration or
prior permission granted under the Act, as the case may be, including
up to prescribed administrative expenses. This restriction inevitably
fixes the accountability of the recipient organisation and mandating
maximum utilisation by itself for permitted purposes. This is the
procedure established by law. It can neither be said to be arbitrary nor
discriminatory much less manifestly arbitrary-within the meaning of
Article 14 or impinging upon Article 21 of the Constitution. As a matter
of law, since the subject Act deals with a distinct class of persons
(accepting/receiving foreign contribution) and it is founded on an
intelligible differentia having object sought to be achieved by the
principal Act, it fulfils the test predicated in Shayara Bano¹2. For the
same reason, the amended provision under challenge is neither
capricious, irrational or lacking determining principle, nor suffers from
the vice of excessiveness and being disproportionate.
121. We need to bear in mind that there is presumption that
Parliament understands and reacts to the needs of its own people as
per the exigencies and experience gained in the implementation of the
law. Mere plea of inconvenience is not enough to attract the
constitutional inhibition. The courts ought not to adopt a doctrinaire
approach in construing the amended provisions and undermine the
legislative intent of strengthening the regulatory mechanism
concerning foreign contribution. The legislature enjoys considerable
latitude while exercising its wisdom on the basis of inputs collated from
different quarters64. There is intrinsic evidence to indicate that the
change effected by the amendments is to serve the legitimate
government purpose and has a rational nexus to the object of the
principal Act and the amendments, and that the pre-amendment
dispensation (unamended Section 7) was not sufficient to effectively
regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution as
predicated by the principal Act.
122. Reliance placed by the petitioners on the dictum in Shreya
Singhal97 and K.S. Puttaswamy3 to urge that it is open to the Court to
test the amendment on the touchstone of manifestly arbitrary, need not
detain us in light of the conclusion noted hitherto, keeping in mind the
legislative history and the compelling necessity to adopt strict regime
for prohibiting "transfer" of foreign contribution and insistence of
"utilisation" thereof by the recipient himself/itself. For the same
reasons, the dictum in Anuradha Bhasin14 that the underlying
consideration of appropriateness, necessity and the least restrictive
measure compliant law, will also be of no avail.
123. The argument that this Court in INSAF15 , while dealing with the
provisions of the 1976 Act had recognised the absolute right to receive
foreign contribution is misplaced and misreading of that decision. For,
the said decision examined the arguments pursued before the Court in
the context of challenge to the validity of Sections 5(1) and 5(4) of the
2010 Act and Rules 3(1)(i), 3(1)(v) and 3(1)(vi) of the 2011 Rules as
being violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(a), 19(1)(c) and 21 of the
Constitution. The provisions in Rule 3(1)(v) and 3(1)(vi) were read
down to mean that the expression "political interests" occurring therein
be construed to mean that it would apply only to those organisations
which have connection with active politics or take part in party politics.
Strikingly, even in this decision the Court noted the object sought to be
achieved by the 2010 Act. To wit, to ensure that parliamentary
institutions, political associations and academic and other voluntary
organisations as well as individuals working in the important areas of
national life should function in a manner consistent with the values of a
sovereign democratic republic without being influenced by foreign
contributions or foreign hospitality. The Court went on to observe that
long title of the Act makes it clear that the regulation of acceptance and
utilisation of foreign contribution is for the purpose of protecting
"national interests" and to prohibit organisations of a political nature
from receiving foreign contributions.
124. That being the underlying purpose for which the Act has been
enacted, whilst interpretating the amended provisions, we cannot be
oblivious to the concern expressed by Parliament, about the state of
affairs and the fallout of the implementation of the dispensation
enunciated under the unamended Act. As Parliament took a well
informed and conscious decision to alter that position-to make it a
strict regulatory regime of not permitting the recipient of foreign
contribution to transfer the funds to third party for the reasons weighed
with it, it must follow that the provision is in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of the country, public order and in the
interests of the general public.
125. The question posed to us was : whether such restriction can be
said to be reasonable restriction or impinges upon the right of any
person? While examining the issue as to whether the amended
provision is a reasonable restriction, the Court cannot be oblivious to
the concern of Parliament/Legislature backed by the past experiences
including cancellation of registration of substantial number of
registration certificates after due inquiry and for tangible reasons owing
to abuse and misutilisation of foreign contribution (donation); and
especially when receipt or acceptance of foreign exchange or be it
foreign contribution, is otherwise understood to be ordinarily prohibited.
For, the "foreign exchange" and more so "foreign contribution" can be
received or brought within the territory of India only as per the
dispensation provided for in the municipal law. There can be no
absolute right in that regard. The fact that transfer was permitted
under the unamended Section 7, it does not follow that Parliament is
not competent to amend that dispensation to make it more stringent,
including to completely prohibit the inflow of
foreign contribution. The amended provision is not to completely
prohibit inflow of foreign contribution, but is a regulatory measure to
permit acceptance by registered persons or persons having prior
permission to do so with condition that they must themselves utilise
the entire contribution including for administrative expenses within the
limits provided under Section 8 of the Act. The subject enactment is
essentially conceived in the interests of public order and also general
public as the intent is to prevent misuse and misutilisation of foreign
contribution coming from foreign sources to safeguard the values of a
sovereign democratic republic.
126. Thus understood, it is a reasonable restriction as it does not
hinder with the right of forming associations as well as to engage in
business of charity. Being a regulatory measure necessitated because of
past experience and to uphold the intent of the principal Act, insisting
for utilisation, spending of foreign contribution by the recipient itself
cannot be said to be irrational, arbitrary, discriminatory, or
unreasonable restriction as such.
127. The restriction or complete prohibition on transfer to third
party, by no standards deprive acceptance of foreign contribution and
utilisation thereof in the manner permitted for definite purposes, such
as cultural, economic, educational or social programme. Such a
provision must be understood as being procedure established by law in
the interests of the general public and in the interests of sovereignty
and integrity of the country, including public order. Resultantly, there is
no infraction even of Article 19(1)(c) or 19(1)(g) of the Constitution as
urged by the writ petitioners before us, including Articles 14 and 21 of
the Constitution. Consistent with this view, we must reject the
challenge to the amended Section 7 on all counts.
128. For the same reason, the argument of the writ petitioners
about lack of rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by
the principal Act much less the Amendment Act, must also fail. The
rationale is of larger public interests and more particularly to obviate
adverse impact on the economy, public order, sovereignty and integrity
of the country. Such amendment has been necessitated because of the
past experience consequent to implementation of the unamended
Section 7 of the 2010 Act. It is so highlighted in the Objects and
Reasons and the introduction of the Amendment Act. It can also be
culled out from the debates in Parliament whilst considering the
Amendment Bill in the respective Houses. To overcome the mischief
and to enhance transparency and accountability regarding acceptance
and also utilisation of foreign contribution which is quite substantial
every financial year having proliferating effect on the economy of the
nation, it had become necessary to enact amended Section 7. In other
words, there is a clear rationale behind the amendment which is
consistent with the purpose of the principal Act and the object sought
to be achieved under the enactments. The fact that unamended
provision was less restrictive, cannot be the basis to test the
constitutional validity of the provision on the touchstone of Article 19
(1)(c) or 19(1)(g) or Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. The
amended Section 7, being plain and clear and having nexus with the
object sought to be achieved and is necessitated because of
sovereignty and integrity of India or security of the State, public
order and in the interests of the general public. It is unfathomable as to
how the amended provision can be regarded as unconstitutional on any
parameter.
129. It is urged that Rule 24 of the 2011 Rules came to be deleted
with effect from 10-11-2020. This rule enabled the registered
organisations to transfer foreign contribution to any unregistered
person in the manner provided therein. However, in light of amendment
to Section 7 prohibiting transfer of foreign contribution to any person,
the need for the dispensation predicated in Rule 24 had become non-
existent. In other words, as per amended Section 7, there is no need to
continue Rule 24 on the statute book and its continuance for some time
would also make no difference in the wake of express prohibition in
amended Section 7 of the 2010 Act.
Validity of Section 12(1-A) and Section 17(1)
130. Section 12(1-A) has been inserted by Act 33 of 2020, which
envisages that every person who makes an application under sub-
section (1) of Section 12 is obliged/required to open FCRA account in
the manner specified in Section 17 and mention details of such account
in his application. Section 17, in particular sub-section (1) as amended,
mandates that every person who had been granted certificate or prior
permission under Section 12 shall receive foreign contribution only in
an account designated as FCRA account in the specified bank. The
unamended Sections 12 and 17 did not impose such restriction.
Notably, as per the new regime foreign remittances are being received
through SWIFT platform by international banking wherein certain
mandatory fields are required to be captured apart from other details
transaction wise. Further, foreign remittances do not have structured
framework, including disclosures regarding purposes. All these
deficiencies will stand resolved thereby enhancing the monitoring
mechanism in real-time basis, remittance wise by adopting the new
dispensation predicated in the amended provisions.
131. Once again, the need to strictly regulate the inflow of foreign
funds and to oversee utilisation thereof for the purposes for which it has
been received having been recognised and being the rationale behind
the Amendment Act, including owing to the experience regarding abuse
of the regime under the unamended provision, the challenge to such
amendment cannot be taken forward.
132. There is force in the argument of the respondents that Section
17 came to be amended aftermath realisation of clear and discernible
lacunae had cropped in due to the presence of FCRA accounts of scores
of registered organisations, in different scheduled banks across the
country. The challenge became more pronounced due to doubling of
foreign contribution inflow in the last decade which had impacted the
efficiency of monitoring and achieving the object of the principal Act.
The amended provision now mandates that FCRA accounts of all the
registered persons/organisations are required to be opened in one
particular branch in the country providing for essential information and
fields, thereby ensuring a complete and transparent check on the inflow
and utilisation of foreign contribution towards a single point source on
real-time basis.
133. The fact that earlier FCRA account could be opened in any
scheduled bank, cannot preclude Parliament from legislating a law
which requires inflow of foreign contribution in some other manner
specified by law. Merely because the framework of acceptance of foreign
contribution had been changed cannot be the basis to question the
validity of the amended provisions. Introducing change for the
betterment of governance is the prerogative and wisdom of Parliament.
The FCRA account operators cannot claim right of continuity of a
deficient and flawed framework. Ordinarily, convenience of business
and persons engaged in doing business must be uppermost in the mind
of Parliament/Legislature-to effectuate the goal of ease of doing
business. However, the strict regime had become essential because of
the past experience of abuse and misutilisation of the "foreign
contribution" and cancellation of certificates of as many as 19,000
registered organisations on the ground of being grossly non-compliant.
Despite such cancellation of large number of certificates of registration,
until December 2021 there were reportedly 22,762 FCRA registered
organisations presumably compliant with new dispensation. Further, as
many as 12,989 organisations have applied for the renewal of the FCRA
licence between 30-9-2020 and 31-12-2021. And as many as 5789
organisations had not applied for renewal of FCRA licence, whose FCRA
licence has ceased to be valid. A fortiori, it would certainly justify the
need to have a holistic approach to ensure that the objective of the
principal Act is fulfilled, namely, of strict regulation of the inflow and
utilisation of foreign contribution for the purposes for which it is so
permitted, such as only cultural, economic, educational or social
programme.
134. In fact, Parliament must be credited with for having taken
recourse to corrective dispensation for eradicating the mischief, which
any sovereign country can ill-afford. Parliament is supreme and has a
final say in matters of legislation when it reflects on alternatives and
choices with inputs from different quarters, with a check in the form of
democratic accountability and a further check by the courts which
exercise the power of judicial review33 We find force in the argument
that it had become necessary for Parliament to step in and provide a
stringent regime for effectively regulating the inflow and utilisation of
foreign contribution. Hence, there had been legitimate goal for
amending the subject provisions of acceptance of funds through one
channel. Concededly, despite the requirement of opening FCRA account
in the designated bank, it is open to the organisation to utilise the
amount so received in the FCRA account through multiple accounts in
the scheduled branches. In that sense, it is a balanced approach.
135. A priori, opening of main FCRA account in the designated bank
as per the law made by Parliament in that regard, cannot be brushed
aside on the specious argument of some inconvenience being caused to
the registered
associations111. Assuming that some inconvenience is likely to be
caused to few applicants, but the constitutionality of a statute cannot
be assailed on the basis of fortuitous circumstances and more so when
it being only a one-time exercise to ensure inflow of foreign
contribution through one channel only, being a precondition for grant of
permission. There is no restriction regarding utilisation of the funds
only through that (primary) FCRA account. For, it is open to the
recipient to operate multiple accounts in other scheduled banks for its
utilisation.
136. As a matter of law, the validity of the amendments must be
tested on the touchstone of tenets underlying Articles 14, 19 and 21 of
the Constitution. The permission is a precondition for acceptance and
utilisation of foreign contribution. Such persons are a separate class
and engage in specified activity. It cannot be a usual or ordinary
business for everyone and anyone wanting to accept foreign
contribution. Permitting inflow of foreign contribution, which is a
donation, is a matter of policy of the State backed by law. In this case,
it is governed by the 2010 Act as amended. It is open to the State to
have a regime which may completely prohibit receipt of foreign
donation, as no right inheres in the citizen to receive foreign
contribution (donation).
137. The provision such as Section 12(1-A) and Section 17(1)
introduced by the Amendment Act, is a holistic approach adopted by
Parliament to provide for strict regulatory measure and for ensuring
transparency and accountability in the matter of foreign contribution.
Notably, there was unanimity amongst the members of both the
Houses cutting across party lines to have such a strict regime as
indiscriminate receipt/inflow and more so utilisation of foreign
contribution had been threatening the sovereignty and integrity of the
country itself. Being a matter of security of the State, public order and
in the interests of the general public, it is not open to question the
validity of such a law on the touchstone of Article 19(1)(c) or 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution. It is not a provision to completely prohibit forming
of the associations or engaging in business of charity as such. It is a
provision for regulating the manner of doing business more
importantly, concerning foreign contribution.
138. Opening of main FCRA account in the designated bank, as has
been rightly contended by the respondents, is only a one-time exercise
and for which instructions and protocols have been issued by the
competent authority, not to insist for physical presence for complying
with the formalities. It can be organised even at the local branches of
the designated bank in the manner specified in the instructions issued
in that regard. Moreover, the provision does not prohibit the
person/registered association from opening multiple accounts in other
scheduled banks, wherein the amount received in (primary) FCRA
account in NDMB can be transferred; and from where day-
to-day activities can be then carried on by them. In any case, the
designated bank being conscious of its banking obligations and to
provide best services to the registered associations, have issued
instructions (Standard Operating Procedure) for making it convenient to
open FCRA account in NDMB as also to operate the foreign contribution
received in such an account. If any further improvement in the
operational convenience is required, it is open to the petitioners and all
other interested persons to request the designated bank to improve
upon such facility. However, merely because the registered association
has been compelled to open FCRA account in the designated bank at
the centralised location for receipt/inflow of foreign contribution from
foreign source, it does not follow that such a requirement would be
manifestly arbitrary or unreasonable. It is only a one-time exercise to
be complied with for availing the permission accorded by the Central
Government under the Act to be a certified association or person given
permission to receive foreign contribution as a precondition.
139. The need to have only one entry point for the inflow of foreign
contribution had been viewed by Parliament as the best option for
regulating the inflow of foreign contribution. This process is expected to
increase the efficiency in continual supervision of the inflow of foreign
contribution on real-time basis by the Authorities concerned and to
enable them to take immediate corrective measures to deal with and
pre-empt the impending threat perceived because of its volume
including undesirable source of remittance. It is not open to the Court
to have a second-guess approach in that regard.
140. In the context of the law made by Parliament in the interests of
the sovereignty and integrity of the country and security of the State,
public order, as also in the interests of the general public, such a
provision cannot be lightly viewed much less on the specious plea of
manifestly arbitrary. Parliament in its wisdom had deemed it essential
to have such a provision because of the prevalent discernible
circumstances referred to in the introduction of the Bill.
141. It was vehemently urged that there is lack of infrastructure at
the designated bank and that the bank branch is manned only by 40
odd personnel. To buttress this plea, reference is made to the
observation made by Reserve Bank of India-that voluminous data on
foreign remittances will put an extra financial burden on the Bank and
increase its costs including divert focus on monitoring of suspicious
transactions. This argument does not commend to us at all. In digital
banking operations, it is not the head count dispensing physical
services that would matter, but the effectiveness of the software is
important. We are also not impressed by the plea that for organisations
located in remote parts of the country, there would be impediments
and for that reason, Section 7 violates test of fairness and
reasonableness. In any case, Respondent 3 (SBI) has on affidavit
explained as to the extent of measures taken for ensuring efficient
servicing of FCRA accounts of all the registered associations/account-
holders. Respondent 3 has also assured that if need arises, suitable
corrective measures including to upgrade the facilities/services would
be taken at its end. Suffice it to observe that the argument under
consideration cannot be the basis to doubt the constitutional validity of
the provisions in the form of Section 12(1-A) and
Section 17(1), as amended vide the Amendment Act. Needless to
underscore that Respondent 3 has stated on affidavit before this Court
that FCRA accounts opened in its designated branch can be operated
online on real-time basis without the need for physical presence of the
account-holder or its officials.
142. Having noted that the provision became necessary for efficient
regulation of foreign contribution on real-time basis, it can neither be
said to be manifestly arbitrary nor irrational much less without
legitimate objective of the State. Accordingly, we have no hesitation in
negating the challenge to these provisions as being violative of Articles
14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
143. The fact that the registered associations were already
complying with the statutory formalities of furnishing of accounts,
intimation, audit and disposal of assets to the satisfaction of the
Authorities concerned, it would not follow that Parliament/Legislature is
denuded of its power of changing the regulatory mechanism or
framework to make it more effective and to make it real-time regarding
the inflow or receipt of foreign contribution and utilisation thereof for
the purposes for which it has been so permitted. Accepting the
argument of the registered associations would not only be undermining
the legislative intent, but also disregarding the object sought to be
achieved by the principal Act.
144. The argument of compelling necessity may have arisen for our
consideration only if we were to find that the dispensation provided in
the amended provisions is in the nature of complete prohibition to form
association or to engage in business. As mentioned earlier, these
provisions are only for effective regulatory measures concerning and
limited to foreign contribution, in the larger public interests, public
order, and more particularly for safeguarding the sovereignty and
integrity of the country. Taking any other view would entail in
undermining the legislative intent and cannot be countenanced.
Validity of Section 12-A
145. Reverting to the challenge to the insertion of Section 12-A vide
the Amendment Act of 2020, it mandates that the person concerned
who seeks prior permission or prior approval under Section 11, or
makes an application for grant of certificate under Section 12, including
for renewal of certificate under Section 16, to provide as identification
document, the Aadhaar number of all its office-bearers or Directors or
other key functionaries. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Amendment Act are testimony about the past experience of abuse of
foreign contribution receipts and spending on activities not connected
with the purposes for which it was so permitted. It had been noticed
that the inflow of foreign contribution had almost doubled between the
years 2010 and 2019 and many of the registered associations had
failed to comply with basic statutory formalities necessitating
cancellation of certificates of registration of more than 19,000
registered organisations. This is a staggering (substantial) number
indicative of gross violations by large number of registered associations.
More so, this amendment had been necessitated to safeguard the
sovereignty and integrity of the country, and public order, including in
the interests of the security of the State and of
the general public. It is a law made by Parliament which is competent
to make such a law concerning the activities related to foreign
donations and more particularly about its acceptance in prescribed
manner and utilisation for the purposes defined in the
certificate/permission granted by the competent authority. It has a
legitimate purpose and nexus sought to be achieved with the objective
underlying the principal Act and the subject amendment. It is not open
to argue that associations desirous of obtaining certificate of
registration under this Act need not furnish official identification
document pertaining to its key functionaries.
146. Regardless of the above, the provision (Section 12-A)
envisages that a copy of the passport can also be provided as
identification document of all its office-bearers or Directors or other key
functionaries or Overseas Citizen of India Card, in case of a foreigner.
The underlying purpose of this provision is merely to identify the key
functionaries of the registered association so that they can be made
accountable for violations, if any. We are of the view that as the
passport in case of a foreigner is accepted as sufficient identification
document, there is no reason why such passport of Indian national
cannot be relied upon for the same purpose. Thus understood, the
challenge to this provision being unreasonable need not detain us nor is
required to be taken any further. Whereas, we hold that the provision
needs to be construed as permitting furnishing of the Indian passport
of the key functionaries of the applicant who are Indian nationals, for
the purpose of their identification.
147. Having said this, it is not necessary to dilate on other
arguments pressed into service dealing with matters of privacy or the
provisions under consideration being manifestly arbitrary.
148. For the view that we have taken, we do not wish to dilate on
every single authority cited across the Bar as the view taken by us is in
no way different than the principle expounded therein.
Conclusion
149. To sum up, we declare that the amended provisions vide the
2020 Act, namely, Sections 7, 12(1-A), 12-A and 17 of the 2010 Act
are intra vires the Constitution and the principal Act, for the reasons
noted hitherto. As regards Section 12-A, we have read down the said
provision and construed it as permitting the key functionaries/office-
bearers of the applicant (associations/NGOs) who are Indian nationals,
to produce Indian passport for the purpose of their identification. That
shall be regarded as substantial compliance of the mandate in Section
12-A concerning identification.
150. Accordingly, Writ Petitions (Civil) Nos. 566 and 751 of 2021 are
disposed of in the aforementioned terms. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 634 of
2021 also stands disposed of. No order as to costs. Pending application
(s), if any, are also disposed of.
+ Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India [Partly allowed]
1
The expression "certificate" as defined in Section 2(1)(e) of the 2010 Act as amended,
reads thus:
"2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) to (d)
*
*
*
(e) "certificate" means certificate of registration granted under sub-section (3) of Section
12;"
2
The expression "person" as defined in Section 2(1)(m) of the 2010 Act as amended, reads
thus:
2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) to (1)
*
*
(m) "person" includes-
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) an association;
(iv) a company registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);"
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
para 107
11
SCEC 1
12
13
3
15
16
17
18
19
The expression "association" as defined in Section 2(1)(a) of the 2010 Act as amended,
reads thus:
2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) "association" means an association of individuals, whether incorporated or not, having
an office in India and includes a society, whether registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or not, and any other organisation, by whatever name called;"
3 SCEC 520
937 : 198 US 45 (1905)
(1932)
(1937)
US 144 (1938)
27
:
93 L Ed 222 : 335 US 538 (1949)
29
4 SCEC 177
30
31
32
33
34
paras 63, 70
36
38
39
(Civ) 875
41
42
43
44
45
47
para 6
49
50
Sakhawant Ali V. State of Orissa, AIR 1955 SC 166, paras 9-10
51
Budhan Choudhry V. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 191, paras 5, 7, 9
52 D.P. Joshi V. State of Madhya Bharat, AIR 1955 SC 334, paras 14-16
53 Hans Muller of Nurenburg V. Supt., Presidency Jail, AIR 1955 SC 367, paras 14, 24-25
54 Kishan Singh V. Ther Singh, AIR 1955 SC 795, paras 3-5
55
P. Balakotaiah V. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 232, paras 13 (IIa), 14-16
56
Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R. Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 538, paras 11-17
57
Express Newspaper (P) Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 578, paras 210-218
58
Khandige Sham Bhat V. ITO, AIR 1963 SC 591, paras 7-9
59 Bira Kishore Deb V. State of Orissa, AIR 1964 SC 1501, para 5
61
62
63
67
O.K. Ghosh V. E.X. Joseph, AIR 1963 SC 812, paras 9-10
68
Saghir Ahmad V. State of U.P., AIR 1954 SC 728, para 23
69
Babulal Parate V. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1961 SC 884, paras 26, 28-32
70 Daya V. Controller of Imports and Exports, AIR 1962 SC 1796, paras 14-19
71
Akadasi Padhan V. State of Orissa, AIR 1963 SC 1047, paras 1, 14-15
72
73
74
75
paras 15-24
79
80
82
83
135-137
84
14
85
380, 526, 558, 582 and 639
86
89
90
91
93 WPs (C) Nos. 566 and 751 of 2021.
94 WP (C) No. 634 of 2021
95
In WP (C) No. 751 of 2021
93
In WPs (C) Nos. 566 and 751 of 2021.
96
15
15a
3
97
3
98
SC 985, paras 49 and 50
99 Vide Notification No. GSR 755(E), dated 5-8-1976 published in the Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 3(i)
100 "3. Prohibition to accept foreign contribution.-(1 No foreign contribution shall be
accepted by any-
(a) candidate for election;
(b) correspondent, columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner, printer or publisher of a registered
newspaper;
(c) public servant, Judge, government servant or employee of any corporation or any other
body controlled or owned by the Government;
(d) member of any legislature;
(e) political party or office-bearer thereof;
(f) organisation of a political nature as may be specified under sub-section (1) of Section 5
by the Central Government;
(g) association or company engaged in the production or broadcast of audio news or audio
visual news or current affairs programmes through any electronic mode, or any other
electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) or any other mode of mass communication;
(h) correspondent or columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner of the association or company
referred to in clause (g).
Explanation 1. -For the purpose of clause (c), "public servant" means a public servant as
defined in Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Explanation 2.-In clause (c) and Section 6, the expression "corporation" means a
corporation owned or controlled by the Government and includes a government company as
defined in clause (45) of Section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
(2)(a) No person, resident in India, and no citizen of India resident outside India, shall accept
any foreign contribution, or acquire or agree to acquire any currency from a foreign source,
on behalf of any political party, or any person referred to in sub-section (1), or both.
(b) No person, resident in India, shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign, which
has been accepted from any foreign source, to any person if he knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that such other person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to any
political party or any person referred to in sub-section (1), or both.
(c) No citizen of India resident outside India shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or
foreign, which has been accepted from any foreign source, to-
(i) any political party or any person referred to in sub-section (1), or both; or
(ii) any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other person
intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to a political party or to any person referred to
in sub-section (1), or both.
(3) No person receiving any currency, whether Indian or foreign, from a foreign source on
behalf of any person or class of persons, referred to in Section 9, shall deliver such
currency-
(a) to any person other than a person for which it was received, or
(b) to any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other
person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to a person other than the person for
which such currency was received."
101 "4. Persons to whom Section 3 shall not apply.-Nothing contained in Section 3 shall
apply to the acceptance, by any person specified in that section, of any foreign contribution
where such contribution is accepted by him, subject to the provisions of Section 10-
(a) by way of salary, wages or other remuneration due to him or to any group of persons
working under him, from any foreign source or by way of payment in the ordinary course of
business transacted in India by such foreign source; or
(b) by way of payment, in the course of international trade or commerce, or in the ordinary
course of business transacted by him outside India; or
(c) as an agent of a foreign source in relation to any transaction made by such foreign
source with the Central Government or State Government; or
(d) by way of a gift or presentation made to him as a member of any Indian delegation,
provided that such gift or present was accepted in accordance with the rules made by the
Central Government with regard to the acceptance or retention of such gift or presentation;
or
(e) from his relative; or
(f) by way of remittance received, in the ordinary course of business through any official
channel, post office, or any authorised person in foreign exchange under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999); or
(g) by way of any scholarship, stipend or any payment of like nature:
Provided that in case any foreign contribution received by any person specified under Section
3, for any of the purposes other than those specified under this section, such contribution
shall be deemed to have been accepted in contravention of the provisions of Section 3."
102 "8. Restriction to utilise foreign contribution for administrative purpose.-(1) Every
person, who is registered and granted a certificate or given prior permission under this Act
and receives any foreign contribution-
(a) shall utilise such contribution for the purposes for which the contribution has been
received:
Provided that any foreign contribution or any income arising out of it shall not be used for
speculative business:
Provided further that the Central Government shall, by rules, specify the activities or
business which shall be construed as speculative business for the purpose of this section;
(b) shall not defray as far as possible such sum, not exceeding twenty per cent of such
contribution, received in a financial year, to meet administrative expenses:
Provided that administrative expenses exceeding twenty per cent of such contribution may
be defrayed with prior approval of the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the elements which shall be included in the
administrative expenses and the manner in which the administrative expenses referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be calculated."
103
"9. Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign contribution, etc. in
certain cases.-The Central Government may-
(a) prohibit any person or organisation, not specified in Section 3, from accepting any foreign
contribution;
(b) require any person or class of persons, not specified in Section 6, to obtain prior
permission of the Central Government before accepting any foreign hospitality;
(c) require any person or class of persons not specified in Section 11, to furnish intimation
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed as to the amount of any foreign
contribution received by such person or class of persons as the case may be, and the source
from which and the manner in which such contribution was received and the purpose for
which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised;
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 11, require any person
or class of persons specified in that sub-section to obtain prior permission of the Central
Government before accepting any foreign contribution;
(e) require any person or class of persons, not specified in Section 6, to furnish intimation,
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, as to the receipt of any foreign
hospitality, the source from which and the manner in which such hospitality was received:
Provided that no such prohibition or requirement shall be made unless the Central Government
is satisfied that the acceptance of foreign contribution by such person or class of persons,
as the case may be, or the acceptance of foreign hospitality by such person, is likely to
affect prejudicially-
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) public interest; or
(iii) freedom or fairness of election to any legislature; or
(iv) friendly relations with any foreign State; or
(v) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic or regional groups, castes or
communities."
104 10. Power to prohibit payment of currency received in contravention of the Act.-
Where the Central Government is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit, that
any person has in his custody or control any article or currency or security, whether Indian
or foreign, which has been accepted by such person in contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act, it may, by order in writing, prohibit such person from paying, delivering,
transferring or otherwise dealing with, in any manner whatsoever, such article or currency or
security save in accordance with the written orders of the Central Government and a copy of
such order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the prescribed manner, and
thereupon the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of Section 7 of the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) shall, so far as may be, apply to, or in relation
to, such article or currency or security and references in the said sub-sections to monies,
securities or credits shall be construed as references to such article or currency or security."
105
"11. Registration of certain persons with Central Government.-(1) Save as
otherwise provided in this Act, no person having a definite cultural, economic, educational,
religious or social programme shall accept foreign contribution unless such person obtains a
certificate of registration from the Central Government:
Provided that any association registered with the Central Government under Section 6 or
granted prior permission under that section of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976
(49 of 1976), as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed
to have been registered or granted prior permission, as the case may be, under this Act and
such registration shall be valid for a period of five years from the date on which this section
comes into force.
(2) Every person referred to in sub-section (1) may, if it is not registered with the Central
Government under that sub-section, accept any foreign contribution only after obtaining the
prior permission of the Central Government and such prior permission shall be valid for the
specific purpose for which it is obtained and from the specific source:
Provided that the Central Government, on the basis of any information or report, and after
holding a summary inquiry, has reason to believe that a person who has been granted prior
permission has contravened any of the provisions of this Act, it may, pending any further
inquiry, direct that such person shall not utilise the unutilised foreign contribution or receive
the remaining portion of foreign contribution which has not been received or, as the case
may be, any additional foreign contribution, without prior approval of the Central
Government:
Provided further that if the person referred to in sub-section (1) or in this sub-section has
been found guilty of violation of any of the provisions of this Act or the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976 (49 of 1976), the unutilised or unreceived amount of foreign
contribution shall not be utilised or received, as the case may be, without the prior approval
of the Central Government.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify-
(i) the person or class of persons who shall obtain its prior permission before accepting the
foreign contribution; or
(ii) the area or areas in which the foreign contribution shall be accepted and utilised with the
prior permission of the Central Government; or
(iii) the purpose or purposes for which the foreign contribution shall be utilised with the prior
permission of the Central Government; or
(iv) the source or sources from which the foreign contribution shall be accepted with the
prior permission of the Central Government."
106 '14. Cancellation of certificate.-(1 The Central Government may, if it is satisfied after
making such inquiry as it may deem fit, by an order, cancel the certificate if-
(a) the holder of the certificate has made a statement in, or in relation to, the application for
the grant of registration or renewal thereof, which is incorrect or false; or
(b) the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions of the
certificate or renewal thereof; or
(c) in the opinion of the Central Government, it is necessary in the public interest to cancel
the certificate; or
(d) the holder of certificate has violated any of the provisions of this Act or rules or order
made thereunder; or
(e) if the holder of the certificate has not been engaged in any reasonable activity in its
chosen field for the benefit of the society for two consecutive years or has become defunct.
(2) No order of cancellation of certificate under this section shall be made unless the person
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(3) Any person whose certificate has been cancelled under this section shall not be eligible
for
registration or grant of prior permission for a period of three years from the date of
cancellation of such certificate."
107 "16. Renewal of certificate.-(1 Every person who has been granted a certificate under
Section 12 shall have such certificate renewed within six months before the expiry of the
period of the certificate:
Provided that the Central Government may, before renewing the certificate, make such
inquiry, as it deems fit, to satisfy itself that such person has fulfilled all conditions specified in
sub-section (4) of Section 12.
(2) The application for renewal of the certificate shall be made to the Central Government in
such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall renew the certificate, ordinarily within ninety days from the
date of receipt of application for renewal of certificate subject to such terms and conditions
as it may deem fit and grant a certificate of renewal for a period of five years:
Provided that in case the Central Government does not renew the certificate within the said
period of ninety days, it shall communicate the reasons therefor to the applicant:
Provided further that the Central Government may refuse to renew the certificate in case
where a person has violated any of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder."
108
"2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) to (g)
*
*
*
(h) "foreign contribution" means the donation, delivery or transfer made by any foreign
source-
(i) of any article, not being an article given to a person as a gift for his personal use, if the
market value, in India, of such article, on the date of such gift, is not more than such sum as
may be specified from time to time, by the Central Government by the rules made by it in this
behalf;
(ii) of any currency, whether Indian or foreign;
(iii) of any security as defined in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and includes any foreign security as defined in clause (o)
of Section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999).
Explanation 1.-A donation, delivery or transfer of any article, currency or foreign security
referred to in this clause by any person who has received it from any foreign source, either
directly or through one or more persons, shall also be deemed to be foreign contribution
within the meaning of this clause.
Explanation 2.-The interest accrued on the foreign contribution deposited in any bank
referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 17 or any other income derived from the foreign
contribution or interest thereon shall also be deemed to be foreign contribution within the
meaning of this clause.
Explanation 3. -Any amount received, by any person from any foreign source in India, by way
of fee (including fees charged by an educational institution in India from foreign student) or
towards cost in lieu of goods or services rendered by such person in the ordinary course of
his business, trade or commerce whether within India or outside India or any contribution
received from an agent of a foreign source towards such fee or cost shall be excluded from
the definition of foreign contribution within the meaning of this clause;"
109 "2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) to (i)
*
*
*
(j) "foreign source" includes-
(i)
the Government of any foreign country or territory and any agency of such Government;
(ii) any international agency, not being the United Nations or any of its specialised agencies,
the World Bank, International Monetary Fund or such other agency as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf;
(iii) a foreign company;
(iv) a corporation, not being a foreign company, incorporated in a foreign country or
territory;
(v) a multi-national corporation referred to in sub-clause (iv) of clause (g);
(vi) a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), and more than
one-half of the nominal value of its share capital is held, either singly or in the aggregate, by
one or more of the following, namely-
(A) the Government of a foreign country or territory;
(B) the citizens of a foreign country or territory;
(C) corporations incorporated in a foreign country or territory;
(D) trusts, societies or other associations of individuals (whether incorporated or not),
formed or registered in a foreign country or territory;
(E) foreign company:
Provided that where the nominal value of share capital is within the limits specified for foreign
investment under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), or the rules or
regulations made thereunder, then, notwithstanding the nominal value of share capital of a
company being more than one-half of such value at the time of making the contribution, such
company shall not be a foreign source;
(vii) a trade union in any foreign country or territory, whether or not registered in such
foreign country or territory;
(viii) a foreign trust or a foreign foundation, by whatever name called, or such trust
or
foundation mainly financed by a foreign country or territory;
(ix) a society, club or other association of individuals formed or registered outside India;
(x) a citizen of a foreign country;"
110 Illustrative list of activities permitted as mentioned in the Annual Report (2004-2005)
prepared by Ministry of Home Affairs, Foreigners' Division, FCRA Wing read thus:
"1. Religious
Celebrations of religious functions/festivals, etc.;
Construction/repair/maintenance of
places of worship, religious schools;
Education of priests and preachers (dissemination of
the message of goodwill, etc. from the holy books);
Publication and distribution of religious
books/literature;
Maintenance of priests/preachers/other religious functionaries;
Any
other activities related to the above.
2. Educational
Construction and maintenance of schools/colleges;
Construction and running of hostels
for poor students;
Grant of stipends/scholarships/assistances in cash or kind to
poor/deserving children;
Purchase and supply of educational material books, notebooks,
etc.;
Conducting adult literacy programmes;
Conducting research;
Non-formal
education/schools for the mentally challenged;
Non-formal education projects/coaching
classes;
Any other activities related to the above.
3. Economic
Following but not being commercial or profit-making activities;
Micro-finance projects,
including setting up banking cooperatives and self-help groups;
Self-sustaining income
generation
projects/schemes;
Agricultural
activities;
Rural development
programmes/schemes;
Animal husbandry projects;
Setting up and running handicraft
centres/cottages and khadi industry/social forestry projects;
Vocational training, tailoring,
motor repairs, computers, etc.;
Projects for income generation activities or any other
developmental projects for urban slum development;
Any other activities related to the
above, not being commercial activities.
4. Social
Construction/running of hospitals/dispensaries/clinics;
Construction of community halls,
etc.;
Construction and management of old-age homes;
Welfare of the old aged persons or
widows;
Construction and management of orphanage;
Welfare of the orphans;
Construction and management of dharamshalas/shelters;
Holding
of
free
medical/health/family welfare/immunisation camps;
Supply of free medicine, and medical
aids, including hearing aids, visual aids, family planning aids, etc.;
Provision of aids such as
tricycles, callipers, etc. to the handicapped;
Treatment/rehabilitation of drug addicts;
Welfare/empowerment projects/schemes for women;
Welfare of children;
Provision of
free clothing/food to the poor, needy and destitutes;
Relief/rehabilitation of victims of
natural calamities;
Help to the victims of riots/other social disturbances; Digging of bore
wells;
Sanitation
including
community
toilets,
etc.;
Awareness
camps/seminars/workshops/meetings/conferences; Providing free legal aids/running legal aid
centres;
Holding sports meet;
Promoting awareness about Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (AIDS)/treatment and rehabilitation of persons affected by AIDS; Welfare of the
physically and mentally challenged;
Welfare of the Schedules Castes;
Welfare of the
Scheduled Tribes;
Welfare of the Backward Classes;
Environmental programmes; Survey
for socio-economic and other welfare programmes;
Preservation and maintenance of wild
life;
Preservation of natural resources; Awareness against social evils; Rehabilitation of
victims of heinous crimes;
Rehabilitation of beggars, bootleggers, child labour, etc.;
Creating awareness of government schemes and laws to general public;
Any other activities
related to the above.
5. Cultural
Celebration
of
national
events
(Independence/Republic
day/festivals);
Theatre/films/puppet show/road show, etc.; Maintenance of places of historical and
cultural importance;
Preservation of ancient/tribal art forms;
Preservation and promotion
of cultural heritage or literature of India; Cultural shows;
Any other activities related to
the above."
111
expounded that on the plea of individual hardships, Court cannot interfere with policy matters
(and in present cases a just law made by Parliament).