In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DINESH MAHESHWARI AND J.B. PARDIWALA, JJ.)
Vinod Katara Petitioner(s)
Versus
State of Uttar Pradesh
Respondent(s)
Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 121 of 2022
Decided on September 12, 2022
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.: - Personal liberty of a person is one of the oldest concepts to
be purported by national courts. As long ago as in 1215, the English Magna Carta
provided that:-
"No free man shall be taken or imprisoned but
by law of the land."
2. Today, the concept of personal liberty has received a far more expansive
interpretation. The notion that is accepted today is that liberty encompasses these
rights and privileges which have long been recognized as being essential to the orderly
pursuit of happiness by a free man and not merely freedom from bodily restraint.
There can be no cavil in saying that lodging juveniles in adult prisons amounts to
deprivation of their personal liberty on multiple aspects.
3. This Writ Application under Article 32 of the Constitution is at the instance of a
convict accused undergoing life imprisonment for the offence of murder seeking
appropriate directions to the respondent State of Uttar Pradesh to verify the exact age
of the convict on the date of the commission of the offence as it is the case of the
convict that on the date of the commission of the offence i.e. 10.09.1982 he was a
juvenile aged around 15 years.
4. The facts giving rise to this litigation may be summarized as under:
(a) The writ applicant along with other co-accused persons was put to trial for the
offence punishable under Section 302 r/w 34 of the IPC;
(b) The 5th Additional Sessions Judge, Agra in the sessions trial No. 535 of 1983
arising from the case crime no. 126 of 1982 registered with the Fatehpur Sikri
District, Agra held the writ applicant herein and the co-accused persons guilty of
the offence of murder and sentenced them to life imprisonment;
(c) The writ applicant herein and the other convicts went in appeal before the
Allahabad High Court by filing the Cr. Appeal No. 133 of 1986 questioning the
legality and validity of the judgment & order of conviction passed by the trial
court dated .01.1986
(d) The appeal was heard by the High Court and vide judgment and order dated
04.03.2016 came to be dismissed thereby affirming the judgment and order of
conviction passed by the trial court;
(e) The writ applicant herein dissatisfied with the order passed by the High Court
dismissing his appeal, referred to above, came before this Court by filing
application for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 6048 of 2016. This Court vide
order dated 16.08.2016 declined to grant leave as prayed for and dismissed the
Special Leave Petition.
5. It may not be out of the place to state at this stage that till this Court dismissed
the Special Leave Petition vide the order dated 16.08.2016, the writ applicant herein
had not raised the question of him being a juvenile on the date of the commission of
the alleged offence on 10.09.1982.
6. It appears that while the writ applicant was undergoing sentence of life
imprisonment, he was subjected to medical examination by the Medical Board
constituted by the respondent State in pursuance of the judgment rendered by a
Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the Criminal Writ Public Interest
Litigation No. 855 of 2012, wherein the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court
observed as under:
"Admittedly, as per the State's earlier affidavits, it was claimed that there were
72 prisoners, who may have been below 18 years in age and who are detained in
the various district or Central jails. Their break up was as follows:
There were 23 such prisoners in Bareilly, 1 in Lucknow, 4 in Allahabad, 2 in
Etawah, 18 in Agra and 23 in Fatehgarh. One such prisoner Raju, who belonged
to Faizabad, whose age was determined to be below 18 years by the Principal
Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board was sent to Special Home after having been
detained for a long time in Faizabad jail.
Prima facie there appears to be some material for suggesting that such prisoners,
may have been below 18 years on the date of commission of the offences. After the
modification of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000,
(hereafter the Act) by Act No. 33 of 2006, under section 2(1) a juvenile in conflict
with law means a juvenile who is alleged to have committed an offence and has not
completed eighteen years of age as on the date of commission of such offence.
Under the proviso to section 7A (1) of the Act, it is mentioned that a claim of
juvenility may be raised before any court and it shall be recognised at any stage,
even after the final disposal of the case, and such claim shall be determined in
terms of the provisions contained in this Act and the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 (hereinafter the Rules).
We, therefore, direct the District Judges, who are Chairpersons of their respective
Legal Services Authorities to directly oversee that efficient lawyers are appointed for
the purpose of providing legal aid to the prisoners, (who are unable to engage
private lawyers) who have been mentioned in the list furnished by the State
Government and described to be below 18 years in age on the date of commission
of offence. The said legal aid lawyers should get the ages of the prisoners
ascertained by obtaining documents and carrying out the other measures provided
under Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice Act and Rules and also on the lines suggested
by the Delhi High Court in WP (C) No. 8889 of 2011 (Court on its own motion V.
Department of Women and Child Development) in its order dated 11.5.2012.
Obtaining information about the probable date of birth of other siblings can also be
taken into account for ascertaining the true age of these prisoners. The legal aid
lawyers may also find out whether there are other prisoners in jail, who may be
below 18 years of age on the date of commission of the offence and who appear to
be wrongly lodged in the regular prisons for adults and the bases for their
conclusions.
Thereafter the matter may be placed before the Principal Judge, Juvenile Justice
Board for determining of the ages as per the criteria set out above.
The prosecution and the complainant will also of course be given an opportunity
to examine their own witnesses and to cross-examine the witnesses, who have been
got examined on behalf of the accused and for that purpose notices of the
proceedings before the JJ Board shall be served on the complainant/prosecution. As
it is possible that in some cases the prisoners mentioned in the State's list may
indeed be below 18 years in age on the date of offence, but as the basis for arrival
at the conclusion in the State's list were usually some preliminary medical
examinations and no detailed steps for ascertaining ages had been taken after
hearing both parties, and it cannot be ruled out that in certain cases extraneous
measures may have been used for reducing the ages, we think that such an
exercise as detailed above wherein the ages are ascertained after hearing both
parties was needed. The said exercise is to be competed within a period of two
months and the reports submitted to this Court on its next listing.
The District Judges/District Legal Services Authorities shall take strict measures
in future for ensuring that prisoners below 18 years of age on the date of offence
are not lodged in adults prisons in violation of the Juvenile Justice Act and Rules.
So far as district Allahabad is concerned, we direct the District Judge, Allahabad
to permit Sister Sheeba Jose, Advocate and Shri Rohan Gupta, Advocate to visit and
interview the concerned prisoners for the purpose of ascertaining their ages and for
submitting the report to the Court on the next date of listing.
It was further submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that SO far as
the prisoner Raju is concerned, whose age was determined to be below 18 years, he
was earlier lodged in Faizabad jail and was subsequently sent to the Special Home.
As he was convicted as far back as in the year 2001 in a case under section 302
IPC. The respondents should inform this Court about the total period spent in jail by
this prisoner and in case it exceeds 3 years (which was the maximum permissible
sentence in view of section 15 of the Act) the basis for his being presently detained
in the Special Home."
7. Thus, vide the order dated 24.05.2012 referred to above passed in a Public
Interest Litigation being Criminal (PIL) Misc. W.P. No. 855 of 2012, the Allahabad High
Court directed the Juvenile Justice Boards to hold an enquiry for determination of the
age of prisoners languishing in jails who claimed to have been juveniles in conflict with
the law.
8. The Medical Board subjected the writ applicant herein to the X-rays of the skull
and sternum. Upon medical examination of the writ applicant herein, the Medical
Board gave its report dated 10.12.2021 certifying that on 10.09.1982 i.e. the date of
the commission of the alleged offence, the writ applicant could have been around 15
years of age as on the date of the medical examination, the convict was around 56
years of age.
9. It appears that sometime later, the writ applicant was in a position to obtain a
document in the form of Family Register dated 02.03.2021 issued under the U.P.
Panchayat Raj (Maintenance of Family Registers) Rules, 1970. In the Family Register
certificate, the year of birth of the writ applicant herein is shown as 1968. If 1968 is
the correct birth year of the writ applicant herein, then in 1982 he was about 14 years
of age.
10. In such circumstances referred to above, the writ applicant is here before this
Court. He claims that as he was a juvenile on the date of the commission of the
alleged offence sometime in the year 1982, he could not have been put to trial along
with other co-accused and should have been dealt with under the provisions of the
Juvenile Justice Act as prevailing at the relevant point of time. It is the prayer of the
writ applicant that the respondent State be directed to get the claim of the writ
applicant in regard to the juvenility verified through the concerned Sessions Court or
the Juvenile Justice Board.
Submissions on behalf of the writ applicant convict:
11. Mr. Rishi Malhotra, the learned counsel appearing for the writ applicant
vehemently submitted that although till the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition
(Criminal) No. 6048 of 2016 by this Court vide order dated 16.08.2016, the convict
had not raised the plea of juvenility, yet the law permits him to raise such a plea even
at this point of time having regard to the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2011. It is submitted that there is clinching
evidence on record as on date in the form of certificate issued by the Medical Board as
well as the Family Register to indicate that in the year 1982 the writ applicant could
be around 15 years of age. The learned counsel would vehemently submit that there is
no good ground to discard the certificate issued by the Medical Board as well as the
extract of the Family Register.
12. To fortify the aforesaid submissions, the learned counsel seeks to rely upon a
three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in the case of Abuzar Hossain ALIAS Gulam
13. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prays that there
being merit in his writ petition, the same may be allowed and appropriate directions
may be issued to do complete justice in the matter.
Submissions on behalf of the State
14. Mr. Ardhendhumauli Kr. Prasad, the learned Additional Advocate General
appearing for the State, on the other hand, has vehemently opposed the present writ
application. The learned counsel would submit that the Family Register is not
admissible in evidence and the entries made therein are not decisive to determine the
age. It is argued that the writ applicant has not placed on record any document of any
educational institution. It is also argued that no ossification test was undertaken or no
modern recognized method was adopted for the purpose of determination of age.
15. The learned counsel appearing for the State invited the attention of this Court
towards the order passed by a Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Ashok V.
State of Madhya Pradesh, Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) No. 643 of 2020 dated
29.11.2021. The order passed by the Coordinate Bench referred to above reads thus:-
"By a judgment and order dated 9.07.1999, the Additional Sessions Judge,
Gohad, District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh, convicted the petitioner inter alia for
offence under Section 302 of the Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced him inter alia to
life imprisonment in Sessions Trial No. 260 of 1997. In the cause title of the said
judgment and order, the petitioner has been described as Ashok, S/o Balram Jatab
age 16 yrs 9 months and 19 days, R/o Village Anjani Pura, District Bhind.
The petitioner filed an appeal being Criminal Appeal No. 455 of 1999 challenging
his conviction and sentence. The said criminal appeal has been dismissed by the
High Court by an order dated 4.11.2017, which is impugned in the Special Leave
Petition (Crl.) No. 643 of 2020, filed by the petitioner. The incident which led to the
conviction of the petitioner, took place on 6.07.1997
The petitioner claims that the petitioner was born on 05.01.1981. The petitioner
was, therefore, approximately 16 years and 7 months old on the date of the
incident. In this Court, the petitioner has for the first time contended that he was a
juvenile on the date of the incident. His conviction and sentence are, therefore,
liable to be set-aside. The claim of juvenility was not raised in the High Court. The
learned Additional Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the State argued that
the claim of juvenility has been raised for the first time in this special leave
petition. The Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, which was in force on the date of
commission of the offence as also the date of the judgment and order of conviction
and sentence by the Sessions Court was repealed by the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000. The Act of 2000 received the assent of the
President of India on 30.12.2000 and came into force on 01.04.2001. The Act of
2000 defined juvenile in conflict with the law to mean a juvenile, who was alleged
to have committed an offence and had not completed 18th year of age as on the
date of commission of such an offence.
Under the 1986 Act, the age of juvenility was up to the 16th year. Section 7A of
the 2000 Act as inserted by Act 33 of 2006 with effect from 22.08.2006 provided as
follows:
"7A. Procedure to be followed when claim of juvenility is raised before any
Court.-(1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised before any court or a court is
of the opinion that an accused person was a juvenile on the date of commission
of the offence, the court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be
necessary (but not an affidavit) SO as to determine the age of such person, and
shall record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or a child or not, stating
his age as nearly as may be:
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before any Court and it
shall be recognised at any stage, even after final disposal of the case, and
such claim shall be determined in terms of the provisions contained in this Act
and the rules made thereunder, even if the juvenile has ceased to be SO on or
before the date of commencement of this Act. (2) If the court finds a person
to be a juvenile on the date of commission of the offence under sub-section
(1), it shall forward the juvenile to the Board for passing appropriate orders
and the sentence, if any, passed by a court shall be deemed to have no
effect."
The claim of juvenility can thus be raised before any Court, at any stage, even
after final disposal of the case and if the Court finds a person to be a juvenile on the
date of commission of the offence, it is to forward the juvenile to the Board for
passing appropriate orders, and the sentence, if any, passed by a Court, shall be
deemed to have no effect. Even though the offence in this case may have been
committed before the enactment of the Act of 2000, the petitioner is entitled to the
benefit of juvenility under Section 7A of the Act of 2000, if on inquiry it is found
that he was less than 18 years of age on the date of the alleged offence.
It is true as pointed out by the learned Additional Advocate General appearing on
behalf of the State that the certificate of Akikrit Shash, High School School Endouri,
District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh relied upon by the petitioner is stated to have been
issued on 17.07.2021. The said certificate does not specifically mention that the
date of birth 01.01.1982 had been entered at the time of first admission of the
petitioner at the primary school level.
Furthermore, there is a birth certificate issued by the Gram Panchayat, Endouri,
District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh which indicates the date of birth of the petitioner as
05.01.1982 and not 01.01.1982 as recorded in the school certificate referred to
above.
The entry in the records of the Gram Panchayat, Endouri, District Bhind, Madhya
Pradesh, also do not appear to be contemporaneous and the certificate has been
issued in the year 2017.
However, as pointed out by Mr. M.P. Parthiban, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the petitioner that the Sessions Court has recorded the age of the
petitioner as 16 years, 9 months and 19 days. The petitioner has been in actual
custody for over three years.
The 2000 Act has been repealed and replaced by the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015. Section 21 of the 2015 Act provides as follows:
"21. Order that may not be passed against a child in conflict with law. - No
child in conflict with law shall be sentenced to death or for life imprisonment
without the possibility of release, for any such offence, either under the
provisions of this Act or under the provisions of the Penal Code, 1860 or any
other law for the time being in force."
Considering that the Trial Court has recorded the age of the petitioner as 16
years and odd, and has been in actual custody in excess of three years, which is the
maximum for a juvenile, we deem it appropriate to grant the petitioner interim bail
on such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Sessions Court. We further
direct the Sessions Court to examine the claim of the petitioner to juvenility in
accordance with law, and submit a report to this Court within one month from the
date of communication of this order.
The concerned Sessions Court shall be entitled to examine the authenticity and
genuineness of the documents sought to be relied upon by the petitioner,
considering that the documents do not appear to be contemporaneous.
In the event the documents are found to be questionable/unreliable, it will be
open to the Sessions Court to have the petitioner medically examined by taking an
possification test or any other modern recognized method of age determination."
16. The aforesaid order passed by the Coordinate Bench has been relied upon by
the learned counsel appearing for the State to fortify his submission that if at all the
issue in regard to the juvenility of the writ applicant requires consideration, the same
should be by the Sessions Court i.e. the Court which had originally tried the writ
applicant for the alleged offence.
17. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel appearing for the
State prays that let the Sessions Court look into the certificate issued by the Medical
Board including the Family Register more particularly its authenticity and
genuineness.
Analysis:
18. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is
that whether we should ask the Sessions Court to examine the authenticity and
genuineness of the documents sought to be relied upon by the writ applicant in
support of his plea of being a juvenile on the date of the commission of the alleged
offence in the year 1982 and also subject the convict to further ossification test?
19. The first and the foremost issue that arises for our consideration in this writ
petition is in regard to the applicability of the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (for short, "the 2000 Act").
20. In the aforesaid context, we must first look into the relevant dates as follows:-
(a) The date of the incident is 10.09.1981 Thus, on the date of incident even the
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 was not in force. What was in force was the Children
Act, 1960. The Children Act, 1960 was a beneficial legislation enacted to take
care of the delinquent and neglected children. Under the said Act, a child meant
a person who had not attained the age of 16 years in the case of a boy or 18
years in the case of a girl.
(b) The petitioner herein came to be convicted by the trial court vide judgment and
order dated 6.01.1986. Even on the date of conviction, the Juvenile Justice Act,
1986 was not in force. The Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 came in force with effect
from 01.12.1986. Thus, even on the date of conviction, the Children Act, 1960
governed the field.
(c) The appeal filed by the petitioner herein in the High Court of Allahabad against
the judgment and order of conviction passed by the trial court came to be
decided and was ordered to be dismissed vide judgment and order dated
04.03.2016. It is relevant to note that on the date when the appeal came to be
dismissed by the High Court, the 2000 Act was in force.
(d)
Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 6048 of 2016 filed by the petitioner herein in
this Court came to be dismissed vide order dated 16.08.2016.
21. On and with effect from 15.01.2016, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2015 (for short, "the 2015 Act") came into force which repealed the
2000 Act. While the appeal of the petitioner herein against his conviction and sentence
was pending in the High Court, the 2000 Act came into force which repealed the
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986. The 2000 Act inter alia raised the age of juvenility from 16
to 18 years and in terms of Section 20 of the 2000 Act, the determination of juvenility
was required to be done in all pending matters in accordance with Section 2(1) of the
2000 Act.
22. The effect of Section 20 of the 2000 Act was considered in Pratap Singh V.
"31. Section 20 of the Act as quoted above deals with the special provision in
respect of pending cases and begins with a non obstante clause. The sentence
"notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all proceedings in respect of a
juvenile pending in any court in any area on the date on which this Act came into
force" has great significance. The proceedings in respect of a juvenile pending in
any court referred to in Section 20 of the Act are relatable to proceedings initiated
before the 2000 Act came into force and which are pending when the 2000 Act
came into force. The term "any court" would include even ordinary criminal courts.
If the person was a "juvenile" under the 1986 Act the proceedings would not be
pending in criminal courts. They would be pending in criminal courts only if the boy
had crossed 16 years or the girl had crossed 18 years. This shows that Section 20
refers to cases where a person had ceased to be a juvenile under the 1986 Act but
had not yet crossed the age of 18 years then the pending case shall continue in that
court as if the 2000 Act has not been passed and if the court finds that the juvenile
has committed an offence, it shall record such finding and instead of passing any
sentence in respect of the juvenile, shall forward the juvenile to the Board which
shall pass orders in respect of that juvenile."
regards Section 20 was stated in following words:-
"8. One of the basic distinctions between the 1986 Act and the 2000 Act relates
to the age of males and females. Under the 1986 Act, a juvenile means a male
juvenile who has not attained the age of 16 years, and a female juvenile who has
not attained the age of 18 years. In the 2000 Act, the distinction between male and
female juveniles on the basis of age has not been maintained. The age-limit is 18
years for both males and females.
9. A person above 16 years in terms of the 1986 Act was not a juvenile. In that
view of the matter the question whether a person above 16 years becomes
"juvenile" within the purview of the 2000 Act must be answered having regard to
the object and purport thereof.
10. In terms of the 1986 Act, a person who was not juvenile could be tried in any
court. Section 20 of the 2000 Act takes care of such a situation stating that despite
the same the trial shall continue in that court as if that Act has not been passed
and in the event, he is found to be guilty of commission of an offence, a finding to
that effect shall be recorded in the judgment of conviction, if any, but instead of
passing any sentence in relation to the juvenile, he would be forwarded to the
Juvenile Justice Board (in short "the Board") which shall pass orders in accordance
with the provisions of the Act as if it has been satisfied on inquiry that a juvenile
has committed the offence. A legal fiction has, thus, been created in the said
provision. A legal fiction as is well known must be given its full effect although it
has its limitations.
11.
12. Thus, by reason of legal fiction, a person, although not a juvenile, has to be
treated to be one by the Board for the purpose of sentencing, which takes care of a
situation that the person although not a juvenile in terms of the 1986 Act but still
would be treated as such under the 2000 Act for the said limited purpose."
juvenility even after conviction was one of the issues and it was stated:-
"11. It is plain from the language of the Explanation to Section 20 that in all
pending cases, which would include not only trials but even subsequent
proceedings by way of revision or appeal, etc., the determination of juvenility of a
juvenile has to be in terms of clause (I) of Section 2, even if the juvenile ceases to
be a juvenile on or before 1-4-2001, when the Act of 2000 came into force, and the
provisions of the Act would apply as if the said provision had been in force for all
purposes and for all material times when the alleged offence was committed.
12. Clause (I) of Section 2 of the Act of 2000 provides that "juvenile in conflict
with law" means a "juvenile" who is alleged to have committed an offence and has
not completed eighteenth year of age as on the date of commission of such offence.
Section 20 also enables the court to consider and determine the juvenility of a
person even after conviction by the regular court and also empowers the court,
while maintaining the conviction, to set aside the sentence imposed and forward
the case to the Juvenile Justice Board concerned for passing sentence in accordance
with the provisions of the Act of 2000."
as under:-
"21. Section 20 makes a special provision in respect of pending cases. It states
that notwithstanding anything contained in the Juvenile Act, all proceedings in
respect of a juvenile pending in any court in any area on the date on which the
Juvenile Act comes into force in that area shall be continued in that court as if the
Juvenile Act had not been passed and if the court finds that the juvenile has
committed an offence, it shall record such finding and instead of passing any
sentence in respect of the juvenile forward the juvenile to the Board which shall
pass orders in respect of that juvenile in accordance with the provisions of the
Juvenile Act as if it had been satisfied on inquiry under the Juvenile Act that the
juvenile has committed the offence. The Explanation to Section 20 makes it clear
that in all pending cases, which would include not only trials but even subsequent
proceedings by way of revision or appeal, the determination of juvenility of
a
juvenile would be in terms of clause (I) of Section 2, even if the juvenile ceased to
be a juvenile on or before 1-4-2001, when the Juvenile Act came into force, and the
provisions of the Juvenile Act would apply as if the said provision had been in force
for all purposes and for all material times when the alleged offence was committed."
26. It is thus well settled that in terms of Section 20 of the 2000 Act, in all cases
where the accused was above 16 years but below 18 years of age on the date of
occurrence, the proceedings pending in the Court would continue and be taken to the
logical end subject to an exception that upon finding the juvenile to be guilty, the
Court would not pass an orden of sentence against him but the juvenile would be
referred to the Board for appropriate orders under the 2000 Act.
27. Thus, in view of the aforesaid discussion, we now proceed to consider the
matter further keeping in view the 2000 Act.
28. Section 7A of the 2000 Act reads as under:
7A. Procedure to be followed when claim of juvenility is raised before
any Court-
(1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised before any court or a court is of the
opinion that an accused person was a juvenile on the date of commission of
the offence, the court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be
necessary (but not an affidavit) SO as to determine the age of such person,
and shall record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or a child or not,
stating his age as nearly as may be:
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before any Court and it
shall be recognised at any stage, even after final disposal of the case, and
such claim shall be determined in terms of the provisions contained in this
Act and the rules made thereunder, even if the juvenile has ceased to be SO
on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) If the court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date of commission of the
offence under sub-section (1), it shall forward the juvenile to the Board for
passing appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by a court shall
be deemed to have no effect."
29. From a reading of Section 7A what becomes very obvious is that whenever a
claim of juvenility is raised, an inquiry has to be made and such inquiry would take
place by receiving evidence which would be necessary but not an affidavit so as to
determine the age of such person.
30. Reference is also required to be made to Chapter II of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 (for short "the 2007 Rules"), more
particularly to Rule 3(1) and Principles 11, IV, XI, XII, XIII & XIV enumerated in Rule
3(2). The said provisions and principles are extracted herein below-
3. Fundamental principles to be followed in administration of these
rules.-
(1) The State Government, the Juvenile Justice Board, the Child Welfare
Committee or other competent authorities or agencies, as the case may be,
while
(2) The following principles shall, inter alia, be fundamental to the application,
interpretation and implementation of the Act and the rules made hereunder:
XXX
XXX
XXX
11. Principle of dignity and worth
(a) Treatment that is consistent with the Child's sense of dignity and worth is a
fundamental principle of juvenile justice. This principle reflects the
fundamental human right enshrined in Article / of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights. Respect of dignity includes not being humiliated, personal identity
boundaries and space being respected, not being labeled and stigmatized,
being offered information and choices and not being blamed for their acts.
(b) The juvenile's or Child's right to dignity and worth has to be respected and
protected throughout the entire process of dealing with the child from the first
contact with law enforcement agencies to the implementing of all measures
for dealing with the child.
III. Principle of Right to be heard
Every child's right to express his views freely in all matters affecting his interest
shall be fully respected through every stage in the process of juvenile justice.
Children's right to be heard shall include creation of developmentally appropriate
tools and processes of interacting with the child, promoting Children's active
involvement in decisions regarding their own lives and providing opportunities for
discussion and debate.
IV. Principle of Best Interest
(a) In all decisions taken within the context of administration of juvenile justice,
the principle of best interest of the juvenile or the juvenile in conflict with law
or child shall be the primary consideration.
(b) The principle of best interest of the juvenile or juvenile in conflict with law or
child shall mean for instance that the traditional objectives of criminal justice,
retribution and repression, must give way to rehabilitative and restorative
objectives of juvenile justice.
(c) This principle seeks to ensure physical, emotional, intellectual, social and
moral development of a juvenile in conflict with law or child SO as to ensure
the safety, well being and permanence for each child and thus enable each
child to survive and reach his or her full potential.
XXX
XXX
XXX
XI. Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality
The juvenile's or Child's right to privacy and confidentiality shall be protected by
all means and through all the stages of the proceedings ad care and protection
processes.
XII. Principle of last resort
Institutionalization of a child or juvenile in conflict with law shall be a step of the
last resort after reasonable inquiry and that too for the minimum possible duration.
XIII. Principle of repatriation and restoration
(a) Every juvenile or child in conflict with law has the right to be re-united with
his family and restored back to the same socio-economic cultural status that
such juvenile or child enjoyed before coming within the purview of the Act or
becoming vulnerable to any form of neglect, abuse or exploitation.
(b) Any juvenile or child, who has lost contact with his family, shall be eligible
for protection under the Act and shall be repatriated and restored, at the
earliest, to his family, unless such repatriation and restoration is likely to be
against the best interest of the juvenile or the child.
XIV. Principle of Fresh Start
(a) The principle of fresh start promotes new beginning for the child or juvenile
in conflict with law by ensuring erasure of his part records.
(b) The State shall seek to promote measures for dealing with children alleged or
recognized as having impinged the penal law, without resorting to juridical
proceedings.'
b. It is submitted that Section 51 of the Act provides that the report of a
probation officer or a social worker shall be confidential. It is further submitted that
Rule 18 provides for a procedure to be followed in respect of violation of Section
21. "
31. Besides the International Convention and the provisions of the 2000 Act resply,
it may be noted that the Constitutional guarantee for the protection of the child is
enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution. Article 39 reads as under:-
"39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State-
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender
age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic
necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth
are protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.'
32. The procedure to be followed for the determination of age is provided under
Rule 12(3)(b) of the 2007 Rules, which reads as:
"12. Procedure to be followed in determination of age. - (3) In every case
concerning a child or juvenile in conflict with law, the age determination inquiry
shall be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee
by seeking evidence by obtaining-
(a) (i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if available; and in the absence
whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school (other than a play school) first
attended; and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a
panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of clause (a) above, the
medical opinion will be sought from a duly constituted Medical Board, which
will declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case exact assessment of the
age cannot be done, the Court or the Board or, as the case may be, the
Committee, for the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if considered
necessary, give benefit to the child or juvenile by considering his/her age on
lower side within the margin of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case shall, after taking into consideration such
evidence as may be available, or the medical opinion, as the case may be, record a
finding in respect of his age and either of the evidence specified in any of the
clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii) or in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall be the conclusive
proof of the age as regards such child or the juvenile in conflict with law."
33. Sub-clause (3) of the aforesaid Rule clearly mandates that while conducting an
inquiry about the juvenility of an accused, the Juvenile Justice Board would seek
evidence by obtaining the matriculation or equivalent certificates and in the absence
whereof the date of birth certificate from the school first attended and in absence
whereof the birth certificate given by a corporation or a Municipal authority or a
Panchayat. It is made clear by sub-clause (b) that only in the absence of the aforesaid
three documents, medical information would be sought from a duly constituted
Medical Board which will declare the age of the juvenile or child. Thus, it is only in the
absence of the aforesaid documents that the Juvenile Justice Board could have asked
for medical information/ossification test.
34. The 2000 Act stands repealed by the 2015 Act. The procedure for determining
the age is now part of Section 94 of the 2015 Act which was earlier provided under the
abovementioned Rule 12 of the Rules.
Family Register
35. The Family Register Rules prescribes preparation of a Family Register in the
State of Uttar Pradesh which contains family-wise names and particulars of all persons
ordinarily residing in the village pertaining to the Gaon Sabha. Such Rules have been
framed under Section 110 of the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947. Such Rules read as
under:
"1. (1) These Rules may be called the U.P. Panchayat Raj (Maintenance of Family
Registers) Rules, 1970.
2. Form and preparation of family register.-A family register in form A shall
be prepared containing family-wise the names and particulars of all persons
ordinarily residing in the village pertaining to the Gaon Sabha. Ordinarily one page
shall be allotted to each family in the register. There shall be a separate section in
the register for families belonging to the Scheduled Castes. The register shall be
prepared in Hindi in Devanagri script.
3. General conditions for registration in the register. -Every person who
has been ordinarily resident within the area of the Gaon Sabha shall be entitled to
be registered in the family register.
Explanation. person shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident in a village if he
has been ordinarily residing in such village or is in possession of a dwelling house
therein ready for occupation.
4. Quarterly entries in the family register.-At the beginning of each quarter
commencing from April in each year, the Secretary of a Gaon Sabha shall make
necessary changes in the family register consequent upon births and deaths, if any
occurring in the previous quarter in each family. Such changes shall be laid before
the next meeting of the Gaon Panchayat for information.
5. Correction of any existing entry.- - The Assistant Development Officer
(Panchayat) may on an application made to him in this behalf order the correction
of any existing entry in the family register and the Secretary of the Gaon Sabha
shall then correct the Register accordingly.
6. Inclusion of names in the Register.-(1) Any person whose name is not
included in the family register may apply to the Assistant Development Officer
(Panchayat) for the inclusion of his name therein.
(2) The Assistant Development Officer (Panchayat) shall, if satisfied, after such
enquiry as he thinks fit that the applicant is entitled to be registered in the
Register, direct that the name of the applicant be included therein and the
Secretary of the Gaon Sabha shall include the name accordingly.
6-A. Any person aggrieved by an order made under Rule 5 or Rule 6 may, within
30 days from the date of such order prefer and appeal to the Sub-Divisional Officer
whose decision shall be final.
7. Custody and preservation of the register.-(1) The Secretary of the Gaon
Sabha shall be responsible for the safe custody of the family register.
(2) Every person shall have a right to inspect the Register and to get attested
copy of any entry or extract therefrom in such manner and on payment of such
fees, if any, as may be specified in Rule 73 of the U.P. Panchayat Raj Rules.
FORM A
(See Rule 2)
Note.- the remarks column the number and date of the order, if any, by which
any name is added or struck off should be given along with the signature of the
person making the entry."
36. A perusal of the above Rules indicate that one page is allotted to each family
and that any change in the family consequent upon the births and deaths is required
to be incorporated on such page. The changes are also required to be laid before the
next meeting of the Gram Panchayat. Thus, it is evident that such Rules are statutorily
framed in pursuance of an Act. The entries in the register are required to be made by
the officials of the Gram Panchayat as part of their official duty.
187, observed in regard to the Family Register referred to above as under:-
"39. We are unable to approve the broad view taken by the High Court in some
of the cases that family register is not relevant to determine age of the family
members. It is a question of fact as to how much evidentiary value is to be attached
to the family register, but to say that it is entirely not relevant would not be the
correct enunciation of law. The register is being maintained in accordance with the
rules framed under a statute. The entries made in the regular course of the affairs
of the Panchayat would thus be relevant but the extent of such reliance would be in
view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case. "
(Emphasis supplied)
38. In Abuzar Hossain (supra), this Court held as under:-
"30. As a matter of fact, prior to the decisions of this Court in Hari Ram [(2009)
:
considered the question relating to admissibility of claim of juvenility for the first
time in this Court with reference to Section 7-A. The contention of juvenility was
raised for the first time before this Court on behalf of the two appellants, namely, A
-1 and A-2. The argument on their behalf before this Court was that they were
"juvenile" within the meaning of the 2000 Act on the date of incident and the trial
held against them under the Code was illegal. With regard to A-1, his school leaving
certificate was relied on while as regards A-2, reliance was placed on his statement
recorded under Section 313 and the school leaving certificate. Dealing with the
contention of juvenility, this Court stated that the claim of juvenility could be raised
at any stage, even after final disposal of the case. The Court then framed the
question in para 41 of the Report as to whether an inquiry should be made or report
be called for from the trial court invariably where juvenility is claimed for the first
time before this Court.
before this Court by the accused, prima facie, suggested that he was a "juvenile" as
defined in the 2000 Act on the date of incident, it was necessary to call for the
report or an inquiry to be made for determination of the age on the date of incident.
However, where a plea of juvenility is found unscrupulous or the materials lack
credibility or do not inspire confidence and even prima facie satisfaction of the court
is not made out, further exercise in this regard may not be required. It was also
stated that if the plea of juvenility was not raised before the trial court or the High
Court and is raised for the first time before this Court, the judicial conscience of the
court must be satisfied by placing adequate material that the accused had not
attained the age of 18 years on the date of commission of the offence. In the
absence of adequate material, any further inquiry into juvenility would not be
required.
32. Having regard to the general guidelines highlighted in para 41 of Pawan case
Court where juvenility is claimed for the first time, the Court then considered the
documents relied upon by A-1 and A-2 in support of the claim of juvenility on the
date of incident. In respect of the two documents relied upon by A-2, namely,
statement under Section 313 of the Code and the school leaving certificate, this
Court observed that the statement recorded under Section 313 was a tentative
observation based on physical appearance which was hardly determinative of age
and insofar as school leaving certificate was concerned, it did not inspire any
confidence as it was issued after A-2 had already been convicted and the primary
evidence like entry from the birth register had not been produced. As regards
school leaving certificate relied upon by A-1, this Court found that the same had
been procured after his conviction and no entry from the birth register had been
produced. The Court was, thus, not prima facie impressed or satisfied by the
material placed on behalf of A-1 and A-2. Those documents were not found
satisfactory and adequate to call for any report from the Board or the trial court
about the age of A-1 and A-2."
39. In Para 39, the Court summarizes the legal position as under:-
"39.1. A claim of juvenility may be raised at any stage even after the final
disposal of the case. It may be raised for the first time before this Court as well
after the final disposal of the case. The delay in raising the claim of juvenility
cannot be a ground for rejection of such claim. The claim of juvenility can be raised
in appeal even if not pressed before the trial court and can be raised for the first
time before this Court though not pressed before the trial court and in the appeal
court.
39.2. For making a claim with regard to juvenility after conviction, the claimant
must produce some material which may prima facie satisfy the court that an inquiry
into the claim of juvenility is necessary. Initial burden has to be discharged by the
person who claims juvenility.
39.3. As to what materials would prima facie satisfy the court and/or are
sufficient for discharging the initial burden cannot be catalogued nor can it be laid
down as to what weight should be given to a specific piece of evidence which may
be sufficient to raise presumption of juvenility but the documents referred to in
Rules 12(3)(a)(i) to (iii) shall definitely be sufficient for prima facie satisfaction of
the court about the age of the delinquent necessitating further enquiry under Rule
12. The statement recorded under Section 313 of the Code is too tentative and may
not by itself be sufficient ordinarily to justify or reject the claim of juvenility. The
credibility and/or acceptability of the documents like the school leaving certificate
or the voters' list, etc. obtained after conviction would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no hard-and-fast rule can be prescribed that they
these documents were not found prima facie credible while in Jitendra Singh
certificate, marksheet and the medical report were treated sufficient for directing an
inquiry and verification of the appellant's age. If such documents prima facie inspire
confidence of the court, the court may act upon such documents for the purposes of
Section 7-A and order an enquiry for determination of the age of the delinquent.
39.4. An affidavit of the claimant or any of the parents or a sibling or a relative in
support of the claim of juvenility raised for the first time in appeal or revision or
before this Court during the pendency of the matter or after disposal of the case
shall not be sufficient justifying an enquiry to determine the age of such person
unless the circumstances of the case are SO glaring that satisfy the judicial
conscience of the court to order an enquiry into determination of the age of the
delinquent.
39.5. The court where the plea of juvenility is raised for the first time should
always be guided by the objectives of the 2000 Act and be alive to the position that
the beneficent and salutary provisions contained in the 2000 Act are not defeated
by the hypertechnical approach and the persons who are entitled to get benefits of
the 2000 Act get such benefits. The courts should not be unnecessarily influenced
by any general impression that in schools the parents/guardians understate the age
of their wards by one or two years for future benefits or that age determination by
medical examination is not very precise. The matter should be considered prima
facie on the touchstone of preponderance of probability.
39.6. Claim of juvenility lacking in credibility or frivolous claim of juvenility or
patently absurd or inherently improbable claim of juvenility must be rejected by the
court at the threshold whenever raised.
40. Justice T.S. Thakur (as His Lordship then was), by his separate but concurring
judgment, observed as under:-
"43.2. The second factor which must ever remain present in the mind of the
Court is that the claim of juvenility may at times be made even in cases where the
accused does not have any evidence showing his date of birth by reference to any
public document like the Register of Births and Deaths maintained by the municipal
authorities, panchayats or hospitals nor any certificate from any school, as the
accused was never admitted to any school. Even if admitted to a school no record
regarding such admission may at times be available for production in the court.
Again, there may be cases in which the accused may not be in a position to provide
a birth certificate from the corporation, the municipality or the panchayat, for we
know that the registration of births and deaths may not be maintained and if
maintained may not be regular and accurate, and at times truthful.
44. Rule 12(3) of the Rules makes only three certificates relevant. These are
enumerated in sub-rules 3(a)(i) to (iii) of the Rule which reads as under:
"(3)(a) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if available; and in the
absence whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school (other than a play school) first
attended; and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a
panchayat;
Non-production of the above certificates or any one of them is not, however, fatal
to the claim of juvenility, for sub-rule (3) (b) to Rule 12 makes a provision for
determination of the question on the basis of the medical examination of the
accused in the "absence" of the certificates.
45. Rule 12(3)(b) runs as under:
"12. (3) (b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of clause (a) above,
the medical opinion will be sought from a duly constituted Medical Board, which
will declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case exact assessment of the age
cannot be done, the court or the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee,
for the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if considered necessary, give
benefit to the child or juvenile by considering his/her age on lower side within
the margin of one year,"
The expression "absence" appearing in the above provision is not defined under
the Act or the Rules. The word shall, therefore, be given its literal dictionary
meaning which is provided by Concise Oxford Dictionary as under:
"Absence.-Being away from a place or person; time of being away; non-
existence or lack of; inattention due to thought of other things."
Black's Law Dictionary also explains the meaning of "absence" as under:
"Absence.-(1) The state of being away from one's usual place of residence.
(2) A failure to appear, or to be available and reachable, when expected. (3)
Louisiana law. The state of being an absent person.- Also termed (in sense 3)
absentia.
46. It is axiomatic that the use of the expression and the context in which the
same has been used strongly suggests that "absence" of the documents mentioned
in Rule 12(3)(a)(i) to (iii) may be either because the same do not exist or the same
cannot be produced by the person relying upon them. Mere non-production may
not, therefore, disentitle the accused of the benefit of the Act nor can it tantamount
to deliberate non-production, giving rise to an adverse inference unless the court is
in the peculiar facts and circumstances of a case of the opinion that the non-
production is deliberate or intended to either mislead the court or suppress the
truth. It is in this class of cases that the court may have to exercise its powers and
discretion with a certain amount of insight into the realities of life.
47. One of such realities is that illiteracy and crime have a close nexus though
one may not be directly proportional to the other. Juvenile delinquency in this
country as elsewhere in the world, springs from poverty and unemployment, more
than it does out of other causes. A large number of those engaged in criminal
activities, may never have had the opportunity to go to school. Studies conducted
by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), Ministry of Home Affairs, reveal that
poor education and poor economic set up are generally the main attributes of
juvenile delinquents. Result of the 2011 study further show that out of 33,887
juveniles arrested in 2011, 55.8% were either illiterate (6122) or educated only till
the primary level (12,803). Further, 56.7% of the total juveniles arrested fell into
the lowest income category. A similar study is conducted and published by B.N.
Mishra in his book Juvenile Delinquency and Justice System, in which the author
states as follows:
"One of the prominent features of a delinquent is poor educational attainment.
More than 63 per cent of delinquents are illiterate. Poverty is the main cause of
their illiteracy. Due to poor economic condition they were compelled to enter into
the labour market to supplement their family income. It is also felt that poor
educational attainment is not due to the lack of intelligence but may be due to
lack of opportunity. Although free education is provided to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, even then, the delinquents had a very low level of
expectations and aspirations regarding their future which in turn is due to lack of
encouragement and unawareness of their parents that they play truant."
(emphasis supplied)
What should then be the approach in such cases, is the question. Can the
advantage of a beneficial legislation be denied to such unfortunate and wayward
delinquents? Can the misfortune of the accused never going to a school be followed
or compounded by denial of the benefit that the legislation provides in such
emphatic terms, as to permit an enquiry even after the last Court has disposed of
the appeal and upheld his conviction? The answer has to be in the negative.
48. If one were to adopt a wooden approach, one could say nothing short of a
certificate, whether from the school or a municipal authority would satisfy the
court's conscience, before directing an enquiry. But, then directing an enquiry is not
the same thing as declaring the accused to be a juvenile. The standard of proof
required is different for both. In the former, the court simply records a prima facie
conclusion. In the latter, the court makes a declaration on evidence, that it
scrutinises and accepts only if it is worthy of such acceptance. The approach at the
stage of directing the enquiry has of necessity to be more liberal, lest, there is
avoidable miscarriage of justice. Suffice it to say that while affidavits may not be
generally accepted as a good enough basis for directing an enquiry, that they are
not SO accepted is not a rule of law but a rule of prudence. The Court would,
therefore, in each case weigh the relevant factors, insist upon filing of better
affidavits if the need SO arises, and even direct, any additional information
considered relevant including the information regarding the age of the parents, the
age of siblings and the like, to be furnished before it decides on a case to case basis
whether or not an enquiry under Section 7-A ought to be conducted. It will
eventually depend on how the court evaluates such material for a prima facie
conclusion that the court may or may not direct an enquiry. "
(Emphasis supplied)
41. Thus, Section 7A(1) of the 2000 Act and the proviso thereto provided that a
claim of juvenility might be raised before any court and it shall be recognized at any
stage, even after the final disposal of the case, and such claim shall be determined in
terms of the provisions contained in the 2000 Act and the Rules made thereunder,
even if the juvenile has ceased to be so, on or before the date of commencement of
the 2000 Act.
42. Sub-section (2) of Section 7A mandates that if the Court finds a person to be a
juvenile on the date of the commission of offence under sub-section (1), it shall
forward the juvenile to the Juvenile Justice Board for passing an appropriate order, and
the sentence, if any, passed by a Court shall be deemed to have no effect.
43. Section 16 of the 2000 Act provides as hereunder:-
"16. Order that may not be passed against juvenile. -
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the
time being in force, no juvenile in conflict with law shall be sentenced to death
or imprisonment for any term which may extend to imprisonment for life, or
committed to prison in default of payment of fine or in default of furnishing
security:
Provided that where a juvenile who has attained the age of sixteen years
has committed an offence and the Board is satisfied that the offence
committed is of SO serious in nature or that his conduct and behaviour have
been such that it would not be in his interest or in the interest of other
juvenile in a special home to send him to such special home and that none
of the other measures provided under this Act is suitable or sufficient, the
Board may order the juvenile in conflict with law to be kept in such place of
safety and in such manner as it thinks fit and shall report the case for the
order of the State Government.
(2) On receipt of a report from a Board under sub-section (1), the State
Government may make such arrangement in respect of the juvenile as it
deems proper and may order such juvenile to be kept under protective
custody at such place and on such conditions as it thinks fit:
Provided that the period of detention SO ordered shall not exceed in any
case the maximum period provided under Section 15 of this Act."
44. The maximum period of detention in respect of a juvenile is three years as
provided in Section 15(1)(g). The said Section provides that where the Juvenile
Justice Board is, on inquiry, satisfied that the juvenile has committed an offence, then
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the Juvenile Justice Board may, if it thinks fit, make an order directing the
juvenile to be sent to a special home for a period of three years.
45. In view of Section 7A of the 2000 Act referred to hereinabove, applicable to the
writ applicant herein, the plea of juvenility could be raised in any court, at any stage
even after the final disposal of the Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of the
Constitution. In the case of the writ applicant herein, his Special Leave Petition had
also been dismissed by this Court. However, this Court is still obliged to consider the
plea of juvenility taken by the writ applicant and grant him appropriate relief. The fact
that the 2000 Act has later been replaced by the 2015 Act would make no difference.
46. In regard to the nature of the inquiry to be conducted by the court in
determining the age under Section 7A of the 2000 Act and Rule 12, this Court in
553, has held as follows:-
"25. Section 7-A, obliges the court only to make an inquiry, not an investigation
or a trial, an inquiry not under the Code of Criminal Procedure, but under the JJ Act.
The criminal courts, Juvenile Justice Board, committees, etc. we have noticed,
proceed as if they are conducting a trial, inquiry, enquiry or investigation as per the
Code. The statute requires the court or the Board only to make an "inquiry" and in
what manner that inquiry has to be conducted is provided in the JJ Rules. Few of
the expressions used in Section 7-A and Rule 12 are of considerable importance and
a reference to them is necessary to understand the true scope and content of those
provisions. Section 7-A has used the expressions "court shall make an inquiry",
"take such evidence as may be necessary" and "but not an affidavit". The Court or
the Board can accept as evidence something more than an affidavit i.e. the Court or
the Board can accept documents, certificates, etc. as evidence, need not be oral
evidence.
26. Rule 12 which has to be read along with Section 7-A has also used certain
expressions which are also to be borne in mind. Rule 12(2) uses the expression
"prima facie" and "on the basis of physical appearance" or "documents, if available".
Rule 12(3) uses the expression "by seeking evidence by obtaining". These
expressions in our view re-emphasise the fact that what is contemplated in Section
7-A and Rule 12 is only an inquiry. Further, the age determination inquiry has to be
completed and age be determined within thirty days from the date of making the
application; which is also an indication of the manner in which the inquiry has to be
conducted and completed. The word "inquiry" has not been defined under the JJ
Act, but Section 2(y) of the JJ Act says that all words and expressions used and not
defined in the JJ Act but defined in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (2 of 1974),
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.
27. Let us now examine the meaning of the words "inquiry", "enquiry",
"investigation" and "trial" as we see in the Code of Criminal Procedure and their
several meanings attributed to those expressions. "Inquiry" as defined in Section 2
(g) CrPC reads as follows:
2. (g) 'inquiry' means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this
Code by a Magistrate or court;"
The word "enquiry" is not defined under the Code of Criminal Procedure which
is an act of asking for information and also consideration of some evidence, may
be documentary.
"Investigation" as defined in Section 2(h) CrPC reads as follows:
2. (h) 'investigation' includes all the proceedings under this Code for the
collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than
a Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf;
The expression "trial" has not been defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure
but must be understood in the light of the expressions "inquiry" or
"investigation" as contained in Sections 2(g) and 2(h) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
28. The expression "trial" has been generally understood as the examination by
court of issues of fact and law in a case for the purpose of rendering the judgment
relating to some offences committed. We find in very many cases that the court/the
Juvenile Justice Board while determining the claim of juvenility forget that what
they are expected to do is not to conduct an inquiry under Section 2(g) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, but an inquiry under the JJ Act, following the procedure laid
down under Rule 12 and not following the procedure laid down under the Code.
29. The Code lays down the procedure to be followed in every investigation,
inquiry or trial for every offence, whether under the Penal Code, 1860 or under
other Penal laws. The Code makes provisions for not only investigation, inquiry into
or trial for offences but also inquiries into certain specific matters. The procedure
laid down for inquiring into the specific matters under the Code naturally cannot be
applied in inquiring into other matters like the claim of juvenility under Section 7A
read with Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules. In other words, the law regarding the
procedure to be followed in such inquiry must be found in the enactment conferring
jurisdiction to hold inquiry.
30. Consequently, the procedure to be followed under the J.J. Act in conducting
an inquiry is the procedure laid down in that statute itself i.e. Rule 12 of the 2007
Rules. We cannot import other procedures laid down in the Code of Criminal
Procedure or any other enactment while making an inquiry with regard to the
juvenility of a person, when the claim of juvenility is raised before the court
exercising powers under Section 7A of the Act. Many of the cases, we have come
across, it is seen that the Criminal Courts are still having the hangover of the
procedure of trial or inquiry under the Code as if they are trying an offence under
the Penal laws forgetting the fact that the specific procedure has been laid down in
Section 7A read with Rule 12.
31. We also remind all Courts/J.J. Board and the Committees functioning under
the Act that a duty is cast on them to seek evidence by obtaining the certificate etc.
mentioned in Rule 12(3)(a)(i) to (iii). The courts in such situations act as a parens
patriae because they have a kind of guardianship over minors who from their legal
disability stand in need of protection.
32. "Age determination inquiry" contemplated under Section 7A of the Act r/w
Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules enables the court to seek evidence and, in that process,
the court can obtain the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if available. Only in
the absence of any matriculation or equivalent certificates, the court need obtain
the date of birth certificate from the school first attended other than a play school.
Only in the absence of matriculation or equivalent certificate or the date of birth
certificate from the school first attended, the court need obtain the birth certificate
given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a panchayat (not an affidavit but
certificates or documents). The question of obtaining medical opinion from a duly
constituted Medical Board arises only if the above mentioned documents are
unavailable. In case exact assessment of the age cannot be done, then the court,
for reasons to be recorded, may, if considered necessary, give the benefit to the
child or juvenile by considering his or her age on lower side within the margin of
one year.
33. Once the court, following the above mentioned procedures, passes an order;
that order shall be the conclusive proof of the age as regards such child or juvenile
in conflict with law. It has been made clear in subsection (5) or Rule 12 that no
further inquiry shall be conducted by the court or the Board after examining and
obtaining the certificate or any other documentary proof after referring to sub-rule
(3) of the Rule 12. Further, Section 49 of the J.J. Act also draws a presumption of
the age of the juvenility on its determination.
34. Age determination inquiry contemplated under the JJ Act and Rules has
nothing to do with an enquiry under other legislations, like entry in service,
retirement, promotion etc. There may be situations where the entry made in the
matriculation or equivalent certificates, date of birth certificate from the school first
attended and even the birth certificate given by a Corporation or a Municipal
Authority or a Panchayat may not be correct. But Court, J.J. Board or a Committee
functioning under the J.J. Act is not expected to conduct such a roving enquiry and
to go behind those certificates to examine the correctness of those documents, kept
during the normal course of business. Only in cases where those documents or
certificates are found to be fabricated or manipulated, the Court, the J.J. Board or
the Committee need to go for medical report for age determination".
47. What is discernible from the dictum laid down in Ashwani Kumar Saxena
(supra) is that, in deciding whether an accused is juvenile or not, a hyper technical
approach should not be adopted. While appreciating the evidence adduced on behalf of
the accused in support of the plea that he is a juvenile, if two views are possible on
the same evidence, the Court should lean in favour of holding the accused to be
juvenile in borderline cases. The inquiry contemplated is not a roving inquiry. The
Court can accept as evidence something more than an affidavit i.e. documents,
certificates etc. as evidence in proof of age. A mere opinion by a person as to the
accused looking one or two years older than the age claimed by him (as the opinion of
the head master in the present case) or the fact that the accused told his age to be
more than what he alleges in the case while being arrested by the police officer would
not hold much water. It is the documentary evidence placed on record that plays a
major role in determining the age of a juvenile in conflict of law. And, it is only in the
cases where the documents or certificates placed on record by the accused in support
of his claim of juvenility are found to be fabricated or manipulated, that the Court, the
Juvenile Justice Board or the Committee need to go for medical test for age
determination.
48. Clause (a) of Rule 12(3) of the 2007 Rules contains a hierarchical ordering,
evident from the use of the language "in the absence whereof". This indicates that
where a matriculation or equivalent certificate is available, the documents adverted to
in (ii) and (iii) cannot be relied upon. The matriculation certificate, in other words, is
given precedence. It is in the absence of a matriculation certificate that the date of
birth certificate of the school first attended, can be relied upon. It is in the absence of
both the matriculation and the birth certificates of the first school attended that a birth
certificate issued by the corporation, municipal authority or panchayat could be
obtained.
examining the scope of Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules, has reiterated that medical opinion
from the Medical Board should be sought only when the matriculation certificate or
equivalent certificate or the date of birth certificate from the school first attended or
any birth certificate issued by a corporation or a municipal authority or a panchayat or
municipality is not available. This Court had held that the entry related to the date of
birth entered in the marksheet is a valid evidence for determining the age of the
accused person so also the school leaving certificate for determining the age of the
appellant.
50. In the instant case, the accused has not produced any matriculation certificate
or equivalent certificate to prove his age. What is produced by him is only the Family
Register issued under the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947. The document cannot be
accepted as equivalent to matriculation certificate to prove the age of the accused.
However, the evidentiary value of the Family Register will have to be looked into in the
course of the inquiry that we may order.
Determination of plea of juvenility at a belated stage
51. Ideally, there should not be any dispute as to the age of a person if the birth is
registered in accordance with law and date of birth is entered in the school records on
the basis of genuine record of birth. However, in India, the factors like poverty,
illiteracy, ignorance, indifference and inadequacy of the system often lead to there
being no documentary proof of a person's age. Therefore, in those cases where the
plea of juvenility is raised at a belated stage, often certain medical tests are resorted
to forage determination in absence of the documents enumerated in Section 94 of the
Act 2015. The rule allowing plea of juvenility to be raised at a considerably belated
stage has its rationale in the contemporary child rights jurisprudence which requires
the stakeholders to act in the best interest of the child.
52. In Court On Its Own Motion V. Dept. of Women and Child Development,
several hundred children were languishing in the Tihar Jail because the police
mentioned them as adults in the arrest memo.
53. The same is the story in the State of Uttar Pradesh which led the High Court of
Allahabad to pass the order in Writ Petition Public Interest Litigation referred to above
in para 6.
54. Awareness about the rights of the child and correlated duties remain low among
the functionaries of the juvenile justice system. Once a child is caught in the web of
adult criminal justice system, it is difficult for the child to get out of it unscathed. The
bitter truth is that even the legal aid programmes are mired in systemic bottlenecks
and often it is only at a considerably belated stage of the proceeding that the person
becomes aware of the rights, including the right to be differently treated on the
ground of juvenility.
55. What needs to be kept in mind is the main object and purpose of the Juvenile
Justice Act. The focus of this legislation is on the juvenile's reformation and
rehabilitation so that he also may have an opportunity to enjoy as other children. In
Pratap Singh (supra), this Court, elaborating on the objects and purpose of the
Juvenile Justice Act, made the following observations: -
The said Act is not only a beneficent legislation, but also a remedial one. The
Act aims at grant of care, protection and rehabilitation of a juvenile vis--vis the
adult criminals. Having regard to Rule 4 of the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, it must also be borne in mind that
the moral and psychological components of criminal responsibility were also one of
the factors in defining a juvenile. The first objective, therefore, is the promotion of
the well-being of the juvenile and the second objective to bring about the principle
of proportionality whereby and whereunder the proportionality of the reaction to the
circumstances of both the offender and the offence including the victim should be
safeguarded "
What is bone ossification test?
56. The famous American philosopher Mark Twain once said, "Age is an issue of
Mind over matter. If you don't mind, it doesn't matter." But the above is not the case
in criminal jurisprudence when it comes to age. Here, age matters because law is
mindful to it.
57. The bone ossification test (hereinafter "ossification test") is a test that
determines age based on the "degree of fusion of bone" by taking the x-ray of a few
bones. In simple words, the ossification test or osteogenesis is the process of the bone
formation based on the fusion of joints between the birth and age of twenty-five years
in an individual. Bone age is an indicator of the skeletal and biological maturity of an
individual which assists in the determination of age. The most common method used
for the calculation of the bone age is radiography of the hand and wrist until the age of
18 years beyond which the medial age of clavicle is used for bone age calculation till
the age of 22 years as the hand and wrist bone radiographs cannot be computed
beyond 18 years of age as the elongation of the bone is complete after adolescence.
However, it must be noted that the ossification test varies slightly based on individual
characteristics, therefore the ossification test though is relevant however it cannot be
called solely conclusive.
58. The 2015 Act under Section 94 (2) (iii) read with Rule 2(3) of the 2007 Rules
provides the legislative sanction for the conduct of ossification test or other medical
age determination test available in the absence of other documentary proof of age i.e.
matriculation certificate or birth certificate, which has to be given within 15 days from
the date of such order. The test is to be conducted by the Child Welfare Committee
(CWC). The provision mentioned herein is the basis for determining the age of a child
under the 2000 Act which even includes a child who is a victim of crime in addition to
a child in conflict with the law.
the ossification test by the medical officer is to assist the court which falls under the
ambit of medical expert opinion i.e., advisory in nature and not binding. However,
such an opinion cannot override ocular or documentary evidence, which has been
proved to be true and admissible as they constitute "statement of facts". This Court in
204, to hold that a medical witness is not a witness of fact therefore the opinion
rendered by such a medical expert is merely advisory until accepted by the Court,
however, once accepted, they become the opinion of the Court.
Margin of error principle
60. The bone ossification test is not an exact science that can provide us with the
exact age of the person. As discussed above, the individual characteristics such as the
growth rate of bones and skeletal structures can affect the accuracy of this method.
:
determination because it does not reveal the exact age of the person, but the
radiological examination leaves a margin of two years on either side of the age range
as prescribed by the test irrespective of whether the ossification test of multiple joints
is conducted. The courts in India have accepted the fact that after the age of thirty
years the ossification test cannot be relied upon for age determination. It is trite that
the standard of proof for the determination of age is the degree of probability and not
proof beyond reasonable doubt.
61. In the aforesaid context, we may also refer to a decision of this Court in the
Court has observed in para 27 as under:-
regarded as conclusive when it comes to ascertaining the age of a person. More so,
the appellants herein have certainly crossed the age of thirty years which is an
important factor to be taken into account as age cannot be determined with
precision.
"
Court should not take a hyper-technical approach while appreciating evidence for
determination of age of the accused. If two views are possible, the Court should lean
in favour of holding the accused to be a juvenile in border line cases. This approach
was further reiterated by this Court in Rajendra Chandra V. State of Chhattisgarh,
determination is the degree of probability and not proof beyond reasonable doubt.
this Court observed explicitly that Section 94 of the 2015 Act does not give
precedence to the matriculation and other certificates, to determine the age of person,
since the said section only deals with the matter of procedure. This Court held that lex
non cogit ad impossibilia (law does not demand the impossible) and when the
ossification test cannot yield trustworthy and reliable results, such test cannot be
made a basis to determine the age of the person and other available certificates may
be taken into consideration.
142, this Court, while negativing the contention canvassed on behalf of the appellant
convict therein that the procedure as contained in Rule 12(3)(b) of the 2007 Rules
now being part of Section 94 of the 2015 Act and once the statute has provided the
ossification test as the basis for determining juvenility, the findings of such ossification
test cannot be ignored, held in paras 15 and 16 resply as under:-
"15. We find that the procedure prescribed in Rule 12 is not materially different
than the provisions of Section 94 of the Act to determine the age of the person.
There are minor variations as the Rule 12(3)(a)(i) and (ii) have been clubbed
together with slight change in the language. Section 94 of the Act does not contain
the provisions regarding benefit of margin of age to be given to the child or juvenile
as was provided in Rule 12(3)(b) of the Rules. The importance of ossification test
has not undergone change with the enactment of Section 94 of the Act. The
reliability of the ossification test remains vulnerable as was under Rule 12 of the
Rules.
16. As per the Scheme of the Act, when it is obvious to the Committee or the
Board, based on the appearance of the person, that the said person is a child, the
Board or Committee shall record observations stating the age of the Child as nearly
as may be without waiting for further confirmation of the age. Therefore, the first
attempt to determine the age is by assessing the physical appearance of the person
when brought before the Board or the Committee. It is only in case of doubt, the
process of age determination by seeking evidence becomes necessary. At that
stage, when a person is around 18 years of age, the ossification test can be said to
be relevant for determining the approximate age of a person in conflict with law.
However, when the person is around 40-55 years of age, the structure of bones
cannot be helpful in determining the age. This Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar V.
Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal held, in the context of certificate required under
Section 65B of the Evidence Act, 1872, that as per the Latin maxim, lex non cogit
ad impossibilia, law does not demand the impossible. Thus, when the ossification
test cannot yield trustworthy and reliable results, such test cannot be made a basis
to determine the age of the person concerned on the date of incident. Therefore, in
the absence of any reliable trustworthy medical evidence to find out age of the
appellant, the ossification test conducted in year 2020 when the appellant was 55
years of age cannot be conclusive to declare him as a juvenile on the date of the
incident.
65. We are conscious of the fact that in the case on hand the convict was subjected
to medical examination after being referred to the Medical Board. However, the report
on record does not inspire much confidence. Over and above the same, the decision in
the case of Ram Vijay Singh (supra) makes it very clear that in the absence of a
reliable and trustworthy medical evidence to find out the age of the appellant herein,
the ossification test conducted in the year 2021 when the appellant was above 50
years of age cannot be conclusive to declare him as a juvenile on the date of the
incident. This Court observed that when a person is around 18 years of age, the
ossification test can be said to be relevant for determining the approximate age of a
person in conflict with law. However, when the person is around 40-55 years of age,
the structure of bones cannot be helpful in determining the age. In such
circumstances, it will be a matter of debate as to what extent the new ossification test
report that may come on record can be relied upon and to what extent the same would
be helpful to the appellant herein.
66. Despite all the odds against the writ applicant, we would still like to look into
the matter in the larger interest of justice. It will be in fitness of things if the writ
applicant convict is once again subjected to the ossification test at the Civil Hospital,
Allahabad or any other latest medical age determination test and such test shall be
carried out by a team of three doctors, one of whom should be the head of the
Department of Radiology.
67. In view of the aforesaid, we issue the following directions:
(i) We direct the Sessions Court, Agra to examine the claim of the writ applicant to
juvenility in regard with law within one month from the date of communication of
this order;
(ii) The concerned Sessions Court shall also examine the authenticity and
genuineness of the Family Register sought to be relied upon by writ applicant
convict considering that the document does not appear to be contemporaneous.
This document assumes importance, more particularly in the light of the fact that
the ossification test report may not be absolutely helpful in determining the
exact age of the writ applicant on the date of incident. If the Family Register on
record is ultimately found to be authentic and genuine, then we may not have to
fall upon the ossification test report. In such circumstances, the Presiding Officer
concerned shall pay adequate attention towards this document and try to
ascertain the authenticity and genuineness of the same. If need be, the
statements of the persons concerned i.e. from the concerned government
department may also be recorded;
(iii) The Sessions Court shall ensure that the writ applicant convict is medically
examined by taking an ossification test or any other modern recognized method
of age determination;
(iv) The Sessions Court concerned shall submit its report as regards the aforesaid to
this Court within one month from the date of communication of this order;
(v) The Registry is directed to forward one copy of this order to Sessions Court,
Agra;
(vi) We request the learned counsel appearing for the State to take appropriate
steps to facilitate the Sessions Court to complete the enquiry.
68. Notify this matter after a period of four weeks along with the report that may be
received from the Sessions Court, Agra. The final order shall be passed after perusal of
the report upon receipt from the Sessions Court, Agra.