(2023) 1 Supreme Court Cases 472 : (2022) 22 GSTR-OL 6 : 2022
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE N.V. RAMANA, C.J. AND J.K. MAHESHWARI AND HIMA KOHLI, JJ.)
SUNDARESH BHATT, LIQUIDATOR OF ABG
SHIPYARD
Appellant;
Versus
CENTRAL BOARD OF INDIRECT TAXES AND
CUSTOMS
Respondent.
Civil Appeal No. 7667 of decided on August 26, 2022
A. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - Ss. 238 and 14 - Primacy
of IBC over Customs Act - IBC, being the more recent statute, held, clearly
overrides the Customs Act - In any case, S. 238 IBC clearly provides that
IBC overrides any provision of law which is inconsistent with the IBC
- This is clearly made out by a reading of S. 142-A of the Customs Act which
notes that the Customs Authorities would have first charge on the assets of an
assessee under the Customs Act, except with respect to cases under S. 529-A of
the Companies Act, 1956, Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993,
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 and the IBC, 2016 - Further, such an exception created under
the Customs Act is duly acknowledged under S. 238 IBC as well
- Held, the Customs Act and the IBC act in their own spheres and in case of
any conflict, the IBC overrides the Customs Act - In present case, held, the Court
has to ascertain as to whether there is a conflict in the operation of two different
statutes in the given circumstances and as the first effort, Court is mandated to
harmoniously read the two legislations, unless the Court finds a clear conflict in its
operation (see also Shortnote B) - Customs Act, 1962 - S. 142-A - Statute Law
- Later Acts/Subsequent Acts - Non Obstante Clause/Relative scope of
Provisions/Statutes/Addition to/Non Derogation Clause
(Paras 40 to 43)
B. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - Ss. 238, 14 and 53 - IBC
and Customs Act - Harmonious construction of - Held, though the IBC has
overriding effect over the Customs Act (see Shortnote A), the Customs Act
and IBC can be read in a harmonious manner wherein the authorities under
the Customs Act have a limited jurisdiction to determine the quantum of
operational debt, in this case, the customs duty, in order to stake claim in
terms of S. 53 IBC before the liquidator - However, the
respondent/authority does not have the power to execute its claim beyond
the ambit of S. 53 IBC - Customs Act, 1962, S. 142-A
(Para 50)
C. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - Ss. 14 and 33(5) -
Demand notices seeking enforcement of customs dues during the
moratorium period - Invalidity of - Sale of warehoused goods belonging to
the corporate debtor under liquidation, by Customs Authority -
Impermissibility of - Custody over warehoused goods - Grantability of, to
IRP/RP/liquidator i.e. despite existence of customs dues
- Held, demand notices to seek enforcement of customs dues during the
moratorium period would violate the provisions of S. 14 or S. 33(5) IBC, as the
case may be, because the demand notices are an initiation of legal proceedings
against the corporate debtor - Held, once moratorium is imposed in terms of S.
14 or S. 33(5) IBC as the case may be, the respondent authority only has a limited
jurisdiction to assess/determine the quantum of customs duty and other levies and
the authority does not have the power to initiate recovery of dues by means of
sale/confiscation, as provided under the Customs Act - Further, after such
assessment, the respondent authority has to submit its claims (concerning customs
dues/operational debt) in terms of the procedure laid down, in strict compliance of
the time periods prescribed under the IBC, before the adjudicating authority - Held,
in any case, the IRP/RP/liquidator can immediately secure goods from the authority
to be dealt with appropriately, in terms of the IBC - Customs Act, 1962, S. 72
(Paras 44 to 53 and 57)
D. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - Ss. 14, 25 and 33(5) - Title
over warehoused goods on which customs duty is not paid - Non-vesting of
in Customs Authority, when liquidation process under IBC stands initiated
- Nclat, in allowing the appeal of the respondent authority, inter alia, held that
the goods lying in the customs bonded warehouse were not the corporate debtor's
assets as they were neither claimed by the corporate debtor after their import, nor
were the bills of entry cleared for some of the said goods and by not filing the said
bills of entry, the Nclat held that the importer i.e. the corporate debtor, had
relinquished his title to the imported goods - Nclat also held that the corporate
debtor is deemed to have lost his title to the imported goods by action of Ss. 48
and 72 of the Customs Act
- Held, the interpretation provided by the Nclat, regarding the deemed transfer
of title of the goods from the assessee to the Customs Authority under S. 72 of
the Customs Act, would fly in the face of S. 14 IBC r/w Ss. 25 and 33(5) IBC -
Moreover, such deemed transfer cannot be countenanced in law as the same would
be in breach of Art. 300-A of the Constitution, as properties are deemed to be
transferred to the Customs Authority without there being adequate hearing or any
adjudication of any form - Customs Act, 1962, S. 72
(Paras 14 and 51 to 54)
On 1-8-2017, the National Company Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad ("NCLT") passed
an order commencing the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process ("CIRP")
against the corporate debtor, and the appellant was appointed as the
Interim Resolution Professional. In the same order, the NCLT also declared a
moratorium under Section 13(1)(a) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
("IBC").
On 21-8-2017, the appellant informed the respondent of the initiation of CIRP
and sought custody of the warehoused goods and requested the respondent not to
dispose of or auction the same. On 29-3-2019, the respondent for the first time,
issued a notice to the corporate debtor regarding non-fulfilment of export
obligations in terms of the EPCG licence demanding customs duty of Rs 17,13,989
with interest. From 2-4-2019 to 7-4-2019, the respondent issued five different
demand notices to the corporate debtor regarding non-fulfilment of export
obligations under different EPCG licences for various amounts.
On 25-4-2019, the NCLT passed an order commencing liquidation against the
corporate debtor under Section 33(2) IBC. Vide the said order, the NCLT declared
that the earlier moratorium imposed under Section 13(1)(a) IBC shall cease to
have effect by the operation of Section 14(4) IBC. However, a fresh direction was
passed under Section 33(5) IBC barring the institution of any suit or legal
proceeding by or against the corporate debtor. Further, the NCLT also appointed
the appellant as the liquidator vide the same order.
Thereafter, the respondent filed claims before the appellant for goods
warehoused in both Gujarat and Maharashtra on 20-5-2019, 27-5-2019 and 29-5
-2019 under the IBC. On 27-6-2019, the appellant informed the respondent
through its officers that liquidation proceedings had commenced against the
corporate debtor and that the goods were to be released to the appellant.
Due to inaction by the respondent, the appellant filed IA No. 474 of 2019 before
the NCLT under Section 60(5) IBC seeking a direction against the respondent to
release the warehoused goods belonging to the corporate debtor on 1-7-2019.
At this juncture, for the first time on 11-7-2019, the respondent issued a notice
to the corporate debtor under Section 72(1) of the Customs Act for customs dues
amounting to Rs 763,12,72,645 on 2531 bills of entries. The respondent filed a
concurrent claim for the said amount before the appellant under the IBC.
The issues involved in this appeal were:
(1) Whether the provisions of the IBC would prevail over the Customs Act,
and if so, to what extent?
(2) Whether the respondent could claim title over the goods and issue notice
to sell the goods in terms of the Customs Act when the liquidation process has
been initiated?
Allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court
Held :
The warehoused goods belonging to the corporate debtor which is under
liquidation, are sought to be sold by the Customs Authorities in lieu of customs
dues. The respondent has relied on certain provisions of the Customs Act to
assume such power. This has been vehemently opposed by the appellant herein,
who has argued that once the insolvency process has been initiated against the
corporate
debtor, the IBC becomes squarely applicable and overrides any other enactment
giving priority to the charges on the property.
(Para 22)
When goods are warehoused and the importer has not taken sufficient steps to
take the goods out for domestic consumption or for transshipment, within the
required time period, then the proper officer has to take steps in terms of Section
72(2) of the Customs Act. It is only after the determination of dues by the proper
officer that goods may be sold, in the event that the demanded amount relating to
customs duty, interest, fines, and other penalties have not been paid. In that case
alone, after such determination, a sufficient portion of goods may be sold.
(Para 31)
In the present case, the corporate debtor as part of its business used to
regularly import and warehoused goods in the customs bonded warehouses from
at least 2011. The CIRP process commenced against the corporate debtor on 1-8-
2017 by the order of the NCLT. It appears from the record that no notices were
issued by the respondent against the corporate debtor with respect to the
warehoused goods prior to initiation of the CIRP. In fact, all the duty demand
notices issued by the respondent were from March 2019 onwards.
(Para 33)
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code came into force in India from 28-5-2016
to combine provisions relating to insolvency found across different statutes into a
single comprehensive instrument. Under the earlier legal regime, different statutes
were resulting in multiple parallel proceedings, which inevitably resulted in
uncertainty for the creditors over their recovery. One of the objectives behind the
enactment of the IBC was to end the conflict between different statutes.
(Para 34)
Halsbury's Laws of England, Para 8, Vol. III, 4th Edn., referred to
When the insolvency process commences, the adjudicating authority is
mandated to declare a moratorium on continuation or initiation of any coercive
legal action against the corporate debtor.
(Para 37)
Section 14 IBC prescribes a moratorium on the initiation of CIRP proceedings
and its effects. One of the purposes of the moratorium is to keep the assets of the
corporate debtor together during the insolvency resolution process and to facilitate
orderly completion of the processes envisaged under the statute. Such measures
ensure the curtailing of parallel proceedings and reduce the possibility of conflicting
outcomes in the process.
(Para 38)
Even if a company goes into liquidation, a moratorium continues in terms of
Section 33(5) IBC.
(Para 39)
The IBC, being the more recent statute, clearly overrides the Customs Act. This
is clearly made out by a reading of Section 142-A of the Customs Act. The
aforesaid provision notes that the Customs Authorities would have first charge on
the assets of an assessee under the Customs Act, except with respect to cases
under Section 529-A of the Companies Act, 1956, Recovery of Debts and
Bankruptcy Act, 1993, Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 and the IBC, 2016.
(Para 40)
Accordingly, such an exception created under the Customs Act is duly
acknowledged under Section 238 IBC as well. Additionally, Section 238 IBC clearly
overrides any provision of law which is inconsistent with the IBC.
(Para 41)
108 ELT 342 (Cal), held, statutorily overruled
The Customs Act and the IBC act in their own spheres. In case of any conflict,
the IBC overrides the Customs Act. In present context, the Court has to ascertain
as to whether there is a conflict in the operation of two different statutes in the
given circumstances. As the first effort, the Court is mandated to harmoniously
read the two legislations, unless the Supreme Court finds a clear conflict in its
operation.
(Para 43)
The demand notices issued by the respondent are plainly in the teeth of Section
14 IBC as they were issued after the initiation of the CIRP proceedings. Moratorium
under Section 14 IBC was imposed when insolvency proceedings were initiated on 1
-8-2017. The first notice sent by the respondent authority was on 29-3-2019.
Further, when insolvency resolution failed and the liquidation process began, the
NCLT passed an order on 25-4-2019 imposing a moratorium under Section 33(5)
IBC. It is only after this order that the respondent issued a notice under Section 72
of the Customs Act against the corporate debtor. The various demand notices have
therefore clearly been issued by the respondent after the initiation of the insolvency
proceedings, with some notices issued even after the liquidation moratorium was
imposed.
(Para 44)
The demand notices to seek enforcement of customs dues during the
moratorium period would clearly violate the provisions of Sections 14 or 33(5) IBC,
as the case may be. This is because the demand notices are an initiation of legal
proceedings against the corporate debtor.
(Para 45)
The authorities can only take steps to determine the tax, interest, fines or any
penalty which is due. However, the authority cannot enforce a claim for recovery or
levy of interest on the tax due during the period of moratorium.
(Para 47)
242 : (1968) 68 ITR 295, held, overruled
The respondent could only initiate assessment or re-assessment of the duties
and other levies. They cannot transgress such boundary and proceed to initiate
recovery in violation of Sections 14 or 33(5) IBC. The interim resolution
professional, resolution professional or the liquidator, as the case may be, has an
obligation to ensure that assessment is legal and he has been provided with
sufficient power to question any assessment, if he finds the same to be excessive.
(Para 48)
In the present case, the demand notice dated 11-7-2019 was issued by the
respondent under Section 72 of the Customs Act, in clear breach of the
moratorium imposed under Section 33(5) IBC. Issuing a notice under Section 72 of
the Customs Act for non-payment of customs duty falls squarely within the ambit
of initiating legal proceedings against a corporate debtor. Even under the liquidation
process, the liquidator is given the responsibility to secure assets and goods of the
corporate debtor under Section 35(1)(b) IBC.
(Para 49)
The Customs Act and IBC can be read in a harmonious manner wherein the
authorities under the Customs Act have a limited jurisdiction to determine the
quantum of operational debt - in this case, the customs duty - in order to stake
claim in terms of Section 53 IBC before the liquidator. However, the respondent
does not have the power to execute its claim beyond the ambit of Section 53 IBC.
(Para 50)
(Civ) 1, affirmed
There was no "abandonment of goods" which would authorise the Customs
Authorities to initiate the adjudicatory process to transfer title to themselves.
Before any goods can be declared to have been "abandoned", the same must be
adjudged by some authority after due notice. The position cannot be assumed or
deemed. In the case at hand, no such adjudication or notice has been placed on
record to suggest that such abandonment of the warehoused goods had taken
place prior to the imposition of the moratorium.
(Para 52)
The fact is that the duty demand notice and notice under Section 72(2) of the
Customs Act, were issued during the moratorium period, which has been
completely ignored by the NCLAT and has resulted in rendering the moratorium
otiose.
(Para 53)
The interpretation provided by the NCLAT, regarding the deemed transfer of title
of the goods from the assessee to the Customs Authority under Section 72 of the
Customs Act, would fly in the face of Section 14 IBC, read with Sections 25 and 33
(5). Moreover, such deemed transfer cannot be countenanced in law as the same
would be in breach of Article 300-A of the Constitution, as properties are deemed
to be transferred to the Customs Authority without there being adequate hearing or
any adjudication of any form.
(Para 54)
Conclusions
Thus, it is concluded as follows:
(1) Once moratorium is imposed in terms of Sections 14 or 33(5) IBC as the
case may be, the respondent authority only has a limited jurisdiction to
assess/determine the quantum of customs duty and other levies. The
respondent authority does not have the power to initiate recovery of dues by
means of sale/confiscation, as provided under the Customs Act.
(2) After such assessment, the respondent authority has to submit its claims
(concerning customs dues/operational debt) in terms of the procedure laid
down, in strict compliance of the time periods prescribed under the IBC, before
the adjudicating authority.
(3) In any case, the IRP/RP/liquidator can immediately secure goods from
the respondent authority to be dealt with appropriately, in terms of the IBC.
(para 57)
NCLAT 2244, reversed
NCLT 2191, referred to
VN-D/69165/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Gaurav Mitra, Arvind Datar, J. Salva and
Jay Savla, Senior Advocates [Sameer Pandit, Aman Raj Gandhi
(Advocate-on-Record), Parthasarathy Bose, Anuj Jain, Aditya Ladha,
Ananya Pratap Singh, Azeem Samuel, Nidhiram, Akash Kakade,
Somanath Padhan (Advocate-on-Record), Gurdeep Singh Sachar,
Vikrant Shetty, Swetab Kumar, Abhishek Sharma, Ms Ashly Cherian,
Gaurav Arora, Ms Renuka, Kamlendra Singh, Ms Renuka Sahu and Alok
Tripathi (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the Appellant;
K.M. Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General, Mukul Rohatgi, Siddhartha
Dave and Vikram Nankani, Senior Advocates [Sharath Nambiar, Vatsal
Joshi, Anuj Srinivas Udupi, Nakul Chingappa K.K., Mukesh Kr. Maroria
(Advocate-on-Record), Shiv Mangal Sharma, Saurabh Rajpal, Shashank
Khurana, Ms Shrinjan Khosla (for M/s Aura & Co.) (Advocate-on-
Record), Gaurav Mathur, Abhishek Shah, Ms Anushree Prashit Kapadia,
Divyank Dutt Dwivedi, Ravi Singh Chhikara, Jasdeep Singh Dhillon,
Salil Thakore, Rahul Gupta (Advocate-on-Record), Prabhat Kr.
Chaurasia, M/s Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Anushree Prashit Kapadia (Advocate-on-Record), Aman Raj Gandhi
(Advocate-on-Record), Prabhat Kr. Rai and Naveen Kumar (Advocate-
on-Record), Advocates], for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. V. Amit Gupta
494f-g, 495a
Indirect Taxes & Customs V. Sundaresh Bha#78f-g, 478g, 481f-g, 482f-
(reversed)
g, 485a, 495a, 496g-h
Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs
480f-g, 481f-g
Sundaresh Bhatt
480a, 485g, 486a, 492b-c
ABG Shipyard Ltd.
479b-c, 487g-h, 492b-c
(Cal), Collector of Customs V. Dytron (India) Ltd.
(held statutorily overruled)
491g
Deshpande
492e, 494a-b
Mysore Spun Silk Mills Ltd. (In Liquidation), In re
(held, overruled)
494a
Union of India V. Seth Spinning Mills Ltd. (held,
overruled)
494a
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
N.V. RAMANA, C.J. - The present civil appeal under Section 62(1) of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ("IBC") arises out of the
impugned judgment dated 22-11-20211 passed by the National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi ("NCLAT") in Company
Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021. Vide the impugned
judgment1, NCLAT has allowed the appeal filed by the respondent
against the order of the National Company Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad
("NCLT")/adjudicating authority whereby the adjudicating authority
directed the release of certain goods lying in the Customs Bonded
Warehouses without payment of customs duty and other levies.
2. A conspectus of the facts necessary for the disposal of the present
appeal is as follows : ABG Shipyard ("corporate debtor") was in the
business of shipbuilding prior to the initiation of corporate insolvency
proceedings against it. As a part of its business enterprise, it used to
regularly import various materials for the purpose of constructing ships
which were to be exported on completion. Some of these goods were
stored by the corporate debtor in Customs Bonded Warehouses in
Gujarat and Container Freight Stations in Maharashtra. Bills of entry for
warehousing were submitted at the relevant time. The corporate debtor
also took the benefit of an Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme
("EPCG Scheme") and was granted a licence under the said scheme
("EPCG licence") with respect to the said warehoused goods.
3. On 1-8-2017², the National Company Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad
("NCLT") passed an order commencing the Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process ("CIRP") against the corporate debtor, and the
appellant was appointed as the Interim Resolution Professional. In the
same order, NCLT also declared a moratorium under Section 13(1)(a) of
the IBC.
4. On 21-8-2017, the appellant informed the respondent of the
initiation of CIRP and sought custody of the warehoused goods and
requested the respondent not to dispose of or auction the same. On 29-
3-2019, the respondent for the first time, issued a notice to the
corporate debtor regarding non-fulfilment of export obligations in terms
of the EPCG licence demanding customs duty of Rs 17,13,989 with
interest. From 2-4-2019 to 7-4-2019, the respondent issued five
different demand notices to the corporate debtor regarding non-
fulfilment of export obligations under different EPCG licences for various
amounts.
5. The details of the demand notices issued by the respondent for
non-fulfilment of EPCG licence conditions by the corporate debtor are
tabulated herein for ease of reference:
SI.
Date
Details of demand notice
Demanded amount
No.
(plus interest as
applicable)
1.
29-3-
EPCG Licence No. 5230007265
Rs 17,13,989
2019
dated 16-7-2010
2.
2-4-
EPCG Licence No. 5230008206
Rs 96,20,325
2019
dated 16-11-2010
3.
4-4-
EPCG Licence No. 5230007016
Rs 53,29,072
2019
dated 17-5-2010
4.
5-4-
EPCG Licence No. 5230007082
Rs 2,05,73,402
2019
dated 3-6-2010
5.
5-4-
EPCG Licence No. 5230006881
Rs 6,64,646
2019
dated 31-3-2010
6.
7-4-
EPCG Licence No. 5L32206936
Rs 12,04,09,501
2019
dated 20-4-2010
6. On 25-4-2019 NCLT passed an order commencing liquidation
against the corporate debtor under Section 3(2) of the IBC. Vide the
said order, NCLT declared that the earlier moratorium imposed under
Section 13(1)(a) of the IBC shall cease to have effect by the operation
of Section 14(4) of the IBC. However, a fresh direction was passed
under Section 33(5) of the IBC barring the institution of any suit or
legal proceeding by or against the corporate debtor. Further, NCLT also
appointed the appellant as the liquidator vide the same order.
7. Thereafter, the respondent filed claims before the appellant for
goods warehoused in both Gujarat and Maharashtra on 20-5-2019, 27-
5-2019 and 29-5-2019 under the IBC. On 27-6-2019, the appellant
informed the respondent through its officers that liquidation
proceedings had commenced against the corporate debtor and that the
goods were to be released to the appellant.
8. Due to inaction by the respondent, the appellant filed IA No. 474
of 2019 before NCLT under Section 60(5) of the IBC seeking a direction
against the respondent to release the warehoused goods belonging to
the corporate debtor on 1-7-2019.
9. At this juncture, for the first time on 11-7-2019, the respondent
issued a notice to the corporate debtor under Section 72(1) of the
Customs Act for customs dues amounting to Rs 763,12,72,645 on 2531
bills of entries. The respondent filed a concurrent claim for the said
amount before the appellant under the IBC. Details of the amount
claimed by the respondent before the appellant are as follows:
SI.
Date
Details of claims filed by
Claimed amount
No.
respondent before appellant
(plus interest as
under Form C
applicable)
1.
20-5-
Non-fulfilment of obligations
Rs 37,92,29,749
2019
under 11 EPCG licences
2.
27-5-
Non-fulfilment of obligations
Rs 151,33,06,859
2019
under 37 EPCG licences
3.
29-5-
Non-clearing of imported
Rs 22,70,50,898
2019
goods from Jawaharlal Nehru
Port Trust, Nhava Sheva,
Maharashtra
4.
18-9-
Dues for all cargo in customs
Rs 763,12,72,645
2019
bonded warehouses in Gujarat
10. On 25-2-20204, NCLT allowed IA No. 474 of 2019 filed by the
appellant and passed the following directions : (Sundaresh Bhatt case4,
"14. Therefore, the present IA deserves to be allowed.
Accordingly, it is allowed in terms of its prayer clause as well as with
following directions.
(i) The respondents are directed to allow the applicant-liquidator
to remove the material, which is lying in the customs bonded
warehouses without any condition, demur and/or payment of
customs duty.
(ii) The respondents are at liberty to lodge its claim with the
applicant-liquidator with regard to the customs duty charges payable
on the release of material, which form part of the assets of the
corporate debtor company (in liquidation), before the liquidator
under the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
and in accordance with law.
(iii) The Customs Department shall allow removal of
goods/material within two weeks, from the date of receipt of an
authentic copy of this order from the liquidator.
(iv) Meanwhile, the respondents shall not proceed for auctioning,
selling or appropriating the materials owned by the corporate debtor
company, for the purpose of recovery of its customs duty, which may
tantamount to violation of the I&B Code and put the
applicant/liquidator of the corporate debtor company (under
liquidation) in disadvantageous position."
11. NCLT considered Section 238 of the IBC and held that the non
obstante clause in the IBC, being part of a subsequent law, shall have
overriding effect on proceedings under the Customs Act. Further,
looking to the waterfall mechanism under Section 53 of the IBC, NCLT
held that distribution of proceedings from sale of liquidation of assets
shall also prevail over the Customs Act provisions. NCLT held that, as
government dues, the claims by the respondent would have to be dealt
with in accordance with Section 53 of the IBC. Apart from the above,
NCLT also placed reliance on a circular issued by the Central Board of
Excise and Customs, being Circular No. 1053/02/2017-CX dated 10-3-
2017 relating to Section 11-E of the Central Excise Act, 1944. The
abovementioned circular clarifies that dues under the Central Excise Act
would have first charge only after the dues under the provisions of the
IBC are recovered. As Section 142-A of the Customs Act is pari materia
with Section 11-E of the Central Excise Act, 1944, NCLT applied the
same rationale to interpret the said section in holding that the
provisions of the IBC have priority.
12. Subsequent to the above judgment, the appellant sold the goods
warehoused in Surat for a consideration of Rs 169.11 crores. The sales
process with respect to the goods warehoused in Dahej, Gujarat is
currently ongoing, and is challenged before this Court in CA No. 7722 of
2021 and CA No. 7731 of 2021.
13. On 4-3-2021, the respondent filed an appeal before NCLAT
challenging the order dated 25-2-2020 4 passed by NCLT. On 22-11-
20211, NCLAT passed the impugned order, whereby it allowed the
appeal filed by the respondent and set aside the directions of NCLT
requiring the respondent to release the warehoused goods to the
possession of the appellant without seeking
the customs dues. NCLAT rather directed that the warehoused goods
can be "released or disposed of as per applicable provisions of the
Customs Act by the proper officer".
14. NCLAT, in allowing the appeal of the respondent, held that the
goods lying in the customs bonded warehouse were not the corporate
debtor's assets as they were neither claimed by the corporate debtor
after their import, nor were the bills of entry cleared for some of the
said goods. By not filing the said bills of entry, NCLAT held that the
importer i.e. the corporate debtor, had relinquished his title to the
imported goods. NCLAT held that the corporate debtor is deemed to
have lost his title to the imported goods by action of Sections 48 and
72 of the Customs Act. As such, the respondent is empowered to sell
the goods and recover the government dues.
15. NCLAT held that "imported goods", which are subject to levy of
customs, stand on a different footing as payment of customs duty is a
consequence of importing the goods rather than a liability on the
corporate debtor to pay it. The appellant cannot stand at a better
footing than the corporate debtor that he represents and cannot take
possession of assets which the corporate debtor itself could not have
obtained. Customs duty therefore needs to be paid for the release of
the warehoused goods.
16. NCLAT held that the Customs Act is a complete code which
provides that warehoused goods cannot be released until the import
duties are paid. Mere filing of claims under "Form C" by the respondent
before the appellant cannot be taken to signify the relinquishment of
the right of the respondent over the warehoused goods.
17. On the issue of priority of IBC over the Customs Act, NCLAT held
that the issue did not arise in the present case, as the goods in
question were imported prior in time to the initiation of the CIRP. While
the containers were imported between 2012 to 2015, the CIRP was
initiated only in 2017 and the corporate debtor went into liquidation in
2019. By not paying the import duties, the corporate debtor had lost
the right to the warehoused goods prior to the initiation of the CIRP.
NCLAT held that these warehoused goods stand on a different footing
and cannot be considered assets of the corporate debtor which were
subject to the IBC provisions.
18. Aggrieved by the above judgment passed by NCLAT, the
appellant has filed the present civil appeal against the impugned
judgment
19. Mr Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf
of the appellant, submitted as follows:
19.1. The corporate debtor is the owner of the goods. The learned
Senior Counsel referred to Section 48 of the Customs Act and stated
that it only applies to goods which are neither cleared nor warehoused
by the importer. This section, however, is not applicable to the present
case as the notice issued and Form C filed by the respondent are in
relation to warehoused goods. Thus, the notice issued by the
respondent under Section 72 of the Customs Act and the consequent
Form C does not in any manner attract Section 48 of the Customs Act.
19.2. The corporate debtor has not lost ownership of the goods as
alleged by the respondent. The respondent, by issuing notice under
Section 72 of the Customs Act and filing its claim with the liquidator,
has admitted that the corporate debtor is the owner. Neither Section 72
nor Section 48 of the Customs Act signifies any transfer to the
respondent. The corporate debtor has also never relinquished title to
the goods and no communication regarding the same has been made to
the respondent.
19.3. By submitting claims under Section 38 of the IBC, the
respondent has elected to subject its dues to be governed by the IBC,
and more specifically, to the distribution matrix provided Section 53 of
the IBC. The claims made by the respondent before the appellant are
based solely on the corporate debtor's ownership of the goods. The
respondent cannot blow hot and cold at the same time by again
claiming before this Court that the corporate debtor has lost ownership
of the said goods.
19.4. The respondent could not have exercised its right under the
Customs Act, as the statutory charge of the respondent under Section
142-A of the Customs Act is expressly subordinate to the IBC.
19.5. The respondent's custody of the corporate debtor's goods is in
violation of Sections 14 and 33 of the IBC. Section 14(1)(a) of the IBC
expressly prohibits the institution or continuation of proceedings
against the corporate debtor during the moratorium period. Further,
Section 14(1)(c) states that foreclosure, recovery, or enforcement of
any security interest against the corporate debtor is prohibited.
20. Mr K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General of India
appearing for the respondent, submitted as under:
20.1. The goods left in the customs bonded warehouse are not the
assets of the corporate debtor. This is because these goods were never
claimed after being imported. As per the record, the goods were
imported between the years 2012 and 2015, and the corporate debtor
started the liquidation process in 2019. In this span of 4 years, the
corporate debtor never cleared bills of entry for part of the goods and
abandoned all the material lying in the customs bonded warehouse.
Despite receipt of various demand notices by the respondent, the
corporate debtor did not clear the goods and hence the same are liable
to be sold by the respondent under the Customs Act.
20.2. The liquidator can take into his possession only the assets of
the corporate debtor as under Section 35(1)(b) of the IBC. However, in
the present case, the warehoused goods cannot be termed as assets of
the corporate debtor, until and unless the same are legally cleared from
the warehouses upon payment of relevant dues and duties. The
corporate debtor herein has not even paid the bill of entry for part of
the goods.
20.3. Section 45 of the Customs Act lays down restrictions on
custody and removal of imported goods. It stipulates that all imported
goods unloaded in the customs area shall remain in the custody of such
person approved by the Commissioner till the time the same are
cleared for home consumption or
are warehoused or transhipped. Further, it provides that if such goods
are not cleared as per the criteria mentioned above, they can be sold
after permission from the proper officer. Section 71 of the Customs Act
further states that no goods shall be taken out of the warehouse except
as provided under by the Customs Act. Hence, the goods cannot be
removed without payment of import duties and charges.
20.4. The corporate debtor has abandoned the imported goods for
several years, refused to pay the import duties and other charges, and
has not taken any effort to take possession of the goods for several
years. Consequently, the corporate debtor has lost its right to the
warehoused goods, and hence under Section 72 of the Customs Act,
the government authorities are fully authorised to recover the dues. In
such a circumstance, where the corporate debtor's title to the goods
has been deemed to have been relinquished, the liquidator does not
have the authority to take possession of them.
20.5. Customs duty is an incidence or consequence of import. Even
before the CIRP was initiated, the corporate debtor could not have
secured the possession of the warehoused goods without paying the
due charges. Hence, the liquidator, who is representing the corporate
debtor, cannot stand on a better footing than the corporate debtor
itself.
20.6. It is further submitted that merely because the respondent
had filed its claim before the liquidator, it cannot be said that the
respondent had relinquished its rights over the warehoused goods. The
claim was filed by the respondent only to realise its dues, and hence
cannot be viewed as a relinquishment or abandonment of its rights.
21. In light of the arguments advanced and the documents
submitted before this Court, we are called upon to answer two
important questions which arise for our consideration:
21.1. (a) Whether the provisions of the IBC would prevail over the
Customs Act, and if so, to what extent?
21.2. (b) Whether the respondent could claim title over the goods
and issue notice to sell the goods in terms of the Customs Act when the
liquidation process has been initiated?
Analysis
22. It must be noted that this question assumes significance as the
warehoused goods belonging to the corporate debtor which is under
liquidation, are sought to be sold by the Customs Authorities in lieu of
customs dues. The respondent has relied on certain provisions of the
Customs Act to assume such power. This has been vehemently opposed
by the appellant herein, who has argued that once the insolvency
process has been initiated against the corporate debtor, the IBC
becomes squarely applicable and overrides any other enactment giving
priority to the charges on the property.
23. NCLAT has not directly answered this question of law. Rather, it
has entered into the facts of the case to distinguish the applicability of
the IBC as compared to the Customs Act. NCLAT held that the corporate
debtor had abandoned the goods much before the insolvency process
was initiated, and thereby the title of the goods had passed to the
Customs Authority.
NCLAT paras 41, 45, 48 & 49)
"41. Thus, it is clear that NCLT and NCLAT cannot usurp the
legitimate jurisdiction of other courts, tribunals and fora when the
dispute does not arise solely from or relating to the insolvency of the
corporate debtor. In the instant case, the corporate debtor had
abandoned the imported goods in the customs warehouses for
several years and failed to pay the import duty and other charges
and had not taken any steps to take possession of those goods for
several years. Therefore, the importer had lost his right to the
imported goods. Consequently, the Customs Authorities are fully
empowered under Section 72 of the Act to sell those goods to
recover the government dues. The liquidator has no right to take into
possession over those goods for which the corporate debtor's title is
deemed relinquished by implication of law. Even before initiating the
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, the corporate debtor
company could not have secured the possession of the imported
goods except by paying the customs duty. The Resolution
Professional/Liquidator, who virtually represents the Company,
cannot stand on a better footing than the corporate debtor itself.
*
*
*
45. In the instant case, the appellant has filed its claim before the
liquidator in response to the notice issued by the liquidator. Given
the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
abovementioned case*, it is clear that by submission of claim in
response to the notice issued by the liquidator, it cannot be
presumed that the appellant had relinquished its right over the
property and submitted to the jurisdiction of the liquidator. The
claim is filed in an effort to realise its dues. Still, it will not amount
to relinquishment of its right over the warehoused goods under its
custody for which the appellant has every right to sell those goods
for the realisation of the government dues.
*
*
*
48. We are not convinced with the argument advanced by the
respondent because the goods imported by the corporate debtor
were imported much before the initiation of the Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process, and the corporate debtor never claimed them
after import. Undisputedly the containers were imported between
2012 to 2015. The CIRP was initiated against the corporate debtor in
2017, and the liquidation order was passed on 25-4-2019³.
49. Therefore, the corporate debtor's assets because the corporate
debtor never made any effort for clearing the goods by paying
customs duty and other applicable charges before the initiation of
liquidation proceeding after importing them. Undisputedly the
containers were imported between 2012 to 2015. The CIRP was
initiated against the corporate debtor in 2017, and the liquidation
order was passed in 25-4-2019³. Therefore the assets lying in the
customs bonded warehouses cannot be considered assets of the
corporate debtor. The liquidator intends to possess the uncleared
goods from the customs warehouses without upfront payment of
customs duty, which is against the statutory provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962. Therefore, the imported goods subject to levy of
customs stand on a different footing than the goods/assets, not in
the corporate debtor's possession. Therefore, the assets lying in the
customs bonded warehouses cannot be considered assets of the
corporate debtor."
25. In the above context, this Court is required to analyse whether
NCLAT's treatment of the facts is correct or if a fresh look is required.
Before we enter into a detailed discussion and analysis of the case at
hand, it would be beneficial to analyse certain provisions of the
Customs Act which may be relevant to this case.
26. When goods are imported/exported from India, such goods may
be subjected to customs duty as indicated under Section 12 of the
Customs Act. There are many objectives behind such exaction - some
of it is to maintain trade balance, control imports and exports,
protection of domestic industry, prevention of smuggling, conservation
and augmentation of foreign exchange, and so on.
27. When goods are imported, it can be either for home
consumption or for transshipment. An importer can either choose to
pay the duty and utilise the goods immediately for domestic usage or
execute a bond so as to warehouse the said goods. Accordingly, an
importer has to submit a bill of entry either for home consumption or
for warehousing in terms of Section 46 of the Customs Act, in the
prescribed format.
28. When a person chooses to warehouse the goods, he ought to
execute a bond in terms of Section 59 of the Customs Act. Such
warehoused goods can subsequently be either cleared for home
consumption or can be exported.
29. Section 61 of the Customs Act mandates the time period allowed
for warehousing. For example, in the case of capital goods intended for
a 100% export-oriented undertaking, warehousing is permitted till such
goods are cleared from the warehouse. In case of goods not intended
for such export-oriented purpose, a time period of one year is
prescribed in terms of Section 61(1)(c) of the Customs Act. The
provision also provides for an extension which could be granted by the
appropriate authority, for a period of not more than one year. Under
Section (2) of the Customs Act, provision is made to charge interest
on those goods which are warehoused beyond the period granted.
30. Section 71 of the Customs Act provides that no warehoused
goods shall be taken out of the warehouse, except on clearance for
home consumption or export or for removal to another warehouse, or as
provided by the Act.
31. Section 72 of the Customs Act, 1962 deals with the issue of
when the goods can be said to have been improperly removed from the
warehouse. As this provision is of some relevance to the present case, it
is extracted below:
"72. Goods improperly removed from warehouse, etc.-(1)
In any of the following cases, that is to say,
(a) where any warehoused goods are removed from a warehouse
in contravention of Section 71;
(b) where any warehoused goods have not been removed from a
warehouse at the expiration of the period during which such goods
are permitted under Section 61 to remain in a warehouse;
*
*
*
(d) where any goods in respect of which a bond has been
executed under Section 59 and which have not been cleared for
home consumption or export or are not duly accounted for to the
satisfaction of the proper officer,
the proper officer may demand, and the owner of such goods shall forthwith pay,
the full amount of duty chargeable on account of such goods together with interest,
fine and penalties payable in respect of such goods.
(2) If any owner fails to pay any amount demanded under sub-
section (1), the proper officer may, without prejudice to any other
remedy, cause to be detained and sold, after notice to the owner
(any transfer of the goods notwithstanding) such sufficient portion of
his goods, if any, in the warehouse, as the said officer may deem
fit."
From the aforesaid, it can be noted that when goods are warehoused
and the importer has not taken sufficient steps to take the goods out
for domestic consumption or for transshipment, within the required
time period, then the proper officer has to take steps in terms of
Section 72(2) of the Customs Act. The aforesaid provision mandates
that it is only after the determination of dues by the proper officer that
goods may be sold, in the event that the demanded amount relating to
customs duty, interest, fines, and other penalties have not been paid.
In that case alone, after such determination, a sufficient portion of
goods may be sold.
32. In order to complete the discussion on the Customs Act, it may
be necessary to take note of Section 142-A extracted below:
"142-A. Liability under Act to be first charge.-
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any Central
Act or State Act, any amount of duty, penalty, interest or any other
sum payable by an assessee or any other person under this Act,
shall, save as otherwise provided in Section 529-A of the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and the
Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993), and the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and the Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002) and the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) be the first charge on the
property of the assessee or the person, as the case may be."
33. In the present case, the corporate debtor as part of its business
used to regularly import and warehoused goods in the customs bonded
warehouses from at least 2011. As has already been mentioned above,
the CIRP process commenced against the corporate debtor on 1-8-2017
by the order2 of NCLT. It appears from the record that no notices were
issued by the respondent against the corporate debtor with respect to
the warehoused goods prior to initiation of the CIRP. In fact, all the
duty demand notices issued by the respondent were from March 2019
onwards. It is in this context that it is necessary for us to ascertain
whether the IBC overrides the Customs Act or vice versa.
34. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code came into force in India
from 28-5-2016 to combine provisions relating to insolvency found
across different statutes into a single comprehensive instrument. Under
the earlier legal regime, different statutes were resulting in multiple
parallel proceedings, which inevitably resulted in uncertainty for the
creditors over their recovery. One of the objectives behind the
enactment of the IBC was to end the conflict between different
statutes.
35. The purpose behind Insolvency law has been captured in
Halsbury's Laws of England (Para 8, Vol. III, 4th Edn.) in the following
manner:
"A man has a perfect right, so long as he is solvent, to continue
a
losing business; but the moment he becomes insolvent he does so at
the risk of his creditors. As soon as he finds that he cannot pay loop
in the pound, although he may nevertheless think that if he goes on
he may be able to retrieve his position, he ought to call together his
creditors, who will have to bear the loss in case his calculations are
wrong, and leave them to determine whether the business shall be
continued or not. Moreover, it is not enough to consult only the
largest creditors. There is no insolvency within the meaning of this
offence if a careful, prudent, and unhurried realisation of the assets
would produce enough to pay loop in the pound on the amount of
liabilities."
36. It may be relevant to capture a brief outlook as to various stages
involved in the corporate insolvency process in India:
36.1. When a financial default occurs, either the borrower (corporate
debtor under Section 10 read with Section 11 of the IBC) or the lender
(creditors - financial creditor under Section 7 or operational creditor
under Section 9 of the IBC) can approach NCLT for initiating the
resolution process. Operational creditors need to give a notice of 10
days to the corporate debtor before approaching NCLT. If the corporate
debtor fails to repay dues to the operational creditor, or fails to show
any existing dispute or arbitration, then the operational creditor can
approach NCLT.
36.2. Upon admission of an application by NCLT, the claims of the
creditor will be frozen for 180 days, during which time, NCLT will hear
proposals for revival of the corporate debtor and decide on future
course of action. During this period, a moratorium is imposed to ensure
no coercive proceedings are launched or continued against the
corporate debtor in any other forum or under any other law, until
approval of the resolution plan or initiation of the liquidation process.
36.3. NCLT first appoints an interim resolution professional. The
interim resolution professional is to hold office until a resolution
professional is appointed. He further takes control of the corporate
debtor's operations and collects its financial information from
information utilities. NCLT must also ensure public announcement of
the initiation of corporate insolvency process and call for submission of
claims.
36.4. The corporate insolvency process must normally be completed
within 180 days of admission of the application by NCLT. The
Committee of Creditors has to then take decisions regarding insolvency
resolution as provided by law.
37. In this context, we may note that when the insolvency process
commences, the adjudicating authority is mandated to declare a
moratorium on continuation or initiation of any coercive legal action
against the corporate debtor. Section 14 of the IBC reads as under:
"14. Moratorium.-(1) Subject to provisions of sub-sections (2)
and (3), on the insolvency commencement date, the adjudicating
authority shall by order declare moratorium for prohibiting all of the
following, namely-
(a) the institution of suits or continuation of pending suits or
proceedings against the corporate debtor including execution of any
judgment, decree or order in any court of law, tribunal, arbitration
panel or other authority;
(b) transferring, encumbering, alienating or disposing of by the
corporate debtor any of its assets or any legal right or beneficial
interest therein;
(c) any action to foreclose, recover or enforce any security interest
created by the corporate debtor in respect of its property including
any action under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002);
(d) the recovery of any property by an owner or lessor where such
property is occupied by or in the possession of the corporate debtor.
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby
clarified that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, a licence, permit, registration, quota,
concession, clearances or a similar grant or right given by the
Central Government, State Government, local authority, sectoral
regulator or any other authority constituted under any other law for
the time being in force, shall not be suspended or terminated on the
grounds of insolvency, subject to the condition that there is no
default in payment of current dues arising for the use or continuation
of the licence, permit, registration, quota, concession, clearances or
a similar grant or right during the moratorium period.
(2) The supply of essential goods or services to the corporate
debtor as may be specified shall not be terminated or suspended or
interrupted during moratorium period.
(2-A) Where the interim resolution professional or resolution
professional, as the case may be, considers the supply of goods or
services critical to protect and preserve the value of the corporate
debtor and manage the operations of such corporate debtor as a
going concern, then the supply of such goods or services shall not be
terminated, suspended or interrupted during the period of
moratorium, except where such corporate debtor has not paid dues
arising from such supply during the moratorium period or in such
circumstances as may be specified.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to-
(a) such transactions, agreements or other arrangements as may
be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any
financial sector regulator or any other authority;
(b) a surety in a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor.
(4) The order of moratorium shall have effect from the date of
such order till the completion of the corporate insolvency resolution
process:
Provided that where at any time during the corporate insolvency
resolution process period, if the adjudicating authority approves the
resolution plan under sub-section (1) of Section 31 or passes an
order for liquidation of corporate debtor under Section 33, the
moratorium shall cease to have effect from the date of such approval
or liquidation order, as the case may be."
38. Section 14 of the IBC prescribes a moratorium on the initiation
of CIRP proceedings and its effects. One of the purposes of the
moratorium is to keep the assets of the corporate debtor together
during the insolvency resolution process and to facilitate orderly
completion of the processes envisaged under the statute. Such
measures ensure the curtailing of parallel proceedings and reduce the
possibility of conflicting outcomes in the process. In this context, it is
relevant to quote the February 2020 Report of the Insolvency Law
Committee, which notes as under:
"8.2. The moratorium under Section 14 is intended to keep 'the
corporate debtor's assets together during the insolvency resolution
process and facilitating orderly completion of the processes
envisaged during the insolvency resolution process and ensuring that
the company may continue as a going concern while the creditors
take a view on resolution of default'. Keeping the corporate debtor
running as a going concern during the CIRP helps in achieving
resolution as a going concern as well, which is likely to maximise
value for all stakeholders. In other jurisdictions too, a moratorium
may be put in place on the advent of formal insolvency proceedings,
including liquidation and reorganisation proceedings. UNCITRAL Guide
notes that a moratorium is critical during reorganisation proceedings
since it 'facilitates the continued operation of the business and
allows the debtor a breathing space to organise its affairs, time for
preparation and approval of a reorganisation plan and for other steps
such as shedding unprofitable activities and onerous contracts,
where appropriate'."
From the above, it can be seen that one of the motivations of imposing
a moratorium is for Sections 14(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the IBC to form a
shield that protects pecuniary attacks against the corporate debtor. This
is done in order to provide the corporate debtor with breathing space,
to allow it to continue as a going concern and rehabilitate itself. Any
contrary interpretation would crack this shield and would have adverse
consequences on the objective sought to be achieved.
39. Even if a company goes into liquidation, a moratorium continues
in terms of Section 33(5) of the IBC which reads as under:
"33. (5) - Subject to Section 52, when a liquidation order has
been passed, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted by
or against the corporate debtor:
Provided that a suit or other legal proceeding may be instituted by
the liquidator, on behalf of the corporate debtor, with the prior
approval of the adjudicating authority."
40. We may note that the IBC, being the more recent statute,
clearly overrides the Customs Act. This is clearly made out by a reading
of Section 142-A of the Customs Act. The aforesaid provision notes that
the Customs Authorities would have first charge on the assets of an
assessee under the Customs Act, except with respect to cases under
Section 529-A of the Companies Act, 1956; Recovery of Debts and
Bankruptcy Act, 1993; Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 and the IBC,
2016. Accordingly, such an exception created under the Customs Act is
duly acknowledged under Section 238 of the IBC as well.
41. Additionally, we may note that Section 238 of the IBC clearly
overrides any provision of law which is inconsistent with the IBC.
Section 238 of the IBC provides as under:
"238. Provisions of this Code to override other laws.-The
provisions of this Code shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law."
42. NCLAT, while playing down the effect of Section 142-A of the
Customs Act and Section 238 of the IBC, has held that the Customs Act
is a complete code in itself and no person can seek removal of goods
from the warehouse without paying customs duty. NCLAT relies on the
judgment in Collector of Customs V. Dytron (India) Ltd. 5 by the High
Court of Calcutta, which laid down that customs duty carry first charge
even during the insolvency process under Sections 529 and 530 of the
Companies Act, 1956. However, reliance on the said precedent is not
appropriate as NCLAT has failed to notice that such interpretation has
been legislatively overruled by the inclusion of Section 142-A under the
Customs Act, through Section 51 of the Finance Act of 2011.
43. From the above, it is to be noted that the Customs Act and the
IBC act in their own spheres. In case of any conflict, the IBC overrides
the Customs Act. In present context, this Court has to ascertain as to
whether there is a conflict in the operation of two different statutes in
the given circumstances. As the first effort, this Court is mandated to
harmoniously read the two legislations, unless this Court finds a clear
conflict in its operation.
44. At the cost of repetition, we may note that the demand notices
issued by the respondent are plainly in the teeth of Section 14 of the
IBC as they were issued after the initiation of the CIRP proceedings.
Moratorium under Section 14 of the IBC was imposed when insolvency
proceedings were initiated on 1-8-2017-Superscript(2), The first notice sent by the
respondent authority was on 29-3-2019. Further, when insolvency
resolution failed and the liquidation process began, NCLT passed an
order on 25-4-2019 imposing a moratorium under Section 33(5) of the
IBC. It is only after this order that the respondent issued a notice under
Section 72 of the Customs Act against the corporate debtor. The
various demand notices have therefore clearly been issued by the
respondent after the initiation of the insolvency proceedings, with some
notices issued even after the liquidation moratorium was imposed.
45. We are of the clear opinion that the demand notices to seek
enforcement of customs dues during the moratorium period would
clearly violate the provisions of Sections 14 or 33(5) of the IBC, as the
case may be. This is because the demand notices are an initiation of
legal proceedings against the corporate debtor. However, the above
analysis would not be complete unless this Court examines the extent
of powers which the respondent authority can exercise during the
moratorium period under the IBC.
46. In the above context, the judgment of this Court in S.V.
Kandoakar V. V.M. Deshpande6, is extremely relevant. In that case, this
Court, while expounding the interplay of Section 446 of the Companies
Act, 1956 (bankruptcy provision) with the Income Tax Act, 1961, held
"17.
Looking at the legislative history and the scheme of the
Indian Companies Act, particularly the language of Section 446, read
as a whole, it appears to us that the expression "other legal
proceeding" in sub-section (1) and the expression "legal proceeding"
in sub-section (2) convey the same sense and the proceedings in
both the sub-sections must be such as can appropriately be dealt
with by the winding-up court. The Income Tax Act is, in our opinion,
a complete code and it is particularly so with respect to the
assessment and reassessment of income tax with which alone we are
concerned in the present case. The fact that after the amount of tax
payable by an assessee has been determined or quantified its
realisation from a company in liquidation is governed by the Act
because the income
tax payable also being a debt has to rank pari passu with other debts
due from the company does not mean that the assessment proceedings
for computing the amount of tax must be held to be such other legal
proceedings as can only be started or continued with the leave of the
liquidation court under Section 446 of the Act. The liquidation court, in
our opinion, cannot perform the functions of Income Tax Officers while
assessing the amount of tax payable by the assessees even if the
assessee be the company which is being wound up by the Court. The
orders made by the Income Tax Officer in the course of assessment or
reassessment proceedings are subject to appeal to the higher hierarchy
under the Income Tax Act. There are also provisions for reference to the
High Court and for appeals from the decisions of the High Court to the
Supreme Court and then there are provisions for revision by the
Commissioner of Income Tax. It would lead to anomalous consequences
if the winding-up court were to be held empowered to transfer the
assessment proceedings to itself and assess the company to income
tax. The argument on behalf of the appellant by Shri Desai is that the
winding-up court is empowered in its discretion to decline to transfer
the assessment proceedings in a given case but the power on the plain
language of Section 446 of the Act must be held to vest in that court to
be exercised only if considered expedient. We are not impressed by this
argument. The language of Section 446 must be so construed as to
eliminate such startling consequences as investing the winding-up
court with the powers of an Income Tax Officer conferred on him by the
Income Tax Act, because in our view the legislature could not have
intended such a result.
18. The argument that the proceedings for assessment
or
reassessment of a company which is being wound up can only be
started or continued with the leave of the liquidation court is also, on
the scheme both of the Act and of the Income Tax Act,
unacceptable. We have not been shown any principle on which the
liquidation court should be vested with the power to stop
assessment proceedings for determining the amount of tax payable
by the company which is being wound up. The liquidation court
The surest way legal research!
would have full power to scrutinise the claim of the revenue after
income tax has been determined and its payment demanded from
the liquidator. It would be open to the liquidation court then to
decide how far under the law the amount of income tax determined
by the Department should be accepted as a lawful liability on the
funds of the company in liquidation. At that stage the winding-up
court can fully safeguard the interests of the company and its
creditors under the Act. Incidentally, it may be pointed out that at
the Bar no English decision was brought to our notice under which
the assessment proceedings were held to be controlled by the
winding-up court.
On the view that we have taken, the decisions in Seth Spinning Mills
and Mysore Spun Silk Mills do not seem to lay down the correct rule of
law that the Income Tax Officers must obtain leave of the winding-up
court for commencing or continuing assessment or reassessment
proceedings."
47. Therefore, this Court in V.M. Deshpande case 6 held that the
authorities can only take steps to determine the tax, interest, fines or
any penalty which is due. However, the authority cannot enforce a
claim for recovery or levy of interest on the tax due during the period of
moratorium. We are of the opinion that the above ratio squarely applies
to the interplay between the IBC and the Customs Act in this context.
48. From the above discussion, we hold that the respondent could
only initiate assessment or reassessment of the duties and other levies.
They cannot transgress such boundary and proceed to initiate recovery
in violation of Sections 14 or 33(5) of the IBC. The interim resolution
professional, resolution professional or the liquidator, as the case may
be, has an obligation to ensure that assessment is legal and he has
been provided with sufficient power to question any assessment, if he
finds the same to be excessive.
49. There is another aspect of this case that needs to be highlighted
to portray the inconsistency of the Customs Act vis-à-vis the IBC
during the moratorium period. In the present case, the demand notice
dated 11-7-2019 was issued by the respondent under Section 72 of the
Customs Act, in clear breach of the moratorium imposed under Section
33(5) of the IBC. Issuing a notice under Section 72 of the Customs Act
for non-payment of customs duty falls squarely within the ambit of
initiating legal proceedings against a corporate debtor. Even under the
liquidation process, the liquidator is given the responsibility to secure
assets and goods of the corporate debtor under Section 35(1)(b) of the
IBC.
50. As laid down earlier, the Customs Act and IBC can be read in a
harmonious manner wherein the authorities under the Customs Act
have a limited jurisdiction to determine the quantum of operational
debt - in this case, the customs duty - in order to stake claim in
terms of Section 53 of the IBC before the liquidator. However, the
respondent does not have the power to execute its claim beyond the
ambit of Section 53 of the IBC. Such harmonious construction would be
in line with the ruling in Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. V. Amit Gupta9,
wherein a balance was struck by this Court between the jurisdiction of
NCLT under the IBC and the potential encroachment on the legitimate
jurisdiction of other authorities.
51. However, it appears to us that in the impugned order1, NCLAT
has misinterpreted the aforesaid judgment of this Court in Gujarat Urja
OnLine NCLAT para 41)
"41. Thus, it is clear that NCLT and NCLAT cannot usurp the
legitimate jurisdiction of other courts, tribunals and fora when the
dispute does not arise solely from or relating to the insolvency of the
corporate debtor. In the instant case, the corporate debtor had
abandoned the imported goods in the customs warehouses for
several years and failed to pay the import duty and other charges
and had not taken any steps to take possession of those goods for
several years. Therefore, the importer had lost his right to the
imported goods. Consequently, the Customs Authorities are fully
empowered under Section 72 of the Act to sell those goods to
recover the government dues. The liquidator has no right to take into
possession over those goods for which the corporate debtor's title is
deemed relinquished by implication of law. Even before initiating the
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, the corporate debtor
company could not have secured the possession of the imported
goods except by paying the customs duty. Resolution
Professional/liquidator, who virtually represents the company, cannot
stand on a better footing than the corporate debtor itself."
52. Such interpretation clearly ignores the fact that there was no
"abandonment of goods" which would authorise the Customs
Authorities to initiate the adjudicatory process to transfer title to
themselves. Before any goods can be declared to have been
"abandoned", the same must be adjudged by some authority after due
notice. The position cannot be assumed or deemed. In the case at
hand, no such adjudication or notice has been placed on record to
suggest that such abandonment of the warehoused goods had taken
place prior to the imposition of the moratorium.
53. NCLAT, by deciding the question of passing of title from the
corporate debtor to the respondent authority, has clearly ignored the
mandate of Section 72(2) of the Customs Act relating to sale. This
interpretation of NCLAT clearly ignores the effects of the moratorium
under Sections 14 and 33(5) of the IBC. The fact is that the duty
demand notice and notice under Section 72(2) of the Customs Act,
were issued during the moratorium period, which has been completely
ignored by NCLAT and has resulted in rendering the moratorium otiose.
54. The interpretation provided by NCLAT, regarding the deemed
transfer of title of the goods from the assessee to the Customs
Authority under Section 72 of the Customs Act, would fly in the face of
Section 14 of the IBC, read with Sections 25 and 33(5). Moreover, such
deemed transfer cannot be countenanced in law as the same would be
in breach of Article 300-A of the Constitution, as properties are deemed
to be transferred to the Customs Authority without there being
adequate hearing or any adjudication of any form. Such an
interpretation cannot be accepted by this Court.
55. Interestingly, in the present case, on 20-5-2019, 27-5-2019, 29
-5-2019 and 18-9-2019 the Customs Authorities filed Form C under
Regulation 17 of the IBBI Liquidation Process Regulations, 2016 before
the appellant/liquidator in order to stake claims for distribution of
proceeds of sale in consonance with Section 53 of the IBC. The
respondent authority, does a U-turn on filing such claims and instead,
unilaterally decides to initiate recovery proceedings under Section 72
(2) of the Customs Act. Further, the Customs Authority bypasses even
the notice and adjudicatory requirements contemplated under Section
72(2) of the Customs Act and takes the position that there is a deemed
transfer of title with respect to the assets as customs duty and other
levies were not duly paid. Such a change in stance is clearly an
afterthought, without there being any basis in law to bypass the
specialised procedure laid down under the IBC.
56. For the sake of clarity following questions, may be answered as
under:
(a) Whether the provisions of the IBC would prevail over the
Customs Act, and if so, to what extent?
56.1. The IBC would prevail over the Customs Act, to the extent that
once moratorium is imposed in terms of Sections 14 or 33(5) of the IBC
as the case may be, the respondent authority only has a limited
jurisdiction to assess/determine the quantum of customs duty and
other levies. The respondent authority does not have the power to
initiate recovery of dues by means of sale/confiscation, as provided
under the Customs Act.
(b) Whether the respondent could claim title over the goods and
issue notice to sell the goods in terms of the Customs Act when
the liquidation process has been initiated?
56.2. Answered in negative.
57. On the basis of the above discussions, following are our
conclusions:
57.1. Once moratorium is imposed in terms of Sections 14 or 33(5)
of the IBC as the case may be, the respondent authority only has a
limited jurisdiction to assess/determine the quantum of customs duty
and other levies. The respondent authority does not have the power to
initiate recovery of dues by means of sale/confiscation, as provided
under the Customs Act.
57.2. After such assessment, the respondent authority has to submit
its claims (concerning customs dues/operational debt) in terms of the
procedure laid down, in strict compliance of the time periods prescribed
under the IBC, before the adjudicating authority.
57.3. In any case, the IRP/RP/liquidator can immediately secure
goods from the respondent authority to be dealt with appropriately, in
terms of the IBC.
58. Resultantly, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned
order and judgment of NCLAT. There shall be no orders as to costs.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs V.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021, dt. 22-11-2021] [Reversed]
1
2244
2
3
4
2191
*
452.
5
(Cal)
6
7
8
295
9