(2022) 6 Supreme Court Cases 762 : (2022) 3 Supreme Court
Cases (Cri) 733 : (2022) 3 Supreme Court Cases (Civ) 563 : 2022
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, SURYA KANT AND VIKRAM NATH, JJ.)
LOOP TELECOM AND TRADING LIMITED
Appellant;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER
Respondents.
Civil Appeals Nos. 1447-67 of 2016 with No. 893 of 2019
decided on March 3, 2022
A. Contract and Specific Relief - Contract Act, 1872 - Ss. 65 and 23 -
Claim of restitution under S. 65, when the contract is found to be void on
ground of illegality - Role of party claiming restitution in relation to such
illegality - Relevance of - Principle of in pari delicto for denial of restitution
- Applicability of, where the claimant is more responsible for the illegality or
the parties are considered to be equally responsible
- In adjudicating a claim of restitution under S. 65 of the Contract Act,
held, the court must determine the illegality which caused the contract to
become void, and, the role the party claiming restitution has played in it - If
the party claiming restitution was equally or more responsible for the
illegality (in comparison to the defendant), there shall be no cause for
restitution
- Refund of entry fee paid by party concerned (appellant herein) for
participating in process for obtaining telecom service licence (2G licence) -
Impermissible, on quashment of licence/process by Supreme Court, when
party in pari delicto/responsible for illegality - Substitution of an open and
transparent bidding process by a process designed to confer unlawful
benefits on a group of selected bidders - Relevance and effect of
- In the present case, held, the appellant has been held to be in pari
no manner of doubt that the appellant was among the group of licensees
who were found to be complicit in obtaining benefits under the unlawfully
designed "first-come-first-serve" policy of the Union Government at the
cost of the public exchequer - Thus, the appellant, held, not entitled to
claim refund of its entry fee
- Doctrines and Maxims - Pari Delicto - Restitution - Defective
Transactions - Failed or Illegal contract - Contract and Specific Relief -
Remedies/Relief - Recovery of Benefit conferred/Los incurred under void
contract - Telecommunications Laws - Telecom Agreement/Telecom
Licence/Spectrum Allocation/Scams/Auction/Licence Fees
B. Contract and Specific Relief - Contract Act, 1872 - Ss. 65 and 23 -
Claim of restitution under S. 65, when the contract is found to be void on
ground of illegality - Role of party claiming restitution in relation to such
illegality - Relevance of - Acquittal/exoneration of the party concerned in
criminal proceedings relating to the illegality in question - Irrelevance of, in
determining restitution, in present case, refund of entry fee paid by party
concerned for participating in process for obtaining telecom service licence
(2G licence)
- Special Judge, CBI acquitted the promoters of the appellant since the
prosecution was unable to prove that : (i) officers of DoT considered the
representation of the appellant to be false; (ii) the appellant was engaging
in a sham transaction; or that (iii) the appellant was actually controlled by E,
with whom the appellant had made the application for telecom licence
- Held, the acquittal of the promoters of the appellant of these criminal
charges does not efface or obliterate the findings which are contained in the
be in pari delicto - Hence, as a beneficiary and confederate of fraud, the
appellant cannot be lent the assistance of Court for obtaining the refund of
the entry fee
- Restitution - Defective Transactions - Failed or Illegal contract -
Contract and Specific Relief - Remedies/Relief - Recovery of Benefit
conferred/Loss incurred under void contract - Telecommunications Laws
-
Telecom
Agreement/Telecom
Licence/Spectrum
Allocation/Scams/Auction/Licence Fees
C. Telecommunications Laws - Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
Act, 1997 - S. 14 - Jurisdiction of TDSAT - Quashment of telecom licence
by Court - Held, would not affect jurisdiction vested in TDSAT - Scope of
jurisdiction of TDSAT - Extension of, to disputes following the issue of a
letter of intent, pre-grant of actual licence as also disputes arising out of a
licence granted between a quondam licensee and the licensor - Claim of
refund/restitution - Consideration of, as being based under an agreement
held to be void as opposed to emanating from the relationship as licensor
and licensee
dispute over the terms of the licence with the Union of India (licensor)
would fall within the jurisdiction of TDSAT under S. 14(a)(i) - Further, the
respondent's argument that the appellant is no longer a "licensor" after the
quashing of the licences would be a restrictive reading of the jurisdiction of
TDSAT
- In the present case, however held, that since the policy on the
allocation of spectrum and the licences were quashed on the grounds of
mala fides and arbitrariness in the Union Government's policy, the
subsequent enquiry into viability of the refund of the entry fee would have
to be agitated before the same Court
- Restitution - Defective Transactions - Failed or Illegal contract -
Claim of restitution when the contract is found to be void on ground of
illegality - Appropriate forum for determining restitution claim - Contract
and Specific Relief - Remedies/Relief - Recovery of Benefit
conferred/Loss incurred under void contract - Contract Act, 1872 - Ss. 65
and 23 - Constitution of India, Art. 14
D. Contract and Specific Relief - Contract Act, 1872 - S. 65 - Claim for
restitution (refund of entry fee in process for obtaining telecom licence)
when contract is found to be void - Necessity of raising such claim at the
earliest opportunity, at stage where voidness of the contract is being
adjudicated, or to seek leave of court adjudicating the voidness, to raise
claim for restitution later
- Appellant made no effort to urge during the course of the submissions
refund of entry fee in the event that the Court were to quash the process
and the award of telecom licences - Further, the appellant did not seek the
permission of Supreme Court at that stage to reserve their liberties of
agitating a claim for refund of entry fee in separate proceedings - Also,
besides having such a course of action open to them before the judgment
was delivered, the appellants had their remedies open in law even after the
decision by seeking liberty of adopting independent proceedings for
agitating the refund of the entry fee - Not having done this at any stage in,
or in connection with, the proceedings relating to the decision in CPIL case,
the appellant cannot be permitted to do so subsequently - Constitution of
India, Arts. 32 and 226
(Paras 43 to 51)
E. Constitution of India - Art. 14 - Belated challenge to policy decision
with hindsight - Not maintainable - Greater free play in the joints,
reiterated, must be accorded to decisions of economic policy where the
legislature or the executive is called upon to make complex choices which
cannot always conform to a straitjacket or doctrinaire solution
(Paras 75 to 79)
F. Contract and Specific Relief - Contract Act, 1872 - S. 56
-
Applicability of S. 56, reiterated, is not limited to cases of physical
impossibility, but includes cases of legal impossibility
(Para 57)
The appellant applied for the grant of Unified Access Service Licences ("UASL")
for twenty-one service areas on 3-9-2007. A letter of intent was issued. The
appellant paid the circle-wise entry fee of Rs 1.1 crores and furnished a
performance bank guarantee and financial bank guarantee for the twenty-one
areas. The appellant entered into UASL agreements on 3-3-2008 for the twenty-
one service areas with the respondent, which came into effect from 25-1-2008.
declared that the policy of the Union Government for allocation of 2G spectrum on
a "first-come-first-serve" basis was illegal. As a consequence, the UASLs which
were granted by the Union Government were quashed. On 25-5-2012, the
appellant instituted a petition ("first telecom petition") before TDSAT seeking, among
other things, a refund of the entry fee of Rs 1454.94 crores, inclusive of interest.
By its judgment dated 16-9-2015, TDSAT dismissed the first telecom petition
holding, inter alia, that:
(1) The quashing of the appellant's licences by the Supreme Court in its
agreements becoming void within the meaning of Section 65 of the Contract
Act, 1872 ("the 1872 Act"). The Supreme Court quashed the UASLs since it
found the Union Government's policy of "first-come-first-serve" to be illegal and
arbitrary. Hence, the appellant cannot claim restitution under Section 65 of the
1872 Act.
(2) The quashing of the appellant's licences by the Supreme Court in its
judgment in CPIL case cannot be brought under the Contract Act, 1872, since
the UASL agreements had not become void under Sections 23 and 56 of the
1872 Act.
(3) Even assuming that the appellant's UASL agreements became void under
the Contract Act, 1872, its claim for restitution under Section 65 would be
governed by the principle of in pari delicto potion est conditio defendentis (in
equal fault, better is the condition of the possessor). A refund of the entry fee
could not be made until the possibility of the appellant being in pari delicto was
completely effaced.
Aggrieved by the judgment of TDSAT dated 16-9-2015, the appellant moved the
Supreme Court in Civil Appeals Nos. 1447-67 of 2016. On 13-5-2016, the
appellant sought liberty of the Supreme Court to withdraw the civil appeals, and to
approach the Supreme Court once again if it became so necessary. Leave was
accordingly granted by the Supreme Court.
The appellant then instituted another petition before TDSAT (second telecom
petition) raising the issue of a refund of the entry fee, on the ground that it had
been exonerated by the Special Judge, CBI. By its judgment dated 11-12-2018,
TDSAT dismissed the second telecom petition noting that the appellant had made a
second attempt for claiming the same relief which had been sought earlier in the
first telecom petition. It further held that had TDSAT sought to provide the appellant
with the remedy of approaching it after the conclusion of the trial before the Special
Judge, CBI, it would have indicated it in its judgment. Finally, it was also noted that
the Supreme Court, through its order dated 13-5-2016, did not grant the appellant
the leave to approach TDSAT but only to approach the Supreme Court.
The issue involved in this matter was whether the appellant's claim for refund of
entry fee sustainable? i.e.
(1) Whether the appellant was in pari delicto with DoT and the then officials
of the Union Government and its claim for restitution not permissible?
(2) Whether acquittal of the promoters of the appellant by the Special Judge,
CBI would entitle the appellant to claim refund of the entry fee?
(3) Whether the appellant's second petition before TDSAT, raising the issue of
refund of the entry fee, maintainable?
Dismissing the appeals, the Supreme Court
Held :
The decision of the Supreme Court, which was rendered on 2-2-2012, arose
from petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution. The petitions questioned the
grant of UASLs to the private respondents in those proceedings (which included the
appellant), on the ground that the procedure which was adopted by DoT was
arbitrary, illegal and in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
(Para 17)
In the course of its decision, the Supreme Court held, in no uncertain terms, that
the then Minister for Communications and Information Technology had acted to
favour some companies at the cost of the public exchequer.
(Para 21)
impossible to accept the submission which has been urged on behalf of the
appellant that the fraud in the "first-come-first-serve" policy lay at the doorstep of
the Union Government alone and that the appellant was free from taint or
wrongdoing. The decision of the Supreme Court held that the "first-come-first-
serve" policy was writ large with arbitrariness, and was intended to favour certain
specific entities at a grave detriment to the public exchequer. Undoubtedly, the
authors of the "first-come-first-serve" policy were the official actors comprised
within the Union Government. But equally, the decision did not exculpate the private
business entities who obtained UASLs and became the beneficiaries of their
decision. The decision of the Supreme Court concludes in no uncertain terms that
the then Minister of Communications and Information Technology wanted to favour
some companies at the cost of the public exchequer, and that as a matter of fact
the entire process was "stage-managed" to favour those who had access to the
nitty-gritties of the policy in advance. As a result, the Supreme Court found that
companies which had submitted applications in 2004 or 2006 were sidelined by
favouring those who had applied between August and September 2007 and who
"succeeded in getting higher seniority entitling them to allocation of spectrum on
priority basis".
(Para 23)
Rs 5 crores each on three licensees on the ground that they had benefited at the
cost of the public exchequer by a "wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional action"
taken by DoT for the grant of licences and allocation of spectrum, and who had
subsequently offloaded their stakes for many thousand crores in the name of fresh
infusion or transfer of equity. On the other hand, the appellant was amongst the
four licensees who were directed to pay a costs of Rs 50 lakhs each "because they
too had been benefited by the wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional exercise
undertaken by DoT for grant of UASL and allocation of spectrum of 2G band".
(Para 24)
The beneficiaries of the patently unconstitutional mechanism deployed for the
allocation of spectrum were corporate entities who were favoured under the "first-
come-first-serve" policy. The appellant is one of them. The distinction made by the
judgment of the Supreme Court between the three licensees who were subjected
to costs of Rs 5 crores and four licensees, including the appellant, who were subject
to costs of Rs 50 lakhs was because in the case of the former their stakes had
been offloaded ostensibly in the name of a fresh infusion or transfer of equity.
However, it is evident that all these licensees were complicit in the illegal exercise of
obtaining favours for themselves by the indulgence of those in power. That, above
all, was the foundation of the decision in CPIL case and the justification for quashing
licences and the allocation of the 2G spectrum. The Supreme Court then directed
the TRAI to frame fresh recommendations for the grant of licences and for the
allocation of spectrum in the 2G band in twenty-two service areas by auction, as
was done for the allocation of spectrum in the 3G band. Thus, the decision in CPIL
case leaves no manner of doubt that the appellant was in pari delicto along with the
Union Government.
(Para 25)
The claim for refund of entry fee
Letters of Intent were issued to the appellant for providing unified access service
to twenty-one service areas. The appellant deposited the circle-wise entry fee, in
terms of the UASL Guidelines, on 10-1-2008 in the amount of Rs 1454.94 crores.
It is only upon the payment of this entry fee that the appellant became eligible to be
issued UASLs in the twenty-one service areas. Clause 18.1 of the UASL agreement
acknowledged the payment of a "one-time non-refundable entry fee" prior to the
signing of the agreement. Thus, the entry fee was a one-time non-refundable fee
payable. According to the Union Government, this was payable by an applicant for
participating in the process of obtaining the UASL and was distinguishable from the
licence fee under Clause 10.1, which was relatable to the actual operation of the
licence.
(Para 27)
TDSAT held that, strictly speaking, contractual term stipulating that the entry fee
was non-refundable would not by and in itself preclude the claim for refund on the
that the entire process leading up to the award of the licences was arbitrary and
constitutional.
(Para 29)
Jurisdiction of TDSAT
The powers envisaged by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997
("the TRAI Act") for TDSAT are wide and it would not be appropriate for the Supreme
Court to impose limitations on them.
(Para 34)
A dispute commencing with the acceptance of a tender leading to the possible
issue of a licence and disputes arising out of the grant of licence even after the
period has expired would all come within the purview of Section 14(a) of the TRAI
Act. To put it differently, Section 14 takes within its sweep disputes following the
issue of a letter of intent, pre-grant of actual licence as also disputes arising out of a
licence granted between a quondam licensee and the licensor."
(Para 37)
affirmed
36, referred to
The basis of the claim of the refund does not emanate from the relationship
between the appellant and the respondent as licensor and licensee. The claim for
restitution is based independently on the ground that upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in CPIL case holding the licence to be unlawful, the appellant is
entitled to restoration of the benefit which has been obtained by the Union of India
under an agreement which is held to be void.
(Para 42)
Analysis of the decision in CPIL case indicates that when the controversy over
the allocation of 2G spectrum and the licences was the subject-matter of
adjudication before the Supreme Court, the appellant as well as the Union
Government were defending the allocation of the spectrum and the grant of 2G
licences. The appellant was on notice of the fact that the award of licences in
pursuance of the "first-come-first-serve" policy was under challenge and the main
relief which was sought in the proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution was
for the setting aside of the auction and the award of damages. It is in this backdrop,
that the conduct of the appellant assumes significance. The appellant did not, in the
course of the adjudication before the Supreme Court, put forth the plea for refund
of the entry fee in the event that the allocation of the spectrum or the grant of
licences were to stand vitiated.
(Para 43)
It is well settled that a decision pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction
is binding between the parties unless it is modified or reversed by adopting a
procedure prescribed by law. It is in the interest of the public at large that finality
should attach to the binding decisions pronounced by a court of competent
jurisdiction and it is also in the public interest that individuals should not be vexed
twice over with the same kind of litigation.
(Para 45)
relied on
:
218, referred to
Bhagubhai Dullabhbhai Bhandari V. District Magistrate, AIR 1956 SC 585 : 1956 Cri
LJ
1126 : 1956 SCR 533; Daryao V. State of U.P., AIR 1961 SC 1457 : (1962) 1
SCR 574, cited
The submission of the appellant that the right to appeal for a refund of the entry
understanding of the process and the ultimate decision of the Supreme Court. While
directing the cancellation of the licences and ordering a fresh auction, the Supreme
Court imposed costs of Rs 5 crores on one set of licensees and Rs 50 lakhs on
another set, after assessing their culpability in wrongly benefitting from the "wholly
arbitrary" and "unconstitutional exercise" of licence and spectrum allocation. It
would be an improper reading of the judgment to postulate that the decision leaves
open a claim for the refund of the entry fee. The payment of the entry fee was one
element in the overall financial conspectus which led to the award of licences. The
adjudication before the Supreme Court in CPIL case must be construed as a one
composite whole from which its parts cannot be separated.
(Para 46)
Dehors the decision in CPIL case, the appellant's dispute over the terms of the
licence with the Union of India (licensor) would fall within the jurisdiction of TDSAT
under Section 14(a)(i) of the TRAI Act. The respondent's argument that the
appellant is no longer a "licensor" after the quashing of the licences would be a
restrictive reading of the jurisdiction of TDSAT. However, since the policy on the
allocation of spectrum and the licences were quashed on the grounds of mala fides
and arbitrariness in the Union Government's policy, the subsequent enquiry into
viability of the refund of the entry fee would have to be agitated before the same
Court.
(Para 47)
affirmed
Union of India V. Assn. of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India, (2011) 10
The appellant made no effort to urge during the course of the submissions
entry fee in the event that the Court were to quash the process and the award of
licences. Significantly, the appellant did not seek the permission of the Supreme
Court at that stage to reserve their liberties of agitating a claim for refund of entry
fee in separate proceedings. Besides having such a course of action open to them
before the judgment was delivered, the appellants had their remedies open in law
even after the decision by seeking liberty of adopting independent proceedings for
agitating the refund of the entry fee. Not having done this at any stage in, or in
connection with, the proceedings relating to the decision in CPIL case, the appellant
cannot be permitted to do so subsequently.
(Para 49)
The conduct of the appellant indicates that on 13-5-2016, the appellant sought
to withdraw the appeals against the order of TDSAT. The Court had recorded:" the
appellant prays for liberty to withdraw the present appeals and instead approach
this Court once again if it becomes so necessary". The appellant ought to have
obtained specific liberty of the Court on 13-5-2016 of pursuing proceedings before
TDSAT, something which is conspicuous by its absence in the order which was
passed by the Supreme Court. Yet, the appellant chose to move TDSAT by filing the
second telecom petition.
(Para 51)
The claim founded on frustration and restitution
The appellant has placed reliance on the provisions of Sections 56 and 65 of the
Contract Act, 1872. The basic postulate of the appellant is that when a licence is
granted under the proviso to Section 4(1) of the Telegraph Act, 1885 the licence is
in the nature of a contract between the Government and licensee, thus bringing it
within the ambit of the Contract Act, 1872.
(Para 53)
Union of India V. Assn. of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India, (2011) 10
The applicability of Section 56 of the Contract Act, 1872 is not limited to cases
of physical impossibility. In deciding cases in India, the only test which must apply
"is that of supervening impossibility or illegality of the act agreed to be
contractually done".
(Para 57)
The application of Section 65 of the Contract Act, 1872 has to be limited to
those cases where the party claiming restitution itself was not in pari delicto.
(Para 61)
R. Yashod Vardhan and Chitra Narayan, Pollock & Mulla's The Indian Contract and
Specific Relief Acts, Vol. I (16th Edn., LexisNexis), referred to
All claims for restitution are subject to a defence of illegality. The genesis of this
defence is in the legal maxim ex turpi causa non oritur actio (no action can arise
from a bad cause). A court will not assist those who aim to perpetuate illegality.
(Para 62)
Holman V. Johnson, (1775) 1 Cowp 341 at p. 343 : 98 ER 1120 at p. 1121,
followed
Graham Virgo, The Principles of the Law of Restitution (3rd Edn., OUP) p. 710,
referred to
In pari delicto potior est conditio possidentis is a way of qualifying the ex turpi
causa defence : This in pari delicto principle enables the court to analyse the
particular circumstances of the case to determine whether the claimant is less
responsible for the illegality than the defendant, for then, as between the claimant
and the defendant, the just result is that the claimant should not be denied relief,
since the parties are not in pari delicto. But where the claimant is more responsible
for the illegality or the parties are considered to be equally responsible, the in pari
delicto principle applies and restitution will be denied. Thus, when the party claiming
restitution is equally or more responsible for the illegality of a contract, they are
considered in pari delicto.
(Paras 63 and 64)
Graham Virgo, The Principles of the Law of Restitution (3rd Edn., OUP) p. 711,
referred to
In determining a claim of restitution, the claiming party's legal footing in relation
to the illegal act (and in comparison to the defendant) must be understood. Unless
the party claiming restitution participated in the illegal act involuntarily or the rule of
law offers them protection against the defendant, they would be held to be in pari
delicto and therefore, their claim for restitution will fail.
(Para 65)
(2016) 3 WLR 399 : 2016 UKSC 42, followed
ILR 1955 Hyd 101, referred to
Where both the parties before the Court are confederates in the fraud, the Court
The surest way t legal research!
must lean in favour of the approach which would be less injurious to public interest.
(Para 67)
Immani Appa Rao V. Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi, (1962) 3 SCR 739 : AIR 1962 SC
363, followed
Berg V. Sadler, (1937) 2 KB 158 (CA), cited
Hence, in adjudicating a claim of restitution under Section 65 of the Contract
Act, 1872 the court must determine the illegality which caused the contract to
become void and the role the party claiming restitution has played in it. If the party
claiming restitution was equally or more responsible for the illegality (in comparison
to the defendant), there shall be no cause for restitution. This has to be determined
on the facts of each individual case.
(Para 69)
In the present case, the appellant has been held to be in pari delicto. The
decision of the Supreme Court in CPIL case leaves no manner of doubt that the
appellant was among the group of licensees who were found to be complicit in
obtaining benefits under the "first-come-first-serve" policy of the Union
Government at the cost of the public exchequer. In such a situation and following
the well-settled principles which have been enunciated above, the appellant could
not be held entitled to claim a refund of its entry fee.
(Para 73)
No. 388 of 2009, decided on 24-11-2009 (Del); Union of India V. S. Tel Ltd.,
If the Union Government had held a transparent and objective process of
conducting an auction when the initial licences were granted in favour of the
appellant, a much higher value would have been realised by the public exchequer.
The appellant has been the beneficiary of a manifestly arbitrary policy which was
adopted by the Union Government and which was quashed in the decision of the
Supreme Court in CPIL case. That being the position, the appellant would not be
entitled to a refund of the entry fee even on the principle of restitution embodied in
Section 65 of the Contract Act, 1872.
(Para 74)
The policy of set-off
According to the appellant, the set-off which was granted by the Union
Government in pursuance of the decision of the EGoM on 31-10-2012, constitutes
an admission of liability. In this backdrop, it has been submitted that the policy
which was adopted by the Union Government by allowing a set-off to licensees
whose licences have been quashed subject to their participating in and being found
successful in the fresh auction, suffers from manifest arbitrariness.
(Para 75)
The appellant did not challenge the policy per se at that stage, nor did it attempt
to enter into the fray at that stage when a fresh auction was held. In these
circumstances, the policy decision adopted by the Union Government cannot be
allowed to be questioned at the behest of the appellant who sought a refund
simpliciter in proceedings before TDSAT. A greater free play in the joints must be
accorded to decisions of economic policy where the legislature or the executive is
called upon to make complex choices which cannot always conform to a
straitjacket or doctrinaire solution.
(Para 79)
Conclusion
The appellant was in pari delicto with DoT and the then officials of the Union
Government. The appellant was the beneficiary of the unlawfully designed "first-
come-first-serve" policy which was intended to favour a group of private bidding
entities at the cost of the public exchequer. The contention of the appellant that it
was exculpated from any wrongdoing by the judgment of the Supreme Court in
CPIL case is patently erroneous. The process leading up to the award of the UASLs
and the allocation of the 2G spectrum was found to be arbitrary and constitutionally
infirm. The need for an open and transparent bidding process for the allocation of
natural resources was substituted by a process which was designed to confer
unlawful benefits on a group of selected bidders by which the appellant benefited.
The appellant has tried to obviate these findings by relying on its acquittal by the
Special Judge, CBI.
(Para 81)
It is important to note that the criminal trial before the Special Judge, CBI was
limited to the question as to whether the promoters of the appellant had cheated
the DoT by providing a false representation of its compliance with Clause 8 of the
UASL Guidelines, since it was allegedly being controlled by the Essar group. The
Special Judge, CBI acquitted the promoters of the appellant since the prosecution
was unable to prove that : (i) officers of DoT considered the representation of the
appellant to be false; (ii) the appellant was engaging in a sham transaction; or (iii)
the appellant was actually controlled by the Essar group. Hence, the acquittal of the
promoters of the appellant of these criminal charges does not efface or obliterate
the findings which are contained in the final judgment of the Supreme Court in CPIL
case. Hence, as a beneficiary and confederate of fraud, the appellant cannot be lent
the assistance of the Supreme Court for obtaining the refund of the entry fee. In
any event, such a course of action before TDSAT was clearly in the teeth of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in CPIL case.
(Para 82)
504; Union of India V. Assn. of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India,
VN-D/68818/CVR
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Huzefa Ahmadi, Senior Advocates
[Prateek Gupta, Ms Madhavi Agrawal, Ms Anwesha Padhi and Ms Parul
Shukla (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates], for the Appellant;
Vikramjit Banerjee, Additional Solicitor General [Nachiketa Joshi,
Apoorv Kurup, Akshay Amritanshu, T.S. Sabarish, Mohd. Akhil, Saransh
Kumar, Nring Chamwibo Zeliong, Siddhartha Sinha, Tathagat, Aditya
Mishra and Gurmeet Singh Makker (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates],
for the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Vedanta Ltd. V. Goa Foundation
798d
Unified Telecom Service Providers of India
781f
Unified Telecom Service Providers of India
781f
Union of India
776e, 776f, 802a
Narayanamma V. Govindappa
809g
Ltd.
798d-e
Trading Ltd. V. Union of India
802a
8. (2016) 3 WLR 399 : 2016 UKSC 42, Patel V. Mirza
806b
776a-b, 776c-d, 776e,
Union of India
776e-f, 782e, 782f,
801f, 801f-g
774d, 775d-e, 775g-h,
V. Union of India
776a-b, 782d, 791b-c,
791c
Union of India
810d, 811c, 811g
India
798d-e
Litigation V. Union of India
776f-g, 777d-e, 778f,
779g-h, 780b-c, 781a,
781c, 782a, 782a-b,
782b-c, 782c, 782e-f,
. en TAMIL a LOW University
782f-g, 782g, 783a,
783c, 783d, 783e,
783e-f, 783f, 783g,
784a, 784a-b, 784b-c,
784c, 784d-e, 784e,
785d, 785f-g, 786c,
788d-e, 789e, 790a,
790d, 790d-e, 792a,
792b, 792c-d, 797c,
797g-h, 798a, 799a-b,
799d, 799e-f, 799f-g,
801b-c, 801d, 801d-e,
802c, 810d-e, 811c-d,
812a, 812b, 812c-d,
812e-f, 815b-c, 815e-f,
815f
781a, 800a-b, 800c-d,
Unified Telecom Service Providers of India
800d-e, 800e, 800f,
800f-g, 801a, 801a-b,
802e-f
Union of India
783f
Tel Ltd.
811a-b
of India
784f, 810g
18. LPA No. 388 of 2009, decided on 24-11-2009
(Del), Union of India V. S. Tel Ltd.
811a
795e, 796a-b, 796c-d,
Teleservices (Maharashtra) Ltd.
796f-g, 797a, 799g,
799g-h
Telecom Service Providers of India V. Union of
800a-b, 800c-d, 800d,
India
800e, 801a, 801a-b
Moideen Koya V. State of Kerala
798e, 798e-f
Thapar & Bros. (Coal Sales) Ltd.
778d-e
793c-d, 794g
(Maharashtra) Ltd. V. Union of India
795f-g
Singh
797f, 797f-g, 804b, 804d
Union of India V. TRAI
792f
Garg V. Union of India
814g-h
Jharkhand Mines Ltd.
806g, 807a
29. (1962) 3 SCR 739 : AIR 1962 SC 370, Immani
808f, 809f-g, 809g-h,
Appa Rao V. Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi
810a, 810b
30. AIR 1961 SC 1457 : (1962) 1 SCR 574, Daryao V.
State of U.P.
799a-b
31. AIR 1956 SC 585 : 1956 SCR 533, Bhagubhai
Dullabhbhai Bhandari V. District Magistrate
799a
ILR 1955 Hyd 101, Budhulal V. Deccan Banking06g, 807a-b, 807d, 808e-
Co.
f
Mugneeram Bangur & Co.
803d-e
34. (1937) 2 KB 158 (CA), Berg V. Sadler
809c
Bahadur Singh
807a-b
36. (1775) 1 Cowp 341 at p. 343 : 98 ER 1120 at p.
1121, Holman V. Johnson
805d
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J.-
INDEX
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
A.
The appeals
774
B.
Submissions of the counsel
776
C.
The CPIL judgment
784
D.
The claim for refund of entry fee
790
E.
Jurisdiction of TDSAT
792
F.
The claim founded on frustration and restitution
802
G.
The policy of set-off
812
H.
Conclusion
815
A. The appeals
1. These appeals under Section 18 of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997 ("the TRAI Act") arise from the judgments
dated 16-9-20151 and 11-12-20182 of the Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal ("TDSAT"). The appellant claimed a
refund of Rs 1454.94 crores representing the entry fee (together with
interest) paid by it for 2G licences for twenty-one service areas. By the
judgment of this Court in Centre for Public Interest Litigation V. Union
of India³ 3 ("CPIL"), the 2G licences which were granted by the Union of
India, including to the appellant, were quashed. The appellant claims to
be entitled to the refund of its entry fee on, as it contends, "well-settled
principles of civil, contractual and constitutional law".
2. The appellant applied for the grant of Unified Access Service
Licences ("UASL") for twenty-one service areas on 3-9-2007. A letter of
intent was issued. The appellant paid the circle-wise entry fee of Rs 1.1
crores and furnished a performance bank guarantee and financial bank
guarantee for the twenty-one areas. The appellant entered into UASL
agreements on 3-3-2008 for the twenty-one service areas with the
respondent, which came into effect from 25-1-2008.
3. Among the conditions which were stipulated in the UASL
agreements, those governing the duration of the licence and the entry
fee were in the following terms:
"3. Duration of licence
3.1. This LICENCE shall be valid for a period of 20 years from the
effective date unless revoked earlier for reasons as specified
elsewhere in the document.
*
*
18. FEES PAYABLE
18.1. Entry fee:
One-time non-refundable entry fee of Rs 1.1 crores has been paid
by the LICENSEE prior to signing of this licence agreement."
4. On 2-2-2012, this Court by its judgment in CPIL3 declared that
the policy of the Union Government for allocation of 2G spectrum on a
"first-come-first-serve" basis was illegal. As a consequence, the UASLs
which were granted by the Union Government were quashed. On 25-5-
2012, the appellant instituted a petition4 ("first telecom petition")
before TDSAT seeking, among other things, a refund of the entry fee of
Rs 1454.94 crores, inclusive of interest. The appellant has stated that
on 1-6-2012 it shut down its operations after porting out all its
subscribers.
5. By its judgment dated 16-9-20151, TDSAT dismissed the first
telecom petition holding, inter alia, that:
5.1. The quashing of the appellant's licences by this Court in its
judgment in CPIL3 cannot be equated with the UASL agreements
becoming void within the meaning of Section 65 of the Contract Act,
1872. This Court quashed the UASLs since it found the Union
Government's policy of "first-come-first-serve" to be illegal and
arbitrary. Hence, the appellant cannot claim restitution under Section
65.
5.2. The quashing of the appellant's licences by this Court in its
judgment in CPIL3 cannot be brought under the Contract Act, since the
UASL agreements had not become void under Sections 23 and 56 of the
Contract Act, 1872.
5.3. Even assuming that the appellant's UASL agreements became
void under the Contract Act, its claim for restitution under Section 65
would be governed by the principle of in pari delicto potior est conditio
defendentis (in equal fault, better is the condition of the possessor). A
refund of the entry fee could not be made until the possibility of the
appellant being in pari delicto was completely effaced.
6. When TDSAT delivered its judgment ¹, the appellant was facing
trial before the Special Judge, CBI for charges under Sections 120-B
and 420 of
the Penal Code, 1860 in a case relating to the grant of UASLs. By a
judgment dated 21-12-2017, the appellant was acquitted of criminal
charges by the Special Judge, CBI. The Central Bureau of Investigation
has filed a petition for leave to appeal against the order of acquittal,
which is presently pending before the Delhi High Court.
7. Aggrieved by the judgment of TDSAT dated 16-9-20151, the
appellant moved this Court in Civil Appeals Nos. 1447-67 of 2016. On
13-5-20165, the appellant sought liberty of this Court to withdraw the
civil appeals, and to approach this Court once again if it became so
necessary. Leave was accordingly granted by this Court.
8. The appellant then instituted another petition before TDSAT6
("second telecom petition") raising the issue of a refund of the entry
fee, on the ground that it had been exonerated by the Special Judge,
CBI. By its judgment dated 11-12-2018², TDSAT dismissed the second
telecom petition noting that the appellant had made a second attempt
for claiming the same relief which had been sought earlier in the first
telecom petition. It further held that had TDSAT sought to provide the
appellant with the remedy of approaching it after the conclusion of the
trial before the Special Judge, CBI, it would have indicated it in its
judgment. Finally, it was also noted that this Court, through its order
dated 13-5-2016 did not grant the appellant the leave to approach
TDSAT but only to approach this Court.
9. The judgment dated 11-12-2018 has given rise to the filing of
the second set of civil appeals ² by the appellant. The appellant also
moved a miscellaneous application8 in Civil Appeals Nos. 1447-67 of
2016 seeking permission for the revival of the earlier civil appeals,
which had been permitted to be withdrawn on 13-5-20165.
10. By an order dated 7-1-20209, the miscellaneous applications
seeking the revival of the first set of civil appeals were allowed, keeping
open all the contentions including the contentions of the respondents
based on the earlier order dated 13-5-20165 This judgment will
accordingly govern both, the original set of civil appeals which stand
revived in pursuance of the order dated 7-1-20209 9 and the second set
of civil appeals.
B. Submissions of the counsel
11. Dr A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
the appellant, has urged the following submissions:
11.1. Since the licences of the appellant were quashed by the
judgment of this Court in CPI 3 the appellant is entitled to a refund of
its entry fee based on civil, contractual and constitutional principles.
11.2. The appellant paid an entry fee of Rs 1454.94 crores for
twenty-one service areas and the licences were valid for a period of
twenty years. The appellant was prevented from providing services
under the licences because:
(a) This Court held that the respondent's "first-come-first-serve"
policy for grant of licences was flawed, arbitrary and illegal; and
(b) As a consequence, licences which were granted under said the
policy (including the licences of the appellant) were quashed.
11.3. The quashing of the licences by this Court amounted to a
frustration of each licence, which was in the nature of a contract, in
terms of Section 56 of the Contract Act. Consequently, the appellant is
entitled to a restitution of the entry fee paid in terms of Section 65, as
the licences were quashed not on account of the fault of the appellant
but due to the culpability of the Union Government.
11.4. The well-settled principle is that no person can be prejudiced
because of an act of a court (actus curiae neminem gravabit).
11.5. The substratum of TDSAT's decision which disallowed the claim
of the appellant in view of the pending criminal proceedings has been
wiped off by the acquittal of the appellant by the Special Judge, CBI.
11.6. The set-off policy of the Union Government, in terms of which
a set-off of the entry fee which was paid was granted only to those
entities who participated in the fresh round of auction which took place
after the judgment of this Court in CPI is based on incorrect
classification which lacks intelligible differentia and nexus to its object.
Further, the set-off policy suffers from manifest arbitrariness and is
discriminatory. Thus, it should be struck down as being violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution.
11.7. The set-off policy of the Union Government allowing the grant
of a set-off of the entry fee, albeit to certain bidders, is an admission of
a debt that is due and payable:
11.7.1. On 12-10-2012, the respondent issued "Queries and
Responses to an NIA" and in answer to Query No. 74 regarding the set-
off of entry fee, it was stated as follows:
"A set-off is allowed against the earnest money and the payment
due in the event of spectrum being won in this auction. The total
amount of such set-off shall be limited to the total entry fee paid by
the entity for all its licences which have been quashed by the
Supreme Court. No interest will be due on this amount."
11.7.2. The Empowered Group of Ministers ("EGoM") held a meeting
on 18-10-2012, at which a decision was taken in the following terms:
"13. The EGoM considered the letter dated 12-10-2012 from the
Minister of Information and Broadcasting regarding set-off of entry
fee
against the earnest money and payment due in the event of spectrum
being won and noted that the entry fee paid by TSPs whose licences
were quashed was for a period of 20 years. While on one hand, the
TSPs could be expected to have paid a pro rata amount for the period of
operation of the licence i.e. 2008-2012, on the other hand, there could
be a claim for refund with interest for the pro rata amount for the
balance period. Therefore, the EGoM decided to allow such TSPs to
adjust an amount equivalent to their full entry fee, without any
interest, against the auction payments, both for participation and/or
final payment on successful conclusion. It was clarified that the set-off
would be permitted only to the quashed licence-holders participating in
the auction. Such set-off would be allowed to the extent of total entry
fee paid for all quashed licences on an aggregate basis without
consideration of the expired period of licence, only if they succeed in
the auction
"
(emphasis supplied)
11.7.3. Pursuant to the above policy of granting a set-off, the Union
Government has granted a set-off of the entry fee to Telewings
(formerly Uninor), Videocon, Idea Cellular Ltd. and Sistema Shyam. In
particular, a set-off has been granted to Telewings despite there being
grave criminal charges against it including, inter alia, charges under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
11.8. The proposition that the policy of the Union of India to permit
the grant of a set-off of the entry fee amounts to an admission that a
refund of the entry fee is payable and due, finds support in the decision
of this Court in Union of India V. Karam Chand Thapar & Bros. (Coal
Sales) Ltd. 10
11.9. The non-refund of the entry fee to the appellant is
discriminatory for the following reasons:
11.9.1. A set-off towards the fee payable for the spectrum has been
permitted to those telecom service providers ("TSPs") who participated
in and won spectrum in the subsequent auction after the judgment of
this Court in CPI³.
11.9.2. The licences of eight TSPs were quashed by this Court by its
judgment in CPI ³. There cannot be any distinction or classification in
law between the said eight TSPs and similar treatment must be
afforded to all. The classification based on their decision to participate
in the subsequent auction for refund of entry fee is discriminatory and
has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the set-off
policy.
11.9.3. Out of the eight TSPs, four TSPs participated in the
subsequent auction and were permitted a set-off of their entry fee
towards payment for the auction allotted spectrum. Details of the cases
where a set-off was granted are:
Name of company
Year of
Amount set-
Status in the
auction
off (in Rs)
2G judgment
M/s
Telewings
Nov. 2012
1658.57
Respondent 3;
(formerly
Uninor)
crores
Penalty of Rs 5
(bought
Unitech
crores
licences)
M/s Videocon
Nov. 2012
1506.82
Respondent 5;
crores
No
penalty
levied
M/s Idea Cellular
Nov. 2012
684.59
Respondent 8;
crores
No
penalty
levied
M/s Sistema Shyam
March 2013
1626.32
Respondent 10;
crores
Penalty of Rs 50
lakhs
11.9.4. The remaining four TSPs, including the appellant, did not
participate in the subsequent auction for spectrum. Their details are
tabulated below:
Name of company
Entry fee
Status in the
Action taken for
paid (in Rs)
2G judgment
refund of entry
fee
M/s S. Tel (P) Ltd.
25 crores
Respondent 6;
Due
to
low
Penalty of Rs 50
amount, it did
lakhs
not seek refund
of entry fee.
M/s
Tata
9 crores
Respondent 9;
Due to low
Teleservices
Penalty of Rs 5
amount, it did
crores
not seek refund
of entry fee.
M/s
Etisalat
DB
1564 crores
Respondent 2;
Refund claimed.
(Swan Telecom)
Penalty of Rs 5
Civil Appeal No.
crores
7331 of 2016
pending
M/s Loop Telecom
1454.94
Respondent 10;
Refund claimed.
Ltd. (Appellant)
crores
Penalty of Rs 50
Present
civil
lakhs
appeal against
the order of
TDSAT
11.9.5. TDSAT afforded differential treatment to the appellant due to
the pendency of criminal proceedings against it. In any event, this
ground ceases to exist in view of the acquittal of the appellant of
criminal charges on 21-12-2017 by the Special Judge, CBI. Following
the appellant's acquittal, there is no rationale for denying refund of
entry fee to the appellant.
11.10. The set-off policy penalises a business entity for taking a
commercial decision not to participate in the subsequent auction.
Whether or not an entity should have participated in the auction of
spectrum following the decision of this Court in CPIL3 was entirely for
each of them to determine and this cannot form the basis for granting
or denying a set-off.
11.11. The non-refund of the entry fee to the appellant suffers from
manifest arbitrariness:
(a) The set-off policy creates a separate class between similarly
placed TSPs whose licences were quashed, on the basis of whether or
not a bidder or entity has chosen to participate in the fresh auction;
and
(b) A business entity may have valid reasons not to participate in
the fresh auction, for which it cannot be penalised;
11.12. The appellant ought not to be punished for the wrongdoing of
the respondent:
11.12.1. In the judgment in CPI ³, this Court held that the "first-
come-first-serve" policy of the Union Government for the grant of
telecom licences was flawed, arbitrary and illegal.
11.12.2. This Court further imposed costs of Rs 5 crores upon those
licence-holders before it who had benefited at the cost of the public
exchequer and had offloaded their stakes for thousands of crore of
rupees in the name of fresh infusion of or transfer of equity. On the
other hand, costs of only Rs 50 lakhs were imposed on those licence-
holders (including the appellant) who had allegedly benefited by the
wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional action of the Department of
Telecommunication ("DoT") for the grant of UASLs and the allocation of
the 2G spectrum band. Hence, no role was attributed to the appellant
for quashing of its licences.
11.12.3. In any event, the appellant has been acquitted of criminal
charges on 21-12-2017 by the Special Judge, CBI.
11.12.4. Even otherwise, the pendency of criminal proceedings is
not an impediment to proceed with civil proceedings.
11.12.5. The respondent has already auctioned spectrum which was
allocated earlier to the appellant for Rs 10,400 crores and has thus
benefited twice from the same spectrum. The respondent cannot be
allowed to unjustly enrich itself by usurping the entry fee paid by the
appellant. The principles underlying the doctrine of unjust enrichment
are duly fulfilled in the present case.
11.13. The provisions of the Contract Act would be applicable to the
claim of the appellant:
11.13.1. TDSAT has wrongly held that the licences were quashed by
this Court in the exercise of its constitutional powers, thereby ousting
the provisions of the Contract Act.
11.13.2. The licence granted under the proviso to Section 4(1) of
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 ("the Telegraph Act") is in the nature of
a contract between the Government and its licensees. This proposition
finds support in the judgment of this Court in Union of India V. Assn. of
Unified Telecom Service Providers of India¹¹ ("AUSPI").
11.13.3. Once the contracts were held to be void and were quashed
in CPI ³, the consequences which are envisaged in the Contract Act
must follow. When a contract is discovered to be void, the
benefit/advantage received by one party under the contract ought to be
returned to the other party.
11.13.4. The appellant, when it entered into the contract with the
respondent, had no knowledge of the fact that the "first-come-first-
serve" policy of the Union Government would be quashed by this Court.
The Union Government defended its policy before this Court, and thus
ought to be directed to refund the entry fee.
11.13.5. In the absence of any legislative intervention precluding
the grant of the refund, the rights of the parties would be governed by
the law of contract. Thus, the doctrine of frustration under Section 56
and the principle of restitution under Section 65 of the Contract Act
would stand attracted in the present case.
11.13.6. Judicial orders are declaratory and retrospective in nature.
The judgment in CPIL relates back to the validity of the licences. The
appellant had only six thousand subscribers before the licences were
quashed and was in the phase of rolling out and investing capital as a
result of which it did not acquire any substantial benefit.
11.13.7. Since the licences were provided on a representation that
they would have a tenure of twenty years but were declared to be void
within four years due to the flawed policy of the Union Government, the
appellant will be entitled to refund of the entry fee with interest.
11.13.8. The respondent is estopped from relying upon the UASL
Guidelines and UASL agreements, which provide that the entry fee is
non-refundable. This is because the licences were not quashed either
due to a default on the part of the appellant or its withdrawal, but due
to the policy of the Union Government being found to be illegal and
arbitrary.
11.14. The decisions1 of this Court in relation to the payment of
adjusted gross revenue("AGR") have no relevance to the present case.
12. Opposing the submissions which have been urged on behalf of
the appellant, Mr Vikramjit Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor
General, appearing on behalf of the Union of India has urged the
following submissions:
12.1. The entry fee paid by the appellant is specifically made non-
refundable by the UASL Guidelines which were issued by the DoT on 14
-12-2005. Once the letters of intent were issued to the appellant for
twenty-one service areas, the appellant deposited the entry fee for each
circle in accordance with the UASL Guidelines on 10-1-2008. The
appellant became eligible for the issuance of UASLs for each of the
twenty-one service areas only thereafter. The UASL agreements which
were entered into between the Union Government and the appellant on
4-3-2008 expressly contemplated that
the entry fee was a one-time non-refundable fee. The entry fee being
non-refundable in nature, the appellant cannot now seek a refund.
12.2. The issues which are sought to be raised in the present civil
appeals are squarely governed by the judgment in CPI³. The judgment
of this Court examined the validity of the licences and spectrum
allocation made to the licensees including the appellant. The judgment
in CPIL3 found that the licensees had unfairly gained access to the then
Minister in-charge as well as certain officers of the DoT in order to gain
preferences. This Court found that the grant of licences was "stage-
managed" to favour specific licensees, including the appellant, as a
result of which costs of Rs 50 lakhs were also imposed on them.
12.3. While quashing the grant of the licences, the judgment in
CPIL3 did not grant any refund of the entry fee. The claim for restitution
not having been allowed by this Court in CPI ³, the appellant cannot
seek to do so at this stage.
12.4. After the judgment in CPIL quashing the UASLs granted to
the appellant, the appellant has ceased to be a licensee for the
purposes of Section 14(1)(a) of the TRAI Act, which empowers TDSAT to
adjudicate disputes between a licensor and a licensee. TDSAT did not
have jurisdiction under the provisions of Section 14(1)(a). In any
event, TDSAT by its judgment dated 16-9-20151 rejected the
appellant's claim for refund on the ground that it was incompetent to
do so, the licences having been quashed by the judgment of this Court.
Having moved this Court in the first set of civil appeals, the appellant
withdrew the civil appeals on 13-5-2016, though with liberty to move
this Court again, if it became so necessary. Thus, in view of the order
dated 13-5-2016 the appellant could have only moved this Court and
not TDSAT. However, it instituted a second telecom petition before
TDSAT. TDSAT by its judgment dated 11-12-2018 rejected the second
attempt of the appellant for claiming the same relief, since this would
essentially amount to a review of the judgment in CPIL3 Thus, moving
the second telecom petition was not only contrary to Section 14 of the
TRAI Act but also in violation of the text and spirit of the order dated
13-5-20165 of this Court.
12.5. The decision of the EGoM dated 31-10-2012 granting set-off to
those bidders who had participated and were found to be successful in
the fresh round of auctions was a one-time concession offered to TSPs
whose licences were quashed earlier, in order to ensure that telecom
services were provided to consumers in an uninterrupted manner. The
decision in CPI did not bar licensees from participating in the
subsequent auction. Since the entry fees paid by licensees covered by
the judgment in CPIL3 could not have been refunded, the EGoM decided
to adjust their entry fee in the subsequent auction in the event that
they were declared successful. It was believed that this would
encourage the participation of all TSPs in the subsequent auction and
increase
the prospects of a higher price discovery, thereby ultimately benefitting
the public exchequer. This set-off policy was uniformly applied to all
licensees covered by the judgment in CPI ³, including the appellant,
and thus is not discriminatory. No TSP covered by the decision in CPIL3
was compelled to participate in the subsequent auction being
conducted by the DoT by virtue of the set-off policy. Rather, the policy
only sought to increase participation in the subsequent auction by
offering a concession in the form of set-off of the previously paid entry
fee, in case they emerged successful in the fresh auction. Being a policy
decision involving industry-specific issues, this Court should be
circumspect in interfering with this decision of the Union Government.
12.6. The acquittal of the promoters of the appellant in the criminal
case has no bearing on the refund of the entry fee. The judgment of the
Special Judge, CBI acquitting the promoters of the appellant was only
concerned with the alleged violation of Clause 8 of the UASL Guidelines
issued by DoT. The acquittal has no bearing on the findings of this
Court in CPIL according to which UASL and allocation of spectrum was
held to be "stage-managed" and violative of the principles of public
law. This precludes the appellant from claiming any refund or
restitution.
12.7. As a matter of fact, the judgment of this Court in CPIL 3 has
imposed costs of Rs 50 lakhs on the appellant for wrongly benefitting
from the wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional exercise of licence and
spectrum allocation. Consequently, even under the contract law, the
appellant is disentitled from claiming any refund or restitution of the
entry fee based on the principle of in pari delicto.
13. In the submissions made in the rejoinder, both Dr A.M. Singhvi
and Mr Huzefa Ahmadi, learned Senior Counsel, have submitted that
the judgment in CPIL 3 does not expressly or impliedly bar the refund of
entry fee. As a matter of fact, TDSAT held that the decision of this Court
was not conclusive in ruling out a refund. The judgment in CPIL 3 was
reserved on 17-3-2011 13 and was delivered on 2-2-2012³, and the
quashing of the licences could not have been contemplated by any of
the litigants. Theoretically, even if the claim for restitution could have
been made before this Court at that stage, the appellant is not
precluded from raising the claim before this Court in the present
proceedings. Further, Sections 14 and 15 of the TRAI Act confer a
plenary remedy before TDSAT. Hence, the appellant moved TDSAT within
a few weeks of the judgment in CPI ³. It was urged that for the
principles of constructive res judicata to apply, the bar must be clearly
evident. In a public interest litigation petition, it would not be
appropriate to apply the principles of constructive res judicata against
the respondent (the appellant herein) save in an exceptional case.
14. Elaborating on the above submissions, Mr Huzefa Ahmadi urged
that:
14.1. The right to claim restitution would arise only after the
licences were quashed by this Court and hence, the decision in CPIL3
does not operate as constructive res judicata.
14.2. The relief sought before this Court in the public interest
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution which led to the decision in
CPIL 3 was the setting aside of the auction and damages. This Court did
not grant damages per se while it imposed costs on the licensees.
Hence, in terms of Section 11 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, the
prayer for damages must be deemed to have been refused.
14.3. The ultimate direction in CPIL3 was that its observations would
not apply to other proceedings and hence, there was no intent to
foreclose other rights under the law.
15. In view of these premises, it has been urged that the petition
under Article 32 which led to the decision in CPIL did not seek the
forfeiture of the entry fee and hence, the principles of constructive res
judicata would find no application at all. This Court having imposed
costs of Rs 5 crores on one set of licensees and Rs 50 lakhs on another
group of licensees (which included the appellant), it would be wholly
disproportionate to forfeit an amount of Rs 1454.94 crores in the
absence of an implied forfeiture in terms of the earlier decision of this
Court.
16. The rival submissions will now be analysed.
C. The CPIL 3 judgment
17. The decision of this Court, which was rendered on
arose from petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution. The petitions
questioned the grant of UASLs to the private respondents in those
proceedings (which included the appellant), on the ground that the
procedure which was adopted by DoT was arbitrary, illegal and in
violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. Among the grounds of
challenge, it was urged that:
17.1. Since the cut-off of 25-9-2007 fixed for considering the
applications had been held14 to be arbitrary by the Delhi High Court
(which was approved by this Court), the procedure adopted by DoT
with the approval of the Minister for Communications and Information
Technology was liable to be declared as arbitrary and illegal.
17.2. The DoT had violated the recommendations made by the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India ("TRAI") that there should be no
cap on the number of access service providers in any service area.
17.3. As noted in the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General,
the consideration of a large number of ineligible applications and the
grant of licences to them was illegal and arbitrary.
17.4. The method adopted by DoT for grant of licences was flawed
because it was based upon the recommendations made by TRAI, which
were arbitrary and contrary to public interest, since they recommended
the granting of licences at the entry fees which were determined in
2001.
17.5. While granting licences which were bundled with the spectrum
at a price which was fixed in 2001, the DoT did not consult the Finance
Ministry and violated the decision taken by the Council of Ministers in
2003.
17.6. The "first-come-first-serve" policy violated Article 14, and its
distortion by the then Minister of Communications and Information
Technology and the consequent grant of licences was liable to be
annulled.
17.7. The Union Government did not take any action to cancel the
licences of a number of licensees who had failed to fulfil the roll-out
obligations and violated the conditions of the licences.
18. While dealing with the grounds of challenge, in the course of the
judgment, this Court underscored that natural resources, such as
spectrum, are public goods and the doctrine of equality and public trust
must guide the State in determining the actual mechanism for their
distribution. After analysing the rationale adopted by TRAI for
recommending the allocation of the 2G spectrum on the basis of 2001
"91. To say the least, the entire approach adopted by TRAI was
lopsided and contrary to the decision taken by the Council of
Ministers and its recommendations became a handle for the then
Minister of Communications and Information Technology and the
officers of DoT who virtually gifted away the important national asset
at throw-away prices by wilfully ignoring the concerns raised from
various quarters including the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and
also some of its own officers. This becomes clear from the fact that
soon after obtaining the licences, some of the beneficiaries offloaded
their stakes to others in the name of transfer of equity or infusion of
fresh capital by foreign companies, and thereby made huge profits.
We have no doubt that if the method of auction had been adopted
for grant of licence which could be the only rational transparent
method for distribution of national wealth, the nation would have
been enriched by many thousand crores."
19. This Court found a basic flaw in the "first-come-first-serve"
"94. There is a fundamental flaw in the first-come-first-served
policy inasmuch as it involves an element of pure chance or accident.
In matters involving award of contracts or grant of licence or
permission to use public property, the invocation of first-come-first-
served policy has inherently dangerous implications. Any person who
has access to the power corridor at the highest or the lowest level
may be able to obtain information from the
Government files or the files of the agency/instrumentality of the State
that a particular public property or asset is likely to be disposed of or a
contract is likely to be awarded or a licence or permission is likely to be
given, he would immediately make an application and would become
entitled to stand first in the queue at the cost of all others who may
have a better claim."
20. This Court held that an auction conducted after due publicity
was perhaps the best method for fulfilling the constitutional
requirement of preserving equity in the alienation of natural resources.
In the absence of such a mechanism, this Court held that alienation of
natural resources/public property is likely to be misused by
unscrupulous people who are only interested in garnering maximum
financial benefit and have no respect for constitutional ethos and
values.
21. In the course of its decision, this Court held, in no uncertain
terms, that the then Minister for Communications and Information
Technology had acted to favour some companies at the cost of the
"97*. The exercise undertaken by the officers of DoT between
September 2007 and March 2008, under the leadership of the then
Minister of Communications and Information Technology was wholly
arbitrary, capricious and contrary to public interest apart from being
violative of the doctrine of equality. The material produced before the
Court shows that the Minister of Communications and Information
Technology wanted to favour some companies at the cost of the
public exchequer and for this purpose, he took the following steps:
(i) Soon after his appointment as Minister of Communications
and Information Technology, he directed that all the applications
received for grant of UAS licence should be kept pending till the
receipt of the TRAI recommendations.
(ii) The recommendations made by TRAI on 28-8-2007 were
not placed before the full Telecom Commission which, among
others, would have included the Finance Secretary. The notice of
the meeting of the Telecom Commission was not given to any of
the non-permanent members despite the fact that the
recommendations made by TRAI for allocation of spectrum in 2G
bands had serious financial implications. This has been
established from the pleadings and the records produced before
this Court which show that after issuance of licences, 3 applicants
transferred their equities for a total sum of Rs 24,493 crores in
favour of foreign companies. Therefore, it was absolutely
necessary for DoT to take the opinion of the Finance Ministry as
per the requirement of the Government of India (Transaction of
Business) Rules, 1961.
(iii) The officers of DoT who attended the meeting of the
Telecom Commission held on 10-10-2007 hardly had any choice
but to approve the recommendations made by TRAI. If they had
not done so, they would have incurred the wrath of the Minister of
Communications and Information Technology.
(iv) In view of the approval by the Council of Ministers of the
recommendations made by the Group of Ministers in 2003, DoT
had to discuss the issue of spectrum pricing with the Ministry of
Finance. Therefore, DoT was under an obligation to involve the
Ministry of Finance before any decision could be taken in the
context of Paras 2.78 and 2.79 of the TRAI's recommendations.
However, as the Minister of Communications and Information
Technology was very much conscious of the fact that the
Secretary, Finance, had objected to the allocation of 2G Spectrum
at the rates fixed in 2001, he did not consult the Finance Minister
or the officers of the Finance Ministry.
(v) The Minister of Communications and Information
Technology brushed aside the suggestion made by the Minister of
Law and Justice for placing the matter before the Empowered
Group of Ministers. Not only this, within few hours of the receipt of
the suggestion made by the Prime Minister in his letter dated 2-
11-2007 that keeping in view the inadequacy of spectrum,
transparency and fairness should be maintained in the matter of
allocation thereof, the Minister of Communications and
Information Technology rejected the same by saying that it will be
unfair, discriminatory, arbitrary and capricious to auction the
spectrum to new applicants because it will not give them level
playing field.
(vi) The Minister of Communications and Information
Technology introduced the cut-off date as 25-9-2007 for
consideration of the applications received for grant of licence
despite the fact that only one day prior to this, a press release
was issued by DoT fixing 1-10-2007 as the last date for receipt of
the applications. This arbitrary action of the Minister of
Communications and Information Technology though appears to
be innocuous, actually benefited some of the real estate
companies who did not have any experience in dealing with
telecom services and who had made applications only on 24-9-
2007 i.e. one day before the cut-off date fixed by the Minister of
Communications and Information Technology on his own.
(vii) The cut-off date i.e. 25-9-2007 decided by the Minister of
Communications and Information Technology on 2-11-2007 was
not made public till 10-1-2008 and the first-come-first-served
policy, which was being followed since 2003 was changed by him
on 7-1-2008 and was incorporated in press release dated 10-1-
2008. This enabled some of the applicants, who had access either
to the Minister or the officers of DoT to get the demand drafts,
bank guarantee, etc. prepared in advance for compliance with
conditions of the LoIs, which was the
basis for determination of seniority for grant of licences and allocation
of spectrum.
(viii) The meeting of the full Telecom Commission, which was
scheduled to be held on 9-1-2008 to consider issues relating to
grant of licences and pricing of spectrum was deliberately
postponed on 7-1-2008 so that the Secretary, Finance and
Secretaries of three other important Departments may not be able
to raise objections against the procedure devised by DoT for grant
of licence and allocation of spectrum by applying the principle of
level playing field.
(ix) The manner in which the exercise for grant of the LoIs to
the applicants was conducted on 10-1-2008 leaves no room for
doubt that everything was stage-managed to favour those who
were able to know in advance the change in the implementation
of the first-come-first-served policy. As a result of this, some of
the companies which had submitted applications in 2004 or 2006
were pushed down in the priority and those who had applied
between August and September 2007 succeeded in getting higher
seniority entitling them to allocation of spectrum on priority
basis."
This is a clear indicator of the complicity between the Minister and the
business entities he was acting to favour on the basis of the "first-come
-first-serve" policy.
22. This Court found that "everything was stage-managed to favour
those who were able to know in advance the change in the
implementation of the first-come-first-served policy". It was in the
backdrop of the above finding, that this Court issued the following
"102. In the result, the writ petitions are allowed in the following
terms:
(i) The licences granted to the private respondents on or after
10-1-2008 pursuant to two press releases issued on 10-1-2008
and subsequent allocation of spectrum to the licensees are
declared illegal and are quashed.
(ii) The above direction shall become operative after four
months.
(iii) Keeping in view the decision taken by the Central
Government in 2011, TRAI shall make fresh recommendations for
grant of licence and allocation of spectrum in 2G band in 22
service areas by auction, as was done for allocation of spectrum in
3G band.
(iv)
The
Central
Government
shall
consider
the
recommendations of TRAI and take appropriate decision within
next one month and fresh licences be granted by auction.
(v) Respondents 2, 3 and 9 who have been benefited at the
cost of public exchequer by a wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional
action taken by DoT for grant of UAS licences and allocation of
spectrum in 2G band and who offloaded their stakes for many
thousand crores
in the name of fresh infusion of equity or transfer of equity shall pay
costs of Rs 5 crores each. Respondents 4, 6, 7 and 10 shall pay costs of
Rs 50 lakhs each because they too had been benefited by the wholly
arbitrary and unconstitutional exercise undertaken by DoT for grant of
UAS licences and allocation of spectrum in 2G band. We have not
imposed costs on the respondents who had submitted their applications
in 2004 and 2006 and whose applications were kept pending till 2007.
(vi) Within four months, 50% of the costs shall be deposited
with the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee for being used
for providing legal aid to poor and indigent litigants. The
remaining 50% costs shall be deposited in the funds created for
Resettlement and Welfare Schemes of the Ministry of Defence.
(vii) However, it is made clear that the observations made in
this judgment shall not, in any manner, affect the pending
investigation by CBI, Directorate of Enforcement and other
agencies or cause prejudice to those who are facing prosecution in
the cases registered by CBI or who may face prosecution on the
basis of charge-sheet(s) which may be filed by CBI in future and
the Special Judge, CBI shall decide the matter uninfluenced by
this judgment. We also make it clear that this judgment shall not
prejudice any person in the action which may be taken by other
investigating agencies under the Income Tax Act, 1961, the
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 and other similar
statutes."
23. Reading the judgment of this Court in CPI it is impossible to
accept the submission which has been urged on behalf of the appellant
that the fraud in the "first-come-first-serve" policy lay at the doorstep
of the Union Government alone and that the appellant was free from
taint or wrongdoing. The decision of this Court held that the "first-come
-first-serve" policy was writ large with arbitrariness, and was intended
to favour certain specific entities at a grave detriment to the public
exchequer. Undoubtedly, the authors of the "first-come-first-serve"
policy were the official actors comprised within the Union Government.
But equally, the decision did not exculpate the private business entities
who obtained UASLs and became the beneficiaries of their decision. The
decision of this Court concludes in no uncertain terms that the then
Minister of Communications and Information Technology wanted to
favour some companies at the cost of the public exchequer, and that as
a matter of fact the entire process was "stage-managed" to favour
those who had access to the nitty-gritties of the policy in advance. As a
result, the Court found that companies which had submitted
applications in 2004 or 2006 were sidelined by favouring those who had
applied between August and September 2007 and who "succeeded in
getting higher seniority entitling them to allocation of spectrum on
priority basis".
24. In the concluding part, the judgment in CPIL 3 imposed costs of
Rs 5 crores each on three licensees on the ground that they had
benefited at the cost of the public exchequer by a "wholly arbitrary and
unconstitutional action" taken by DoT for the grant of licences and
allocation of spectrum, and who had subsequently offloaded their
stakes for many thousand crores in the name of fresh infusion or
transfer of equity. On the other hand, the appellant was amongst the
four licensees who were directed to pay costs of Rs 50 lakhs each
"because they too had been benefited by the wholly arbitrary and
unconstitutional exercise undertaken by DoT for grant of UASL and
allocation of spectrum of 2G band".
25. The beneficiaries of the patently unconstitutional mechanism
deployed for the allocation of spectrum were corporate entities who
were favoured under the "first-come-first-serve" policy. The appellant is
one of them. The distinction made by the judgment of this Court
between the three licensees who were subjected to costs of Rs 5 crores
and four licensees, including the appellant, who were subject to costs of
Rs 50 lakhs was because in the case of the former their stakes had
been offloaded ostensibly in the name of a fresh infusion or transfer of
equity. However, it is evident that all these licensees were complicit in
the illegal exercise of obtaining favours for themselves by the
indulgence of those in power. That, above all, was the foundation of the
decision in CPIL3 and the justification for quashing licences and the
allocation of the 2G spectrum. This Court then directed TRAI to frame
fresh recommendations for the grant of licences and for the allocation of
spectrum in the 2G band in twenty-two service areas by auction, as
was done for the allocation of spectrum in the 3G band. Thus, the
decision in CPIL 3 leaves no manner of doubt that the appellant was in
pari delicto along with the Union Government.
D. The claim for refund of entry fee
26. The nature of the entry fee has to be understood from the UASL
Guidelines which were issued by the DoT on 14-12-2005. Clause 6 of
15
the Guidelines required each applicant seeking a UASL for a given
service area to deposit a "non-refundable entry fee" in accordance with
Annexure I, which elucidated the quantum of the fee which was
payable for different service areas. Clause 14 indicates that the entry
fee was payable in addition to the annual licence fee which was payable
for holding a UASL.
27. Letters of intent were issued to the appellant for providing
unified access service to twenty-one service areas. The appellant
deposited the circle-wise entry fee, in terms of the UASL Guidelines, on
10-1-2008 in the amount of Rs 1454.94 crores. It is only upon the
payment of this entry fee that the appellant became eligible to be
issued UASLs in the twenty-one service areas. Clause 18.1 17 of the
UASL agreement acknowledged the payment of a "one-time non-
refundable entry fee" prior to the signing of the agreement. Thus, the
entry fee was a one-time non-refundable fee payable. According to the
Union Government, this was payable by an applicant for participating in
the process of obtaining the UASL and was distinguishable from the
licence fee under Clause 10.1 18 which was relatable to the actual
operation of the licence.
28. In the course of its judgment dated 16-9-20151, TDSAT dealt
with the submission of the Union of India that the entry fee was "non-
refundable" in terms of the UASL Guidelines. Dealing with the
para 32)
"32. To us it appears that submissions based on Section 4 of the
Telegraph Act or the characterisation of the entry fee in the UASL
guidelines and the licence as "non-refundable" is really begging the
question. The submissions would have carried weight if the
petitioners' licences were cancelled or terminated for any violation of
the terms of the licences or were surrendered by it of its own accord.
In
the facts of the present case the petitioner failed to get entry into
the exclusive domain reserved by law for the State
29. There is much to commend in the above line of reasoning of
TDSAT. The entry fee, under the terms of the UASL Guidelines and the
UASL agreements, was a one-time non-refundable fee. TDSAT held that
the submission of the Union of India would have credence if the
licences were terminated for breach or if the licensee were to voluntarily
surrender the licence. However, this was
a case where the licence was held to be unlawful, due to its grant being
in breach of the Constitutional mandate under Article 14. All the
licences and the allocation of spectrum came to be cancelled by the
decision in CPIL on the ground that the policy and the process followed
by the Union Government were arbitrary, and unjustified benefits had
been granted to the licensees. Thus, TDSAT held that, strictly speaking,
the contractual term stipulating that the entry fee was non-refundable
would not by and in itself preclude the claim for refund on the basis of
the judgment of this Court in CPIL³, which held that the entire process
leading up to the award of the licences was arbitrary and constitutional.
TDSAT having entered the above finding, for the rest of the discussion,
this judgment will also proceed on that premise.
E. Jurisdiction of TDSAT
30. The appellant has objected to TDSAT's conclusion that the
appellant's remedy does not fall in the contractual realm between itself
and the Union of India. Since the public law remedy of restitution was
neither claimed before nor granted by this Court in CPI TDSAT went
into the genesis of the dispute and consequential reliefs granted by this
Court. TDSAT held that since the challenge was focused on the arbitrary
and mala fide actions that were embodied in the policy of allotting 2G
spectrum licences, the quashing of the licences was a necessary
consequence of the grant of the licences being vitiated. Thus, TDSAT
held that "a direction for refund [is] outside the purview of the Contract
Act and an exercise of constitutional powers is clearly beyond the
authority of this Tribunal [TDSAT] and in that regard the petitioner must
approach the Court that quashed its licences, that is, the Supreme
Court and seek appropriate reliefs".
31. This Court will analyse whether TDSAT had the jurisdiction to
entertain the claim for a refund of the entry fee. TDSAT is an
adjudicatory body constituted under the TRAI Act. Initially, the TRAI
was empowered to regulate the telecom sector in India and adjudicate
upon disputes. The adjudicatory powers of TRAI, specifically with
respect to issuing directions to DoT, were placed in issue before the
Delhi High Court in Union of India V. TRAI19 The Delhi High Court held
that TRAI did not possess the authority to issue directions to DoT. In
order to overcome the effect of this position, the TRAI Act was
amended in 2000 and TDSAT was established. TDSAT's website
elaborates on the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2000 and notes:
"In order to bring in functional clarity and strengthen the
regulatory framework and the disputes settlement mechanism in the
telecommunication sector, the TRAI Act of 1997 was amended in the
year 2000 and TDSAT was set up to adjudicate disputes and dispose
of appeals
with a view to protect the interests of service providers and consumers
of the telecom sector and to promote and ensure orderly growth of the
telecom sector."
32. The TRAI Act governs the functioning of TDSAT. The jurisdiction
of civil courts has been ousted by Section 15. Section 16 enables TDSAT
to regulate its own procedure, guided by the principles of natural
justice. An appeal on a substantial question of law lies to this Court
under Section 18 of the TRAI Act. In the above statutory context, the
jurisdiction of TDSAT will be evaluated below.
33. Section 14(a)21 of the TRAI Act empowers TDSAT to adjudicate
any dispute:
(i) Between a licensor and licensee;
(ii) Between two or more service providers; and
(iii) Between a service provider and a group of consumers.
34. The scope of TDSAT's powers to adjudicate "any dispute" was
interpreted in COAI V. Union of India²2 by a three-Judge Bench of this
Court. The Court held that the powers envisaged by the TRAI Act for
TDSAT are wide and it would not be appropriate for this Court to impose
8)
"8.
Chapter IV containing Section 14 was inserted by an
amendment of the year 2002 and the very Statement of Objects and
Reasons would indicate that to increase the investors' confidence
and to create a level playing field between the public and the private
operators, suitable amendment in the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 1997 was brought about and under the amendment, a
tribunal was constituted called the Telecom Disputes Settlement and
Appellate Tribunal for adjudicating the disputes between a licensor
and a licensee, between two or more service providers, between a
service provider and a group of consumers and also to hear and
dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the
Authority. The aforesaid provision was absolutely essential as the
organisations of the licensor, namely, MTNL and BSNL were also
service providers. That being the object for which an independent
tribunal was constituted, the power of that Tribunal has to be
adjudged from the language conferring that power and it would not
be appropriate to restrict the same on the ground that the decision
which is the subject-matter of challenge before the Tribunal was that
of an expert body.
Having regard to the very purpose and object
for which the Appellate Tribunal was constituted and having
examined the different provisions contained in Chapter IV, more
particularly, the provision dealing with ousting the jurisdiction of the
civil court in relation to any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is
empowered by or under the Act, as contained in Section 15, we have
no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the power of the
Appellate Tribunal is quite wide, as has been indicated in the statute
itself and the decisions of this Court dealing with the power of a
court, exercising appellate power or original power, will have no
application for limiting the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal
under the Act. Since the Tribunal is the original authority to
adjudicate any dispute between a licensor and a licensee or between
two or more service providers or between a service provider and a
group of consumers and since the Tribunal has to hear and dispose
of appeals against the directions, decisions or order of TRAI, it is
difficult for us to import the self-contained restrictions and
limitations of a court under the Judge-made law to which reference
has already been made and reliance was placed by the learned
Attorney General."
35. S.B. Sinha, J., in his concurring opinion, further elaborated on
the jurisprudence surrounding tribunals constituted under regulatory
statutes. The judgment noted that TDSAT was a creature of statute and
was empowered to determine its jurisdiction, subject to the constraints
stipulated in the statute. The appeal to this Court under Section 18 has
been confined to a "substantial question of law". Since no such
constraints have been placed on the jurisdiction of TDSAT under Section
22
14, the jurisdiction of TDSAT was held to be broader : (COAI case
"27. TDSAT was required to exercise its jurisdiction in terms of
Section 14-A of the Act. TDSAT itself is an expert body and its
jurisdiction is wide having regard to sub-section (7) of Section 14-A
thereof. Its jurisdiction extends to examining the legality, propriety
or correctness of
a direction/order or decision of the authority in terms of sub-section (2)
of Section 14 as also the dispute made in an application under sub-
section (1) thereof. The approach of the learned TDSAT, being on the
premise that its jurisdiction is limited or akin to the power of judicial
review is, therefore, wholly unsustainable. The extent of jurisdiction of a
court or a tribunal depends upon the relevant statute. TDSAT is a
creature of a statute. Its jurisdiction is also conferred by a statute. The
purpose of creation of TDSAT has expressly been stated by Parliament in
the amending Act of 2000. TDSAT, thus, failed to take into consideration
the amplitude of its jurisdiction and thus misdirected itself in law.
*
*
*
29. If a jurisdictional question or the extent thereof is disputed
before a tribunal, the tribunal must necessarily decide it unless the
statute provides otherwise. (See Judicial Review of Administrative
Law by H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, p. 260.) Only when a
question of law or a mixed question of fact and law are decided by a
tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme Court can exercise its power
of judicial review.
*
*
*
34. Statutory recommendations made by it are normally accepted
by the Central Government, as a result of which the rights and
obligations of the parties may seriously be affected. It was in the
aforementioned premise Parliament thought of creating an
independent expert tribunal which, if an occasion arises therefor,
may interfere with the finding of fact, finding of law or a mixed
question of law and fact of the authority. Succinctly stated, the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal is not circumscribed in any manner
whatsoever."
36. Section 14 of the TRAI Act has also been interpreted in Union of
India V. Tata Teleservices (Maharashtra) Ltd. 23 ("Tata Teleservices") by
a two-Judge Bench of this Court. In that case, the respondent had
moved TDSAT seeking a declaration that the action of the Union of India
(the licensor) in raising a claim and recovering the amount was
unlawful. The respondent also sought a declaration that a set-off made
by invoking a condition of the licence in respect of the Maharashtra
service area was illegal. The Union of India claimed that it was entitled
to make the set-off and recover damages occasioned by the failure of
the respondent to fulfil its obligations under a letter of intent issued in
respect of the Karnataka Telecom circle. TDSAT had rejected24 the claim
of the Union of India that it was entitled to a legal or equitable set-off
and held that it had no jurisdiction to enter a counterclaim at the
instance of the Union of India. In appeal, this Court held that either as
a licensor or a service provider, the Union Government could make an
application to TDSAT regarding a dispute between it and the licensee,
another service provider or a group of consumers. This Court noted that
there was no reason to whittle down the right "of the Union
Government to move the Tribunal for adjudication of its claim within
the purview of Section 14(1)". This Court observed that if the subject-
matter
was capable of being raised by way of a claim under Section 14 of the
TRAI Act, it would not be logical to exclude the power to raise a
counterclaim.
37. Having held that TDSAT had jurisdiction to entertain a
counterclaim, the judgment dealt with the submission of the
respondent that where a licence had not actually been issued to a party
by the Union Government, the dispute did not fall either under clause
(i) or (ii) of Section 14(a). The Court held that : (Tata Teleservices
"19.
In other words, a dispute commencing with the acceptance
of a tender leading to the possible issue of a licence and disputes
arising out of the grant of licence even after the period has expired
would all come within the purview of Section 14(a) of the Act. To put
it differently, Section 14 takes within its sweep disputes following
the issue of a letter of intent, pre-grant of actual licence as also
disputes arising out of a licence granted between a quondam
licensee and the licensor."
38. The Court observed that though the bid submitted by the
respondent had been accepted by the Union of India and a letter of
intent was issued, the contract ultimately did not come into existence
since the respondent was insisting on certain modifications and the
licence was not actually granted. The Court held : (Tata Teleservices
"22. We have already indicated that a specialised tribunal has
been constituted for the purpose of dealing with specialised matters
and disputes arising out of licences granted under the Act. We
therefore do not think that there is any reason to restrict the
jurisdiction of the tribunal so constituted by keeping out of its
purview a person whose offer has been accepted and to whom a
letter of intent is issued by the Government and who had even
accepted that letter of intent. Any breach or alleged breach of
obligation arising after acceptance of the offer made in response to a
notice inviting tender, would also normally come within the purview
of a dispute that is liable to be settled by the specialised tribunal."
39. This Court also held that there was no reason to restrict the
expression "licensee" appearing in Section 14(a)(i) to exclude a person
like the respondent to whom a letter of intent had been issued, when
the letter of intent had been accepted but an attempt had been made
to negotiate certain terms before a formal contract was entered into
23
p. 526, para 23)
"23. We see no reason to restrict the expressions "licensor" or
"licensee" occurring in Section 14(a)(i) of the Act and to exclude a
person like the respondent who had been given a letter of intent
regarding the Karnataka Circle, who had accepted the letter of intent
but was trying to negotiate some further terms of common interest
before a formal contract was entered into and the work was to be
started. To exclude disputes arising between the parties thereafter
on the failure of the contract to go through, does not appear to be
warranted or justified considering the purpose for
which TDSAT has been established and the object sought to be achieved
by the creation of a specialised tribunal."
(emphasis supplied)
40. Relying upon the judgment in Tata Teleservices ²³, the appellant
claims that the refund of the entry fee falls within the purview of
Section 14(a)(i) of the TRAI Act. While evaluating the submissions, it
must be noted at the outset, that there is an inconsistency in the line of
submissions urged on behalf of the appellant. The Union of India
submitted that the entry fee which was paid by the appellant was a one
-time non-refundable fee in terms of the UASL Guidelines and the UASL
agreement. The response of the appellant to the above submission is
that the licence was not terminated for a breach on the part of the
appellant, nor did the appellant voluntarily surrender the licence.
Hence, according to the appellant, the clause in the guidelines and the
agreement precluding refund would not stand attracted. In other
words, as a result of the decision of this Court in CPI ³, the entire
process leading up to the award of licence for 2G spectrum was held to
be vitiated and the licences were quashed. TDSAT has accepted this line
of submission of the appellant and held that the UASL condition in
regard to the non-refundability of the one-time entry fee would not per
se stand attracted where the licence was not terminated for a breach
but was quashed by this Court by the exercise of its jurisdiction under
Article 32 for the reason that the entire process was found to be
vitiated and manifestly arbitrary. The basis of the claim which has been
raised by the appellant for refund is not a dispute over the terms which
govern the relationship between the parties following the issuance of a
letter of intent but before the grant of an actual licence, or a dispute
arising out of a licence granted between the licensor or a licensee.
41. As a matter of fact, it is also important to note that the
appellant, as will be analysed in greater detail later, has placed reliance
on the doctrine that an agreement which is void cannot be split up and
none of the parties to the agreement can be permitted to seek part-
enforcement of a contract through a court of law. In support of this
proposition, reliance has been placed on the decision of this Court in
Tarsem Singh V. Sukhminder Singh2 ("Tarsem Singh"). A two-Judge
Bench of this Court had held that if an agreement is held to be void,
then none of the terms, "except in certain known exceptions, specially
where the clause is treated to constitute separate and independent
agreement, severable from the main agreement" can be enforced
separately and independently.
42. The reliance on the principle embodied in Tarsem Singh25 is a
clear indicator that the basis of the claim of the refund does not
emanate from the relationship between the appellant and the
respondent as licensor and licensee. The claim for restitution is based
independently on the ground that upon the decision of this Court in
CPIL holding the licence to be unlawful, the appellant
is entitled to restoration of the benefit which has been obtained by the
Union of India under an agreement which is held to be void.
43. Apart from what has been stated above, the earlier analysis of
the decision in CPIL 3 indicates that when the controversy over the
allocation of 2G spectrum and the licences was the subject-matter of
adjudication before this Court, the appellant as well as the Union
Government were defending the allocation of the spectrum and the
grant of 2G licences. The appellant was on notice of the fact that the
award of licences in pursuance of the "first-come-first-serve" policy was
under challenge and the main relief which was sought in the
proceedings under Article 32 was for the setting aside of the auction
and the award of damages. It is in this backdrop, that the conduct of
the appellant assumes significance. The appellant did not, in the course
of the adjudication before this Court, put forth the plea for refund of the
entry fee in the event that the allocation of the spectrum or the grant of
licences were to stand vitiated.
44. This Court has noticed a rising trend of cases where parties have
attempted to take another bite at the cherry by initiating proceedings
over various forums, particularly to circumvent the jurisdiction of this
Court which is in seisin of the matter. A purportedly ancillary remedy is
urged in another forum as a dilatory tactic or as an attempt at forum
shopping. One of us (Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, J.), speaking for a two-
Judge Bench of this Court in Vedanta Ltd. V. Goa Foundation2 had
26
disapproved of such tactics. In that case, the Court dismissed a review
petition against the decision in Goa Foundation V. Sesa Sterlite Ltd.
which had analysed a party's attempt to pursue litigation before the
High Court in spite of a conclusive decision28 of this Court which had
quashed its mining leases and directed issuances of fresh leases with
fresh environmental clearances in the State of Goa.
45. In T.P. Moideen Koya V. State of Kerala²9 a three-Judge Bench
of this Court disapproved of the practice of vexatious litigation when
the effect of a binding judgment is sought to be diluted or altered in a
manner that deviates from the procedure for modification. The Court
"13. It is well settled that a decision pronounced by a court of
competent jurisdiction is binding between the parties unless it is
modified or reversed by adopting a procedure prescribed by law. It is
in the interest of the public at large that finality should attach to the
binding decisions pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction
and it is also in the public interest that individuals should not be
vexed twice over with the same kind of litigation. While hearing a
petition under Article 32 it is not permissible for this Court either to
exercise a power of review or some kind of an appellate jurisdiction
over a decision rendered in a matter which has come
to this Court by way of a petition under Article 136 of the Constitution.
The view taken in Bhagubhai Dullabhbhai Bhandari V. District
Magistrate that the binding nature of the conviction recorded by the
High Court against which a special leave petition was filed and was
dismissed cannot be assailed in proceedings taken under Article 32 of
the Constitution was approved in Daryao V. State of U.P. 31 (see AIR
para 14 of the Report)."
46. The judgment in CPIL contains a detailed enumeration of the
facts which were brought to the attention of the Court and all the
submissions which were placed on the record by the contesting parties.
The submissions bear expressly on the lack of transparency and the
effort on the part of the authorities of the Union Government to benefit
a select group of persons/entities who were favoured under the "first-
come-first-serve" policy. The decision dwelt on the benefits which the
selected entities have received-both in terms of excluding others as
well as in setting down the financial terms for the award of the licence.
The determination of the entry fee was an integral element of the
financial terms governing the award of the licence and was not a stand-
alone feature which could be isolated from the overall process leading
up to the award of licences. Therefore, the submission of the appellant
that the right to appeal for a refund of the entry fee would enure after
the decision in CPIL 3 would be a simplistic understanding of the process
and the ultimate decision of this Court. While directing the cancellation
of the licences and ordering a fresh auction, this Court imposed costs of
Rs 5 crores on one set of licensees and Rs 50 lakhs on another set, after
assessing their culpability in wrongly benefitting from the "wholly
arbitrary" and "unconstitutional exercise" of licence and spectrum
allocation. It would be an improper reading of the judgment to
postulate that the decision leaves open a claim for the refund of the
entry fee. The payment of the entry fee was one element in the overall
financial conspectus which led to the award of licences. The
adjudication before this Court in CPIL3 must be construed as a one
composite whole from which its parts cannot be separated.
47. The appellant has argued that if TDSAT's conclusion on the
jurisdiction were to be accepted, it would impinge on the expanse of its
jurisdiction and will exclude certain disputes falling within the ambit of
public law. However, this argument is not a correct reading of the
conclusion that TDSAT has arrived at. Dehors the decision in CPIL the
appellant's dispute over the terms of the licence with the Union of India
(licensor) would fall within the jurisdiction of TDSAT under Section 14(a)
(i), as affirmed by this Court in Tata Teleservices The respondent's
argument that the appellant is no longer a "licensor" after the quashing
of the licences would be a restrictive reading of the jurisdiction of TDSAT
in view of the decision in Tata Teleservices ²³. However, since the policy
on the allocation of spectrum and the licences were quashed on the
grounds of mala fides and arbitrariness in the Union Government's
policy, the subsequent enquiry into viability of the refund of the entry
fee would have to be agitated before the same court.
48. Such practice has been previously followed by TDSAT. In AUSPI11
a two-Judge Bench of this Court considered the decision3 of TDSAT on
the definition of AGR which was upheld33 by this Court in the exercise
of its appellate jurisdiction under Section 18 of the TRAI Act. This Court
was called upon to decide whether a substantially similar question can
be reagitated before TDSAT after this Court's dismissal of the civil
appeal against TDSAT order holding that AGR will include only revenue
arising from licensed activities and not revenue from activities outside
the licence of the licensee. The Court observed that TDSAT had
jurisdiction, only after specifically noting the order of this Court
granting the Union of India specific liberty to allege the issues before
"32. The first substantial question of law which we have to decide
is whether after dismissal of Civil Appeal No. 84 of 2007 of the Union
of India by this Court on 19-1-2007 against the order dated 7-7-
2006
32
of the Tribunal, the Union of India can reagitate the question
decided in the order dated 7-7-2006 that the adjusted gross
revenue will include only revenue arising from licensed activities and
not revenue from activities outside the licence of the licensee.
33. For deciding this question, we must first look at the language
of the order dated 19-1-20073 of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 84 of
2007. The order dated 19-1-200733 is quoted hereinbelow:
'Heard the parties. Pursuant to the direction of TDSAT in the
impugned order³², a fresh recommendation has been made by TRAI.
In view thereof, we see no reasons to interfere. The appeal is
dismissed. The appellant is, however, given liberty to urge the
contentions raised in this petition before TDSAT.'
It will be clear from the language of the order dated 19-1-2007 33 that while
dismissing the appeal, the Court has given liberty to the appellant, namely, Union
of India, to urge the contentions raised in Civil Appeal No. 84 of 2007.
34.
Thus, as per the express language of the order dated 19-1-
33
2007 of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 84 of 2007, the Union of
India could raise each of the grounds extracted above before the
Tribunal. Hence, even
if we hold that the order dated 7-7-2006 32 of the Tribunal got merged
with the order dated 19-1-200733 of this Court passed in Civil Appeal
No. 84 of 2007, by the express liberty granted by this Court in the
order dated 19-1-200733, the Union of India could urge before the
Tribunal all the contentions covered under Grounds 1 to 6 extracted
above including the contention that the definition of "adjusted gross
revenue" as given in the licence could not be challenged by the
licensees before the Tribunal and will include all items of revenue
mentioned in the definition of "adjusted gross revenue" in the licence."
(emphasis in original)
49. Apart from the above, it must be noted that the appellant made
no effort to urge during the course of the submissions before the Court
in CPI that they should be allowed a refund of entry fee in the event
that the Court were to quash the process and the award of licences.
Significantly, the appellant did not seek the permission of this Court at
that stage to reserve their liberties of agitating a claim for refund of
entry fee in separate proceedings. Besides having such a course of
action open to them before the judgment was delivered, the appellants
had their remedies open in law even after the decision by seeking
liberty of adopting independent proceedings for agitating the refund of
the entry fee. Not having done this at any stage in, or in connection
with, the proceedings relating to the decision in CPI the appellant
cannot be permitted to do so subsequently.
50. Attempting to get over this hurdle, the appellant urged before
this Court that what could have been agitated in the course of the
proceedings leading up to the decision in CPIL 3 can well be agitated in
the present proceedings since the coram in both cases would be the
Supreme Court and the appellant is now in appeal before this Court
against the decision of TDSAT. Such a course of action would not plainly
be open to the appellant since the jurisdiction which has been invoked
presently in the civil appeal is the appellate jurisdiction arising out of
the decision of TDSAT to reject the claim for refund of the entry fee.
51. The conduct of the appellant indicates that on 13-5-20165, the
appellant sought to withdraw the appeals against the order of TDSAT.
The Court had recorded - "the appellant prays for liberty to withdraw
the present appeals and instead approach this Court once again if it
becomes so necessary". The appellant ought to have obtained specific
liberty of the Court on 13-5-2016 of pursuing proceedings before
TDSAT, something which is conspicuous by its absence in the order
which was passed by this Court. Yet, the appellant chose to move TDSAT
by filing the second telecom petition. TDSAT noted that the petition was
a "second attempt" by the appellant "for claiming the same relief"
which
had been sought under the impugned order of TDSAT. Thus, when the
appellant failed in seeking relief on 11-12-2018², it filed an appeal
against the order of TDSAT and then moved this Court for restoration of
the first set of appeals which was allowed on 7-1-2020°. The course of
action which has been adopted by the appellant is anything but fair-
withdrawing the civil appeals which were instituted against the first
order of TDSAT without obtaining specific liberty or permission to move
TDSAT, instituting a second round of litigation before TDSAT, and then
obtaining a revival of the first set of civil appeals. A party must not be
allowed to conduct litigation in this manner. Such a course of action is
subject to grave abuse since it lays bare an effort at forum-shopping
and selectively deciding where and before whom it would pursue its
remedies. It is in this backdrop, that the failure of the appellant to be
fair with the Court when it addressed its submissions in the judicial
process leading up to the decision in CPI 3 must be assessed.
52. For the above reasons we are of the view that TDSAT has
correctly come to the conclusion that the claim by the appellant for
refund of the entry fee could not have been entertained.
F. The claim founded on frustration and restitution
53. In this section of the judgment, we will analyse the claim of the
appellant that it is entitled to claim a refund of the entry fee on an
application of the doctrine of frustration and the principle of restitution.
The appellant has placed reliance on the provisions of Sections 56 and
65 of the Contract Act. The basic postulate of the appellant is that when
a licence is granted under the proviso to Section 4(1) of the Telegraph
Act, the licence is in the nature of a contract between the Government
and licensee, thus bringing it within the ambit of the Contract Act.
564, para 39)
"39. The proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Telegraph
Act, however, enables the Central Government to part with this
exclusive privilege in favour of any other person by granting a
licence in his favour on such conditions and in consideration of such
payments as it thinks fit. As the Central Government owns the
exclusive privilege of carrying on telecommunication activities and as
the Central Government alone has the right to part with this
privilege in favour of any person by granting a licence in his favour
on such conditions and in consideration of such terms as it thinks fit,
a licence granted under the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 4 of
the Telegraph Act is in the nature of a contract between the Central
Government and the licensee."
The principle which has been elucidated in the above extract is that
when the Union Government parts with the exclusive privilege which is
conferred upon it by Section 4(1) of the Telegraph Act by granting a
licence, the licence is in the nature of contract between the Union
Government and the licensee.
55. It is on the above premise that the appellant seeks to invoke the
application of the doctrine of frustration of contract and of restoration.
56. Section 56 of the Contract Act provides as follows:
"56. Agreement to do impossible act.-An agreement to do an
act impossible in itself is void.
Contract to do act afterwards becoming impossible or
unlawful.- A contract to do an act which, after the contract is made,
becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor
could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes
impossible or unlawful.
Compensation for loss through non-performance of act
known to be impossible or unlawful.-Where one person has
promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable
diligence, might have known, and which the promisee did not know,
to be impossible or unlawful, such promisor must make
compensation to such promisee for any loss which such promisee
sustains through the non-performance of the promise."
57. The doctrine of frustration is elucidated in the three-Judge Bench
decision of this Court in Satyabrata Ghose V. Mugneeram Bangur &
34
Co.
B.K. Mukherjee, J., while explaining the doctrine of frustration,
observed : (AIR pp. 46-47, para 10)
"10. Although various theories have been propounded by the
Judges and jurists in England regarding the juridical basis of the
doctrine of frustration, yet the essential idea upon which the doctrine
is based is that of impossibility of performance of the contract; in
fact impossibility and frustration are often used as interchangeable
expressions. The changed circumstances, it is said, make the
performance of the contract impossible and the parties are absolved
from the further performance of the contract impossible and the
parties are absolved from the further performance of it as they did
not promise to perform an impossibility.
We hold, therefore, that the doctrine of frustration is really an
aspect or part of the law of discharge of contract by reason of
supervening impossibility or illegality of the act agreed to be done
and hence comes within the purview of Section 56 of the Contract
Act. It would be incorrect to say that Section 56 of the Contract Act
applies only to cases of physical impossibility and that where this
section is not applicable, recourse can be had to the principles of
English law on the subject of frustration."
Thus, it was held that the applicability of Section 56 of the Contract Act
is not limited to cases of physical impossibility. The Court also noted
that in deciding cases in India, the only test which must apply "is that
of supervening impossibility or illegality of the act agreed to be
contractually done". Thus, the Court enunciated the doctrine underlying
Section 56 by construing the word "impossible" in its practical sense,
not just in its literal sense. Similarly, Section 2035 of the Contract Act
envisages a situation where an agreement is void when both parties are
under a mistake as to a matter of fact.
58. In Tarsem Singh25, this Court was confronted with a contract
being void under Section 20 of the Contract Act as the parties were
under a mistake of fact regarding the metric for assessing the area of
land that was the subject of the contract. This Court, while interpreting
the expression "discovered to be void", held that these words
comprehend a situation in which parties were suffering from a mistake
of fact from the very beginning but had not realised at the time of
entering into the agreement or signing of the documents that they were
suffering from any such mistake and had therefore acted bona fide
while entering into such agreements. The agreement, as the Court held,
in that case was void from its inception and was discovered to be so at
a much later date.
59. The appellant, besides placing reliance on Tarsem Singh25 has
urged that all judicial decisions are retrospective (unless in a particular
case this Court makes its judgment prospective) and hence, the
voidness which attaches to its UASLs would relate back to their very
inception. It is on this basis that the appellant stakes its claim for a
refund of the entry fee based on the principle of restitution.
60. Section 65 of the Contract Act recognises the principle of
restitution, particularly when a contract is discovered to be or becomes
void. It stipulates thus:
"65. Obligation of person who has received advantage under
void agreement, or contract that becomes void.-When an
agreement is discovered to be void, or when a contract becomes
void, any person who has received any advantage under such
agreement or contract is bound to restore it, or to make
compensation for it, to the person from whom he received it."
61. In Pollock & Mulla's seminal treatise on the Contract Act366 , it has
been noted that Section 65 does not operate in derogation of the
maxim in pari delicto potion est conditio possidentis:
"Section 65 is not in derogation of the common law maxims ex
dolo malo non oritur actio and in pari delicto potion est conditio
possidentis; and only those cases as are not covered by these
maxims can attract application of the provision of Section 65 on the
footing that when an agreement in its inception was not void and it
was not hit by the maxims but is discovered to be void
subsequently, right to restitution of the advantage received under
such agreement is secured on equitable consideration. The section
has been held not to apply where both parties knew of the illegality
at the time the agreement was made, and were in pari delicto."
Thus, the application of Section 65 of the Contract Act, 1872 has to be
limited to those cases where the party claiming restitution itself was
not in pari delicto.
62. In The Principles of Law of Restitution37, it has been noted that
all claims for restitution are subject to a defence of illegality. The
genesis of this defence is in the legal maxim ex turpi causa non oritur
actio (no action can arise from a bad cause). A court will not assist
those who aim to perpetuate illegality. This rule was initially recognised
by the House of Lords in its decision in Holman V. Johnson38 Lord
Mansfield held : (ER p. 1121)
"The objection, that a contract is immoral or illegal as between
the plaintiff and defendant, sounds at all times very ill in the mouth
of the defendant. It is not for his sake, however, that the objection is
ever allowed; but it is founded in general principles of policy, which
the defendant has the advantage of, contrary to the real justice, as
between him and the plaintiff, by accident, if I may so. The principle
of public policy is this; ex dolo malo non oritur actio. No court will
lend its aid to a man who founds his cause of action upon an
immoral or illegal act. If, from the plaintiff's own stating or
otherwise, the cause of action appears to arise ex turpi causa, or the
transgression of a positive law of this country, there the Court says
he has no right to be assisted."
(emphasis supplied)
The Principles of Law of Restitution subsequently notes that in
pari delicto potior est conditio possidentis is a way of qualifying the ex
turpi causa defence³9:
"This in pari delicto principle enables the court to analyse the
particular circumstances of the case to determine whether the
claimant is less responsible for the illegality than the defendant, for
then, as between the
claimant and the defendant, the just result is that the claimant should
not be denied relief, since the parties are not in pari delicto. But where
the claimant is more responsible for the illegality or the parties are
considered to be equally responsible, the in pari delicto principle
applies and restitution will be denied."
(emphasis supplied)
64. Thus, when the party claiming restitution is equally or more
responsible for the illegality of a contract, they are considered in pari
delicto.
65. In the decision of the UK Supreme Court in Patel V. Mirza40 ,
Lord
Sumption, JSC has succinctly explained the nature of the inquiry to
determine whether a party is in pari delicto : (WLR pp. 466-67, paras
241-43)
"241. To the principle that a person may not rely on his own
illegal act in support of his claim, there are significant exceptions,
which are as old as the principle itself and generally inherent in it.
These are broadly summed up in the proposition that the illegality
principle is available only where the parties were in pari delicto in
relation to the illegal act. This principle must not be misunderstood.
It does not authorise a general inquiry into their relative
blameworthiness. The question is whether they were *legally* on the
same footing. The case law discloses two main categories of case
where the law regards the parties as not being in pari delicto, but
both are based on the same principle.
242. One comprises cases in which the claimant's participation in
the illegal act is treated as involuntary : for example, it may have
been brought about by fraud, undue influence or duress on the part
of the defendant who seeks to invoke the defence.
243. The other category comprises cases in which the application
of the illegality principle would be inconsistent with the rule of law
which makes the act illegal. The paradigm case is a rule of law
intended to protect persons such as the plaintiff against exploitation
by the likes of the defendant. Such a rule will commonly require the
plaintiff to have a remedy notwithstanding that he participated in its
breach."
(emphasis supplied)
Thus, in determining a claim of restitution, the claiming party's legal
footing in relation to the illegal act (and in comparison to the
defendant) must be understood. Unless the party claiming restitution
participated in the illegal act involuntarily or the rule of law offers them
protection against the defendant, they would be held to be in pari
delicto and therefore, their claim for restitution will fail.
66. The position in India is similar to that of Kuju Collieries Ltd. V.
Jharkhand Mines Ltd. 41 , where a Bench of three learned Judges of this
Court relied on a judgment42 of a five-Judge Bench of the then
Hyderabad High Court.
While construing the provisions of Section 65, this Court held : (Kuju
"8. A Full Bench of five Judges of the Hyderabad High Court in
Budhulal V. Deccan Banking Co. 42 speaking through our Brother,
Jaganmohan Reddy, J. as he then was, referred with approval to
these observations43 of the Privy Council. They then went on to refer
to the observations of Pollock and Mulla in their treatise on Indian
Contract and Specific Relief Acts, 7th Edn. to the effect that Section
65 of the Contract Act, 1872 does not apply to agreements which are
void under Section 24 by reason of an unlawful consideration or
object and there being no other provision in the Act under which
money paid for an unlawful purpose may be recovered back, an
analogy of English law will be the best guide. They then referred to
the reasoning of the learned authors that if the view of the Privy
Council is right, namely, that "agreements discovered to be void"
apply to all agreements which are ab initio void including
agreements based on unlawful consideration, it follows that the
person who has paid money or transferred property to another for an
illegal purpose can recover it back from the transferee under this
section even if the illegal purpose is carried into execution and both
the transferor and transferee are in pari delicto. The Bench then
36)
'33. In our opinion, the view of the learned authors is neither
supported by any of the subsequent Privy Council decisions nor is it
consistent with the natural meaning to be given to the provisions of
Section 65. The section by using the words "when an agreement is
discovered to be void" means nothing more nor less than : when the
plaintiff comes to know or finds out that the agreement is void. The
word "discovery" would imply the pre-existence of something which
is subsequently found out and it may be observed that Section 66,
Hyderabad Contract Act makes the knowledge (Ilm) of the
agreement being void as one of the pre-requisites for restitution and
is used in the sense of an agreement being discovered to be void. If
knowledge is an essential requisite even an agreement ab initio void
can be discovered to be void subsequently. There may be cases
where parties enter into an agreement honestly thinking that it is a
perfectly legal agreement and where one of them sues the other or
wants the other to act on it, it is then that he may discover it to be
void. There is nothing specific in Section 65 of the Contract Act,
1872 or its corresponding section of the Hyderabad Contract Act to
make it inapplicable to such cases.
34. A person who, however, gives money for an unlawful purpose
knowing it to be so, or in such circumstances that knowledge of
illegality or unlawfulness can as a finding of fact be imputed to him, the
agreement under which the payment is made cannot on his part be
said to be discovered to be void. The criticism that if the aforesaid view
is right then a person who has paid money or transferred property to
another for illegal purpose can recover it back from the transferee under
this section even if the illegal purpose is carried into execution,
notwithstanding the fact that both the transferor and transferee are in
pari delicto, in our view, overlooks the fact that the courts do not assist
a person who comes with unclean hands. In such cases, the defendant
possesses an advantage over the plaintiff - in pari delicto potion est
conditio defendentio.
35. Section 84 of the Trusts Act, 1882, however, has made an
exception in a case:
"84. Transfer for illegal purpose.-where the owner of property
transfers it to another for illegal purpose and such purpose is not
carried into execution, or the transferor is not as guilty as the
transferee or the effect of permitting the transferee to retain the
property might be to defeat the provisions of any law, the transferee
must hold the property for the benefit of the transferor."
36. This specific provision made by the legislature cannot be
taken advantage of in derogation of the principle that Section 65,
Contract Act, is inapplicable where the object of the agreement was
illegal to the knowledge of both the parties at the time it was made.
In such a case the agreement would be void ab initio and there
would be no room for the subsequent discovery of that fact.'
We consider that this criticism as well as the view taken by the Bench is
justified. It has rightly pointed out that if both the transferor and transferee are in
pari delicto the courts do not assist them."
(emphasis supplied)
While upholding the view of the Hyderabad High Court, this Court held
"it [the Full Bench42 of the Hyderabad High Court] has rightly pointed
out that if both the transferor and transferee are in pari delicto the
courts do not assist them".
67. In an earlier decision of this Court in Immani Appa Rao V.
Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi4 ("Immani Appa Rao"), a three-Judge
Bench held that where both the parties before the Court are
confederates in the fraud, the Court must lean in favour of the approach
which would be less injurious to public interest. P.B. Gajendragadkar, J.
(as he then was), speaking for the Court, held : (AIR p. 375, para 12)
"12. Reported decisions bearing on this question show that
consideration of this problem often gives rise to what may be
described as a battle of legal maxims. The appellants emphasised
that the doctrine which is pre-eminently applicable to the present
case is ex dolo malo non oritur
actio or ex turpi causa non oritur actio. In other words, they contended
that the right of action cannot arise out of fraud or out of transgression
of law; and according to them it is necessary in such a case that
possession should rest where it lies in pari delicto potior est conditio
possidentis; where each party is equally in fraud the law favours him
who is actually in possession, or where both parties are equally guilty
the estate will lie where it falls. On the other hand, Respondent 1
argues that the proper maxim to apply is nemo allegans suam
turpitudinum audiendum est, whoever has first to plead turpitudinum
should fail; that party fails who first has to allege fraud in which he
participated. In other words, the principle invoked by Respondent 1 is
that a man cannot plead his own fraud. In deciding the question as to
which maxim should govern the present case it is necessary to recall
what Lord Wright, M.R. observed about these maxims in Berg V.
Sadler45, KB at p. 162. Referring to the maxim ex turpi causa non oritur
actio Lord Wright observed that : (KB p. 162)
\
This [maxim], though veiled in the dignity of learned language,
is a statement of a principle of great importance; but like most
maxims it is much too vague and much too general to admit of
application without a careful consideration of the circumstances and
of the various definite rules which have been laid down by the
authorities.
Therefore, in deciding the question raised in the present appeal it would be
necessary for us to consider carefully the true scope and effect of the maxims
pressed into service by the rival parties, and to enquire which of the maxims would
be relevant and applicable in the circumstances of the case. It is common ground
that the approach of the Court in determining the present dispute must be
conditioned solely by considerations of public policy. Which principle would be
more conducive to, and more consistent with, public interest, that is the crux of
the matter. To put it differently, having regard to the fact that both the parties
before the Court are confederates in the fraud, which approach would be less
injurious to public interest. Whichever approach is adopted one party would
succeed and the other would fail, and SO it is necessary to enquire as to which
party's success would be less injurious to public interest."
(emphasis supplied)
68. The principle which was enunciated in the judgment in Immani
Appa Rao44 has been more recently applied in a decision of a three-
Judge Bench of this Court in Narayanamma V. Govindappa46. The Court
"28. Now, let us apply the other test laid down in Immani Appa
Rao44 At the cost of repetition, both the parties are common
participator in the illegality. In such a situation, the balance of
justice would tilt in whose
favour is the question. As held in Immani Appa Rao44, if the decree is
granted in favour of the plaintiff on the basis of an illegal agreement
which is hit by a statute, it will be rendering an active assistance of the
court in enforcing an agreement which is contrary to law. As against
this, if the balance is tilted towards the defendants, no doubt that they
would stand benefited even in spite of their predecessor-in-titl
committing an illegality. However, what the court would be doing is
only rendering an assistance which is purely of a passive character. As
held by Gajendragadkar, J. in Immani Appa Rao44 the first course
would be clearly and patently inconsistent with the public interest
whereas, the latter course is lesser injurious to public interest than the
former."
69. Hence, in adjudicating a claim of restitution under Section 65 of
the Contract Act, the court must determine the illegality which caused
the contract to become void and the role the party claiming restitution
has played in it. If the party claiming restitution was equally or more
responsible for the illegality (in comparison to the defendant), there
shall be no cause for restitution. This has to be determined on the facts
of each individual case.
70. The appellant before us has relied upon the decision of TDSAT in
S. Tel (P) Ltd. V. Union of India ("S. Tel") to establish that the blame
for quashing of the UASLs lies with the Union Government alone. The
issue which came up for decision before TDSAT in that case was whether
the petitioner was entitled to the refund of the money which it paid for
allocation of 3G spectrum under licences which were later quashed by
the judgment³ of this Court. In that case, the petitioner had applied for
UASLs in six circles/service areas on 7-7-2007. The Government issued
a press note on 24-9-2007 prescribing a cut-off date of 10-10-2007 for
submissions of applications for a fresh UASL. On 28-9-2007, the
petitioner applied for UASLs in sixteen circles in addition to its earlier
application for six circles. On 10-1-2008, by another press note, the
deadline for fresh licences was retrospectively advanced to 25-9-2007.
On the same day, the Government granted licences to 122 applicants,
including the petitioner's previous application for six circles, whose
applications had been received prior to 25-9-2007. Against the denial
of licences for sixteen circles on the ground that the application was
made beyond the cut-off date, the petitioner moved the Delhi High
Court challenging the action of the Government in retrospectively
advancing the last date for submission of applications as arbitrary. The
High Court held14 that the decision to fix the cut off-date for making
applications, with a view to limit the number of service providers was
contrary to the decision of the TRAI which the Government had
purported to accept. The Government was accordingly directed to
consider the petitioner's application which was
submitted on 28-9-2007. The Division Bench having dismissed48 an
intra-court appeal, led to proceedings before this Court. The Attorney
General stated that the application submitted by the petitioner was not
rejected but was held in abeyance and it would be considered on a first
-come-first-serve basis in terms of the then prevailing policy in
consultation with the TRAI. This Court in S. Tel 49 disposed of the appeal
while sustaining the findings recorded by the Delhi High Court in regard
to the change in the cut-off dates.
71. For the purpose of the present discussion, it would not be
necessary to advert to the detailed analysis in the above case, save and
except to note that the petitioner moved TDSAT claiming a refund of the
amount which it had paid for the 3G spectrum in three service areas.
TDSAT)
"In course of hearing of the case we repeatedly asked Mr Banerjee
what blame, if any, for the quashing of its licences extends to the
petitioner. Mr Banerjee was unable to show anything from the
Supreme Court judgment in Centre for Public Interest Litigation or
from the Government records that might show that the petitioner
was in any way responsible for the quashing of its licences.
It is thus clear that though the petitioner's UAS licences were
declared illegal and quashed, that was not due to any fault by the
petitioner but on account of the illegalities committed by the
Government in the issuance of those one hundred and twenty-two
(122) licences. While discussing the provisions of Clauses 3.6 and
3.7 of the NIA it is noted above that those clauses deal with a
situation where the licence is cancelled/terminated at the instance of
the licensor for some fault on the part of the licensee. The quashing
of the petitioner's licences in the present case thus clearly does not
fall under the two clauses in the NIA. Further, as a result of the
quashing of the petitioner's licences its contract with the
Government relating to 3G spectrum got discharged on account of
frustration, as provided under Section 56 of the Contract Act, leaving
it open to the petitioner to seek the relief of restitution in terms of
Section 65 of the Contract Act."
72. The decision of TDSAT to allow a refund is thus clearly postulated
on the principle that the petitioner was not at fault, but the UASLs were
quashed because of the illegalities committed by the Government.
Therefore, there is a clear distinction between the facts as they
emerged before TDSAT in S. Tel47 and the facts of the present case.
73. In the present case, the appellant has been held to be in pari
delicto. The decision of this Court in CPIL3 leaves no manner of doubt
that the appellant was among the group of licensees who were found to
be complicit in obtaining benefits under the "first-come-first-serve"
policy of the Union Government at the cost of the public exchequer. In
such a situation and following the well-settled principles which have
been enunciated above, the appellant could not be held entitled to
claim a refund of its entry fee.
74. On behalf of the appellant, it is sought to be urged that in the
auction which followed the decision in CPIL 3 the Union Government
granted fresh licences including for the areas which were governed by
the licences in favour of the appellant at a much higher value. This
argument is completely unacceptable for the simple reason that if the
Union Government had held a transparent and objective process of
conducting an auction when the initial licences were granted in favour
of the appellant, a much higher value would have been realised by the
public exchequer. The appellant has been the beneficiary of a
manifestly arbitrary policy which was adopted by the Union Government
and which was quashed in the decision of this Court in CPIL³ That
being the position, the appellant would not be entitled to a refund of
The surest way't to legal research!
the entry fee even on the principle of restitution embodied in Section
65 of the Contract Act.
G. The policy of set-off
75. According to the appellant, the set-off which was granted by the
Union Government in pursuance of the decision of the EGoM on 31-10-
2012, constitutes an admission of liability. In this backdrop, it has been
submitted that the policy which was adopted by the Union Government
by allowing a set-off to licensees whose licences have been quashed
subject to their participating in and being found successful in the fresh
auction, suffers from manifest arbitrariness.
76. By the judgment of this Court in CPI the licensees whose
licences had been quashed were not barred from participating in the
subsequent auction for the grant of fresh licences. On 12-10-2012, the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology issued a
document titled "Queries and Responses to the NIA for competitive bids
for allocation of spectrum issued by the DoT". Among the queries,
which were in the nature of Frequently Asked Questions, Queries 74
and 75 and the response were in the following terms:
"74. (i) The original entry level
A set-off is allowed against the
Pan India licence fee of Rs
earnest money and the payment
1506.82 crores (along with
due in the event of spectrum
interest from the date of payment
being won in this auction. The
of such licence fee) which was
total amount of such set-off shall
paid for acquiring the licences,
be limited to the total entry fee
which are quashed by the Hon'ble
paid by the entity for all its
Supreme Court for no reason
licences
which
have
been
attributable to a licensee, should
quashed by the Supreme Court.
be allowed to be set-off against
No interest will be due on this
the earnest money required to be
amount.
paid for participating in the new
auction and against the
successful bid amount, in the
event of a successful bid. In the
event there would be any shortfall
in the money required to be paid
by
on successful bid and the
licensee fee already paid to you in
respect of the quashed 21 UASL,
shall obviously pay such
additionally.
(ii)
The
bank
guarantees
Required bank guarantees in the
originally submitted with the DoT
event
of
winning
of
in respect of the 21 UAS licences
spectrum/acquisition of Unified
which are quashed by the Hon'ble
licence (Access Services) will
Supreme Court for no reason
need to be furnished.
attributable to *** should be
allowed to be used for the
acquisition and allotment of new
licences and spectrums towards
the requirement of the same, in
the event of a successful bid by
In the event there would be
any shortfall in the bank
guarantees required to be
submitted by on successful
bid and the bank guarantees
already submitted with DoT in
respect of the quashed 21 UASL,
shall obviously submit such
bank guarantees additionally.
75. (i) We would like to seek
This cannot be clarified at this
clarity
with
regard
to
stage.
Government's position on levying
"one-time charge" on the
incumbent operators before the
auction, so that we could arrive at
a well-informed decision with
regard to our participation in the
auction.
(ii) The price already paid by
Please refer to response to query
at the time of issuance of licences
at SI. No. 74."
in 2008 should be adjusted in
totality towards the auction price
in case we are successful in
auction else it should be refunded
in totality. (Not to be linked circle
-wise.)
(emphasis supplied)
77. On 31-10-2012, the Cabinet Secretariat of the Union
Government circulated the minutes of the meeting of the EGoM held on
18-10-2012. The minutes contain the rationale for the adoption of a
policy of set-off in the following terms:
"13. The EGoM considered the letter dated 12-10-2012 from the
Minister of Information & Broadcasting regarding set-off of entry fee
against earnest money and payment due in the event of spectrum
being won and noted that the entry fee paid by TSPs whose licences
were quashed was for a period of 20 years. While on the one hand,
the TSPs could be expected to have paid a pro rata amount for the
period of operation of the licence i.e. 2008-2012, on the other hand,
there could be a claim for refund with interest for the pro rata
amount for the balance period. Therefore, the EGoM decided to allow
such TSPs to adjust an amount equivalent to their full entry fee,
without any interest, against the auction payments, both for
participation and for final payment on successful conclusion. It was
clarified that the set-off would be permitted only to the quashed
licence-holders participating in the auction. Such set-off would be
allowed to the extent of total entry fee paid for all quashed licences
on an aggregate basis without consideration of the expired period of
licence, only if they succeed in the auction. The set-off will be
permitted against the earnest money bank guarantee amount
initially and later against the amount payable for auction price,
irrespective of the number of local service areas (LSAs) in which the
holder of quashed licence is successful in the auction and without
requiring correlation between LSAs in which licences were held
earlier and the LSAs in which the holder of the quashed licences is
successful."
78. The Union Government has submitted before this Court that the
set-off policy was formulated in order to encourage participation of all
telecom operators in the subsequent auction, increasing the possibility
of higher price discovery to the benefit of the public exchequer. It has
been urged that the set-off policy was aimed at the revival of the
telecom industry in a manner which encouraged uninterrupted supply
of services. The policy sought to increase participation at a subsequent
auction by offering a concession in the form of a set-off of the
previously paid entry fee, in case the bidder had emerged successful in
the fresh auction.
79. The appellant did not challenge the policy per se at that stage,
nor did it attempt to enter into the fray at that stage when a fresh
auction was held. In these circumstances, the policy decision adopted
by the Union Government cannot be allowed to be questioned at the
behest of the appellant who sought a refund simpliciter in proceedings
before TDSAT. As held by a Constitution Bench in R.K. Garg V. Union of
India50 a greater free play in the joints must be accorded to decisions
of economic policy where the legislature or the executive is called upon
to make complex choices which cannot always conform to a straitjacket
or doctrinaire solution.
80. For the above reasons, we do not find any reason to entertain
the challenge to the set-off policy at this stage at the behest of the
appellant.
H. Conclusion
81. For the above reasons, we have come to the conclusion that the
appellant was in pari delicto with DoT and the then officials of the Union
Government. The appellant was the beneficiary of the "first-come-first-
serve" policy which was intended to favour a group of private bidding
entities at the cost of the public exchequer. The contention of the
appellant that it was exculpated from any wrongdoing by the judgment
of this Court in CPIL3 is patently erroneous. The process leading up to
the award of the UASLs and the allocation of the 2G spectrum was
found to be arbitrary and constitutionally infirm. The need for an open
and transparent bidding process for the allocation of natural resources
was substituted by a process which was designed to confer unlawful
benefits on a group of selected bidders by which the appellant
benefited. The appellant has tried to obviate these findings by relying
on its acquittal by the Special Judge, CBI.
82. It is important to note that the criminal trial before the Special
Judge, CBI was limited to the question as to whether the promoters of
the appellant had cheated the DoT by providing a false representation
of its compliance with Clause 8 of the UASL Guidelines, since it was
allegedly being controlled by the Essar group. The Special Judge, CBI
acquitted the promoters of the appellant since the prosecution was
unable to prove that : (i) officers of DoT considered the representation
of the appellant to be false; (ii) the appellant was engaging in a sham
transaction; or (iii) the appellant was actually controlled by the Essar
group. Hence, the acquittal of the promoters of the appellant of these
criminal charges does not efface or obliterate the findings which are
contained in the final judgment of this Court in CPIL3. Hence, as a
beneficiary and confederate of fraud, the appellant cannot be lent the
assistance of this Court for obtaining the refund of the entry fee. In any
event, such a course of action before TDSAT was clearly in the teeth of
the judgment of this Court in CPI³.
83. For the above reasons, we have come to the conclusion that
there is no merit in the appeals. The appeals are accordingly dismissed.
Pending application(s) if any, stand disposed of.
+
OnLine TDSAT 99 (Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, Petition No. 329 of
2012, dt. 16-9-2015) [Affirmed]
#
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Loop Telecom & Trading Ltd. V. Union of India, 2018
Telecommunication Petition No. 63 of 2018, dt. 11-12-2018) [Affirmed]
3
4
Petition No. 329 of 2012
5
6
Telecom Petition No. 63 of 2018
7
Civil Appeal No. 893 of 2019
8
Miscellaneous Applications Nos. 198-218 of 2019
9
10
11
12
*
Ed. : Para 97 corrected vide Official Corrigendum No. F.3/Ed.B.J./9/2012 dated 6-2-2012.
15
"6. The detail of non-refundable entry fee, category of service area, financial bank
guarantee, performance bank guarantee, net worth and paid-up equity capital required under
the unified access services licence for each service area is as per Annexure I. The prescribed
paid-up equity capital shall be maintained during currency of the licence."
16 "14. In addition to the non-refundable entry fee described above, the licensee shall also
pay licence fee annually @ 10/8/6% of adjusted gross revenue (AGR) for category A/B/C
service areas respectively excluding spectrum charges."
17 "18.1. Entry fee.-One time non-refundable entry fee of Rs 1.1 crores has been paid by
the LICENSEE prior to signing of this licence agreement."
18
"10.1. The LICENSOR reserves the right to suspend the operation of this LICENCE in whole or
in part, at any time, if, in the opinion of the LICENSOR, it is necessary or expedient to do so in
public interest or in the interest of the security of the State or for the proper conduct of the
TELEGRAPH. Licence fee payable to the LICENSOR will not be required to be paid for the period
for which the operation of this LICENCE remains suspended in whole. If situation so warrant, it
shall not be necessary for LICENSOR to issue a notice for seeking comments of the LICENSEE for
this purpose and the decision of the LICENSOR shall be final and binding.
Provided that the LICENSOR shall not be responsible for any damage or loss caused or arisen
out, of aforesaid action. Provided further that the suspension of the licence will not be a
cause or ground for extension of the period of the LICENCE and suspension period will be taken
as period spent."
19
20
Available at<https://tdsat.gov.in/admin/introduction/uploads/TDSAT%20INTRO.pdf> last
accessed on 28-2-2022.
21
"14. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.-The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Telecom Disputes Settlement
and Appellate Tribunal to-
(a) adjudicate any dispute-
(i) between a licensor and a licensee;
(ii) between two or more service providers;
(iii) between a service provider and a group of consumers:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of matters relating to-
(A) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade
practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission established under sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969);
(B) the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer Disputes
Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established under Section 9 of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986);
(C) the dispute between telegraph authority and any other person referred to in sub-
section (1) of Section 7-B of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885);"
22
23
26
28
29
30 Bhagubhai Dullabhbhai Bhandari V. District Magistrate, AIR 1956 SC 585 : 1956 Cri LJ
1126 : 1956 SCR 533
31 Daryao V. State of U.P., AIR 1961 SC 1457 : (1962) 1 SCR 574
TDSAT 135
at p. 560, para 33
34
:
35 "20. Agreement void where both parties are under mistake as to matter of fact. -
Where both the parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential
to the agreement, the agreement is void.
Explanation.-An erroneous opinion as to the value of the thing which forms the subject-
matter of the agreement, is not to be deemed a mistake as to a matter of fact."
36
R. Yashod Vardhan and Chitra Narayan, Pollock & Mulla's The Indian Contract and Specific
Relief Acts, Vol. I (16th Edn., LexisNexis).
37
Graham Virgo, The Principles of the Law of Restitution (3rd Edn., OUP) p. 710.
38 Holman V. Johnson, (1775) 1 Cowp 341 at p. 343 : 98 ER 1120 at p. 1121
39
Graham Virgo, The Principles of the Law of Restitution (3rd Edn., OUP) p. 711.
40
Patel V. Mirza, (2016) 3 WLR 399 : 2016 UKSC 42
*
Ed. : The word between two asterisks has been emphasised in original as well.
41
Hyd 101
44 Immani Appa Rao V. Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi, (1962) 3 SCR 739 : AIR 1962 SC 370
45 Berg V. Sadler, (1937) 2 KB 158 (CA)
46
47
48
Union of India V. S. Tel Ltd., LPA No. 388 of 2009, decided on 24-11-2009 (Del)
50