In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE AJAY RASTOGI AND ABHAY S. OKA, JJ.)
Vasudha Sethi and Others
Appellants;
Versus
Kiran V. Bhaskar and Another
Respondents.
Criminal Appeal No. 82 of 2022 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 7129 of 2021)
Decided on January 12, 2022
Family and Personal Laws - Guardians and Wards - Child Custody - Welfare of Child -
Constitution of India - Art. 226 - Issue of writs - Habeas Corpus - Maintainability in a
child custody case - Constitution of India - Art. 226 Scope of Judicial
Review/Interference - Family/Matrimonial/Child custody disputes - Conflict of Laws and
Private I International Law - Child Custody
Impugned judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court, affirmed
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
ABHAY S. OKA, J.: - Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2. This appeal arises out of an unfortunate dispute between the appellant no. 1 -
wife and the respondent no. 1 - husband over the custody of their minor male child
Aaditya Kiran. This appeal takes an exception to the Judgment and order dated 31 Superscript(s)
st
August 2021 passed by the learned Single Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High
Court in a petition for habeas corpus filed by the respondent no. 1 herein for seeking
custody of the minor.
3. The respondent no. 1 and the appellant no. 1 were married in New York, United
States of America (for short "USA") on 13th January 2011. The child was born in USA
on 21st January 2016. Thus, the child is a citizen of USA by birth and is holding a USA
passport. Unfortunately, the child was diagnosed with hydronephrosis which required
surgery. It is the case of the respondent no. 1 that as they were not in a position to
secure an appointment of a doctor in USA for surgery, it was agreed between the
appellant no. 1 and the respondent no. 1 that the child will undergo surgery at Max
Hospital, Saket. As the child is a citizen of USA, consent for international travel with
one legal guardian was executed by and between the appellant no. 1 and the
respondent no. 1 on 4th February 2019. The consent was recorded in the said
document to enable the child to travel with the mother - the appellant no. 1 to India.
The consent was executed for the period between 5th February 2019 to 26t
September 2019. The consent document recorded that the child will be leaving USA on
th February 2019 and will be returning back to USA on 26th September 2019. It was
further recorded that any changes to this plan shall be discussed and consented to by
both the parents. A certificate dated 17th September 2019 issued by Dr. Anurag
Krishna, Director, Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery of Max Hospital, Saket, New Delhi
records that the child underwent a surgery on 14th March 2019. It records that he had
examined the child on 12th July 2019 when he found that the child was doing well. Dr.
Anurag Krishna has recorded that the child needs to be reviewed 6 to 7 months post-
surgery along with a fresh ultrasound and renal scan.
4. It is the case of the respondent no. 1 that at the time of surgery, he flew down to
India. After the surgery, he returned to USA for his work. It is brought on record that
the respondent no. 1 has a status of permanent resident in USA which is valid up to
16th August 2031. According to the case of the respondent no. 1, the appellant no. 1
violated the international travel consent by not allowing the minor child to come back
to USA by 26th September 2019. According to the respondent no. 1, the appellant no.
1
detained the minor in her illegal custody in India. Therefore, the respondent no. 1
filed a petition on 30th January 2020 before the Circuit Court of Benton County,
Arkansas, USA, which according to the respondent no. 1 is the Court of competent
jurisdiction. The petition was filed for seeking primary care, control, and custody of the
minor on account of his wrongful detention outside USA. On 3rd February 2020, the
Circuit Court passed an interim order granting primary care, custody, and control of
the minor child to the respondent no. 1 and directed the appellant no. 1 to return the
child to the respondent no. 1. In the petition for habeas corpus filed by the respondent
no. 1 in the High Court, he has stated that though a copy of the said order of the
Circuit Court was forwarded to the appellant no. 1 by email, she continues to detain
the minor child in India. In the circumstances, the respondent no. 1 filed a petition
seeking a writ of habeas corpus in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and prayed
for a direction to the State of Haryana to secure the release of the minor child from the
illegal custody of the present appellants. The appellant nos. 2 and 3 are the parents of
the appellant no. 1 who are residents of Gurgaon in Haryana. At present, the appellant
no. 1 is staying with them. Various interim orders were passed in the said petition
from time to time. The High Court appointed a learned counsel as amicus curiae, who
interacted with the appellant no. 1 as well as the respondent no. 1 on
phone/WhatsApp calls with a view to ascertain their respective stands. He also
submitted a report. By the impugned Judgment and order, the writ petition filed by
the respondent no. 1 was allowed. In paragraph 55, the High Court issued following
directions:
(i) respondent No. 2 is directed to return to USA along with minor child on or
before 30.09.2021;
(ii) in case respondent No. 2 opts to return to USA, the petitioner shall bear the
travel and incidental expenses of respondent No. 2 and the minor child for return to
and also the expenses for their stay in USA till decision of the custody petition and
the petitioner shall not initiate any criminal/contempt proceedings against
respondent No. 2 for inter country removal of the minor child;
(iii) if respondent No. 2 fails to comply with aforesaid direction, respondent No. 2
shall hand over custody of the minor child and his passport to the petitioner on
01.10.2021 or on such other date as may be agreed to by the petitioner;
(iv) in case respondent No. 2 fails to hand over custody of the minor child and
her passport to the petitioner on 01.10.2021 or on such other date as may be
agreed to by the petitioner, respondent No. 1 shall take over the custody and
passport of the minor child from respondent No. 2 and hand over custody and
passport of the minor child to the petitioner on such date as may be agreed to by
the petitioner;
(v) on custody of the minor child and his passport being handed over to the
petitioner, the petitioner shall be entitled to take the minor child to USA;
(vi) in case passport of the minor child is not handed over to the petitioner or
respondent No. 1 by respondent No. 2 on the ground of loss/damage etc., the
petitioner shall be entitled to get the duplicate passport issued from the concerned
authority; and
(vii) on such return of the minor child to USA, either of the parties shall be at
liberty to revive the proceedings before US Court for appropriate orders regarding
appointment of guardian and grant of custody of the minor child."
5. Further directions were issued in paragraphs 57 and 58 by the High Court based
on a decision of this Court in the case of Yashita Sahu V. State of Rajasthan
Paragraphs 57 and 58 read thus:-
"57. In view of the observations in Yashika Sahu's case (supra) it is ordered that
till filing of any such application by either of the parties for revival of the
proceedings before the US Court and passing of any interim/final order by the US
Court of competent jurisdiction on the same, respondent No. 2 shall be entitled to
visit the child and have his temporary custody from 10 : 00 a.m. to 5 : 00 p.m. on
every Sunday or as agreed upon between the petitioner and respondent No. 2 if
respondent No. 2 returns to and stays in USA or make video calls to the minor child
for about half an hour on every day in between 5 : oo p.m. to 6 : 00 p.m. (US time)
or as agreed upon between the petitioner and respondent No. 2 in case respondent
No. 2 does not return to and stay in USA and in such an eventuality, the petitioner
shall bring the minor child to India to meet respondent No. 2 and his maternal
grand parents/other relatives once in a year.
58. However, nothing in this order shall prevent the parties from adopting any
joint parenting plan as agreed to by the parties for welfare of the minor child such
as by arranging admission of the minor child in some school with hostel facility and
by visiting her during holidays and taking her custody during vacation as may be
permitted by the school authorities. It is also further clarified that the observations
in the present order have been made for the purpose of disposal of the present writ
petition and shall not bind any Court or authority in disposal of any other case
involving question of custody or welfare of the child."
6. As per the assurance recorded in the order dated 24th September 2021 of this
Court, the respondent no. 1 has secured a USA visa to the appellant no. 1 of the B-2
non-immigrant category. As can be seen from the order dated 24th November 2021,
this Court made an attempt to ascertain whether an amicable solution could be found
to the dispute. Both sides were directed to submit their suggestions for the amicable
resolution of the dispute. However, an amicable resolution of the dispute was not
possible.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANTS
7. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that even after
surgery, the child needs constant medical care. She submitted that any lapses could
be extremely fatal for the life of the minor. She submitted that the doctor who
operated upon the child has advised a very strict care regime for the child. She
pointed out that constant monitoring of his health is required. Even the water intake of
the child has to be carefully monitored. She pointed out that even the appellant no. 3,
the grandmother of the child is taking care of the minor child and there is a family
support available as she is residing with her parents. She pointed out that a detailed
affidavit has been filed by the appellant no. 1 indicating reasons why in the interest of
the child he should be in India till he is 9-10 years old.
8. Relying upon the material on record, she submitted that even the respondent no.
1 constantly wished to settle down in India and therefore, he purchased more and
more land in India and especially in Bangalore. The learned counsel pointed out that it
was the respondent no. 1 who himself selected a pre-school for the child while he was
in India in April, 2019. She submitted that the respondent no. 1 since the time he got
married to the appellant no. 1 made plans to move back to India permanently and was
planning to construct a farm house and a residential house in Bangalore. She
submitted that it was the desire of the respondent no. 1 that the appellant no. 1
should work in India. Accordingly, property was bought in Bangalore where the mother
of the respondent no. 1 resides. The learned counsel pointed out that after emails
dated 25th December 2019 and 14t th January 2020 were forwarded by the appellant no.
1 to return the money to the appellant no. 2 taken from him for land purchase in
Bangalore, the aforesaid petition was filed by the respondent no. 1 in the Court at
Arkansas in USA.
9. In the written submissions of the appellants, there are various factors pointed
out, such as the temperamental nature of the respondent no. 1 and the conduct of the
respondent no. 1. The learned counsel submitted that this Court has held that
principles of autonomy must inure in the individual against non-state persons as well.
She submitted that in custody cases, a woman cannot be completely eliminated in the
name of the welfare of the child. She urged that the woman cannot be deprived of her
rights. She submitted that in any case, the appellant no. 1 is the primary/sole
caretaker of the child. Relying upon the decisions of this Court in Smt. Surinder Kaur
Sandhu V. Harbax Singh Sandhus, Elizabeth Dinshaw (Mrs.) V. Arvand M. Dinshaw3
and Nithya Anand Raghavan V. State (NCT of Delhi)4, the learned counsel submitted
that there is a statutory presumption in favour of the appellant no. 1 under the
doctrine of tender years. She submitted that this doctrine has been upheld in the
aforesaid three cases and this Court asserted maternal preference as found under
Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (the Act of 1956). She
submitted that the appellant no. 1 is the primary caregiver and therefore, it is in the
child's best interest to retain the custody with the appellant no. 1.
10. The learned counsel submitted that to compel the appellant no. 1 who is the
primary caregiver to return to USA under the rule of "best interest of child" will
amount to an invasion of her fundamental right of autonomy which is a part of the
right of privacy guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. By adopting a
summary procedure, such invasion on the rights of the appellant no. 1 cannot be
made. She submitted that the welfare of the child will mean balancing the interests of
all in the family of the child. The mother being the primary caregiver must be kept in
mind by the Court and her legal rights must be respected and protected by the Court.
She submitted that the appellant no. 1 is a fit mother and, in patriarchy, some special
care is needed to counter the dominant presence of the father of the child. The learned
counsel extensively relied upon an Article by Mr. John Ekelaar under the title "Beyond
the welfare principle". She submitted that the best interest of the child is the primary
principle which also means the welfare of each member of the family of the child. She
submitted that the matter in patriarchy becomes also a matter of gender rights which
is a constitutional issue covered under Article 14 read with Article 15(3) of the
Constitution of India. She submitted that the constitutional provisions recognize that
women form a separate category who need to be enabled by the law.
11. She submitted that the citizenship of a child has nothing to do with the welfare
principle. A child may be a citizen of any country, but if the competent Court finds that
it is in the best interest of the child that he is brought up in India, the child should be
permitted to stay in India. The learned counsel invited our attention to a decision of
this Court in the case of Kanika Goel V. the State of Delhi through Station House
Officer as well as a decision in the case of Prateek Gupta V. Shilpi Gupta° She
submitted that in these two cases, though the child was a foreign citizen, it was found
to be in the best interest that the child remains in India to continue with the prime
caregiver. Her submission is that in this case, the child can continue to be an
American citizen and stay in India on the basis of an OCI card. She submitted that
eventually, the child can make his own choice at the age of 18.
12. The learned counsel submitted that the decisions in the cases of Nithya (supra)
and Kanika (supra) are binding precedents as the same are rendered by the Benches
consisting of three Hon'ble Judges. She submitted that the High Court has completely
ignored the binding precedents. She submitted that the learned Judge of the High
Court cannot decide the case based on his subjective personal opinion. She submitted
that it is necessary that clear and consistent law be followed even in the custody
matters and judicial discretion is not used to subvert the evolving law.
13. The learned counsel submitted that in this case, a writ of habeas corpus was
not maintainable as the custody of the appellant no. 1 is not illegal. She pointed out
that in the cases of Nithya (supra) and Kanika (supra), directions were issued to the
Family Court to complete the hearing of custody matters within a time frame. The
learned counsel submitted that in the cases of Yashita (supra) and Lahari Sakhamuri
V. Sobhan Kodali ², an exception was made to the rule laid down, in the cases of Nithya
(supra) and Kanika (supra) as in these two cases, the mothers had submitted to the
jurisdiction of the Court in USA.
14. She reiterated that in the name of welfare and interest of the child, the welfare
of one of the parents cannot be eliminated altogether. The learned counsel submitted
that the appellant no. 1 cannot be compelled to go back to USA. Her submission is
that if the child is placed in the custody of the respondent no. 1 on the ground that
the appellant no. 1 is not interested in going to USA, the child will be reduced to a
chattel.
15. The learned counsel submitted that to refuse a woman the right of mothering is
refusing to acknowledge and respect a very core biological and social identity. She
submitted that a custody dispute cannot be decided purely in the facts of each case.
She submitted that the law laid down in the case of Nithya (supra) has to be followed
as recently done by Bombay High Court in the case of Chandima Janaka Wijesinghe V.
Union of India in Crl. Writ Petition No. 547 of 2021.
16. The learned counsel submitted that the issue of medical evaluation of the child
requires a detailed hearing. She submitted that the visa granted to the appellant no. 1
is only a tourist visa which would entitle her to visit USA only for specific enlisted
reasons. She submitted that the stand of the respondent no. 1 of supporting the
appellant no. 1 for getting the visa is illusory. She pointed out that the respondent no.
1, by relying upon alleged legal separation, has contended that he cannot support the
application for a grant of a green card to the appellant no. 1. The learned counsel also
invited our attention to the pleadings in the interlocutory applications filed by the
respondent no. 1. She submitted that the conduct of the respondent no. 1 of making
allegations in the applications shows that he is more interested in litigation and
winning the battle against the appellant no. 1 rather than acting in collaboration with
her for the benefit of the child.
17. The learned counsel further submitted that the Indian medical system is better
suited for taking care of the minor son and even the appellant no. 3 is a doctor. She
submitted that it is not in the interest of the minor son that he is taken to USA.
18. She submitted that considering the unique facts of the case, the larger Bench
decisions of this Court in the cases of Nithya (supra) and Kanika (supra) are
applicable. She submitted that the said two decisions constitute binding precedents
and the cases of Lahiri (supra) and Yashita (supra) are exceptions to the general rule.
She submitted that the concept of forum convenience has no place in the
Guardianship proceedings. She submitted that this is not a case of abduction of the
child as the child was brought to India with the consent of the respondent no. 1 for
the purposes of medical treatment. Therefore, the learned counsel submitted that the
offer given by the respondent no. 1 cannot be accepted for the reasons set out in the
written submissions. She submitted that the impugned Judgment is erroneous and
illegal which deserves to be set aside.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT NO. 1
19. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent no. 1 pointed out that the
appellant no. 1 has spent more than nine years in USA. After her marriage with the
respondent no. 1, she has spent eight years in USA. He invited our attention to the
consent executed by the appellant no. 1 and the respondent no. 1 for permitting the
child to travel to India between 5th February 2019 to 26th September, 2019. He
submitted that in the light of the increase in cases of international parental child
abduction from the USA, the Immigration Authorities in USA do not allow a minor US
citizen to leave the country only with one parent without the express consent of the
non-travelling parent. He submitted that after the consent document was executed, no
changes therein were even discussed between the parties. He submitted that
documents on record will show that in terms of the international travel consent form,
return tickets of 26th September, 2019 were also booked. He submitted that in
violation of the international travel consent, the appellant no. 1 has not sent back the
minor son to USA, which amounts to the detention of the minor in her illegal custody
in India.
20. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent no. 1 submitted that there is
no document produced on record by the appellants to show that the child needs
continuous follow-up treatment.
21. The learned counsel submitted that in terms of the interim order dated 10th
June 2020 of the High Court, the respondent no. 1 has been interacting regularly with
his minor son through video conference and there is a very healthy and deep father
and son relationship between them. He stated that he has taken legal advice from a
firm specialising in immigration law in USA. He submitted that the respondent no. 1
received advice from the said firm that to enable the appellant no. 1 and the child to
travel to USA, the quickest as well as legally and practically most viable way to get a
visa was to get a B-2 non-immigrant visa.
22. He pointed out that in the visa invitation letter, the respondent no. 1 has
clarified that he will take care of tour expenses of the appellant no. 1, including the
round trip, airfare, food, housing, medical insurance in USA. The learned counsel
submitted that the order of the High Court is a very balanced order which is consistent
with the law laid down by this Court in the cases of Lahiri (supra) and Yashita (supra).
He would, therefore, submit that there is no reason to interfere with the equitable
orden passed by the High Court.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
23. We have given a careful consideration to the submissions. The appellant no. 1
and the respondent no. 1 got married on 13th January 2011 in New York in USA. The
minor son was born on 21 st January 2016 and is admittedly a citizen of USA. There is
no dispute regarding the appellant no. 1 and respondent no. 1 signing and executing a
consent for travel of the minor to India with one legal guardian. It is necessary to
reproduce the said document which reads thus:-
"CONSENT FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL
WITH ONE LEGAL GUARDIAN
I, Kiran Bhaskar of 321 Division St, Cenerton, AR 72719, United States declare
that I am the legal parent/guardian of Aaditya Kiran, male, born January 21, 2016
at Bentonville, AR. Birth certificate registration number 2016001506, issued from
Bentonville, AR. American passport numbered 546227929, issued on October 14,
2016 at United States, Department of State.
My child, Aaditya Kiran, has consent to travel:
(February 5th, 2019 to September 26th, 2019), C/o Mrs. Usha Bhaskar, #33,
"Udayaravi", 2nd Main Rd, Cholanagar, Bangalore, India 560032
Ph: + 91 96112 230438
(February 5th, 2019 to September 26th 2019), C/o, Mr. Vinay Sethi, A-27/19,
DLF Qutab Enclave, Phase 1, Gurgaon, HR, India 122002
Ph: -91 9810048077
with Vasudha Sethi (my wife, Aaditya's mother) of 321 Division St, Centerton,
AR 72719, United States. Vasudha Sethi has an Indian passport numbered
J0499893, which was issued on June 8, 2010 at Regional Passport Office, Delhi,
India. My child will be leaving the United States on February 5th, 2019 and
returning to the United States on September 26th 2019. Any changes to this plan
shall be discussed and consented upon by both parties.
Any questions regarding this document may be addressed to me at:
Kiran Bhaskar
321 Division St, Cenerton, AR 72719,
United States
Primary number : (425) 214-3212
Email : kiran.bhaskar@gmail.com
Signed on this 4th day of February, 2019.
Sd/-
Kiran Bhaskar
Sd/-
Vasudha Sethi"
(underlines supplied)
24. It is not the case of the appellant no. 1 that there was even a discussion
between the appellant no. 1 and the respondent no. 1 for modification of the said
consent till date. Admittedly, the period of travel mentioned in the consent was not
extended by the respondent no. 1. The minor son underwent surgery at the hands of
Dr. Anurag Krishna on 14th March 2019. The certificate dated 17th September 2019
issued by Dr. Anurag Krishna records that he examined the minor on 12th July, 2019
and he found that the child was doing well. He has recorded in the certificate that the
child needs to be reviewed 6 to 7 months after the surgery along with fresh ultrasound
and renal scan. Thus, the surgery has taken place 33 months back. The appellant has
not placed on record any medical certificate or opinion of Dr. Anurag Krishna on the
present health condition of the child. The appellants have not placed on record any
medical certificate of the treating doctor recording that the child needs any further
treatment or medical care in India. The respondent no. 1 consented for the child
travelling to India and remaining in India till 26th th September 2019. The reason for the
grant of consent was to enable the minor to undergo surgery in New Delhi. We will
have to proceed on the footing that there is no documentary evidence available on
record to show that the presence of the child in India for further medical treatment is
necessary.
25. On 3rd February, 2020, the Circuit Court of Benton County, Arkansas, USA
passed an ex-parte order which reads thus:
"Now on the 3rd day of February, 2020, this matter comes before the Court, and
the Court, being well and sufficiently advised finds and orders as follows:
1. The Court has jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter and venue is
proper herein.
2. Defendant has removed the parties' minor child to India and remained there
without the consent of Plaintiff.
3. Defendant has alienated the child from Plaintiff, which is harmful to the child's
well-being.
4. Plaintiff is awarded primary care, custody and control of the minor child,
Aaditya Kiran pending further orders of the Court.
5. Defendant shall return Aaditya Kiran to Plaintiff immediately.
6. A hearing will be scheduled promptly upon request by either party."
(underline supplied)
26. Firstly, we will deal with the legal submissions made by the learned Counsel for
the appellants. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants has placed heavy
reliance on the decisions of this Court in the cases of Kanika (supra) and Nithya
(supra) which are rendered by Benches of three Judges of this Court. With some
emphasis, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants had submitted that there
is a need to make a departure from the rule of "best interest of the child" or the
"welfare principle". Her contention is that welfare would mean balancing the interests
of all the members of the child's family. She contended that the mother as the primary
caregiver must be kept in mind as a person who has legal rights which must be
respected and protected. The learned counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in
the case of K.S. Puttaswamy V. Union of India by contending that principles of
autonomy must inure against non-state persons as well. Her submission is that the
law regarding custody does not and cannot completely eliminate a woman in the name
of child welfare. On this aspect, we must note that in the case of Kanika (supra), this
Court has quoted with approval what is held in paragraph 53 of its decision in the case
of Prateek Gupta (supra). In paragraph 53 of the decision in the case of Prateek Gupta
(supra), it was held that the issue with regard to repatriation of a child has to be
addressed not on a consideration of legal rights of the parties but on the sole criteria
of the welfare of the child. In paragraph no. 34 of its decision, this Court in the case of
Kanika (supra), held thus:
"34. As expounded in the recent decisions of this Court, the issue ought not to
be decided on the basis of rights of the parties claiming custody of the minor child
but the focus should constantly remain on whether the factum of best interest of
the minor child is to return to the native country or otherwise. The fact that the
minor child will have better prospects upon return to his/her native country, may be
a relevant aspect in a substantive proceeding for grant of custody of the minor child
but not decisive to examine the threshold issues in a habeas corpus petition. For
the purpose of habeas corpus petition, the Court ought to focus on the obtaining
circumstances of the minor child having been removed from the native country and
taken to a place to encounter alien environment, language, custom, etc. interfering
with his/her overall growth and grooming and whether continuance there will be
harmful. This has been the consistent view of this Court as restated in the recent
three-Judge Bench decision in Nithya Anand Raghavan [Nithya Anand Raghavan V.
Judge Bench decision in Prateek Gupta [Prateek Gupta V. Shilpi Gupta, (2018) 2
on the same aspect."
(Underline supplied)
27. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant heavily relied upon an article
by Mr. John Ekelaar. The article contains some criticism of "the welfare principle". The
author has strongly advocated how the law should be reformulated by getting rid of
"welfare" or "best interest" principles. The article is in the realm of the opinion of the
learned author. The decision of this Court in the case of Kanika (supra) reiterates the
well-settled law that the issue regarding custody of a minor child and the issue of the
repatriation of the child to the native country has to be addressed on the sole criteria
of the welfare of the minor and not on consideration of the legal rights of the parents.
The principle that the welfare of the minor shall be the predominant consideration and
that the rights of the parties to a custody dispute are irrelevant has been consistently
followed by this Court. In fact, in sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the Hindu Minority
and Guardianship Act, 1956 (for short "the 1956 Act"), it is provided that in
appointment or declaration of guardian of a minor, the welfare of the minor shall be
the paramount consideration. When a Court decides that it is in the best interest of
the minor to remain in the custody of one of the parents, the rights of the other parent
are bound to be affected. As provided in clause (a) of Section 6 of the 1956 Act, in the
case of a minor boy or girl, the natural guardian is the father, but ordinarily, the
custody of a minor who has not completed the age of 5 years shall be with the mother.
On a conjoint reading of sub-section (1) of Section 13 read with clause (a) of Section 6
of the 1959 Act, if it is found that the welfare of a minor whose age is more than 5
years requires that his custody should be with the mother, the Court is bound to do
so. In the same way, if interest of the minor which is the paramount consideration
requires that the custody of a minor child should not be with the mother, the Court
will be justified in disturbing the custody of the mother even if the age of the minor is
less than five years. In such cases, the rights of the father on the mother, as the case
may be, conferred by clause (a) of Section 6 are bound to be affected. Whenever the
Court disturbs the custody of one parent, unless there are compelling reasons, the
Court will normally provide for visitation rights to the other parent. The reason is that
the child needs the company of both parents. The orders for visitation rights are
essentially passed for the welfare of minors and for the protection of their right of
having the company of both parents. Such orders are not passed only for protecting
the rights of the parents. In view of the settled legal position, the welfare of the minor
being the paramount consideration, we cannot act upon the suggestions of Mr. John
Ekelaar in his Article. We cannot accept the submission that while applying the welfare
principle, the rights of the mother or father need to be protected. The consideration of
the well-being and welfare of the child must get precedence over the individual or
personal rights of the parents. Whether the Court while dealing with a case like this
can compel one of the parents to move from one country to another is a separate
issue. We are dealing with the said issue separately.
28. Each case has to be decided on its own facts and circumstances. Though no
hard and fast rule can be laid down, in the cases of Kanika (supra) and Nithya (supra),
this Court has laid down the parameters for exercise of the power to issue a writ of
habeas corpus under Article 226 of the Constitution of India dealing with cases of
minors brought to India from the country of their native. This Court has reiterated that
the paramount consideration is the welfare of the minor child and the rights of the
parties litigating over the custody issue are irrelevant. After laying down the
principles, in the case of Nithya (supra), this Court has clarified that the decision of
the Court in each case must depend on the totality of facts and circumstances of the
case brought before it. The factual aspects are required to be tested on the touchstone
of the principle of welfare of the minor child. In the cases of Lahiri (supra) and Yashita
(supra), the Benches of this Court consisting of two Judges have not made a departure
from the law laid down in the decisions of larger Benches of this Court in the cases of
Nithya (supra) and Kanika (supra). The Benches have applied the law laid down by the
larger Bench to the facts of the cases before them. It is not necessary for us to discuss
in detail the facts of the aforesaid cases. By its very nature, in a custody case, the
facts cannot be similar. What is in the welfare of the child depends on several factors.
A custody dispute involves human issues which are always complex and complicated.
There can never be a straight jacket formula to decide the issue of custody of a minor
child as what is in the paramount interest of a minor is always a question of fact. But
the parameters for exercise of jurisdiction as laid down in the cases of Nithya (supra)
and Kanika (supra) will have to be followed.
29. Now we turn to the findings recorded by the High Court. The perusal of the
impugned judgment shows that the High Court has adverted to the law laid down in
the cases of Kanika (supra) and Nithya (supra) apart from other cases. The High Court
found that in the facts of the case, summary inquiry deserves to be adopted. The
Court noted that the child has spent more than three years in USA and two and a half
years in India. Therefore, it cannot be said that there is a complete integration of the
child with the social, physical, psychological, cultural and academic environment of
either USA or India. After considering the documents placed on record, the High Court
found that the appellant no. 1 has not produced any further medical report or medical
treatment record to show that the minor child requires further regular medical
treatment apart from usual periodical review and therefore, it will not be difficult to
arrange a periodical review even if the child is in USA. The High Court on examination
of the documents found that the respondent no. 1 had financial resources to maintain
the appellant no. 1 and the minor child in USA. Merely because the respondent no. 1
had asked the appellant no. 1 to arrange funds for purchase of lands in Bangalore, it
cannot be said that his intention is to abandon USA and settle down permanently in
India. Moreover, the High Court noted that international travel consent signed by the
appellant no. 1 and the respondent no. 1 required that the minor should come back to
USA on 26th September, 2019. The High Court held that change in the travel plan was
not discussed and consented by both the parties. The High Court also considered the
allegation that the respondent no. 1 has temperamental issues. In fact, the
respondent no. 1 produced a Psychological Evaluation Report dated 21 st October 2020
issued by the Centre for Psychology which recorded that the respondent no. 1 is free of
any neurophysiological problems and has no diagnosable mental health problems. The
certificate recorded that he is free of depression, anxiety and reports no suicidal
tendencies. The High Court also considered the relevance of the report of the USA
Embassy regarding the welfare of the child. The Court noted that there is a