In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE K.M. JOSEPH AND P.S. NARASIMHA, JJ.)
G.T. GIRISH
Appellant;
Versus
Y. SUBBA RAJU (DEAD) BY LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
AND ANOTHER
Respondents.
Civil Appeals No. 380 of 2022 with No. 381 of 2022 , decided on
January 18, 2022
A.
Contract and Specific Relief - Specific Relief Act, 1963 - S. 9
-
Specific performance of contract - When barred - Illegality of contract or
its subject-matter - Applicability of S. 23 of the Contract Act, 1872
- Held, whatever may be intention of parties, a contract which is
expressly or impliedly prohibited by a statute, or is violative of S. 23 of the
Contract Act in any other way, cannot be enforced by court - However,
where in a case for specific performance of agreement to sell, the sale is not
prohibited, but permission or approval is required from some authority, held,
such a contract is enforceable and would not attract S. 23 of the Contract
Act - In present case agreement to sell, both expressly and impliedly,
would defeat object of City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites)
Rules, 1972 which are statutory in nature - Hence, contract was patently
illegal and could not be enforced
- BDA made an allotment of plot on 4-4-1979 to Defendant 1 - Lease-
cum-sale agreement was also executed on same date - It is while so that
on 17-11-1982, plaintiff entered into agreement with Defendant 1 - Under
allotment, Defendant 1 was put in possession of site - If agreement
between plaintiff and Defendant 1 is taken as it is and it is enforced,
following would be consequences - Allotment to Defendant 1 was made on
4-4-1979 - In fact, Defendant 1 was obliged, in law, to construct a
residential building within two years under R. 17(6) of the 1972 Rules - No
doubt, time could be extended thereunder - But, at the time, agreement dt.
17-11-1982 was entered into, Defendant 1 was already in breach -
Agreement between parties contemplated giving a short shrift to mandate
of law - This is clear from fact that under agreement, Defendant 1 was
obliged to sell site as it is
- Construction of building became a practical impossibility - Price, which
was agreed upon, was qua site alone - Consideration and other terms of
agreement, in other words, ruled out possibility of a residential building
being constructed by Defendant 1, who as allottee, was, under law, obliged
to
construct building - Assuming that construction was put up, which
assumption must be premised on possession not being handed over to
plaintiff
and which is contrary, not only to terms of agreement, but also pleading of plaintiff
and consistent stand in evidence adduced on behalf of plaintiff and even proceeding,
however, on basis that plaintiff has failed to establish that possession was handed
over to him on date of agreement and that possession continued with Defendant 1,
terms of agreement, which included, price being fixed for conveying right for site,
necessarily, would have effect of freezing R-1 in even attempting to put up a
construction
- Thus, held, it is quite clear that parties contemplated a state of affairs
which is completely inconsistent with and in clear collision with mandate of
law - Illegality goes to root of matter - It is quite clear that plaintiff must
rely upon illegal transaction and indeed relied upon same in filing suit for
specific performance - Illegality is not trivial or venial - Therefore, contract
in present case being patently illegal was unenforceable for reason that it
clearly, both expressly and impliedly, would defeat object of the 1972 Rules,
which are statutory in nature - Thus High Court clearly erred in holding that
suit for specific performance was maintainable
- However having regard to entirety of evidence and conduct of parties,
noticing even admitted stand of Defendant 2 that plaint scheduled property
has a value of Rs 2.5 crores and plaintiff has paid, in all, a sum of Rs
50,000, which constituted consideration for agreement to sell several years
ago, while suit for specific performance dismissed by Supreme Court,
appellants directed to pay a sum of Rs 20,00,000 in place of specific
performance of contract
- Government Grants, Largesse, Public Property and Public Premises -
Particular Statutes/Norms/Rules/Orders - City of Bangalore Improvement
(Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 - Rr. 18, 17, 8(1) and 7 - Contract and
Specific Relief - Contract Act, 1872, S. 23
B. Government Grants, Largesse, Public Property and Public Premises -
City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 - R. 18 -
Scope and Operation of - Explained in detail
- R. 18(1) is to apply despite anything which is contained in 1972 Rules itself -
That apart, it would operate, notwithstanding any other Rules, Bye-laws and orders,
which may occupy field - Even an instrument executed in respect of any site
allotted, rented or sold by Board for construction of buildings, will not detract from
exercise of power - Power under R. 18, is vested with Chairman
- Scope of power is to execute a deed of conveyance - This is premised on
request being made by allottee grantee or purchaser of site - R. 18(1) further
contemplates that when power is invoked by Chairman under R. 18(1), restrictions,
conditions and limitations mentioned in R. 18(2) will ipso facto apply - R. 18(2)
divides categories into two - R. 18(2)(a) deals with situation where no building has
been constructed on site - R. 18(2)(b) deals with situation where a building has
been constructed on site
- In present case building on site has not been constructed, within meaning of
the 1972 Rules - Thus, it may be indicated that condition that is imposed, includes
obligation on part of purchaser to construct building on site, within period as may be
specified by Board - Purchaser is visited with restriction that he shall not, without
approval of Board, construct on site, any building other than building for which site
was allotted, rented or sold - Purchaser, who is beneficiary of deed of conveyance
in his favour under R. 18(1), is bound by further limitation or condition that
purchaser shall not alienate site within a period of 10 yrs from date of allotment -
Restriction against alienation, however, could not operate against a mortgage, as
provided in R. 18(2)(a)(iii) - Mortgage is, however, to be one effected for purpose
of construction of building on site - R. 18(2)(c) visits purchaser, committing
breach of any of conditions in clause (a), inter alia, with resumption of site, no
doubt, after a reasonable notice - R. 18(2)(c) further declares that all transactions
entered into in contravention of conditions in clauses (a) and (b) are to be null and
void ab initio - Transactions, which are referred to in R. 18(2)(c), are transactions
which are referred to in R. 18(2)(a)(iii) or R. 18(2)(b)
C. Government Grants, Largesse, Public Property and Public Premises -
City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 - Rr. 18
(1), 18(2), 17 and 7 - Effect of interplay of R. 17, terms of the lease-cum-
sale agreement in present case, and provisions of R. 18(1) and R. 18(2) -
Explained
- By virtue of R. 7 allottee is treated as a lessee - He is obliged to observe
conditions of lease-cum-sale agreement - He is obliged to pay rent, as provided in
the Rules and also lease-cum-sale agreement - For a period of 10 yrs, allottee,
who is also described as lessee and purchaser, cannot alienate site or building -
Thus, in a case of allotment under R. 17, condition against alienation is to exist for a
period of 10 yrs from date of allotment - In case of conveyance deed, which is
executed in favour of allottee, condition against alienation will again operate for
period of ten years from date of allotment - This is apart from other conditions
viz. construction of building on site - In short, allottee becomes owner of site
before expiry of 10 yrs upon power being invoked under R. 18(1) but assignment
of rights, which would have been otherwise absolute, is subjected to conditions, as
mentioned in R. 18(2)(a), which includes prohibition against alienation
D. Government Grants, Largesse, Public Property and Public Premises -
City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 - R. 18
(3) - Scope and applicability of - Explained
- R. 18(3) contemplates existence of either of conditions mentioned therein -
They are : (1) lessee applies pointing out that for reason beyond his control, he is
unable to reside in city of Bangalore; (2) by reason of his insolvency or
impecuniosity, it has become necessary for him to sell site and/or site and building,
if any, he may have put up thereon - R. 18(3) must be read along with R. 17
- While a person is a lessee (which means while he is an allottee), course open
to an allottee/lessee, is to follow Rules and lease-cum-sale agreement and put up a
residential building on site - He may be disabled by financial condition from fulfilling
his promise under lease-cum-sale agreement and Rules to put up building - In
either case i.e. when because of dire financial straits, he finds himself in, he can
apply to Authority to permit him to sell the site, if no building has been put up or if
he has put up a building on site, site along with building
- Courses of action open to BDA would be as follows : it may with previous
approval of State Government, call upon applicant, when he has not put up building,
to surrender site - Thus, in a case where a lessee/allottee wishes to sell site, Rules
contemplate that site would have to be surrendered in favour of Authority -
Rationale is, instead of permitting site being sold to any third party, site would go
back to Authority, which in turn, will enable it to allot it to eligible persons waiting in
queue - Where a building has been put up, again, R. 18(3)(b) contemplates that
lessee can be permitted to sell vacant site and building - When lessee, on basis of
his request that he may be permitted to sell site, has surrendered site to BDA,
further consequence contemplated is that lessee will get back value of allotted site,
which he has deposited under Rr. 17(1) and (2) - Over and above same, lessee is
to be paid an additional sum equal to amount of interest @ 12% p.a.
E. Government Grants, Largesse, Public Property and Public Premises
-
City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 - R. 18
(3) - Expression "but without prejudice to the provisions of R. 17" -
Meaning - Explained
- R. 18(3) must be understood as a power with Board to be exercised with
previous approval of State Government - Thus, an allottee, as a rule, is expected
to hold up to promise he has made about his financial capacity to construct building
- Consequences in R. 17 would remain alive
F. Government Grants, Largesse, Public Property and Public Premises -
City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 - R. 18
(3) - Power to be exercised under - Manner in which to be exercised -
Explained
- Power under R. 18(3) is not meant to be a mechanical exercise of power -
This can be discerned from requirement that "previous" approval of State
Government is sine qua non for BDA exercising its power
G. Doctrines and Maxims - Pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis -
Applicability - Where both parties do not show that there was any
conspiracy to defraud a third person or to commit any other illegal act,
maxim, in pari delicto, held, cannot be made applicable - Contract Act,
1872, S. 23
H. Constitution of India - Art. 136 - Scope of Interference under -
Conduct of parties and question as to whether interference would promote
interests of justice, are relevant considerations
I. Limitation Act, 1963 - Art. 54 - Limitation period for suit for specific
performance - Whether subject suit was premature and thus not
maintainable - Determination of
- There is no evidence to support projected apprehension that Defendant 1 was
about to dispose of property - In fact, any such sale would have been completely
illegal being prohibited by law as that is inevitable and necessary implication flowing
from R. 18(3) of the 1972 Rules - There is absolutely no foundation for plaintiff to
have instituted suit except perhaps repudiation - Hence, finding of High Court that
suit for specific performance was not premature, not disturbed - Specific Relief Act,
1963, S. 9
J. Contract and Specific Relief - Specific Relief Act, 1963 - S. 9 - Suit
for specific performance of agreement to sell - Maintainability - Defendant
vendor repudiated contract and plaintiff did not pray for a declaration that
repudiation was bad - Held, plaintiff cannot be non-suited on this score in
view of finding that agreement to sell cannot be enforced
K. Transfer of Property Act, 1882 - Ss. 52 and 3 - Lis pendens -
Doctrine of - Applicability - Doctrine of notice/constructive - Whether
relevant for applying S. 52 - Principles clarified
- Sine qua non for doctrine of lis pendens to apply is that transfer is made or
property is otherwise disposed of by a person, who is a party to litigation -
Person/party, who finally succeeds in litigation, can ask court to ignore any transfer
or other disposition of property by any party to proceeding - This is subject to
condition that transfer or other disposition is made during pendency of lis
- In present case High Court in arriving at finding that transfer in favour of
appellant was hit bv lis pendens. took into consideration doctrine of
notice/constructive notice - However, held, doctrine of notice and constructive
notice would be inapposite and inapplicable in present case - Neither the fact that
transferee had no notice nor fact that transferee acted bona fide, in entering into
transaction, are relevant for applying S. 52 to a transaction - This is unlike
requirement of S. 19(1)(b) of the Specific Relief Act whereunder these
requirements are relevant
- Contract and Specific Relief - Specific Relief Act, 1963, S. 19(b)
On 4-4-1979, the plaint scheduled property, which consisted of a site, was
allotted to Defendant 1 (since deceased), by the Bangalore Development Authority
("BDA"). Based on the allotment, a lease-cum-sale agreement was entered into
between BDA and Defendant 1 on 4-4-1979. Defendant 1 was put in possession on
14-5-1979. On 17-11-1982, Defendant 1 entered into the agreement with the
plaintiff agreeing to execute the sale deed of the site within three months from the
date on which the plaintiff obtained the sale deed from BDA. On 1-3-1983 and 26-4
-1984, the plaintiff issued letters to Defendant 1, calling upon her to execute the
sale deed. Defendant 1 issued letter dated 8-5-1984, intimating that the plaintiff
was in breach. The agreement itself had lapsed and the advance amount by the
plaintiff was forfeited. After issuing notice on 14-2-1985, the plaintiff instituted the
suit in question, seeking specific performance.
Defendant 1, after filing written statement on 14-8-1986, died pending the suit,
on 18-7-1994. The plaintiff impleaded the husband of the defendant as Defendant 1
(a). A sale deed came to be executed by BDA in favour of the son of Defendant 1
and Defendant 1(a), on 19-6-1996. Thereafter, the son executed sale deed of the
plaint scheduled property in favour of Defendant 2.
The trial court did not decree the suit for specific performance but directed return
of Rs 50,000 with 9% interest. The High Court found that the suit is maintainable. It
was further found that Defendant 2 is not a bona fide purchaser for value without
notice of the agreement to sell dated 17-11-1982. It was further found by the High
Court that the alienation made in favour of Defendant 2 was hit by the provisions of
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 ("TPA"). Answering the point,
whether the plaintiff was entitled to the relief of specific performance, it was found
that, in the facts, when the entire sale consideration was paid by the plaintiff to
Defendant 1, nothing more remained to be done by the plaintiff, and having found
that Defendant 2 was not a bona fide purchaser for value without notice, and taking
the view that Section 23 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 did not apply at all and
there being no reason to not exercise discretion in favour of the plaintiff, the suit
was decreed by directing Defendant 1(a), Defendant 1(b) and Defendant 2 to
jointly convey the plaint scheduled property to the plaintiff.
Thus the present appeals in the Supreme Court.
The defendant contended that there was clear prohibition against the alienation
of the site or the plaint scheduled property for a period of ten years in view of Rule
18(2) of the City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972 ("the
1972 Rules"). The very agreement relied upon by the plaintiff was unlawful, and
therefore, the High Court could not have granted specific performance.
The issues for determination before the Supreme Court were:
(i) Whether the enforcement of the agreement to sell dated 17-11-1982,
expressly or impliedly, lead to palpably defeat the object of the 1972 Rules
which are statutory in nature?
(ii) What is the purport of Rule 18 of the 1972 Rules?
(iii) What is the effect of interplay of Rule 17 of the 1972 Rules, lease-cum-
sale agreement and provisions of Rule 18(1) and Rule 18(2) of the 1972 Rules?
(iv) What is the scope of Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules?
(v) What is the meaning of the expression "but without prejudice to the
provisions of Rule 17", in Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules?
(vi) Whether subject suit was premature and thus not maintainable in view of
Article 54 of the Limitation Act, 1963?
(vii) Whether when defendant repudiated contract and plaintiff not prayed for
a declaration that repudiation was bad, plaintiff could be non-suited on this score
in spite of finding that agreement to sell cannot be enforced?
(viii) What is the condition for applying doctrine of lis pendens in view of
Section 52 TPA?
Allowing the appeals, the Supreme Court
Held :
Rule 18 of the 1972 Rules begins with a non obstante clause as far as Rule 18
(1) is concerned. Rule 18(1) of the 1972 Rules is to apply despite anything which is
contained in the 1972 Rules itself. That apart, it would operate, notwithstanding any
other Rules, Bye-laws and orders, which may occupy the field. Even an instrument
executed in respect of any site allotted, rented or sold by the Board for the
construction of buildings, will not detract from the exercise of power. The power,
under Rule 18 of the 1972 Rules, is vested with the Chairman. The scope of the
power is to execute a deed of conveyance. This is premised on the request being
made by the allottee grantee or purchaser of the site. Rule 18(1) of the 1972 Rules
further contemplates that when the power is invoked by the Chairman under Rule
18(1), the restrictions, conditions and limitations mentioned in Rule 18(2) of the
1972 Rules will ipso facto apply.
(Paras 38 and 38.1)
Rule 18(2) of the 1972 Rules divides the categories into two. Rule 18(2)(a)
deals with the situation where no building has been constructed on the site. Rule 18
(2)(b) deals with the situation where a building has been constructed on the site.
Since, the Supreme Court, in this case, is concerned with the case of a site on
which the building has not been constructed, within the meaning of the 1972 Rules,
it can be indicated that the condition that is imposed, includes the obligation on the
part of the purchaser to construct the building on the site, within the period as may
be specified by the Board. The purchaser is visited with the restriction that he shall
not, without the approval of the Board, construct on the site, any building other
than the building for which the site was allotted, rented or sold. The purchaser, who
is the beneficiary of deed of conveyance in his favour under Rule 18(1) of the 1972
Rules, is bound by the further limitation or condition that the purchaser shall not
alienate the site within a period of 10 years from the date of allotment. The
restriction against alienation, however, could not operate against a mortgage, as
provided in Rule 18(2)(a)(iii) of the 1972 Rules. The mortgage is, however, to be
one effected for the purpose of construction of the building on the site.
(Para 38.2)
What the 1972 Rules and agreement contemplate is, though the entire amount
of the value of the site is payable within a period of 90 days or extended period
under Rule 17(2) of the 1972 Rules, the allottee/lessee becomes the purchaser of
the site, only when the conveyance deed is executed in his favour under Rule 7(7)
of the 1972 Rules. During this period, the Rules and the agreement contemplate
clearly that the allottee puts up the building for his residence but he cannot alienate
the property during the period of 10 years, which is the period of tenancy, and this
period of 10 years begins, from the time he is put into possession, based on the
agreement.
(Para 39.3)
Thus, in a case of allotment under Rule 17 of the 1972 Rules, the condition
against alienation is to exist for a period of 10 years from the date of allotment. In
the case of conveyance deed, which is executed in favour of the allottee, the
condition against alienation will again operate for the period of ten years from the
date of allotment. This is apart from the other conditions viz. construction of the
building on the site. In short, the allottee becomes the owner of the site before the
expiry of 10 years upon power being invoked under Rule 18(1) of the 1972
Rules but the assignment of the rights, which would have been otherwise absolute,
is subjected to the conditions, as mentioned in Rule 18(2)(a) of the 1972 Rules,
which includes the prohibition against the alienation.
(Para 41)
The impact of Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules : This Rule was substituted w.e.f. 21
The surest way't to legal research!"
-12-1976. The Rule contemplates two conditions for its operation. Firstly, it
operates without prejudice to the provisions of Rule 17 of the 1972 Rules.
Secondly, Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules applies, notwithstanding anything contained
in Rule 18(2) of the 1972 Rules. Now, what is the exact scope of Rule 18(3) of the
1972 Rules is that it contemplates the existence of either of the conditions
mentioned therein. They are : (1) the lessee applies pointing out that for reason
beyond his control, he is unable to reside in the City of Bangalore; (2) by reason of
his insolvency or impecuniosity, it has become necessary for him to sell the site and
or site and the building, if any, he may have put up thereon.
(Para 42)
Further Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules must be read along with Rule 17 of the
1972 Rules.
(Para 43)
While a person is a lessee (which means while he is an allottee), the course open
to an allottee/lessee, is to follow the 1972 Rules and lease-cum-sale agreement
and put up a residential building on the site. He may be disabled by the financial
condition from fulfilling his promise under the lease-cum-sale agreement and the
1972 Rules to put up the building. In either case i.e. when because of the dire
financial straits he finds himself in, he can apply to the Authority to permit him to
sell the site, if no building has been put up or if he has put up a building on the site,
the site along with the building.
(Para 43.1)
The courses of action open to BDA would be as follows : it may with the
previous approval of the State Government, call upon the applicant, when he has
not put up the building, to surrender the site. Thus, in a case where a lessee/allottee
wishes to sell the site, the Rules contemplate that site would have to be
surrendered in favour of the Authority. The rationale appears to be, instead of
permitting the site being sold to any third party, the site would go back to the
Authority, which in turn, will enable it to allot it to the eligible persons waiting in the
queue. Where a building has been put up, again, Rule 18(3)(b) of the 1972 Rules
contemplates that the lessee can be permitted to sell the vacant site and the
building. When the lessee, on the basis of his request that he may be permitted to
sell the site, has surrendered the site to BDA, the further consequence
contemplated is that the lessee will get back the value of the allotted site, which he
has deposited under Rules 17(1) and (2) of the 1972 Rules. Over and above the
same, the lessee is to be paid an additional sum equal to the amount of interest @
12% p.a.
(Para 43.2)
The import of the expression "but without prejudice to the provisions of Rule
17" in Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules is as follows-under Rule 17 of the 1972 Rules,
it is open to the Authority to cancel allotment and revoke the agreement and
determine the lease. The allottee can be evicted from the site. The amount of
121/2% of the value paid, under Rule 17(1) of the 1972 Rules can be forfeited. No
doubt, the Board will refund the balance to the allottee. This is a consequence which
is contemplated in Rule 17(6) of the 1972 Rules. This power with the Board is kept
preserved when an allottee does not put up the building. Thus, Rule 18(3) of the
1972 Rules must be understood as a power with the Board to be exercised with
the previous approval of the State Government. Thus, an allottee, as a rule,
is expected to hold up to the promise he has made about his financial capacity to
construct the building. Consequences in Rule 17 of the 1972 Rules would remain
alive.
(Para 44)
The power under Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules is to encompass situations of
insolvency or impecuniosity, which overtake an allottee after the allotment takes
place. In other words, the unplanned and uncontemplated vicissitudes of life may
visit him inter alia with insolvency or impecuniosity, leaving him with no other choice
but to sell the site or even the site with the building. The fact that power under Rule
18(3) of the 1972 Rules is not meant to be a mechanical exercise of power, can be
discerned from the requirement that "previous" approval of the State Government
is the sine qua non for BDA exercising its power.
(Para 45)
Where both parties do not show that there was any conspiracy to defraud a
third person or to commit any other illegal act, the maxim, in pari delicto, etc. can
hardly be made applicable.
(Para 67)
Kedar Nath Motani V. Prahlad Rai, AIR 1960 SC 213 : (1960) 1 SCR 861,
considered
In an agreement wherein the vendor agrees to convey property, which is
permissible only with the permission of some Authority, the court can, in
appropriate cases, grant relief.
(Paras 68 to 75)
Kedar Nath Motani V. Prahlad Rai, AIR 1960 SC 213 : (1960) 1 SCR 861; Holman
V. Johnson, (1775) 1 Cowp 341 : 98 ER 1120; Palaniyappa Chettiar V.
Ram V. Radhabai, AIR 1968 SC 534; Narayanamma V. Govindappa, (2019) 19
Ramalingamurthi, (1962) 3 SCR 739 : AIR 1962 SC 370, considered
to
When an agreement to sell is entered into, whereunder to complete the title of
the vendor and for a sale to take place and the sale is not absolutely prohibited but
a permission or approval from an Authority, is required, then, such a contract is,
indeed, enforceable and would not attract the shadow of Section 23 of the
Contract Act, 1872.
(Para 77)
Whatever may be intention of the parties, a contract which is expressly or
impliedly prohibited by a statute, may not be enforced by the court.
(Paras 79 to 91)
Kocheri V. Neminath Appayya Hanamannayar, AIR 1968 SC 1358, considered
A contract may expressly or impliedly be prohibited by provisions of a law. The
intentions of the parties do not salvage such a contract. What is involved in the
present case, may not be a mere case of a conditional decree for specific
performance being granted. The 1972 Rules contemplate a definite scheme. Land,
which is acquired by the public authority, is meant to be utilised for the particular
purpose. The object of the law is to invite applications from eligible persons, who
are to be selected by a committee and the sites are allotted to those eligible
persons, so that the chosen ones are enabled to put up structures, which are
meant to be residential houses.
(Paras 93 to 102)
Gherulal Parakh V. Mahadeodas Maiya, AIR 1959 SC 781; Sobhag Singh V. Jai
Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1328, relied on
clarified and distinguished
Jambu Rao Satappa Kocheri V. Neminath Appayya Hanamannayar, AIR 1968 SC
1358, cited
If the agreement between the plaintiff and Defendant 1 is taken as it is and it is
enforced, the following would be the consequences. The allotment to Defendant 1
was made on 4-4-1979. In fact, the first defendant was obliged, in law, to
construct a residential building within two years under Rule 17(6) of the 1972 Rules.
No doubt, the time could be extended thereunder. But, at the time, the agreement
dated 17-11-1982 was entered into, Defendant 1 was already in breach.
(Para 106)
The agreement to sell between the parties in the present case contemplated
giving a short shrift to the mandate of the law. This is clear from the fact that under
the agreement, Defendant 1 was obliged to sell the site as it is. Construction of the
building became a practical impossibility. The price, which was agreed upon, was
qua the site alone. The consideration and the other terms of the agreement, in
other words, ruled out the possibility of a residential building being constructed by
Defendant 1, who as the allottee, was, under the law, obliged to construct the
building. Assuming for a moment that the construction was put up, which
assumption must be premised on possession not being handed over to the plaintiff
and which is contrary, not only to the terms of the agreement, but also pleading of
the plaintiff and the consistent stand in the evidence adduced on behalf of the
plaintiff and even proceeding, however, on the basis that as found by the trial court,
that the plaintiff has failed to establish that possession was handed over to him on
the date of agreement and that the possession continued with the first defendant,
the terms of the agreement, which included, the price being fixed for conveying the
right for the site, necessarily, would have the effect of freezing Respondent 1 in
even attempting to put up a construction.
(Para 108.2)
Therefore, contention of the plaintiff that there was nothing, which could have
prevented putting up a building is liable to be rejected.
(Para 109)
Going by the recital in the agreement entered into between the plaintiff and
Defendant 1, possession is handed over by Defendant 1 to the plaintiff. The original
possession certificate is also said to be handed over to the plaintiff. The agreement,
even according to the plaintiff, contemplated that within three months
of conveyance of the site in favour of Defendant 1, Defendant 1 was to convey her
rights in the site to the plaintiff. It is quite clear that the parties contemplated a
state of affairs which is completely inconsistent with and in clear collision with the
mandate of the law. On its term, it stands out as an affront to the mandate of the
law.
(Para 110)
The illegality goes to the root of the matter. It is quite clear that the plaintiff
must rely upon the illegal transaction and indeed relied upon the same in filing the
suit for specific performance. The illegality is not trivial or venial. The illegality cannot
be skirted nor got around. The plaintiff is confronted with it and he must face its
consequences. If every allottee chosen after a process of selection under the rules
with reference to certain objective criteria were to enter into bargains of this
nature, it will undoubtedly make the law a hanging stock.
(Para 111)
For reasons indicated above, on a conspectus of the scheme of the 1972 Rules,
it can be held that the contract was unenforceable for reason that it clearly, both
expressly and impliedly, would defeat the object of the 1972 Rules, which are
statutory in nature. The contract was patently illegal for reasons already indicated.
(Para 113)
Is the suit premature? Scope of Article 54 of the Limitation Act, 1963 : There is
absolutely no evidence to support the projected apprehension that Defendant 1
was about to dispose of the property. In fact, any such sale would have been
completely illegal being prohibited by law as that is the inevitable and necessary
implication flowing from Rule 18(3) of the 1972 Rules. There is absolutely no
foundation for the plaintiff to have instituted the suit except perhaps the
repudiation.
(Para 116)
Hence, the finding of the High Court that suit for specific performance was not
premature, is affirmed.
(Paras 118 to 121)
555, considered
Impact of absence of prayer questioning repudiation by Defendant 1
:
Defendant 2 has raised a contention that since Defendant 1 has repudiated the
contract and as the plaintiff has not prayed for a declaration that the repudiation
was bad, the suit would not lie. In view of the finding by the Supreme Court that
agreement dated 17-12-1982 should not be enforced, the plaintiff cannot be non-
suited on this score.
(Para 123)
considered
Lis pendens : The doctrine of lis pendens is based on the maxim "pendente lite
nihil innovetur". This means that pending litigation, nothing new should be
introduced. Section 52 TPA, which incorporates the doctrine of lis pendens, is based
on equity and public policy. It pours complete efficacy to the adjudicatory
mechanism.
(Para 126)
Bellamy V. Sabine, (1857) 1 De G & J 566 : 44 ER 842; Faiyaz Husain Khan V.
The sine qua non for the doctrine of lis pendens to apply is that the transfer is
made or the property is otherwise disposed of by a person, who is a party to the
litigation. Thus, the person/party, who finally succeeds in the litigation, can ask the
court to ignore any transfer or other disposition of property by any party to the
proceeding. This is subject to the condition that transfer or other disposition is
made during the pendency of the lis.
(Para 129)
Mad 578, referred to
The High Court has, in arriving at the finding that the transfer in favour of the
appellant is hit by lis pendens, taken into consideration the doctrine of
notice/constructive notice. However, the doctrine of notice and constructive notice
would be inapposite and inapplicable in the present case. Neither the fact that the
transferee had no notice nor the fact that the transferee acted bona fide, in entering
into the transaction, are relevant for applying Section 52 to a transaction. This is
unlike the requirement of Section 19(1)(b) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963
whereunder these requirements are relevant.
(Paras 135 and 136)
Mad 219, distinguished
Not a case warranting interference under Article 136 of the Constitution? : It is
undoubtedly true that at both the stages, namely, while granting special leave and
also even after special leave has been granted under Article 136 that is when the
Supreme Court considers an appeal it would not be oblivious to the special nature
of the jurisdiction it exercises. It is not axiomatic that on a case being made
otherwise that the Supreme Court would interfere. The conduct of the parties and
the question as to whether interference would promote the interests of justice are
not irrelevant considerations. Being the final court, it is not without reason that the
Supreme Court is accordingly also clothed with the extraordinary powers under
Article 142 of the Constitution to do complete justice between the parties.
(Para 149)
The upshot of the above discussion is that the High Court has clearly erred in
holding that the suit was maintainable. The suit to enforce the agreement dated 17-
11-1982 should not be countenanced by the court.
(Para 154)
Having regard to the entirety of the evidence and the conduct of the parties,
noticing even the admitted stand of Defendant 2 that the plaint scheduled property
has a value of Rs 2.5 crores and the plaintiff has paid, in all, a sum of Rs 50,000,
which constituted the consideration for the agreement to sell several years ago, the
suit for specific performance is dismissed, the appellants are directed to pay a sum
of Rs 20,00,000 in place of the decree of the trial court.
(Para 156)
RM-D/68737/SV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Ms Kiran Suri, Senior Advocate [Ms Kirti Renu Mishra (Advocate-on-
Record), S.J. Amith, Krishna Kumar and Dr (Ms) Vipin Gupta (Advocate
-on-Record), Advocates], for the Appellant;
R. Basant, Senior Advocate [Ms Pritha Srikumar (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Mansi Binjrajka and Ms Kirti Renu Mishra (Advocate-on-
Record), Advocates], for the Respondents.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Ltd. V. P. Gopirathnam
366a, 373g
Narayanamma V. Govindappa
365a
Mohinder Kaur V. Sant Paul Singh
380c
Balwant Vithal Kadam V. Sunil Baburaoi Kadam
367e-f
Punjab & Sind Bank V. Punjab Breeders Ltd.
367f
Jayalakshmamma (reversed)
389d, 389d-e, 389f
Sikandar V. K. Subramani
379g, 380a
of India V. L.S.N. Murthy
371g
Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. (2) V. State of Haryana
368a
Ahmadsahab Abdul Mulla (2) V. Bibijan
378e, 378e-f, 379c
Syed Zaheer V. C.V. Siddveerappa
367d-e
Shyam Shanker Goela
365g
Ferrodous Estate (P) Ltd.
366a-b
Subbireddy V. K.N. Srinivasa Murthy
367c-d
Sabharwal
378f, 379a
Yogambika V. Narsingh
367b-c
378d, 378e-f, 378f-g,
379a, 379c
366d-e, 367a, 367b-c,
Srinivasaiah
368c, 377c
Chandrashekar Hegde V. Bangalore City Corpn.
367a, 368a-b
371a, 371c
21. AIR 1968 SC 1358, Jambu Rao Satappa Kocheri 368c-d, 369a-b, 369b-c,
V. Neminath Appayya Hanamannayar
370e-f, 371e, 372c
22. AIR 1968 SC 1328, Sobhag Singh V. Jai Singh
373f-g
23. AIR 1968 SC 534, Sita Ram V. Radhabai
362d
24. (1962) 3 SCR 739 : AIR 1962 SC 370, Immani364f, 364f-g, 365a, 365a-
Appa Rao V. Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi
b, 365b-c
25. AIR 1960 SC 213 : (1960) 1 SCR 861, Kedar Nath335g, 360g, 361a, 362a-b,
Motani V. Prahlad Rai
363a, 363a-b, 364d
26. AIR 1959 SC 781, Gherulal Parakh
V.
Mahadeodas Maiya
373a-b, 373d-e
Nallakumara Goundan V. Pappayi Ammal
383f-g, 383g, 384d-e
Motilal V. Nanhelal
365c-d, 367c, 373g
334, Palaniyappa Chettiar V. Chockalingam
Chettiar
362a
Manjeshwara Krishnaya V. Vasudeva Mallya
381c-d
Faiyaz Husain Khan V. Munshi Prag Narain
380e-f
Bhola Nath V. Mul Chand
362a
33. (1857) 1 De G & J 566 : 44 ER 842, Bellamy V.
Sabine
380e
34. (1775) 1 Cowp 341 : 98 ER 1120, Holman V.
Johnson
361a, 361a-b
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
K.M. JOSEPH, J.- Leave granted. The appellants are Defendant 1(a),
Defendant 1(b) and second defendant in a suit filed for specific
performance. Defendant ((a) and Defendant 1(b) have filed SLP (C) No.
6858 of 2017 while Defendant 2 has filed SLP (C) No. 6857 of 2017.
The trial court while refusing specific performance, directed the return
of the amount paid by the plaintiff under the contract. By the impugned
judgment ¹, the High Court allowed the plaintiffs' appeal and directed
the appellants to execute the sale deed relating to the plaint scheduled
property in favour of the plaintiffs (legal representatives of original
plaintiff). The parties will be hereinafter referred to by their status in
the trial court.
A brief overview of facts
2. On 4-4-1979, the plaint scheduled property, which consisted of a
site, was allotted to the first defendant (since deceased), by the
Bangalore Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as "BDA").
Based on the allotment, a lease-cum-sale agreement was entered into
&
between BDA and the first defendant on 4-4-1979. The first defendant
was put in possession on 14-5-1979. On 17-11-1982, the first
defendant entered into the agreement with the plaintiff agreeing to
execute the sale deed of the site within three months from the date on
which, the plaintiff obtained the sale deed from BDA. On 1-3-1983 and
26-4-1984, the plaintiff issued letters to the first defendant, calling
upon her to execute the sale deed. The first defendant issued letter
dated 8-5-1984, intimating that the plaintiff was in breach. The
agreement itself had lapsed and the advance amount by the plaintiff
was forfeited. After issuing notice on 14-2-1985, the plaintiff instituted
the suit in question, seeking specific performance.
3. The first defendant, after filing written statement on 14-8-1986,
died pending the suit, on 18-7-1994. The plaintiff impleaded the
husband of the defendant as Defendant 1(a). A sale deed came to be
executed by BDA in favour of the son of Defendant 1 and Defendant 1
(a), on 19-6-1996. Thereafter, the son executed sale deed of the plaint
scheduled property in favour of the second defendant. It is further not
in dispute that the son of the first defendant and Defendant ((a) was
impleaded as Defendant 1 (b) in the suit in the year 1997. The second
defendant came to be impleaded as second defendant in the suit in the
year 1997. Both Defendant 1 (b) and the second defendant filed written
statements.
4. The trial court did not decree the suit for specific performance but
directed return of Rs 50,000 with 9% interest. The High Court found
that the suit is maintainable. It was further found that the second
defendant is not a bona fide purchaser for value without notice of the
agreement to sell dated 17-11-1982. It was further found by the High
Court that the alienation made in favour of the second defendant, was
hit by the provisions of Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
Answering the point, whether the plaintiff was entitled to the relief of
specific performance, it was found that, in the facts, when the entire
sale consideration was paid by the plaintiff to the first defendant,
nothing more remained to be done by the plaintiff, and having found
that the second defendant was not a bona fide purchaser for value
without notice, and taking the view that Section 23 of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963 did not apply at all and there being no reason to not
exercise discretion in favour of the plaintiff, the suit was decreed by
directing Defendant 1(a), Defendant 1(b) and the second defendant to
jointly convey the plaint scheduled property to the plaintiff.
5. We heard Smt Kiran Suri, learned Senior Counsel on behalf of the
second defendant and Shri R. Basant, learned Senior Counsel on behalf
of the plaintiff. Mrs Kirti Renu Mishra, AoR, appears in the appeal filed
by Defendant (a) and Defendant 1(b).
The contentions of the appellants
6. Smt Kiran Suri, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
second defendant contended that the finding that the suit was
maintainable, was unsustainable. She contended that an agreement
must be lawful, in order that a court may grant specific relief. It is her
contention that the agreement is unlawful, being opposed to public
policy, and also as it was a bargain, which would defeat the provisions
of the law in question, within the meaning of Section 23 of the Contract
Act, 1872.
7. The Senior Counsel invited our attention to the terms of the lease-
cum-sale agreement entered into between the first defendant and BDA.
She pointed out that there was clear prohibition against the alienation
of the site or the plaint scheduled property for a period of ten years.
She drew support from the City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment
of Sites) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules"). She
pointed out that the Court has erred in not noticing that Rule 18(2)
proclaims an embargo against alienation for a period of ten years. The
very agreement relied upon by the plaintiff was unlawful, and therefore,
the Court could not have granted specific performance. She drew
support from the judgment of this Court in Kedar Nath Motani V.
Prahlad Rai2 and Narayanamma V. Govindappa³.
8. The Senior Counsel further contended that the suit itself, besides
being not maintainable, was premature. She elaborated and contended
that, what the agreement between the plaintiff and the first defendant
contemplated, was that,
the first defendant would execute the sale deed in favour of the plaintiff
upon the expiry of three months from the date of conveyance of sale
deed executed by BDA. The agreement of lease-cum-sale contemplated
such a conveyance in favour of the first defendant only after the expiry
of ten years from the date of allotment and the date of the lease-cum-
sale agreement dated 4-4-1979. The suit is filed a good four years prior
to even the expiry of ten years.
9. The Senior Counsel attacked the finding of the High Court that the
second defendant was not a bona fide purchaser for value. She pointed
out that as far as knowledge of pendency of suit is concerned, the
evidence pointed to the second defendant not being aware of the suit,
Defendant 1 (b) has admitted to not disclosing about the pendency of
the suit to the second defendant. The second defendant inspected the
site and found it to be a vacant land except for a small shed. Regarding
the finding of the High Court that the original document, evidencing
delivery of possession of the plaint scheduled property by BDA to the
first defendant, was not given to the second defendant and that only a
photocopy was given, it is contended that the second defendant was
informed that the original was lost. There was already an assignment in
favour of Defendant (b). There was no need for the second defendant
to make any further inquiry. All possible inquiry was conducted by the
second defendant. There is no justification for the High Court to
conclude that the second defendant was not a bona fide purchaser for
value. As far as finding of the High Court that the second defendant, a
20-year-old, at the time of the sale, did not have the wherewithal to
purchase the property, it could not be justified, having regard to the
evidence which established that the second defendant was the owner of
10 acres of land. He was into the business of selling milk and he had
the necessary funds and there is no occasion for the High Court to
interfere with the findings of the trial court in this regard.
10. Per contra, Shri R. Basant, learned Senior Counsel for the
plaintiff, reminded us that the matter is appreciated by the two courts.
The finding that there was a valid contract by the trial court was not
challenged by the appellants. There is no pleading to justify the
argument that the agreement in question was not lawful. He would
point out that neither the lease-cum-sale agreement nor the Rules,
prohibited the allotee entering into an agreement to sell the site. He
pointed out that the rule, which is relevant to the fact, is Rule 17. Even
Rule 18, relied upon by the appellants, did not stand in the way of the
agreement to sell or the sale in favour of the plaintiff. He also
emphasised that it does not lie in the mouth of the appellants to invoke
the proposition that agreement in question was unlawful.
11. The learned Senior Counsel pointed to the findings of the High
Court that by his conduct there was complete absence of bona fides in
the claim. He pointed out that as correctly found by the High Court, the
doctrine of lis pendens, applies. He further submitted that, at any rate,
if the Court found that lis pendens did not apply, the fact that the
second defendant has not been found to be a bona fide purchaser for
value, was sufficient for this Court to decline to interfere, particularly, in
a jurisdiction, which originates from the grant of
special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. He would
refute the contention that the suit was not maintainable and further
that it was premature. He would point out that confronted with the
definite stand of the first defendant, who he points out was the wife of
an MLA and also a Minister, and having regard to Article 54 of the
Limitation Act, 1963, had no choice, except to rush to the civil court
and institute the suit.
12. The learned Senior Counsel would rely upon large body of case
law, including judgments of the High Court of Karnataka, to contend
that an agreement to sell, in circumstances, such as obtaining in the
present case, was valid and lawful. He would command for our
acceptance, the findings of the High Court regarding the fact that the
second defendant was not a bona fide purchaser for value. He did not
have the necessary capacity and he was fully aware of the pendency of
the suit.
The law in question
13. The City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945, going by the
Preamble, was enacted for the improvement of the City of Bangalore
and to provide space for its future expansion. It contemplated the
appointment of a Board of Trustees, which was to consist of eleven
trustees with the Chairman and six trustees being appointed by the
Government. The Act clothed the Board with the power to undertake
improvement schemes. What is of relevance to the present case are the
following provisions.
14. Section 24 read as follows:
"24. Board not to sell or otherwise dispose of sites in
certain cases. Board shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any
sites for the purpose of constructing buildings thereon for the
accommodation of person until all the improvements specified in
Section 23 have been substantially provided for the estimates."
15. Section 29 dealt with the power of the Board to acquire, hold
and dispose of the property and it reads as follows:
"29. Power of Board to acquire, hold and dispose of
property.-(1) The Board shall, for the purposes of this Act, have
power to acquire and hold movable and immovable property,
whether within or outside the city.
(2) Subject to such restrictions, conditions and limitations as may
be prescribed by rules made by the Government, the Board shall
have power or lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or
immovable property which belongs to it, and to appropriate or apply
any land vested in or acquire by it for the formation of open spaces
or for building purposes or in any other manner for the purpose of
any improvement scheme.
(3) The restrictions, conditions and limitations contained in any
grant or other transfer of any immovable property of any interest
therein made by the Board shall notwithstanding anything contained
in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (Central Act 4 of 1882) or any
other law have effect according to their tenor."
16. Section 42 conferred power to make rules. The following
provisions are relevant for the purpose of this case:
"42. Power of Government to make rules.-The Government
may, from time to time, make rules, not inconsistent with this Act-
*
*
*
(aa) regulating the allotment or sale by auction of sites by Board;
(ab) specifying the conditions, restrictions and limitations subject
to which the Board may sell, lease or otherwise transfer movable or
immovable property;"
17. Initially, bye-laws regulating the allotment of sites were
published on 8-1-1954. These bye-laws came to be cancelled upon
enactment of City of Bangalore Allotment of Site Rules, 1964.
Thereafter, the City of Bangalore Improvement Disposal of Site Rules,
1971 came to be enacted. The said Rules came to be repealed with the
making of the City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Site) Rules,
1972. These Rules came into force on the 1st day of September, 1972.
These Rules are the Rules, which would govern the fate of this case.
18. Rule 2(b) defines the word "allottee" as meaning the person to
whom the site is allotted under these Rules. The Rules define
"backward class". It also, inter alia, defines "stray site".
19. Rule 3 reads as follows:
"3. Offer of sites for allotment.-(1) Whenever the Board has
formed an extension or layout in pursuance of any scheme, the
Board may, subject to the general or special orders of the
Government, offer any or all the sites in such extension or layout for
allotment to persons eligible for allotment of sites under these Rules.
(2) Due publicity shall be given in respect of the sites for
allotment specifying their location, number, the amount payable as
earnest money, the last date for submission of applications and such
other particulars as the Chairman may consider necessary; by
affixing a notice to the notice board of the office of the Board, and
any other office as the Chairman may decide from time to time and
by publication in not less than three daily newspapers published in
the city of Bangalore in English and Kannada having a wide
circulation in the city."
20. Rule 5 dealt with the allotment of stray sites. Rules 6
contemplated disposal of sites for heritable purposes.
21. Rule 7 proclaimed that the allottee was to be lessee and it reads
as follows:
"7. Allottee to be a lessee.-The site allotted under Rule 3 or
Rule 5 shall be deemed to have been leased to the allottee until the
lease is determined or the site is conveyed in the name of the
allottee in accordance with these Rules. During the period of the
lease, the allottee shall pay to the Board rent at the rate of rupees
three per annum where the area of the site does not exceed two
hundred square metres, rupees six per annum where the area of the
site exceeds
two hundred square metres but does not exceed five hundred square
metres and rupees twelve per annum where the area of the site
exceeds five hundred square metres before the commencement of each
year."
22. Rule 8 dealt with applications. It contemplated that the
applications for allotment of site were to be in Form I. Several details
are to be furnished. It included the annual income of the applicant,
whether the applicant already owned a house or house site in the city,
outside the city and whether he had any share in such property and the
value of the share. It further included the query as to whether the
applicant's wife/husband/minor child, owned a house or house site
inside or outside the city.
23. Since, it may be relevant to the decision at hand, we may advert
to the Form:
"FORM I
[See sub-rule (1) of Rule 8]
Form of Application for Purchase of Site
To
The Chairman,
City Improvement Trust Board,
Bangalore 20
Sir,
I wish to purchase a building site measuring
in
Extension,
Bangalore. I agree to abide by the conditions of allotment and sale of
the site contained in Rule 17 of the City of Bangalore Improvement
(Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972, and the terms of the lease-cum- -
sale agreement; copies of which are enclosed in duplicate. I also
enclose the duplicate copies of the conditions of allotment and sale
and lease-cum-sale agreement duly signed in token of having
accepted the conditions therein.
Particulars about me are given below-
1. Name (in Block letters)
2. Father's/Husband's name
3. Age
4. Whether the applicant belongs to Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe, Nomadic Tribes, Semi-Nomadic Tribes, Backward
Classes, Denotified Tribes.
5. Whether married or single
6. (a) Residential address : Permanent (House No. Name of
street, locality and town):
(b) Present address : (if different from above) for correspondence
with the Board.
7. (i) Occupation or post.
(ii) Address
(iii) Place of employment or business.
8. (a) Annual income of the applicant (both from profession and
from properties if any)
(b) Any other means indicating the capacity of the applicant to
purchase the site applied for and to building a house thereon.
9. Whether the applicant is ordinarily a resident in Bangalore City
or in the area under the jurisdiction of the Board and the period of
such residence.
10. Whether any member of the family of which the applicant is a
member owns or has been allotted site or a house by the Board or
any other authority, within the area under the jurisdiction of the
Board. (Furnish details).
11. (1) Whether the applicant already owns a house or a house-
site:
(a) in the city (with details)
(b) outside the city (with details)
(2) Whether he/she has any share in such property and the value
of the share thereof.
12. (1) Whether the applicant's wife/husband/minor child owns a
house or a house-site:
(a) in the city (with details)
(b) outside the city (with details)
(2) Whether the applicant's wife/husband/minor child has any
share in such property and the value of the share thereof.
13. Whether the applicant has transferred the ownership or rights
in the house or house-site already allotted to him/her in any of the
schemes of the Board or any other authority to somebody else (if so,
furnish details).
14. Whether the applicant or any members or his/her family has
already availed of any housing or loan scheme of Government, local
body or Cooperative Society, if so, give details.
15. Whether the applicants applied for allotment of a site or a site
with a building, in any of the scheme of the Board or and other
authority and whether his/her deposit was refund (if so, furnish
details).
16. Amount of earnest money deposited now (with Challan No.
and date).
I hereby solemnly declare that all the above information given by
me is true. I shall furnish any additional information in my
possession which you may require. If there is any delay on my part
to furnish the necessary information required by the Board, it will be
within the discretion of the Board to reject my application.
If, at any time it is found that the information given by me above
is incorrect, the Board can cancel the allotment, resume possession
of the site and forfeit part or whole of the amount paid by me till
then towards cost of the site or deposit.
I am aware that under the Rules, I have to build the house myself
with my own resources.
Signature of Applicant
Station
Date
Attested:
Magistrate of the First Class
Date
"
24. Rule 10 dealt with the issue of eligibility for allotment and it
reads as follows:
"10. Eligibility for allotment.-No person-
(1) Who is not ordinarily resident (living independently or with his
family members) in the area within the jurisdiction of the Board for
not less than five years immediately before the last date fixed for
making applications:
Provided that the persons who are domiciled in the State of
Karnataka but serving in the Armed Forces of the Union outside the
State of Karnataka shall be eligible for allotment of sites under these
Rules.
(2) Who or any member of whose family owns or is a lessee
entitled to demand conveyance eventually or has been allotted a site
or a house by the Board or any other authority, within the area under
the jurisdiction of the Board; or of the Corporation of the City of
Bangalore, shall be eligible to apply for allotment of a site:
Provided that the Board may relax the restriction in clause (1)
regarding residence in the case of persons-
(i) who are domiciled in the State of Mysore and who bona fide
intend to reside within the area under the jurisdiction of the
Board; or,
(ii) who are domiciled in the State of Mysore but have gone
outside the State on business, employment, study or training and
who bona fide intend to reside within the area under the
jurisdiction of the board;
or
(iii) who though not domiciled in the State of Mysore bona fide
intend to reside within the area under the jurisdiction of the Board."
25. Rule 11 provided for the principles for selection of applicants for
allotment of sites. The following principles have been set out in Rule 11
(1):
"11. Principles for selection of applicants for allotment of
sites.-(1) The Board shall consider the case of each applicant on its
merits and shall have regard to the following principles in making
selection-
(i) the status of the applicant, that is whether he is married or
single and has dependent children;
(ii) the income of the applicant and his capacity to purchase a
site and build a house thereon for his residence:
Provided that this condition shall not be considered in case of
applicants belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
Wandering Tribes, Nomadic Tribes and other Backward Classes.
(iii) the number of years the applicant has been waiting for
allotment of a site and the fact that he did not secure a site earlier
though he is eligible and had applied for a site;
(iv) persons who are ex-servicemen or members of the family
of the deceased servicemen killed in action, during the last ten
years."
26. The sites were to be allotted among different classes of persons
which included wandering tribes, Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes,
ex-servicemen, persons domiciled in Karnataka but serving in the
Armed Forces of the Union outside the State, State Government
servants, Central Government servants and servants of Corporation.
51% was reserved, in other words, in specific percentage terms for
these categories. 51% was made available for the general public. Non-
availability of applicants was also dealt with.
27. Rule 13 provided for selection of an applicant. The Board was
empowered to reject any application without assigning any reason.
28. Rule 17 provides for conditions of allotment. Since, much turns
on the impact of this Rule, we would refer to the same:
"17. Conditions of allotment and sale of site.-The allotment
of a site under these Rules shall be subject to the following
conditions-
(1) The allottee shall within a period of fifteen days from the
date of receipt of the notice of allotment, pay to the Board twelve-
and-a-half per cent of the price of the site and if no such payment
is made the allottee shall be deemed to have declined the
allotment.
(2) The balance of the value of the site (less than a sum of
rupees thirty where the area of the site does not exceed two
hundred square metres, rupees sixty where the area exceeds two
hundred square metres and does not exceed five hundred square
metres and rupees one hundred and twenty where the area
exceeds five hundred square metres) shall be paid within ninety
days from the date of receipt of the notice of allotment, or such
extended period not exceeding one year as the Chairman may
specify. Interest at fifteen per cent shall be paid on the said
amount for the extended period. If the said amount is not paid
within the period of ninety days or the extended period the
earnest money paid by the allottee shall be liable to forfeiture and
the allotment may be cancelled:
Provided that where an allottee is a person-
(i) whose annual income does not exceed three thousand
and six hundred rupees, he may choose to pay the balance
value of the site in quarterly, half yearly or annual instalments
and the rate of interest on the said amount for the extended
period for quarterly payment will be two per cent for half yearly
payments will be three per cent and annual payments four per
cent;
(ii) whose annual income exceeds three thousand and six
hundred rupees but does not exceed seven thousand and two
hundred rupees interest at twelve per cent per annum shall be
paid on the said amount for the extended period:
Provided further that where an allottee is a person belonging
to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or other Backward
Classes or a nomadic tribe or a wandering tribe, or a denotified
tribe or a family of Defence personnel killed or disabled during
the recent war and whose annual income from all sources does
not exceed rupees five thousand, the balance of the value of
the site required to be paid under this sub-rule shall be paid by
him without interest within a period of six years from the date
of receipt of the notice of allotment.
(3) Until the site is conveyed to the allottee the amount paid by
the allottee for the purchase of the site shall be held by the Board as
security deposit for the due performance of the terms and conditions
of the allotment and the lease-cum-sale agreement entered into
between the Board and the allottee.
(4) After payment under sub-rule (2) is made the Board shall
intimate the allottee the actual measurements of the site and the
particulars thereof and a lease-cum-sale agreement in Form II shall
thereafter be executed by the allottee and the Board and registered
by the allottee. If the agreement is not executed within forty-five
days after the Board has intimated the actual measurements and
particulars of the site to the allottee, the earnest money paid by the
allottee may be forfeited, the allotment of the site may be cancelled,
and the amount paid by the allottee after deducting the earnest
money refunded to him. Every allottee shall construct a building on
the site in accordance with the plans and designs approved by the
Board. If in any case it is considered necessary to add any additional
conditions in the agreement the Board may make such additions.
Approval of the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation for the plans
and designs shall be necessary when the layout in which the site is
situated is transferred to the control of the said Corporation.
(5) The allottee shall comply with the conditions of the agreement
executed by him and the buildings and other Bye-laws of the Board
or the Corporation, as the case may be, for the time being in force.
(6) The allottee shall construct a building within a period of two
years from the date of execution of the agreement or such extended
period as the Chairman may in any specified case by written order
permit. If the building is not constructed within the said period the
allotment may, after reasonable notice to the allottee, be cancelled,
the agreement revoked, the lease determined and the allottee
evicted from the site by the Board, and after forfeiting twelve-and-a-
half per cent of the value of the site paid by the allottee, the Board
shall refund the balance to the allottee.
(7) (a) On the expiry of the period of ten years and if the allotment
has not been cancelled or the lease has not been determined in
accordance with these Rules or the terms of the agreement in the
meanwhile the Board shall by notice call upon the allottee to get the
sale deed of the site executed at his own cost within the time
specified in the said notice.
(b) If the allottee fails to get the sale deed executed within the
time so specified the Board shall itself execute the same and recover
the cost and other charges, if any, incidental thereto from the
allottee as if the same are amount due to the Board.
(8) The allottee shall ordinarily reside or himself make use of the
building constructed on the site allotted to him.
(9) With effect from the date of taking possession of the site the
allottee or his heirs and successors shall be liable to pay the taxes,
fees and cesses payable in respect of the site and any building
erected thereon.
(10) If the particulars furnished by the applicant in the prescribed
application form for allotment of site are found incorrect or false
subsequently, twelve-and-half per cent of the site value, shall be
forfeited after the site is resumed by the Board and the balance
amount of site value refunded to the applicant."
29. Rule 18, likewise, speaks about restrictions, conditions and
limitations on sale of sites and we refer to the same:
"18. Restrictions, conditions and limitation on sales of sites.
-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in-
(i) these Rules or any other rules, Bye-laws or orders governing
the allotment, grant or sale of sites by the Board for construction
of buildings; or
(ii) any instrument executed in respect of any site allotted,
granted or sold by the Board for construction of buildings,
the Chairman may at the request of the allottee, grantee or purchaser of a site,
execute a deed of conveyance subject to the restrictions, conditions and limitations
specified in sub-rule (2).
(2) The conveyance by the Chairman of a site in favour of an
allottee, grantee or purchaser of a site (hereinafter referred to as
"the purchaser") shall be subject to the following restrictions,
conditions and limitations, namely-
(a) in the case of a site on which a building has not been
constructed-
(i) the purchaser shall construct a building on the site within
such period as may be specified by the Board, as per plans,
designs and conditions to be approved by the Board or in
conformity with the provisions of the City of Bangalore
Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 and the Bye-laws made
thereunder;
(ii) the purchaser shall not without the approval of the
Board, construct on the site any building other than a building
for the construction of which the site was allotted, granted or
sold;
(iii) the purchaser shall not alienate the site within a period
of ten years from the date of allotment except by mortgage in
favour of the Government of India, the Government of Mysore,
the Life Insurance Corporation of India or the Mysore Housing
Board, or any company or Cooperative society approved by the
Board or any
Corporation set up, owned or controlled by the State Government or the
Central Government to secure moneys advanced by such Government,
Corporation, Board, Company, Society or Corporations, as the case may
be, for the construction of the building on the site;
(b) in the case of a site on which a building has been
constructed, the purchaser shall not alienate the site and the
building constructed thereon within a period of ten years from the
date of allotment, except-
(i) by mortgage in favour of the Government of India, the
Government of Mysore, the Life Insurance Corporation of India
or the Mysore Housing Board or any Cooperative Society
approved by the Board to secure moneys advanced by such
Government, Corporation, Board, Company or Society for the
construction of the building on the site; or
(ii) with the previous approval of the Board;
(c) in the event of the purchaser committing breach of any of
the conditions in clause (a) or clause (b), the Board may at any
time, after giving the purchaser reasonable notice, resume the
site free from all encumbrances. The purchaser may remove all
things which he has attached to the earth:
Provided he leaves the site in the state in which he received it. All
transaction entered into in contravention of the conditions specified
in clauses (a) and (b) shall be null and void ab initio.
Explanation.-In this Rule, references to the Board shall be
deemed to include the Chairman when authorised by the Board by a
general resolution to exercise any power vested in the Board.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-rule (2), but without
prejudice to the provisions of Rule 17 where the lessee applies that
for reasons beyond his control he is unable to reside in the City of
Bangalore or by reasons of his insolvency or impecuniosity it is
necessary for him to sell the site or site and the building, if any, he
may have put up thereon, the Bangalore Development Authority
may, with the previous approval of the State Government, either-
(a) require him to surrender the site, where there is no
building, in its favour; or
(b) where there is a building put up, permit him to sell the
vacant site and building:
Provided that-
(i) in case covered by clause (a), the Bangalore Development
Authority shall pay to the lessee the allotted value of the site and
an additional sum equal to the amount of interest at twelve per
cent per annum thereon; and
(ii) in cases covered by clause (b), the lessee shall pay to the
Bangalore Development Authority a sum equal to the amount of
interest at twelve per cent per annum on the allotted value of the
site."
30. Rule 19 dealt with voluntary surrender and it read as follows:
"19. Voluntary surrender.-An allottee may at any time after
allotment, surrender the site allotted to him to the Board. On such
surrender the Board shall refund all amounts paid by the allottee to
the Board in respect of the said site."
31. The Rules did not apply to disposal of corner sites and
commercial sites.
32. We may notice in fact that the City of Bangalore Improvement
Act, 1945 came to be repealed by the Bangalore Development Authority
Act, 1976. There were certain amendments carried out to the 1972
Rules which need not detain us.
The purport of the above law
33. It is clear that what is involved is the allotment of public
property. The allottee was to be a lessee. The allottee, during the period
of lease, was to pay rent, as provided in Rule 7. Allotment was
premised on selection being carried out based on principles for
selection, as provided in Rule 11 and to be carried out by the Allotment
Committee under Rule 12. The value of the site is fixed. This is clear
from Rule 17(1).
34. The allottee was to pay 121/2% of the price of the site within 15
days of the receipt of notice of allotment. Within 90 days from the date
of receipt of notice of allotment or extended period not exceeding one
year, which may be fixed by the Chairman, the balance had to be paid.
Non-payment attracted interest for the extended period. If the amount
was not paid within 90 days or the extended period, earnest money was
liable to be forfeited and the allotment may be cancelled. The two
provisos of Rule 17 provided for certain concessions to certain
categories. The amount, which was paid by the allottee, formed the
security deposit for the due performance of the obligation, under the
lease-cum-sale agreement between the Board and the allottee. This
was to be so till the conveyance was executed regarding the site to the
allottee. A lease-cum-sale agreement in Form 2 was to be entered into
bv the allottee. Every allottee was mandated to construct a building.
which, we may clarify was to be a residential building, on the site in
accordance with plan approved by the Board. The allottee was to
comply with the conditions in the agreement.
35. Rule 17(6) fixed the period of two years from the date of
execution of the lease-cum-sale agreement or such extended period,
within which the building had to be put up. Till 29-5-1980, the power
to extend the period was vested with the Board. After 29-5-1980 the
power to extend by a written order was vested with the Chairman. If
the building was not constructed within the period of two years or
extended period, the allotment could be cancelled and the agreement
revoked, the lease determined and the allottee evicted from the site by
the Board. Such action was to be preceded by according a reasonable
notice to the allottee against the proposed action. In the event of such
action being taken, the allottee was entitled to the refund of the
amount after forfeiting 121/2% of the value.
36. It is under Rule 17(7)(a) that on expiry of 10 years of the
allotment, the time arrived for conveying the rights over the site. When
10 years expired, if the allotment had not been cancelled or lease
determined, in accordance with the Rules or in terms of the agreement,
the Board, after issuing a notice to the allottee, calls upon the allottee
to execute the sale deed at his cost. If the allottee failed to get the sale
deed executed, the Board was to execute the sale deed and recover the
cost.
37. Now, the time is ripe to advert to the statutory lease-cum-sale
agreement referred to in Rule 17(4). It is in Form II and much turns on
its terms and we advert to the same, which has been, admittedly,
entered into by the first defendant with BDA:
"FORM II
[See Rule 17(4)]
lease-cum-sale agreement
An agreement made this
day of
197 , between
the City of Bangalore Improvement Trust Board, Bangalore,
(hereinafter called the "Lessor/Vendor") which term shall wherever
the context so permits, mean and include its successors in interest
and assigns of the ONE PART and
hereinafter called
Lessee/Purchaser (which term shall wherever the context so permits
mean and include his/her heirs, executors; administrators and legal
representatives) of the OTHER PART;
Whereas, the City of Bangalore Improvement Trust Board
advertised for sale building sites
in Extension;
And, whereas, one of such building site in Site No.:
more
fully described in the Schedule hereunder and referred to as
property;
And, whereas, there were negotiation between the
Lessee/Purchaser on the one hand and the Lessor/Vendor on the
other for allowing the Lessee/Purchaser to occupy the property as
Lessee until the payment in full of the price of the aforesaid site as
might be fixed by the Lessor/Vendor as hereinafter provided;
And, whereas, the Lessor/Vendor agreed to do so subject to the
terms and conditions specified in the City of Bangalore Improvement
(Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972, and the terms and conditions
hereinafter contained;
And, whereas, thus the Lessor/Vendor has agreed to lease the
property and the Lessee/Purchaser has agreed to take it on lease
subject to the terms and conditions specified in the said rules and
the terms and conditions specified hereunder:
Now this Indenture Witnesseth
1. The Lessee/Purchaser is hereby put in possession of the
property and the Lessee/Purchaser shall occupy the property as a
tenant thereof for a period of ten years from (here enter the date
of giving possession)
or in the event of the lease being
determined earlier till the date of such termination. The amount
deposited by the Lessee/Purchaser towards the value of the
property shall, during the period of tenancy, be held by the
Lessor/Vendor as security deposit for the due performance of the
terms and conditions of these presents.
2. The lessee/purchaser shall pay a sum of rupees
per year
as rent on or before
commencing from
3. The Lessee/Purchaser shall construct a building in the
property as per plans, designs and conditions to be approved by
the Lessee/Vendor and in conformity with the provisions of the
City of Bangalore Municipal Corporations Act, 1949, and the Bye-
laws made thereunder within two years from the date of this
agreement:
Provided that where the Lessor/Vendor for sufficient reasons
extends in any particular case the time for construction of such
building, the Lessee/Purchaser shall construct the building within
such extended period.
4. The Lessee/Purchaser shall not sub-divide the property or
construct more than one dwelling house on it.
The expression "dwelling house" means a building constructed
to be used wholly for human habitation and shall not include any
apartments to the building whether attached thereto or not, used
as a shop or a building of warehouse or building in which
manufactory operations are conducted by mechanical power or
otherwise.
5. The Lessee/Purchaser shall not alienate the site or the
building that may be constructed thereon during the period to the
tenancy. The Lessor/Vendor may, however permit the mortgage of
the right, title and interest of the Lessee/Purchaser in favour of
the Government of Mysore, the Central Government or bodies
corporate like the Mysore Housing Board or the Life Insurance
Corporation of India, Housing Cooperative Societies or Banks to
secure moneys advanced by such Governments or bodies for the
construction of the building.
6. The Lessee/Purchaser agrees that the Lessor/Vendor may
take over possession of the property with the structure thereon if
there is any misrepresentation in the application for allotment of
site.
7. The property shall not be put to any use except as a
residential building without the consent in writing of
Lessor/Vendor.
8. The Lessee/Purchaser shall be liable to pay all outgoings
with reference to the property including taxes due to the
Government and the Municipal Corporation of Bangalore.
9. On matters not specifically stipulated in these presents the
Lessor/Vendor shall be entitled to give directions to the
Lessee/Purchaser which the Lessee/Purchaser shall carry out and
default in carrying out such directions will be a breach of
conditions of these presents.
10. In the event of the Lessee/Purchaser committing default in
the payment of rent or committing breach of any of the conditions
of this agreement or the provisions of the City of Bangalore
Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1972, the Lessor/Vendor
may determine the tenancy at any time after giving the
Lessee/Purchaser fifteen days' notice ending with the month of
the tenancy, and take possession of the property. The
Lessor/Vendor may also forfeit twelve-and-a-half per cent of the
amount treated as security deposit under Clause 1 of these
presents.
11. At the end of ten years referred to in Clause 1 the total
amount of rent paid by the Lessee/Purchaser for the period of the
tenancy shall be adjusted towards the balance of the value of the
property.
12. If the Lessee/Purchaser has performed all the conditions
mentioned herein and committed no breach thereof the
Lessor/Vendor shall at the end of ten years referred to in Clause 1,
sell the property, to the Lessee/Purchaser and all attendant
expenses in connection with such sale such as stamp duty,
registration charges, etc. shall be borne by the Lessee/Purchaser.
13. The Lessee/Purchaser hereby also confirms that this
agreement shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified
in the City of Bangalore Improvement (Allotment of Sites) Rules,
1972, and agreed to by the Lessee/Purchaser in his/her
application for allotment of the site.
14. In case the Lessee/Purchaser is evicted under Clause 9 he
shall not be entitled to claim from the Lessor/Vendor and
compensation towards the value of the improvements or the
superstructure erected by him on the scheduled property by
virtue of and in pursuance of these presents.
15. It is also agreed between the parties hereto that Rs
(Rupees ) in the hands of the Lessor/Vendor received by them
from the Lessee/Purchaser shall be held by them as security for
any loss or expense that the Lessor/Vendor may be put to in
connection with any legal proceedings including eviction
proceedings that may be taken against the Lessee/Purchaser and,
all such expenses shall be appropriated by the Lessor/Vendor from
and out of the moneys of the Lessee/Purchaser held in their
hands.
THE SCHEDULE
Site No.
formed by the City of Bangalore Improvement
Trust Board in Block No.
in the
Extension.
Site bound on-
East by:
West by:
North by:
South by
and measuring east to west
north to south
in all measuring
square
feet.
In witness whereof the parties have affixed their signatures to this
agreement.
Chairman.
The City of Bangalore Improvement Trust Board.
Witnesses:
1.
Lessee/Purchaser
2.
Witnesses:
1.
Lessee/Purchaser"
2.
38. The question then arises, as to what is the purport of Rule 18.
Rule 18, in our view, produces the following effects and is intended to
apply as follows:
38.1. It begins with a non obstante clause as far as Rule 18(1) is
concerned. Rule 18(1) is to apply despite anything which is contained
in the Rules itself. That apart, it would operate, notwithstanding any
other Rules, Bye-laws and orders, which may occupy the field. Even an
instrument executed in respect of any site allotted, rented or sold by
the Board for the construction of buildings, will not detract from the
exercise of power. The power, under Rule 18, is vested with the
Chairman. The scope of the power is to execute a deed of conveyance.
This is premised on the request being made by the allottee grantee or
purchaser of the site. Rule 18(1) further contemplates that when the
power is invoked by the Chairman under Rule 18(1), the restrictions,
conditions and limitations mentioned in Rule 18(2) will ipso facto apply.
38.2. Rule 18(2) divides the categories into two. Rule 18(2)(a) deals
with the situation where no building has been constructed on the site.
Rule 18(2)(b) deals with the situation where a building has been
constructed on the site. Since, we are, in this case, concerned with the
case of a site on which the building has not been constructed, within
the meaning of the Rules, we may indicate that the condition that is
imposed, includes the obligation on the part of the purchaser to
construct the building on the site, within the period as may be specified
by the Board. The purchaser is visited with the restriction that he shall
not, without the approval of the Board, construct on the site, any
building other than the building for which the site was allotted, rented
or sold. The purchaser, who is the beneficiary of deed of conveyance in
his favour under Rule 18(1), is bound by the further limitation or
condition that the purchaser shall not alienate the site within a period
of 10 years from the date of allotment. The restriction against
alienation, however, could not operate against a mortgage, as provided
in Rule 18(2)(a)(iii). The mortgage is, however, to be one effected for
the purpose of construction of the building on the site.
38.3. Rule 18(2)(c) visits the purchaser, committing breach of any
of the conditions in clause (a), inter alia, with the resumption of the
site, no doubt, after a reasonable notice. Rule 18(2)(c) further declares
that all transactions entered into in contravention of the conditions in
clauses (a) and (b) are to be null and void ab initio. The transactions,
which are referred to in Rule 18(2)(c), are the transactions which are
referred to in Rule 18(2)(a)(iii) or Rule 18(2)(b).
39. Now, the question would arise as to the effect of the interplay of
Rule 17, the lease-cum-sale agreement and the provisions of Rule 18
(1) and Rule 18(2).
39.1. An allottee begins his innings as a lessee. The terms of the
lease are set out in the Rules itself, which we have adverted to. The
entire value of the site is to be paid at the very beginning, as already
noticed, or within the extended period. However, the allottee continues
as a lessee. He is obliged to observe the conditions of the lease-cum-
sale agreement. He is obliged to pay rent, as provided in the Rules and
also the lease-cum-sale agreement.
39.2. Under Clause (5) of the lease-cum-sale agreement, the
allottee, who is also described as the lessee/purchaser, is forbidden
from alienating the site or the building that may be constructed during
the period of the tenancy. The period of tenancy is fixed as a period of
10 years from the date of giving possession to the allottee. In other
words, an allottee, who is obliged to enter into a lease-cum-sale
agreement is prohibited from alienating the site or the building, which
may be put up for the period of 10 years. This period of 10 years is
adverted to in Rule 17(7). In other words, for a period of 10 years, the
allottee, who is also described as the lessee and purchaser, cannot
alienate the site or the building. It is to be understood that by virtue of
Rule 7 of the Rules, the allottee is treated as a lessee.
39.3. What the Rules and agreement contemplate is, though the
entire amount of the value of the site is payable within a period of 90
days or extended period under Rule 17(2), the allottee/lessee becomes
the purchaser of the site, only when the conveyance deed is executed
in his favour under Rule 17(7). During this period, the Rules and the
agreement contemplate clearly that the allottee puts up the building for
his residence but he cannot alienate the property during the period of
10 years, which is the period of tenancy, and this period of 10 years
begins, from the time he is put into possession, based on the
agreement.
40. Rule 18(1) and Rule 18(2), in a manner of speaking, fast track
the conveyance. In other words, Rule 18(1) enables the Chairman, on
the request of an allottee, within the meaning of Rule 17, to execute a
deed of conveyance, even before the expiry of 10 years, contemplated
in Rule 7(7). However, when an allottee is the beneficiary of the
exercise of power under Rule 18(1) and a conveyance deed is executed
to him, the rule-maker has still incorporated the condition against
alienation for a period of 10 years, which is not to operate from the date
of the conveyance. The embargo against alienation in the case of the
conveyance deed being executed in favour of the allottee during the
currency of the lease-cum-sale agreement in Form II will operate for a
period of 10 years from the date of allotment.
41. Thus, in a case of allotment under Rule 17, the condition against
alienation is to exist for a period of 10 years from the date of allotment.
In the case of conveyance deed, which is executed in favour of the
allottee, the condition against alienation will again operate for the
period of ten years from the date of allotment. This is apart from the
other conditions viz. construction of the building on the site. In short,
the allottee becomes the owner of the site before the expiry of 10 years
upon power being invoked under Rule 18(1) but the assignment of the
rights, which would have been otherwise absolute, is subjected to the
conditions, as mentioned in Rule 18(2)(a), which includes the
prohibition against the alienation. We must remind ourselves that
under Section 29(3) of the 1945 Act, the Transfer of Property Act is
eclipsed by the terms of any grant or transfer. The condition against
alienation is not to be counted from the date of the execution of the
conveyance deed but for the unexpired period, in the case of the lease-
cum-sale agreement executed.
42. The impact of Rule 18(3) is to be noticed. This Rule was
substituted w.e.f. 21-12-1976. The Rule contemplates two conditions
for its operation. Firstly, it operates without prejudice to the provisions
of Rule 17. Secondly, Rule 18(3) applies, notwithstanding anything
contained in Rule 18(2). Now, coming to the exact scope of Rule 18(3),
it contemplates the existence of either of the conditions mentioned
therein. They are-(1) the lessee applies pointing out that for reason
beyond his control, he is unable to reside in the City of Bangalore; (2)
by reason of his insolvency or impecuniosity, it has become necessary
for him to sell the site and or site and the building, if any, he may have
put up thereon.
43. We have already explained the scope of Rule 18 and the
interplay between Rule 17 and Rule 18. Rule 18(3) must be read along
with Rule 17. The argument to the contrary by the plaintiff is
untenable. In fact, it would involve denying relief intended for persons
falling under Rule 17, as will be clear hereinafter. A perusal of Rule 18
(3) would reveal the following:
43.1. While a person is a lessee (which means while he is an
allottee), the course open to an allottee/lessee, is to follow the Rules
and lease-cum-sale agreement and put up a residential building on the
site. He may be disabled by the financial condition from fulfilling his
promise under the lease-cum-sale agreement and the Rules to put up
the building. In either case i.e. when because of the dire financial
straits he finds himself in, he can apply to the Authority to permit him
to sell the site, if no building has been put up or if he has put up a
building on the site, the site along with the building.
43.2. The courses of action open to BDA would be as follows : it may
with the previous approval of the State Government, call upon the
applicant, when he has not put up the building, to surrender the site.
Thus, in a case where a lessee/allottee wishes to sell the site, the Rules
contemplate that site would have to be surrendered in favour of the
Authority. The rationale appears to be, instead of permitting the site
being sold to any third party, the site would go back to the Authority,
which in turn, will enable it to allot it to the eligible persons waiting in
the queue. Where a building has been put up, again, Rule 18(3)(b)
contemplates that the lessee can be permitted to sell the vacant site
and the building. When the lessee, on the basis of his request that he
may be permitted to sell the site, has surrendered the site to BDA, the
further consequence contemplated is that the lessee will get back the
value of the allotted site, which he has deposited under Rules 17(1)
and (2). Over and above the same, the lessee is to be paid an
additional sum equal to the amount of interest @ 12% p.a.
44. We must, at this juncture, also do justice to the words in Rule
18(3) "but without prejudice to the provisions of Rule 17". The import
of this part of Rule 18(3) is as follows-under Rule 17, it is open to the
Authority to cancel allotment and revoke the agreement and determine
the lease. The allottee can be evicted from the site. The amount of
121/2% of the value paid, under Rule 17(1) can be forfeited. No doubt,
the Board will refund the balance to the allottee. This is a consequence
which is contemplated in Rule 17(6). This power with the Board is kept
preserved when an allottee does not put up the building. Thus,
Rule 18(3) must be understood as a power with the Board to be
exercised with the previous approval of the State Government. Thus, an
allottee, as a rule, is expected to hold up to the promise he has made
about his financial capacity to construct the building. Consequences in
Rule 17 would remain alive.
45. The power under Rule 18(3) appears to us to encompass
situations of insolvency or impecuniosity, which overtake an allottee
after the allotment takes place. In other words, the unplanned and
uncontemplated vicissitudes of life may visit him inter alia with
insolvency or impecuniosity, leaving him with no other choice but to
sell the site or even the site with the building. The fact that power
under Rule 18(3) is not meant to be a mechanical exercise of power,
can be discerned from the requirement that "previous" approval of the
State Government is the sine qua non for BDA exercising its power.
The undisputed facts
46. BDA made an allotment of the plot on 4-4-1979 to the first
defendant. The lease-cum-sale agreement was also executed on the
same date. It is while so that on 17-11-1982, the plaintiff entered into
the agreement with the first defendant. Under the allotment, the first
defendant was put in possession of the site.
47. A perusal of the agreement would reveal the following:
"NOW THIS DEED WITNESSETH AS FOLLOWS:
1. The vendor does hereby agree to sell the schedule site to the
purchaser for a price of Rs 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only).
2. The purchaser has hereby agreed with the vendor to
purchase the schedule site for the said price of Rs 50,000 (Rupees
fifty thousand only).
3. The purchaser has paid a sum of Rs 30,000 (Rupees thirty
thousand only) as advance and part of the purchase money by
Cheque No. 81/YA. 709838 dated 17-11-1982, drawn on Indian
Bank, Malleswaram, Bangalore to the vendor, who hereby
acknowledges the receipt of the said amount from the purchaser.
4. The vendor does hereby agree with the purchaser to obtain
the absolute sale deed from the Bangalore Development Authority
and then complete the sale transaction with the purchaser. It is
agreed that the sale has to be completed on or before the expiry
period of three months from the day the vendor obtains the
absolute sale deed from the Bangalore Development Authority and
intimates the purchaser in writing.
5. The vendor has handed over the original possession
certificate to the purchaser.
6. The vendor has agreed to deliver the following documents to
the purchaser:
(a) Absolute sale deed after obtaining from the Bangalore
Development Authority, Bangalore.
(b) Katha certificate issued by the Bangalore Development
Authority in favour of the vendor.
(c) NIL Encumbrance Certificate.
(d) Up-to-date tax paid receipt.
7. The vendor hereby agrees with the purchaser to make
necessary applications to the competent authority under the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 and obtain
permission to transfer the schedule (Ceiling and necessary site to
the purchaser. The purchaser has agreed to render necessary
assistance to the vendor in this regard.
8. The vendor has put the purchaser in possession of the
schedule site this day as part-performance of this contract of sale.
The vendor covenants with the purchaser that the purchaser is
entitled to put up temporary structure on the schedule site."
48. Clause 5 shows that the first defendant has handed over the
original possession certificate to the plaintiff. Clause 8 recites that the
first defendant has put the plaintiff in possession of the site on the date
of the agreement as part-performance of the contract of sale. The first
defendant further covenanted with the plaintiff that he is entitled to
construct a temporary structure on the site.
The correspondence before the suit
49. The plaintiff, on 1-3-1983 i.e. within four months of agreement
dated 17-11-1982, wrote to the first defendant as follows:
"Y. SUBBARAJU
ENGINEERING CONTRACTORS
24, 2ND CROSS, KODANDARAMAPURAM
MALLESWARAM,
BANGALORE - 560 003
Date : 1-3-1983
REGISTERED POST ACK. DUE
To,
Smt Jayalakshmamma,
W/o K.T. Krishnappa,
Ex. MLA, TB Extn.,
Nagamangala,
Mandya District
Madam,
Sub. : Agreement for the sale of Site No. 1588, Block II at
Banashankari I Stage Extension - Regarding.
You have agreed for the sale of the above site, for which an
agreement was made on 17-11-1982 on the condition that you will
register the sale deed within 3 months from the date of obtaining all
the necessary documents required in this connection from BDA. So
far you have not
informed about obtaining the documents from BDA. You had promised
that all the documents will be handed over to me within 2 weeks" time
to facilitate me for registering the property.
Since 3 months are over, I am proposing to sell to my nominee for
the agreed amount of Rs 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only), as
you have failed to produce the clear documents. I am forced to
transfer the property to my nominee at the agreed amount of Rs
50,000 with you. This is for your kind information and early
necessary action.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully
sd/-
(Y. Subbaraju)"
(emphasis supplied)
There is no reference to any threat by the first defendant to sell to
others.
50. The plaintiff did not rest content with the first letter and in the
very next month, on 26-4-1984, complains to the first defendant, by
pointing to the letter dated 1-3-1983 and pointing out that the first
defendant has not replied to his letter, notifying her readiness to
comply with the agreement. Thereafter, it is stated that by the letter
dated 26-4-1984, he was finally calling upon the first defendant to act
in terms of the agreement, execute the sale deed in favour of the
plaintiff or his nominee within one week from the date of receipt of the
letter, failing which, litigation would be launched. This letter provoked
the first defendant to reply through a lawyer on 8-5-1984. The first
defendant admitted the agreement dated 19-11-1982. She, however,
pointed out that it was not as per the terms and conditions of letters
sent by the plaintiff. The plaintiff, it was pointed out, was enjoined
upon to complete the sale within three months from the date of the
agreement. It was pointed out that time was of the essence of the
contract and the contract has lapsed and the advance was forfeited. All
documents of title relating to the site, it was stated, were handed over
to the plaintiff at the time of the agreement itself. In view of the breach
on the part of the plaintiff to pay the balance of the consideration, there
was no legally enforceable contract. It was stated that the first
defendant was always willing and ready to perform her part of the
contract and to execute the sale deed and convey the site. She further
set up the case that she had agreed to sell the site for Rs 1,50,000.
51. On 3-7-1984, the plaintiff sent a lawyer notice. Clause 4, which
we have extracted, in the agreement, was invoked. The plaintiff pointed
out that in terms of the said clause, the first defendant was obliged, in
the first place, to obtain the sale deed from BDA and to inform the
plaintiff in writing about having obtained the sale deed. The plaintiff
was also to obtain the khata certificate. Period of three months would
begin to run only from the said date. The claim of the first defendant
that he had handed over the documents of title, was denied. The
further payments, which were made, after having paid Rs 30,000 on
the
date of the agreement, was stated to be unnecessary but it was pointed
out that the total sum of Rs 50,000 stood paid. It was reiterated that
on the date of the sale agreement itself, the plaintiff was put in
possession. The claim that the sale consideration was Rs 1,50,000 was
denied. The first defendant, it was pointed out, had committed default
in not complying with the terms of the agreement, by obtaining
absolute sale deed from BDA. Legal action was spoken of by the
plaintiff.
52. Lastly, on 14-2-1985, a legal notice was sent by the plaintiff to
the first defendant. Thereinafter, referring to the agreement, it was
complained that though it was then more than two years that the first
defendant had entered into the agreement. The first defendant had
given a reply on 8-5-1984, pleading excuses for execution of the sale
deed. Thereafter, the first defendant was called upon to act in terms of
the sale agreement and execute the sale deed within fifteen days of the
receipt of the notice. It was held out that failure on the part of the first
defendant would constrain the plaintiff to seek relief from the court.
That the plaintiff meant business, is proved by the fact that the suit,
out of which this appeal arises, was filed on 16-11-1985.
The pleadings
53. In the plaint, the plaintiff, inter alia, again reiterated that he was
put in possession of the site at the time of executing the agreement.
After referring to the correspondence, which we have referred to, it is
averred that the first defendant was not willing to perform her part of
the contract. It was complained that the first defendant could not
unilaterally treat the contract as cancelled and that he had unjustly
repudiated her obligation. It was pleaded that he is likely to execute a
sale deed in favour of some other person. To prevent the same, the suit
for specific performance of the agreement and for injunction, it was
stated, was filed. It was further stated that the first defendant is bound
and liable to obtain the absolute sale deed from BDA and deliver the
same to the plaintiff to execute the sale deed.
54. In the amended pleadings, there is reference to the husband
and the son being brought on the party array on the death of the first
defendant. There is also reference to the subsequent sale by the son to
the appellant. The prayer sought was a direction to execute the sale
deed and to convey the title and deliver the documents of title
including the sale deed, after obtaining the same from BDA and
injunction was sought against interfering with the plaintiff's lawful
possession. Such relief of injunction was also sought against the
appellant also.
55. The first defendant, in her written statement, denied the case of
the plaintiff that he was ready and willing. According to her, the
plaintiff had to pay the balance of Rs 1,00,000, which remains after
paying Rs 50,000. Time was pointed out to be essence of the contract.
The first defendant was ready and willing to perform her part. It was
further alleged that the plaintiff was not put in possession.
56. Defendant 1(b), son of the first defendant, filed a written
statement. He refers to the clause prohibiting alienation for a period of
ten years from the date of allotment, and that, absolute rights were not
created by BDA by the allotment. It was further contended that the first
defendant, his mother, was only the lessee of the site and she did not
have any right to convey ownership rights. She was not competent to
convey the property. It was pointed out that the agreement was a void
agreement and could not be enforced.
57. The second defendant, in his written statement, inter alia,
pleaded no knowledge about the agreement dated 17-11-1982,
providing that the first defendant must obtain an absolute sale deed
from BDA and it must be intimated in writing to the plaintiff. The
allegation that the plaintiff was put in possession, was denied as false.
Regarding putting the plaintiff in possession of the possession
certificate, the appellant pleaded no knowledge. It was further pleaded
that the first defendant was the absolute owner in possession of the
site and, after her demise, in view of the death of the husband of the
first defendant, the son became the owner of the property. It was
pleaded that the first defendant was a site-less and houseless person
and permanent resident of Bangalore City. After having made due
enquiries, property was purchased by sale deed dated 19-9-1996. An
additional written statement was filed by the appellant to the amended
plaint which was largely devoted to his case about him being a bona
fide purchaser.
The oral evidence
58. PW 2, the son of the plaintiff (the plaintiff died on 5-1-2001)
deposed, inter alia, that possession of the entire property was delivered
to the plaintiff. Subsequently, his legal representatives are in
possession. After the plaintiff was put in possession, he has allegedly
constructed a temporary shed in it. The shed was demolished in the
year 1991 during the Cauvery riots. He has never made any attempts
to go to BDA to know about the suit property. He deposed that since he
guessed that since 1960 his father commenced civil contract work he
was doing so till his death. With reference to the question that the site
was inalienable for a period of ten years, PW 2 answered that it could
have been sold to them. He confessed to ignorance of BDA Rules
regarding allotment. He did not know that the lease period was
completed on 13-5-1989. He did not know about the non-alienation
clause in the allotment by BDA. He did not know that in the year 1985,
his father did not have the right to file the suit. He was associated with
his father in construction work. He refers to Ext. P-14, which was a
show-cause notice received by the plaintiff from BDA. He deposed that
the plaintiff intimated BDA about the sale agreement.
59. The following evidence of PW 2, the son of the plaintiff is very
relevant. He has deposed inter alia as follows:
"My father was contractor and in real estate business since 30
years. It is not true that there are 70 to 80 cases pending in different
courts. There are about 35 to 40 cases pending. My elder brother is
doing construction."
"I guess since 1960 my father commenced civil contract work. He
was doing same business till his death. Simultaneously, he
commenced real estate business and continued till his demise."
"My father was getting monthly rental income of Rs 1,00,000."
"In the name of our mother, there is commercial complex at
Shehsdripuram. We presently get monthly rent of Rs 4,50,000. The
said commercial complex is joint family property."
"PW 2 has entered into an agreement to purchase 24 acres land at
Tannishandra. He has negotiated to purchase the land @ Rs
8,00,000 per acre. At also Ulsoor, they have vacant site of 90,000 sq
ft. It is quite expensive property, PW 2 deposes. They are staying at
a rented house. At Cunningham Road, they have got a property
which is in dispute. Cunningham property is 1,20,000 sq ft. It is
vacant land. Most importantly PW 2 deposes that if decree is denied
they will have loss of money."
60. The appellant (second defendant) examined as DW 1, inter alia,
deposed that he owned both irrigated and non-irrigated lands to the
extent of 12 acres. He did not own any site or building in Bangalore. He
invested amount arrived from agriculture and milk-vending business to
purchase this property. His father helped him. On the date of purchase,
the possession was handed over to him. Apart from Bettanna, none
acted as broker at the time of purchase. He, inter alia, further states
that he went to the site. He found tin shed. He made inquiries with
regard to ownership of the site and possession. He was told that one
Sudershan was the owner of the site, who used to visit the site often.
He, along with his elder brother, who was residing in Bangalore, went
to the house of Sudershan. Sudershan wanted price of Rs 6,00,000.
Finally, the parties agreed for Rs 4,50,000. Certain xerox copies of
documents, including possession certificate, was handed over to him
and he consulted an advocate who said that the title was clear. On the
date of sale, the possession was handed over to the appellant. Property
was mutated. The broker was not aware of the pendency of the suit. He
will be put to great hardship if the suit is decreed. The original of the
sale deed is with the bank.
61. In cross-examination, the appellant (second defendant), inter
alia, deposed that he has studied up to PUC. His brothers were staying
in Bangalore. His father owned 12 acres. Six acres were irrigated and
six acres was dry land. His brothers were doing jewellery work in
Bangalore. 12 acres was ancestral property. They used to get daily 20
litres of milk per day. They used to get Rs 195-196 per day by selling
milk. Father had not spent any money during marriage of elder
brothers. Neither the father, the second defendant nor his brother
Mukund were income tax assessees. He has no record to show that he
had the money to the extent of Rs 4,50,000 with him. His brothers
were staying in the rented house. He knew the broker since his
childhood. He invested Rs 3,00,000 of his own. The remaining was paid
by his father. He earned Rs 3,00,000 by selling milk and vegetables. He
informed the broker for the first time in June 1996 that he intended to
purchase the site at Bangalore. After seeing the site on the next day
itself, he approached Defendant 1 (a) and
Defendant (b) for discussion. Defendant 1(a) was MLA of their Taluk
and also former Minister. The negotiations were completed on the same
day. The amount was paid by cash. His advocate did not tell him that
both Defendant (a) and Defendant 1(b) had acquired title and
informed him to purchase from both. The entire process of seeing the
site, sale talks, were done in the first week of June 1996. Defendant 1
(a) and Defendant (b) did not disclose regarding the pendency of the
suit. He did not inquire with BDA as to who is the owner of the site. He
denied the suggestion that till date, the legal representatives of the
original plaintiff were in possession of the property. The suggestion that
the possession of the site was handed over to the plaintiff, was denied.
Defendant 1(b) furnished xerox copy of the possession certificate at the
time of negotiations. After receipt of suit summons, he was not on
talking terms with Defendant ((a) and Defendant 1(b). Defendant 1(b)
disclosed to him that the original possession certificate was lost and,
therefore, he gave the duplicate certificate.
62. Defendant (b) was examined as DW 2. He has deposed about
the non-alienation clause and about the agreement in favour of the
plaintiff for Rs 50,000. At the time of the agreement, there was a shed
on the site. It was agreed to execute sale deed in favour of the plaintiff
after getting the absolute sale from BDA. BDA was supposed to execute
the sale deed after the 10-year lease period. The plaintiff had not taken
any steps to waive off the non-alienation clause for the period of 10
years. His father gave consent to BDA to issue the sale deed only in his
name. He knew the appellant from June 1996. The name of the broker
Bettana, is spoken to by him. He speaks about handing over of xerox
copies to DW 1. The second defendant had met him twice in June 1996.
The appellant, when he met DW 2 for the second time, showed his
interest to purchase the property in September 1996 for Rs 4,50,000.
The appellant took time till September 1996 to ascertain whether he
was in possession and to mobilise funds. Entire amount of Rs 4,50,000
was paid in cash.
DW 2 owned a residential house at Arti Nagar in Judges Colony.
The said property was standing in the name of his father. He owned an
industrial site. He did not own any residential property in Bangalore
apart from the residential property. Since, the plaintiff was not having
any right, they did not inform the appellant regarding the pendency of
the suit. The plaintiff never asked his mother to alienate the suit
property before expiry of the non-alienation period. He took duplicate
possession certificate from BDA in June 1996. He did not hand over the
transfer agreement executed by BDA at the time of sale in favour of the
appellant. His father was present, when the appellant met him twice.
His mother has not given any application to BDA to waive-off the non-
alienation clause. He denied the suggestion that possession was
handed over to the plaintiff on the date of agreement. There is no
document to show that he has received Rs 4,50,000 from the second
defendant. There is reference to a site as Koramangala being allotted to
him and it being cancelled by the High Court. He is confronted with the
agreement to sell the said site in favour of another person (P-19).
The findings by the trial court
64. Seven issues were struck by the trial court. Thereafter, two
additional issues were also raised, of which, the first additional issue
was whether the second defendant, second legal representative of
deceased defendant, "proved that the proved sale agreement" is void.
The trial court found the agreement dated 17-11-1982 as proved. It
further found that the plaintiff has not proved that the plaintiff was put
in possession. It was further found that till the year 1989, the first
defendant was unable to take an absolute sale deed from BDA and,
therefore, unable to execute the sale deed in response to the
communication sent by the plaintiff. It was further found that since the
first defendant was not able to get the sale deed from BDA, she could
not cancel the agreement unilaterally. It was further found that the
plaintiff ought to have waited till the expiry of the lease period. It was
found, however, that the plaintiff was always ready and willing,
however, at the same time, the first defendant was not in breach.
65. It was further found that there was no iota of evidence to prove
that the defendant had tried to sell the property in favour of the third
party. It was further found that there was no oral agreement of sale for
Rs 1,50,000 and the plaintiff was not in breach. This aspect was found
against the first defendant. It was found that the second defendant was
a bona fide purchaser of the site for value without notice of the earlier
agreement of sale as well as pendency of the suit. It was further found
that in view of the allotment and the lease-cum-sale agreement, the
plaintiff had no right to file the suit so as to enforce the agreement to
sell during the year 1985. The plaintiff ought to have waited till year
1989. The first defendant died on 18-7-1994 without obtaining the
absolute sale deed from BDA. After her death, the property stood
transferred in favour of her son and the son sold it to the appellant. On
17-9-1996, when the sale took place, the predecessor-in-interest of the
second defendant was not a party. The suit property was sold to the
second defendant for a huge sale consideration of Rs 4,50,000. There
was no cause of action to institute the suit.
66. On these findings, inter alia, the trial court partly decreed the
suit by ordering return of Rs 50,000 along with 9% interest per annum
by Defendants ((a) and 1(b). The relief of permanent injunction was
rejected.
In pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis
67. The principle of in pari delicto potion est conditio defendentis is a
maxim which we must bear in mind. We need only notice the following
discussion by this Court. The decision of this Court in Kedar Nath
Motani² comes to mind : (AIR p. 216, para 9)
"9.
Where both parties do not show that there was any
conspiracy to defraud a third person or to commit any other illegal
act. the maxim. in pari delicto. etc. can hardlv be made applicable."
68. This Court in Kedar Nath Motani² also referred to the following
statement by Lord Mansfield in Holman V. Johnson4 wherein it was held
as follows : (Kedar Nath Motani case², AIR pp. 217-18, para 12)
"12. The law was stated as far back as 1775 by Lord Mansfield in
Holman V. Johnson 4, Cowp at p. 343, ER at p. 1121 in the following
words (ER p. 1121)
The principle of public policy is this; ex dolo malo non oritur
actio. No Court will lend its aid to a man who founds his cause of
action upon an immoral or an illegal act. If, from the plaintiff's
own stating or otherwise, the cause of action appears to arise ex
turpi causa, or the transgression of a positive law of this country,
there the Court says he has no right to be assisted. It is upon that
ground the Court goes; not for the sake of the defendant, but
because they will not lend their aid to such a plaintiff. So if the
plaintiff and defendant were to change sides, and the defendant
was to bring his action against the plaintiff, the latter would then
have the advantage of it; for where both are equally in fault,
potion est conditio defendentis."
There are, however, some exceptions or "supposed exceptions" to the rule of turpi
causa. In Salmond and William on Contracts, four such exceptions have been
mentioned, and the fourth of these exceptions is based on the right of restitutio in
integrum, where the relationship of trustee and beneficiary is involved. Salmond
stated the law in these words at p. 352 of his book (2nd Edn.):
'So if A employs B to commit a robbery, A cannot sue B for the
proceeds. And the position would be the same if A were to vest
property in B upon trust to carry out some fraudulent scheme : A
could not sue B for an account of the profits. But if B, who is A's
agent or trustee, receives on A's account money paid by C pursuant
to an illegal contract between A and C the position is otherwise and
A can recover the property from B, although he could not have
claimed it from C. In such cases public policy requires that the rule
of turpis causa shall be excluded by the more important and
imperative rule that agents and trustees must faithfully perform the
duties of their office.'
Williston in his Book on Contracts (Revised Edn.), Vol. VI, has discussed this
matter at p. 5069, Para 1785 and in paras 1771 to 1774, he has noted certain
exceptional cases, and has observed as follows:
'If recovery is to be allowed by either partner or principal in any
case, it must be where the illegality is of so light or venial a
character that it is deemed more opposed to public policy to allow
the defendant to violate his fiduciary relation with the plaintiff than
to allow the plaintiff to gain the benefit of an illegal transaction."
Even in India, certain exceptions to the rule of turpi causa have been accepted.
Examples of those cases are found in Palaniyappa Chettiar V. Chockalingam
Chettiar5 and Bhola Nath V. Mul Chand6."
(emphasis supplied)
69. We may also notice the following statement by this Court in
Kedar Nath Motani² : (AIR pp. 218-19, para 15)
"15. The correct position in law, in our opinion, is that what one
has to see is whether the illegality goes so much to the root of the
matter that the plaintiff cannot bring his action without relying upon
the illegal transaction into which he had entered. If the illegality be
trivial or venial, as stated by Williston and the plaintiff is not
required to rest his case upon that illegality, then public policy
demands that the defendant should not be allowed to take
advantage of the position. A strict view, of course, must be taken of
the plaintiff's conduct, and he should not be allowed to circumvent
the illegality by resorting to some subterfuge or by misstating the
facts. If, however, the matter is clear and the illegality is not
required to be pleaded or proved as part of the cause of action and
the plaintiff recanted before the illegal purpose was achieved, then,
unless it be of such a gross nature as to outrage the conscience of
the Court, the plea of the defendant should not prevail."
70. In Sita Ram V. Radhabai-, this Court observed as follows : (AIR
p. 537, para 12)
"12. The principle that the courts will refuse to enforce an illegal
agreement at the instance of a person who is himself a party to an
illegality or fraud is expressed in the maxim in pari delicto portion est
conditio defendantis. But as stated in Anson's Principles of the
English Law of Contracts, 22nd Edn., p. 343: 'there are exceptional
cases in which a man will be relieved of the consequences of an
illegal contract into which he has entered - cases to which the
maxim does not apply. They fall into three classes : (a) where the
illegal purpose has not yet been substantially carried into effect
before it is sought to recover money paid or goods delivered in
furtherance of it; (b) where the plaintiff is not in pari delicto with the
defendant; (c) where the plaintiff does not have to rely on the
illegality to make out his claim'."
71. In Narayanamma³, this Court was considering a suit for specific
performance, which was resisted on the ground that the agreement to
sell was contrary to the provisions of the statute. Section 61 of the
Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 provided that no land for which
occupancy was granted, shall within 15 years of the order of the
Tribunal, be transferred by sale, inter
alia. A partition was permitted. Equally, a mortgage could be effected
to secure a loan. Drawing support from the judgment of this Court in
Kedar Nath2, this Court, inter alia, as follows : (Narayanamma case³,
"15. The three-Judge Bench2 of this Court, after referring to the
aforesaid judgments, speaking through M. Hidayatullah, J. (as his
Lordship then was), observes thus : (Kedar Nath Motani case 2 AIR
pp. 218-19, para 15)
`15. The correct position in law, in our opinion, is that what one
has to see is whether the illegality goes so much to the root of the
matter that the plaintiff cannot bring his action without relying
upon the illegal transaction into which he had entered. If the
illegality be trivial or venial, as stated by Williston and the plaintiff
is not required to rest his case upon that illegality, then public
policy demands that the defendant should not be allowed to take
advantage of the position. A strict view, of course, must be taken
of the plaintiff's conduct, and he should not be allowed to
circumvent the illegality by resorting to some subterfuge or by
misstating the facts. If, however, the matter is clear and the
illegality is not required to be pleaded or proved as part of the
cause of action and the plaintiff recanted before the illegal
purpose was achieved, then, unless it be of such a gross nature as
to outrage the conscience of the Court, the plea of the defendant
should not prevail."
16. It could thus be seen, that this Court has held that the correct
position of law is that, what one has to see is whether the illegality
goes so much to the root of the matter that the plaintiff cannot bring
his action without relying upon the illegal transaction into which he
had entered. This Court further held, that if the illegality is trivial or
venial and the plaintiff is not required to rest his case upon that
illegality, then public policy demands that the defendant should not
be allowed to take advantage of the position. It has further been
held, that a strict view must be taken of the plaintiff's conduct and
he should not be allowed to circumvent the illegality by resorting to
some subterfuge or by misstating the facts. However, if the matter is
clear and the illegality is not required to be pleaded or proved as
part of the cause of action and the plaintiff recanted before the
illegal purpose is achieved, then, unless it be of such a gross nature
as to outrage the conscience of the Court, the plea of the defendant
should not prevail."
(emphasis supplied)
58-59, paras 24-26)
"24. The transaction between the late Bale Venkataramanappa
and the plaintiff is not disputed. Initially the said Bale
Venkataramanappa had executed a registered mortgage deed in
favour of the plaintiff.
Within a month, he entered into an agreement to sell wherein, the
entire consideration for the transfer as well as handing over of the
possession was acknowledged. It could thus be seen, that the
transaction was nothing short of a transfer of property. Under Section
61 of the Reforms Act, there is a complete prohibition on such
mortgage or transfer for a period of 15 years from the date of grant.
Sub-section (1) of Section 61 of the Reforms Act begins with a non
obstante clause. It is thus clear that, the unambiguous legislative
intent is that no such mortgage, transfer, sale, etc. would be permitted
for a period of 15 years from the date of grant. Undisputedly, even
according to the plaintiff, the grant is of the year 1983, as such, the
transfer in question in the year 1990 is beyond any doubt within the
prohibited period of 15 years. Sub-section (3) of Section 61 of the
Reforms Act makes the legislative intent very clear. It provides, that
any transfer in violation of sub-section (1) shall be invalid and it also
provides for the consequence for such invalid transaction.
25. Undisputedly, both, the predecessor-in-title of the defendant
(s) as well as the plaintiff, are confederates in this illegality. Both,
the plaintiff and the predecessor-in-title of the defendant(s) can be
said to be equally responsible for violation of law.
26. However, the ticklish question that arises in such a situation
is: 'the decision of this Court would weigh in side of which party'? As
held by Hidayatullah, J. in Kedar Nath Motani², the question that
would arise for consideration is as to whether the plaintiff can rest
his claim without relying upon the illegal transaction or as to
whether the plaintiff can rest his claim on something else without
relying on the illegal transaction. Undisputedly, in the present case,
the claim of the plaintiff is entirely based upon the agreement to sell
dated 15-5-1990, which is clearly hit by Section 61 of the Reforms
Act. There is no other foundation for the claim of the plaintiff except
the one based on the agreement to sell, which is hit by Section 61 of
the Act. In such a case, as observed by Taylor, in his "Law of
Evidence" which has been approved by Gajendragadkar, J. in
Immani Appa Rao8, although illegality is not pleaded by the
defendant nor sought to be relied upon him by way of defence, yet
the Court itself, upon the illegality appearing upon the evidence, will
take notice of it, and will dismiss the action ex turpi causa non oritur
actio i.e. no polluted hand shall touch the pure fountain of justice.
Equally, as observed in Story's Equity Jurisprudence, which again is
approved in Immani Appa Rao8, where the parties are concerned
with illegal agreements or other transactions, courts of equity
following the rule of law as to participators in a common crime will
not interpose to grant any relief, acting upon the maxim in pari
delicto potion est conditio defendentis et possidentis."
(emphasis supplied)
59, para 28)
"28. Now, let us apply the other test laid down in Immani Appa
Rao At the cost of repetition, both the parties are common
participator in the illegality. In such a situation, the balance of
justice would tilt in whose favour is the question. As held in Immani
Appa Rao8, if the decree is granted in favour of the plaintiff on the
basis of an illegal agreement which is hit by a statute, it will be
rendering an active assistance of the court in enforcing an
agreement which is contrary to law. As against this, if the balance is
tilted towards the defendants, no doubt that they would stand
benefited even in spite of their predecessor-in-title committing an
illegality. However, what the court would be doing is only rendering
an assistance which is purely of a passive character. As held by
Gajendragadkar, J. in Immani Appa Rao8, the first course would be
clearly and patently inconsistent with the public interest whereas,
the latter course is lesser injurious to public interest than the
former."
Cases of conditional decree of specific performance
74. The decision, which first comes to mind and is oft-quoted, is the
decision of the Privy Council in Motilal V. Nanhelal ². The Court, in the
said case, affirmed the decision of the Judicial Commissioner, decreeing
a suit for specific performance, taking note of Section 50 of the Central
Provinces Act of 1920, which read as follows and the Court, inter alia,
"
'If a proprietor desires to transfer the proprietary rights in any
portion of his sir land without reservation of the right of occupancy
specified in Section 49, he may apply to a revenue officer and, if
such revenue officer is satisfied that the transferor is not wholly or
mainly an agriculturist, or that the property is self-acquired or has
been acquired within the twenty years past preceding, he shall
sanction the transfer.'
In view of the abovementioned construction of the agreements of
4-9-1914-namely, that Sobhagmal agreed to transfer the
cultivating rights in the sir land-there was, in their Lordships'
opinion, an implied covenant on his part to do all things necessary to
effect such transfer, which would include an application to the
revenue officer to sanction the transfer."
75. In other words, in an agreement wherein the vendor agrees to
convey property, which is permissible only with the permission of some
Authority, the court can, in appropriate cases, grant relief. We need
only notice two recent judgments which have reiterated the principle,
the first of which is reported in Vishwa Nath Sharma V. Shyam Shanker
Goela¹0 which is relied upon, in fact, by the respondents. The decision
of this Court, again relied upon by the
respondents in Ferrodous Estates (P) Ltd. V. P. Gopirathnam also
reiterates the said view.
76. In Ferrodous Estates11, the matter arose under the Tamil Nadu
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1978. The High Court, in the
impugned judgment12, had dismissed the suit for specific performance,
taking the view that till 1999, when the Tamil Nadu Urban Ceiling Act
was repealed, the agreement was not enforceable. That apart, under
the agreement of sale, vacant land, in the aggregate, exceeding the
ceiling limit of the plaintiff, would have to be conveyed to him,
attracting the VETO contained in Section 5(3) read with Section 6 of the
State Act. It was this view, which was reversed by this Court, following
the judgments, which we have referred to which relate to conditional
decrees. This result was arrived at by this Court, after finding that
agreement to sell contemplated transfer of the land only after getting
exemption. Clause (4) of the Agreement contemplated that the vendor
was to obtain permission from the competent authority under the Urban
Land Ceiling Act.
77. We need not multiply authorities. All that is necessary to notice
and find is that when an agreement to sell is entered into, whereunder
to complete the title of the vendor and for a sale to take place and the
sale is not absolutely prohibited but a permission or approval from an
Authority, is required, then, such a contract is, indeed, enforceable and
would not attract the shadow of Section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872.
Certain other decisions
78. We may examine some of the decisions, which have been
referred to by the respondents.
79. In the decision reported in T. Dase Gowda V. D. Srinivasaiah13, a
Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka was considering the suit
for specific performance in the context of the very Rules, which arise
before us. The defendant/appellant in the said case, entered into an
oral agreement with the plaintiff therein on 1-9-1981, to sell the suit
site along with an incomplete structure. The defendant received certain
amounts thereafter. This was followed by a written agreement on 1-10-
1981 wherein the defendant agreed to sell. According to the plaint
averments, the plaintiff was put in possession and he completed the
construction. It was the plaintiff's further case that he was
dispossessed by the defendant. The High Court, under Point 6,
considered the question whether agreement was legally enforceable.
The Court has referred to Rule 18 of the Rules, which, apparently, was
invoked by the defendant. Answering the point, the Court took the view
that there was no transfer of interest, which results from an agreement
to sell and, therefore, Rule 18(2)(a)(iii), did not apply, as there was no
alienation on a mere agreement to sell being executed. The Court
distinguished the decision, which was relied upon by the defendant in
the said case and, interestingly, the appellant before us viz. the
decision of a learned Single Judge in K. Chandrashekar Hegde V.
Bangalore City Corpn.
14
80. We may further notice that the High Court in T. Dase Gowda
case- 13 took the view that a period of ten years had expired even during
1985 and there was no impediment with reference to the enforceability,
it was further found. It was next found that the plaintiff in the said case
was, on evidence, found residing in a rented house and that he had
purchased the plaint scheduled property for self-occupation. It was
found that the building which was constructed was a residential one. It
was, therefore concluded that the element of public policy (public
interest) was also not affected. The Court granted decree for specific
performance.
81. In Yogambika V. Narsingh15, a Division Bench, followed the
decision in T. Dase Gowda13 noting further that the earlier decision had
13
been affirmed by this Court by the dismissal of the SLP by the order
dated 17-7-1991. We may notice also that, in its discussion, the
Division Bench, has laid store by the line of decisions commencing with
Motilal9
82. In Subbireddy V. K.N. Srinivasa Murthy16, the question fell for
decision under Section 5(3) of the Karnataka Village Offices Inam
Abolition Act. The Single Judge found that under the agreement, the
transfer was to be effected only after the expiry of the period of non-
alienation prescribed in Section 5(3) of the Act in question. This case
must be understood in the light of the clause which contemplated the
sale being effected, after the expiry of the period, during which, the
alienation was prohibited. The vendor was to take permission for the
execution of the sale deed.
83. In Syed Zaheer V. C.V. Siddveerappa¹1, a Division Bench
decreed a suit for specific performance wherein the agreement
contemplated execution of sale deed, after the period of non-alienation
prescribed under the grant. The suit was filed, in fact, after the lapse of
the period of fifteen years.
84. In Balwant Vithal Kadam V. Sunil Baburaoi Kadam 18 this Court
rejected the contention that the agreement, which was sought to be
specifically enforced, fell foul of Section 48 of the Maharashtra
Cooperative Societies Act. It was found that an agreement to sell did
not create an interest in land unlike a sale.
85. In Punjab & Sind Bank V. Punjab Breeders Ltd. 19 , this Court was
dealing with a case of the effect of violation of the conditions, under
which, a one-time settlement was extended. The conditions included
the stipulation that the mortgaged property should not be sold for three
years without prior permission, inter alia. An agreement to sell was
found not to be a sale.
86. In Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. (2) V. State of Haryana20,
this Court, while dealing with the effect of what has been described as
GPA sales in Delhi, inter alia, and considering the scope of an
agreement to sell, declared that "a transfer of immovable property by
way of sale, can only be by a deed of conveyance (sale deed)". No title
is transferred by a mere agreement to sell, it was further found.
87. In K. Chandrashekar Hegde' which is relied upon by the
appellant, a Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka, was dealing
with a batch of writ petitions. Among the issues, which prominently
arose, was the objection taken to the construction of multi-storeyed
buildings, wherein claims were made on the basis of allotment under
the Act, as repealed by the Bangalore Development Act and the Rules.
The learned Single Judge has elaborately considered the scheme of the
Rules. He has further explored the impact of the forms prescribed under
the Allotment Rules, 1964 and similar provisions were found in the
subsequent Rules. This judgment has been distinguished by the
judgment in T. Dase Gowda 13
88. Jambu Rao Satappa Kocheri V. Neminath Appayya
Hanamannayar 21 is an important decision. This Court was dealing with
a suit for specific performance. One of the questions, which arose was
whether the enforcement of the contract, would defeat the provisions of
the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948. The appellant
before this Court had agreed to sell 41 acres and odd of jairayat land.
Under Section 5 of the Act, the ceiling area, inter alia, was prescribed
as 48 acres of jairayat land. Section 34 of the Act provided as follows -
"Subject to the provisions of Section 35, it shall not be lawful,
with effect from the appointed day, for any person to hold, whether
as owner or tenant or partly as owner and partly as tenant, land in
excess of the ceiling area."
89. Section 35 declared acquisition of land in excess of the area
prescribed in Section 34, as invalid. Section 84-C, reads as follows:
"84-C. Disposal of land transfer or acquisition of which is
invalid.-(1) Where in respect of the transfer or acquisition of any
land made on or after the commencement of the amending Act,
1955, the Mamlatdar suo motu or on the application of any person
interested in such land has reason to believe that such transfer or
acquisition is or becomes invalid under any of the provisions of this
Act, the Mamlatdar shall issue a notice and hold an inquiry as
provided for in Section 84-B and decide whether the transfer or
acquisition is or is not invalid.
(2) If after holding such inquiry, the Mamlatdar comes to a
conclusion that the transfer or acquisition of land is invalid, he shall
make an order declaring the transfer or acquisition to be invalid.
(3) On the declaration made by the Mamlatdar under sub-section
(2)-
(a) the land shall be deemed to vest in the State Government,
free from all encumbrances lawfully subsisting thereon on the date of
such vesting, and shall be disposed of in the manner provided in sub
-section (4); ..."
90. The contention taken by the defendant in Jambu Rao Satappa
Kocheri case²¹ was that the plaintiff was already holding 31 acres and 2
guntas of jairayat land and, therefore, by acquiring the plaint scheduled
property by way of the decree the plaintiff, would hold land in excess of
the ceiling area. We may notice the following discussion with specific
reference to Section 23 of the Contract Act, in particular : (Jambu Rao
Satappa Kocheri case²1, , AIR p. 1360, paras 6 & 8-9)
"6, By Section 23 of the Contract Act, consideration or object of
an agreement is unlawful if it is forbidden by law; or is of such a
nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law;
or is fraudulent. Both the parties to the contract are agriculturists.
By the agreement the appellant agreed to sell jirayat land
admeasuring 41 acres 26 gunthas for a price of Rs 32,000. The
consideration of the agreement per se was not unlawful, for there is
no provision in the Act which expressly or by implication forbids a
contract for sale of agricultural lands between two agriculturists. Nor
is the object of the agreement to defeat the provisions of any law.
The Act has imposed no restriction upon the transfer of agricultural
lands from one agriculturist to another. It is true that by Section 35
a person who comes to hold, after the appointed day, agricultural
land in excess of the ceiling, the lands having been acquired either
by purchase, assignment, lease, surrender or by bequest, the
acquisition in excess of the ceiling is invalid. The expression
"acquisition of such excess land shall be invalid" may appear
somewhat ambiguous. But when the scheme of the Act is examined,
it is clear that the legislature has not declared the transfer or
bequest invalid, for Section 84-C provides that the land in excess of
the ceiling shall be at the disposal of the Government when an order
is made by the Mamlatdar. The invalidity of the acquisition is
therefore only to the extent to which the holding exceeds the ceiling
prescribed by Section 5, and involves the consequence that the land
will vest in the Government.
*
*
*
8. An agreement to sell land does not under the Transfer of
Property Act create any interest in the land in the purchaser. By
agreeing to purchase land, a person cannot be said in law to hold
that land. It is only when land is conveyed to the purchaser that he
holds that land. Undoubtedly the respondent was holding some area
of land at the date of the agreement and at the date of the suit, but
on that account it cannot be inferred that by agreeing to purchase
land under the agreement in question his object was to hold in
excess of the ceiling. It was open to the respondent to transfer or
dispose of the land held by him to another agriculturist. The
Act contains no general restrictions upon such transfers, and unless at
the date of the acquisition the transferee holds land in excess of the
ceiling, the acquisition to the extent of the excess over the ceiling will
not be invalid. There is nothing in the agreement, nor can it be implied
from the circumstances, that it was the object of the parties that the
provisions of the Act relating to the ceiling should be transgressed. The
mere possibility that the respondent may not have disposed of his
original holding at the date of the acquisition of title pursuant to the
agreement entered into between him and the appellant will not, in our
judgment, render the object of the agreement such, that, if permitted,
it would defeat the provisions of any law. The Court, it is true, will not
enforce a contract which is expressly or impliedly prohibited by statute,
whatever may be the intention of the parties, but there is nothing to
indicate, that the legislature has prohibited a contract to transfer land
between one agriculturist and another. The inability of the transferee to
hold land in excess of the ceiling prescribed by the statute has no effect
upon the contract, or the operation of the transfer. The statutory
forfeiture incurred in the event of the transferee coming to hold land in
excess of the ceiling does not invalidate the transfer between the
parties.
9. We hold that a contract for purchase of land entered into with
the knowledge that the purchaser may hold land in excess of the
ceiling is not void, and the seller cannot resist enforcement thereof
on the ground that, if permitted, it will result in transgression of the
law."
(emphasis supplied)
91. We may cull out the ratio in the following terms : whatever may
be intention of the parties, a contract which is expressly or impliedly
prohibited by a statute, may not be enforced by the court.
92. The Bombay Act did not prohibit a contract of sale of agricultural
land between two agriculturists. The invalidity of the acquisition of land
in excess, involved the consequence that the land would vest in the
Government. In the context of the said Act, the Court in Jambu Rao
Satappa Kocheri case21 has taken the view that a person can be said to
hold land only when it is conveyed to him, which would not take place
when there is a mere agreement to sell. The further reasoning of the
Court appears to be that it is open to the buyer to transfer or dispose of
land already held by him to another agriculturist and unless at the date
of acquisition, the buyer held the land in excess of the ceiling limit, the
acquisition to the extent of the excess over the ceiling, would not be
invalid. It was further declared that the mere possibility that the
respondent/buyer may not have disposed of his original holding on the
date of acquisition of title under the agreement to sell, would not
render the object of the agreement such that, if permitted, it would
defeat the provisions of any law. Thus, the contract was found to be not
void.
93. This judgment came to be followed in Bhagat Ram V. Kishan22.
In the said case, the question arose under Section 23 of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act, 1954, in a suit for specific performance. Section 23 reads
as follows:
"23. Use of holding for industrial purposes.-(1) A bhumidhar
or asami shall not be entitled to use his holding or part thereof for
industrial purposes, other than those immediately connected with
any of the purposes referred to in Section 22, unless the land lies
within the belt declared for the purpose by the Chief Commissioner
by a notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may, on application
presented to the Deputy Commissioner in the prescribed manner,
sanction the use of any holding or part thereof by a bhumidhar for
industrial purposes even though it does not lie within such a belt."
5)
"5. Bhumidhari right is transferable and Defendant 1 is entitled to
use the land even for the purpose other than those enumerated in
Section 22 if he obtains permission of the Chief Commissioner.
Therefore, the agreement for transfer of land does not become
invalid by itself. Defendant 1 after obtaining the property could use
it for the intended purpose on obtaining permission of the Chief
Commissioner or if no such permission was obtained, he could use
the land for the purposes authorised under Section 22 of the Act. In
our opinion, the High Court went wrong in holding that the
agreement was opposed to public policy or transfer under the
agreement was hit by Section 23 of the Act. Support for our view is
available from the decision of this Court in Jambu Rao Satappa
Kocheri V. Neminath Appayya Hanamannayar ²1. The suit by the
plaintiff for declaration that the agreement is bad had rightly been
dismissed by the trial court as also the first appellate court and the
High Court on an erroneous view reversed the same. In our opinion
the suit is liable to be dismissed."
95. We have set out the provisions of the Rules and the lease-cum-
sale agreement. Before we deal with the question as to whether the
agreement in question, falls foul of Section 23 of the Contract Act, we
shall deal with the contention raised by the respondent that there is no
law, as understood in this case, which would be defeated by the
agreement and what is holding the field is only the Rules.
96. It is true that this Court in Union of India V. L.S.N. Murthy23, , has
"17. In Pollock & Mulla, Indian Contract and Specific Relief Acts,
13th Edn., Vol. I published by LexisNexis Butterworths, it is stated
at p. 668:
'The words "defeat the provisions of any law" must be taken as
limited to defeating the intention which the legislature has
expressed, or which is necessarily implied from the express terms of
an Act. It is unlawful to contract to do that which it is unlawful to
do; but an agreement will not be void, merely because it tends to
defeat some purpose ascribed to the legislature by conjecture, or
even appearing, as a matter of history, from extraneous evidence,
such as legislative debates or preliminary memoranda, not forming
part of the enactment.'
It is thus clear that the word "law" in the expression "defeat the provisions of any
law" in Section 23 of the Contract Act is limited to the expressed terms of an Act of
the legislature."
97. With respect, the principle laid down, does not commend itself
to us. We do agree that the illegality cannot be a matter of conjecture
nor the purpose divined by the Court from parliamentary debates. But
that is not to say that as found by this Court in Jambu Rao Satappa
Kocheri V. Neminath Appayya Hanamannayar ² ², which decision was not
considered by this Court, that it cannot be implied. But we must find
that the Court was dealing with a notification, which was, in fact, a
"letter" written by the Government of India. We can have no quarrel
with the proposition that a "letter" cannot be law within the meaning of
Section 23 of the Contract Act. The Court, in the said case, was not
dealing with subordinate legislation in the form of statutory rules. The
Rules in question before us are, undoubtedly, statutory rules. Therefore,
we do not think it is necessary for us to refer the matter to a larger
Bench on account of the observations found in the judgment in para 17.
What is contemplated under Section 23 of the Contract Act is law, in all
its forms, being immunised from encroachment and infringement by a
contract, being enforced. Not only would a statutory rule be law within
the meaning of Article 13 of the Constitution of India but it would also
be law under Section 23 of the Contract Act.
98. Section 10 of the Contract Act declares as to what agreements
are contracts and all agreements are declared contracts, if they are
made by the free consent of parties competent to contract with a lawful
consideration and with the lawful object and not expressly declared to
be void under the Contract Act. Section 23 must be read with Section
10. Without the illustrations, Section 23, reads as follows:
"23. What considerations and objects are lawful, and what
not.-The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless-
it is forbidden by law; or
is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the
provisions of any law; or
is fraudulent; or
involves or implies, injury to the person or property of another; or
the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy.
In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an
agreement is said to be unlawful. Every agreement of which the
object or consideration is unlawful is void."
99. The very first head under which an agreement becomes unlawful
is, when the consideration or object of agreement is forbidden by law.
In regard to the same, we may notice the view of a Bench of three
24
learned Judges in Gherulal Parakh V. Mahadeodas Maiya Therein,
quoting from Pollock and Mulla from their work Contract Act, this Court
has stated as follows : (AIR p. 786, para 8)
"8.
'act or undertaking is equally forbidden by law whether it
violates a prohibitory enactment of the legislature or a principle of
unwritten law. But in India, where the criminal law is codified, acts
forbidden by law seem practically to consist of acts punishable under
the Penal Code and of acts prohibited by special legislation, or by
regulations or orders made under authority derived from the
legislature."
(emphasis supplied)
100. In regard to the commentary by the very same author, under
the second head of "illegal object or consideration" in Section 23 of the
Contract Act viz. if the consideration or object is of such a nature that if
permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law, it is that, this
Court took the view that law for the purpose of Section 23 would be,
law made by the legislature. Quite apart from the fact that what is
involved in the said case was only a letter, the judgment of this Court
in Gherulal Parakh24 and the Commentary from the very same author,
was not noticed by this Court. Therefore, it becomes all the more
reason as to why we need not refer the matter to a larger Bench. We
may also notice that "law", for the purposes of clauses (1) and (2)
cannot be different. It is very clear that Regulations or Orders made
under the authority derived from the legislature referred to by this
Court, are species of subordinate legislation. Statutory rules would also,
therefore, clearly be law.
101. In the facts of this case, the question would, therefore, be, as
to whether the enforcement of the agreement to sell dated 17-11-1982,
expressly or impliedly, lead to palpably defeat the law in question,
which is contained in the statutory rules or is prohibited by the same.
102. A contract may expressly or impliedly, be prohibited by
provisions of a law. The intentions of the parties do not salvage such a
contract. [See Sobhag Singh V. Jai Singh25. What is involved in this
case, may not be a mere case of a conditional decree for specific
performance being granted as was the case in the line of decisions
commencing with Motilal9 and ending with Ferrodous Estates¹¹ 11 The
Rules contemplate a definite scheme. Land, which is acquired by the
public authority, is meant to be utilised for the particular purpose. The
object of the law is to invite applications from eligible persons, who are
to be selected by a committee and the sites are allotted to those
eligible persons, so that the chosen ones are enabled to put up
structures, which are meant to be residential houses.
103. It is implicit in the Rules, and what is more, in the lease-cum-
sale agreement in the present case, that the allottee, who is treated as
a lessee under Rule 7, will remain in possession and, what is more,
proceed to fulfil his obligation under the lease-cum-sale agreement and
the Rules. The obligations of the allottee/lessee are unambiguous. He
has held himself out to be in dire need of a plot of land for the purpose
of constructing a residential building. He has to disclose his annual
income and any other means indicating his capacity, not only to
purchase the site applied for but also to construct the house. He has to
respond to the query as to whether any member of the family, of which
he is a member, owns or has been allotted a site or a house by the
Board or any other Authority, within the area under jurisdiction of the
Board. The applicant must, furthermore, disclose whether he already
owns a house or house site in the city or outside the city. Whether the
applicant's wife, husband or minor child owns a house or house site, is
another matter, he must disclose. Incorrect information in any of these
matters, would entitle the Board to resume the site.
104. Rule 11 specifically announces among the principles as relevant
for selecting an applicant for allotment, the income of the applicant to
build the house on the site for his residence. No doubt, it is not
applicable to certain classes, which include the Other Backward Classes.
Rule 11(3) further declares that the number of years, the applicant has
been waiting for allotment of a site, inter alia, as a relevant principle.
105. It may be true that as contended by Shri R. Basant, learned
Senior Counsel for the respondent that despite the fact no building was
put up by the allottee, BDA has not deemed it fit to cancel the
allotment. We gather the impression that BDA has been lax in the
pursuit of the lofty goals of the law. We do not pursue the matter
further as BDA is not a party.
106. If the agreement between the plaintiff and the first defendant
is taken as it is and it is enforced, the following would be the
consequences. The allotment to the first defendant was made on 4-4-
1979. In fact, the first defendant was obliged, in law, to construct a
residential building within two years under Rule 17(6). No doubt, the
time could be extended thereunder. But, at the time, the agreement
dated 17-11-1982 was entered into, the first defendant was already in
breach.
107. The result, however, of the agreement dated 17-11-1982, is as
follows : the first defendant would be liable to convey the right in the
site to the plaintiff. The price would be Rs 50,000 for the site,
proceeding on the basis of the concurrent findings by the Court. This is
on the supposition that the parties contemplated that the site would be
conveyed after the period of ten years from the date of allotment upon
the expiry of which alone, the allottee viz. the first defendant would be
entitled to the conveyance under Rule 17(7) of the Rules. It must be
noticed that in fact, under the lease-cum-sale agreement and the
Rules, what is contemplated is that on events leading up to the stage
where the elements of Rule 17 (7) are satisfied alone, a right or duty
would accrue to the allottee/lie upon the party.
108. However, what is more important in the context of the facts of
this case is the following facet:
108.1. Under the agreement, the parties contemplated and have
expressly provided that the plaintiff was to be put in possession of the
site on the date of the agreement i.e. on 17-11-1982. Did the parties
contemplate the construction of the building residential in nature, for
the purpose of which, the site was allotted to the first defendant? Is it
not a clear case where enforcing the agreement, as it is, would
necessarily result in the first defendant not acting in accordance with
lease-cum-sale agreement, which, she entered into with BDA and, what
is even more crucially important, against the mandate of the law, as
contained in the Rules, which contemplated that the allotment was
made for the construction of a residential building by the allottee and
the construction was to be completed within the period of two years or
an extended period?
108.2. The agreement between the parties contemplated giving a
short shrift to the mandate of the law. This is clear from the fact that
under the agreement, the first defendant was obliged to sell the site as
it is. Construction of the building became a practical impossibility. The
price, which was agreed upon, was qua the site alone. The
consideration and the other terms of the agreement, in other words,
ruled out the possibility of a residential building being constructed by
the first defendant, who as the allottee, was, under the law, obliged to
construct the building. Assuming for a moment that the construction
was put up, which assumption must be premised on possession not
being handed over to the plaintiff and which is contrary, not only to the
terms of the agreement, but also pleading of the plaintiff and the
consistent stand in the evidence adduced on behalf of the plaintiff and
even proceeding, however, on the basis that as found by the trial court,
that the plaintiff has failed to establish that possession was handed
over to him on the date of agreement and that the possession
continued with the first defendant, the terms of the agreement, which
included, the price being fixed for conveying the right for the site,
necessarily, would have the effect of freezing the first respondent in
even attempting to put up a construction.
109. We, therefore, reject the contention of the plaintiff that there
was nothing, which could have prevented putting up a building. The
argument of the plaintiff involves rewriting of the contract. This is
different from a situation where an allottee, without being trammelled
by an agreement, is unable to put up a building even for the whole of
ten years and action is not taken under Rule 7(6) and yet conveyance
is made in his favour under Rule 17(7). The direct impact of the
agreement is that it compelled the party to abstain from performing its
obligation in law apart from breaching the agreement with BDA. In
other words, taking the agreement as it is, it necessarily would be in
the teeth of the obligation in law of the first respondent to put up the
construction. The agreement to sell involved clearly terms which are
impliedly prohibited by law
in that the first defendant was thereunder to deliver title to the site and
prevented from acting upon the clear obligation under law. This is a
clear case at any rate wherein enforcing the agreement unambiguously
results in defeating the dictate of the law. The "sublime" object of the
law, the very soul of it stood sacrificed at the altar of the bargain which
appears to be a real estate transaction. It would, in other words, in
allowing the agreement to fructify, even at the end of ten-year period of
non-alienation, be a case of an agreement, which completely defeats
the law for the reasons already mentioned.
110. Going by the recital in the agreement entered into between the
plaintiff and the first defendant, possession is handed over by the first
defendant to the plaintiff. The original possession certificate is also said
to be handed over to the plaintiff. The agreement, even according to
the plaintiff, contemplated that within three months of conveyance of
the site in favour of the first defendant, the first defendant was to
convey her rights in the site to the plaintiff. It is quite clear that the
parties contemplated a state of affairs which is completely inconsistent
with and in clear collision with the mandate of the law. On its term, it
stands out as an affront to the mandate of the law.
111. The illegality goes to the root of the matter. It is quite clear
that the plaintiff must rely upon the illegal transaction and indeed
relied upon the same in filing the suit for specific performance. The
illegality is not trivial or venial. The illegality cannot be skirted nor got
around. The plaintiff is confronted with it and he must face its
consequences. The matter is clear. We do not require to rely upon any
parliamentary debate or search for the purpose beyond the plain
meaning of the law. The object of the law is set out in unambiguous
term. If every allottee chosen after a process of selection under the
rules with reference to certain objective criteria were to enter into
bargains of this nature, it will undoubtedly make the law a hanging
stock.
112. To elucidate the matter a little further, let us take another
example. If the agreement was entered into by the first defendant,
under which, the first defendant would abide by her obligations, both
under the lease-cum-sale agreement and, more importantly, the Rules
and were to put up a building and the agreement contemplated,
conveying the site along with the building, to a buyer after the expiry of
ten years and upon getting the conveyance from BDA, such an
agreement, perhaps, being not an alienation in itself, may have passed
muster.
113. At this juncture, we must also deal with the argument of the
plaintiff that the agreement to sell is not a sale and, what is prohibited
under the Rules and lease-cum-sale agreement, was only alienation.
There can be no quarrel with the proposition that no interest in property
could be conveyed by a mere agreement to sell. But the question is,
whether the agreement to sell in this case is in the teeth of Section 23
of the Contract Act. For reasons, which we have indicated, on
a
conspectus of the scheme of the Rules, we have no hesitation in
holding that the contract was unenforceable for reason that it clearly,
both expressly and impliedly, would defeat the object of the Rules,
which are statutory in nature. The contract was patently illegal for
reasons already indicated.
114. Now, let us look at it from a different perspective. The
agreement is dated 17-11-1982. We have noticed the correspondence
by the plaintiff. We have also noticed the terms of the agreement
between the plaintiff and the first defendant. In the first letter sent by
the plaintiff which incidentally was within four months of the date of
agreement, the plaintiff called upon the first defendant to execute the
sale deed. There is no mention about the first defendant attempting to
sell the property to anybody. It is noteworthy that the plaintiff has
stated that he intends to sell the property to his nominee. This further
indicates that he was not a person who was in need of this site for the
purposes of putting up of residential building unlike even the plaintiff in
the case considered by the High Court of Karnataka and relied upon by
the plaintiff, namely, T. Dase Gowda V. D. Srinivasaiah¹³.
115. We have already noticed the command of the law as contained
in Rule 18(3) of the Rules read with Rule 17. If an allottee who is
treated as a lessee for reasons which are indicated in Rule 18(3) wishes
to sell the site (which is applicable in this case as no building has been
put up) then he can sell the site only as was provided in Rule 18(3),
that is to say, if going by the correspondence by the plaintiff wherein
the first defendant was called upon to execute the sale deed of the site,
this would be clearly in the teeth of Rule 18(3), the scope of which has
already been explained. The plaintiff could not have asked for decree
commanding the first defendant to sell the site in terms of the
correspondence with which he began communicating with the first
defendant. In other words, a sale of a site to any other person clearly
stood prohibited and unless the allottee/lessee is compelled to sell in
the circumstances mentioned in Rule 18(3) the law permitted the sale
of the site only to the Authority itself. Therefore, if the plaintiff wanted
to enforce the agreement for the sale of the site on an immediate basis
it would clearly attract the embargo that it was completely prohibited.
Is the suit premature? Scope of Article 54 of the Limitation Act
116. The further question which is raised by the second defendant is
that the suit itself was premature. We have found that the trial court
has entered into a clear finding that there is absolutely no evidence to
support the projected apprehension that the first defendant was about
to dispose of the property. There is no material to support the finding
otherwise. In fact, any such sale would have been completely illegal
being prohibited by law as that is the inevitable and necessary
implication flowing from Rule 18(3). There is absolutely no foundation
for the plaintiff to have instituted the suit except perhaps the
repudiation.
117. One of the contentions, which is raised by the learned counsel
for the second defendant is that, under Article 54 of the Limitation Act,
1963, the period of limitation would begin to run from the time of
repudiation of
the agreement to sell only when the contract does not provide for the
time at which the contract is to be performed. In other words, the
contention of the second defendant is that the agreement dated 17-11-
1982, contemplated, even according to the plaintiff, in Clause 4 that
the first defendant must convey the title within a period of three
months from the date on which, BDA conveyed the title to her.
According to the second defendant, therefore, in this case, the time for
performance of the obligation by the vendor, was fixed. Therefore, there
was no need for the plaintiff and, what is more, no justification for the
plaintiff, to institute the suit prematurely, almost four years prior to the
appointed date.
118. Article 54 of the Limitation Act, reads as follows:
"54.
For
specific
3
The date fixed for the
performance
of
a
years.
performance, or, if no
contract.
such date is fixed, when
the plaintiff has notice
that performance
is
refused."
Article 54 contemplates that when a date is fixed for the performance of
the contract, then, the period of limitation begins to run from that date.
When such a date is not fixed in an agreement to sell, then, refusal or
breach by the vendor will start the clock ticking.
119. However, we may notice, in this regard, what the Court has
opined. In Ramzan V. Hussaini²6, a Bench of two learned Judges of this
Court took the view that the word "date" in Article 54, need not be
expressly mentioned in an agreement and it can be found out from the
other terms of the agreement. If this were so, there may be merit in
the second defendant's contention.
120. In a later decision, a Bench of three learned Judges in
Ahmadsahab Abdul Mulla (2) V. Bibijan27, has, however, taken the view
that the word "the date" in Article 54, means that the specific date
must be indicated in an agreement as the date of performance. No
doubt, the Court, in fact, went on to distinguish the earlier decision
464-66, paras 5, 8 & 11)
"5. In Tarlok Singh case 28 the factual scenario was noticed and
the case was decided after referring to Article 54 of the Schedule to
the Act. Ramzan case26 related to the specific performance of
'date fixed for performance' 'need not be ascertainable in the face of
the contract deed and may be ascertainable on the happening of a
certain contingent event specified in the contract'.
*
*
*
8. The judgments in Ramzan26 26 and Tarlok Singh 28 cases were
rendered in a different factual scenario and the discussions do not
throw much light on the controversy at hand.
*
*
*
11. The inevitable conclusion is that the expression "date fixed for
the performance" is a crystallised notion. This is clear from the fact
that the second part "time from which period begins to run" refers to
a case where no such date is fixed. To put it differently, when date is
fixed it means that there is a definite date fixed for doing a particular
act. Even in the second part the stress is on "when the plaintiff has
notice that performance is refused". Here again, there is a definite
point of time, when the plaintiff notices the refusal. In that sense
both the parts refer to definite dates. So, there is no question of
finding out an intention from other circumstances."
121. No doubt, the Court in Ahmadsahab Abdul Mulla case 27 took
the view, inter alia, that the judgment in Ramzan V. Hussaini was a
case of a contingent contract. It could still be argued that the rights of
the defendant were only that, if all went well, and BDA conveyed the
title to her, she was to convey her rights within a period of three
months. We would think that in the facts of this case, we need not
disturb the finding of the High Court particularly when we find that the
contract itself is unenforceable.
Is it a new case?
122. Yet another objection raised by the plaintiff is that the Court
must not permit the plea of the appellant that the contract was void or
that it was unenforceable and that it is a new point. Quite apart from
the fact and ignoring even the same that before the trial court, the
second additional issue was, as to whether the contract was void but
not ignoring the first point which was raised by the High Court, which
was as to whether the suit was maintainable, wherein the High Court
has discussed the matter, it appears to us to be a question of law,
which is to be applied to facts, which are not in dispute and, therefore,
we reject the said contention. Even absent a plea by the defendant,
illegality, by putting the contract side by side with the Rules, is writ
large.
Impact of absence of prayer questioning repudiation by the first
defendant
123. The second defendant has raised a contention that since the
first defendant has repudiated the contract and as the plaintiff has not
prayed for a declaration that the repudiation was bad, the suit would
not lie.
124. Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in I.S.
Sikandar V. K. Subramani²9. In the said judgment, we find that this
Court has taken the view that when the vendor has cancelled the
agreement, it is incumbent upon the
vendee to seek a declaration that the cancellation was illegal. This is
36-37)
"36. Since the plaintiff did not perform his part of contract within
the extended period in the legal notice referred to supra, the
agreement of sale was terminated as per notice dated 28-3-1985
and thus, there is termination of the agreement of sale between the
plaintiff and Defendants 1-4 w.e.f. 10-4-1985.
37. As could be seen from the prayer sought for in the original
suit, the plaintiff has not sought for declaratory relief to declare the
termination of agreement of sale as bad in law. In the absence of
such prayer by the plaintiff the original suit filed by him before the
trial court for grant of decree for specific performance in respect of
the suit schedule property on the basis of agreement of sale and
consequential relief of decree for permanent injunction is not
maintainable in law."
125. The said view has been followed in the judgment of this Court
reported in Mohinder Kaur V. Sant Paul Singh30 We do not however
need to rest our decision to non-suit the plaintiff on this score in view
of our finding that the agreement dated 17-12-1982 should not be
enforced.
Lis pendens
126. The doctrine of lis pendens is based on the maxim "pendente
lite nihil innovetur". This means that pending litigation, nothing new
should be introduced. Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(for short "the TP Act"), which incorporates the doctrine of lis pendens,
is based on equity and public policy. It pours complete efficacy to the
adjudicatory mechanism. This is done by finding that any disposition of
property, as described in the Section by a party to the litigation will, in
not any way, detract from the finality of the decision rendered by the
court. It is clear that it is not based on the ground of notice as laid
down by Lord Cranworth in Bellamy V. Sabine Superscript(3), which has been
followed by the Privy Council in the decision in Faiyaz Husain Khan V.
Munshi Prag Narain³².
127. We may notice the following discussion in this regard in The
Transfer of Property, by Mulla, 12th Edn.:
"The rule is, therefore, based not on the doctrine of notice, but on
expediency i.e. the necessity for fine adjudication. It is immaterial
whether the alienee pendente lite had, or had not, notice of the
pending proceeding. This is, of course, no longer the case in
England, or in Gujarat and Maharashtra, where the doctrine only
affects transactions pendente lite if the lis has been duly registered."
128. It is further important to notice that when a transaction is
done, lis pendens or pending a case, the transaction is, as such, not
annulled. The
transaction is, in other words, not invalidated. In fact, as between the
transferor and the transferee, it does not lie in the mouth of the
transferor to set up the plea of lis pendens to defeat the disposition of
property. Equally, the principle of lis pendens is, not to be confounded
with the aspect of good faith or bona fides. In other words, the
transferee or the beneficiary of the property, which is disposed of by a
party, cannot set up the case that he acted bona fide or in good faith.
This enables the court and the parties in a suit or a proceeding, which
otherwise is in conformity with requirements of Section 52, to proceed
in the matter on the basis that the adjudication by the court, will not,
in any way, be subverted or delayed, when the day of final reckoning
arrives.
129. The cardinal and indispensable requirement, which flows both
from Section 52 and the principle, it purports to uphold, is that the
transfer or dealing of the property, which is the subject-matter of the
proceeding, is carried out by a party to the proceeding. Section 52 uses
the word "party" twice. It refers to the disability of a party to transfer or
otherwise deal with the property, pending adjudication. This embargo is
intertwined with the beneficiary of the veto against such transfer, being
any other party thereto. In fact, the Special Bench of the Madras High
Court in Manjeshwara Krishnaya V. Vasudeva Mallya 33, , puts the doctrine
of lis pendens as an extension of the doctrine of res judicata. Thus, the
sine qua non for the doctrine of lis pendens to apply is that the transfer
is made or the property is otherwise disposed of by a person, who is a
party to the litigation. The doctrine of lis pendens, only subject,
however, the transfer or other disposition of property to the final
decision that is rendered. The person/party, who finally succeeds in the
litigation, can ask the court to ignore any transfer or other disposition of
property by any party to the proceeding. This is subject to the condition
that transfer or other disposition is made during the pendency of the
lis.
130. The first defendant died pending the suit on 6-8-1994. Her
death was reported before the Court on 16-1-1995. The plaintiff
brought on record, the husband of the first defendant by the order
dated 25-8-1995, as Defendant 1 (a). Defendant 1(b), who is the son of
the second defendant, sold the property on 19-9-1996, in favour of the
appellant. It is thereafter that on 9-4-1997, the predecessor-in-interest
of the appellant viz. the son of the first defendant, and the second
defendant were impleaded on 9-4-1997. The transfer made in favour of
the second defendant was, therefore, made at a time, when the son of
the first defendant was not a party to the suit. Therefore, it is that the
contention was taken before the trial court successfully by the
appellants that the transfer in favour of the appellant was not hit by the
doctrine of lis pendens.
131. The High Court in the impugned judgment1 reversed this
finding. The High Court, in doing so, employs, inter alia, the following
"93. The position of law with regard to the rights and obligation of
a dead person can be succinctly stated thus:
The rights which a dead man thus leaves behind him vests in his
representative. They pass to some person whom the dead man, or
the law on his behalf, has appointed to represent him in the world of
the living. This representative bears the person of the deceased, and
therefore, has vested in him all the inheritable rights, and has
imposed upon him all the inheritable liabilities of the deceased.
Inheritance is in some sort a legal and fictitious continuation of the
personality of the dead man, for the representative is in some sort
identified by the law with him whom he represents. The rights which
the dead man can no longer own or exercise in propria persona, and
the obligations which he can no longer in propria persona fulfil, he
owns, exercises, and fulfils in the person of a living substitute. To
this extent, and in this fashion, it may be said that the legal
personality of a man survives his natural personality, until, his
obligations being duly performed, and his property duly disposed of,
his representation among the living is no longer called for. Just as
many of a man's rights survive him, so also do many of his
liabilities; and these inheritable obligations pass to his
representative, and must be satisfied by him.
As far as the estate of a dead man is concerned, there are two
class of persons who are entitled to it, namely, creditors and
beneficiaries. A beneficiary possesses a dual capacity, while he may
benefit by inheriting the dead man's estate is also liable to the dead
man's obligations. He survives even after his death, especially the
obligations concerning immovable property. The beneficiaries who
are entitled to the residue after satisfaction of the creditors, are of
two classes : (1) those nominated by the last will of the deceased
and (2) those appointed by the law in default of any such
nomination. They succeed respectively by testamentary succession
(ex testamento) or intestate succession (ab intestate) (source
Salmond on Jurisprudence, Twelfth Edn., P.J. Fitzgerald).
Section 2(11) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) defines
legal representative to mean a person who in law represents the
estate of a deceased person, and includes any person who
intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues
or is sued in a representative character the person on whom the
estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued. The
aforesaid definition is both exhaustive as well as an inclusive
definition. It is exhaustive in the sense that a legal representative
means a person who in law represents the estate of the deceased."
132. Thereafter, the High Court proceeded to consider the distinction
between a legal representative as defined in Section 2(11) of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 and legal heirs. Still further, the Court also
considered the scheme of Order 22 CPC and finally proceeds to find as
"94.
Even though Defendant (b) was not arrayed along with
his father as a legal heir of the deceased Defendant 1, the fact
remains that the estate of Defendant 1, which also includes the suit
schedule property was represented through Defendant 1(a), the
husband of Defendant 1.
Therefore, the contention that the sale that was made by Defendant 1
(b) in favour of Defendant 2 when Defendant 1(b) was not a party to
the suit is not subject to any direction that may be issued in the suit,
and that Section 52 of the Act would not apply in the instant case is not
a correct understanding of the position of law. Further, in the instant
case, Defendant (a) also did not inform the trial court that his son was
also a legal representative of deceased Defendant 1 and therefore, he
also ought to be brought on record as the heir of the deceased
Defendant 1 when the application was filed by the plaintiff to bring only
him on record as legal heir of deceased Defendant 1. Therefore, it is
held that in the instant case, the estate of Defendant 1 was represented
through Defendant 1(a) in the suit and that the alienation made by
Defendant 1(b) to Defendant 2, even in the absence of Defendant 1(b)
being made a party to the suit has no significance.
95. That apart, it is also noted from the evidence of Defendant 2,
who has deposed as DW 1, that when the talks for the sale of the
suit property took place in June, 1996, Defendant 1(a) along with
Defendant 1 (b) and the broker Battanna were present. The reason as
to why Defendant 1(a) did not disclose about the pendency of the
suit when he was by then arrayed as the legal heir of deceased
Defendant 1 in the said suit is for obvious reasons. Defendant 1(a)
did not disclose about the pendency of the suit to Defendant 2 only
with an intention to deprive the right of the plaintiff in the suit
property i.e. by creating third party rights in the said property. Also,
it cannot be believed that Defendant 1(b), though not arrayed as a
legal representative of deceased Defendant 1 (his mother) at that
point of time was totally unaware about the pendency of the suit.
The legal heirs of deceased Defendant 1, namely, her husband and
only son resided at the same address. Therefore, constructive, if not
actual, notice has to be attributed to Defendant 1(b) regarding the
pendency of the suit. By selling the same to Defendant 2 would
result in plaintiff's right being jeopardised. As already noted from the
evidence of DWs 1 and 2, talks for the sale of the suit site by
Defendants 1(a) and 1(b) were held with Defendant 2 in the first
week of June, 1996. In fact, at that point of time, BDA had not yet
conveyed the site in the name of Defendant 1(b). BDA did so only on
14-6-1996."
133. The High Court has relied on the decision of the Madras High
Court in Nallakumara Goundan V. Pappayi Ammal³4. In the said case,
after the death of the party, a legal representative disposed of the
plaint scheduled property within the period provided for substituting
the dead person with the legal representative. It was in the said
context held by the Madras High Court as under : (Pappayi Ammal
34
"6.
The same principle should, I think, apply to a case where as
here the original defendant died and the alienation was made after
his death and before the filing of the application to bring his legal
representative on record. The suit must be deemed to be pending
against the legal persona
of the deceased i.e. against his legal representative and must be
deemed to continue until at least the expiration of the time limited by
any law of limitation to bring him on record. Whether if an application is
made long after the expiration of the time fixed for bringing the legal
representative on record and an alienation is made by the legal
representative and later on the plaintiff in the action seeks to set aside
the abatement and to bring the legal representative on record, and that
is ordered, the doctrine of lis pendens applies or not does not arise and
need not be considered. There may be difficulties in such a case, but
where the alienation is made within the time prescribed for bringing the
legal representative on record, it is a clear case and there can be no
doubt whatever that the rule does apply."
134. Thereafter, the Court concluded that in the circumstances,
Section 52 of the TP Act squarely applied.
135. It would appear that the High Court has, in arriving at the
finding that the transfer in favour of the appellant is hit by lis pendens,
taken into consideration the doctrine of notice/constructive notice. We
have already observed that the doctrine of notice and constructive
notice would be inapposite and inapplicable. Neither the fact that the
transferee had no notice nor the fact that the transferee acted bona
fide, in entering into the transaction, are relevant for applying Section
52 to a transaction. This is unlike the requirement of Section 19(1)(b)
of the Specific Relief Act whereunder these requirements are relevant.
136. The decision of the Madras High Court in Nallakumara
Goundan turned on in its own facts as indicated by the said Court
34
itself. In other words, that was a case where even within the period of
limitation for substitution of the legal representative of a deceased
party in a suit, the legal representative purported to deal with the
property. It was in the said context that the Court proceeded to hold
that lis pendens would apply. In this case the transfer in favour of the
second defendant took place on 16-9-1996. The vendor and the
vendee, namely, Defendant 1 (b) and the second defendant were not
parties on the date of the transaction. They were impleaded only almost
one year thereafter. No doubt we are not oblivious to the role played by
Defendant (a), namely, the husband of the first defendant who gave
his "no objection" to the assignment of the entire rights in favour of his
son, namely, Defendant 1(b) without which BDA could not have
assigned the right in favour of Defendant 1 (b). Though not urged by
the plaintiff, could it be said that as Defendant (a) was already a party
and this must be treated as a case were Defendant 1 (a) as "otherwise
dealt" with the property within the meaning of Section 52 without
which the title would not vest in Defendant 1(b).
137. A transfer which is made lis pendens it is settled law, is not a
void document. It does create rights as between the parties to the sale.
The right of the party to the suit who conveys his right by a sale is
extinguished. All that Section 52 of the Transfer Property Act provides
is that the transfer which is
made during the pendency of the proceeding is subjected to the final
result of the litigation.
138. Even assuming for a moment that the conduct of Defendant 1
(a), the father of Defendant 1(b), in giving a no objection and thereby
enabling Defendant 1 (b) to derive the title exclusively to the property
and which title stood conveyed to the second defendant attracted, the
principle of lis pendens, it would still not invalidate the sale. At best,
the plaintiff can contend that, should he be entitled for a decree of
performance the sale in favour of the second defendant should be
subjected to such decree. As far as the transfer is made by Defendant 1
(b) to the second defendant in his own right and insofar as Defendant 1
(b) was not a party and by the time the sale was effected the period of
limitation for impleading Defendant 1 (b) had already clearly expired
even the principle laid down in the decision of the Madras High Court
would not apply and the High Court was not correct in finding that the
sale by Defendant (b) in favour of the second defendant was hit by lis
pendens.
Is the second defendant, a bona fide purchaser?
139. The trial court has found that the second defendant is a bona
fide purchaser. The High Court holds otherwise. The purchase of the
suit site is purported to be made by the second defendant on 17-9-
1996. The High Court, after going through the evidence, enters the
following findings:
139.1. The negotiations took place first time in June 1996 and, at
that time, the suit was pending. BDA has not yet registered the
conveyance in favour of Defendant 1 (b). Even before BDA executed the
sale deed in favour of Defendant (b), he had decided to enter into the
agreement. The conveyance in favour of Defendant 1(b) was entered
only on 14-6-1996 and he executed the sale deed in favour of the
second defendant on 19-9-1996. The second defendant has deposed
that he met not just DW 2 along with the broker but he had also met
the father of DW 2 viz. Defendant 1(a), who was arrayed as the legal
representative of the first defendant. Only photocopies of documents
were given to the second defendant before the sale. Defendant 2 did
not make any inquiry about the original. It must be presumed that the
second defendant had notice of the agreement to sell the site in respect
of which the decree for specific performance was sought.
139.2. The Court, then, referred to Section 3 of the TP Act and
brings in the concept of constructive notice. Had the second defendant
made inquiries with regard to the original possession certificate, the
truth would have been revealed. Much is said about no inquiry is being
made about the original possession certificate. The High Court notes
that the agreement to sell with the plaintiff is not registered but, again,
it draws inference from absence of inquires by the second defendant
about why the original possession certificate was not handed over to
him. The fact that Defendant 1(a) did not reveal to the second
defendant about the pendency of the suit, is, on the one hand noted
but the Court holds that even then, the second defendant ought to
have made inquiry about pendency of any litigation. The fact that
second Defendant 1(b) as DW 2 admitted that he had no material to
support the fact that he had received Rs 4,50,000, was very valuable in
mid-1990s, if considered.
139.3. The Court questions the idea that the second defendant who
was only 20 years of age and involved in agricultural operations and
milk-vending business, who had no intention of settling in Bangalore,
would have thought of purchasing a site in Bangalore. The amount of
consideration was not deposited in any bank. The Court proceeds to
hold that on an overall reappreciation, it was found that he was not a
bona fide purchaser for value without notice. Thereafter, the High Court
further proceeds to pose the question as to why the second defendant,
who is the resident of Nagamangala Taluk, engaged in agricultural
operation and milk-vending business, should enter into an agreement
in Bangalore, that too, when he is 20 years old. Betanna, the alleged
broker, was not examined. Thereafter, the High Court proceeds to even
find that the entire transaction between Defendant 1 (b) and the second
defendant is a sham transaction, made only to defeat the plaintiff.
139.4. In the next paragraph, however, applying Sections 3 and 54
of the TP Act, it is again found that the second defendant is not a bona
fide purchaser for value. Finally, it was found, by answering Point 2,
that the second defendant is not a bona fide purchaser for value
without notice of the agreement to sell in favour of the plaintiff.
140. We must, in the first place, notice that on a perusal of the
plaint, even after the amendment, there is no case set up by the
plaintiff that the sale deed executed in favour of the second defendant,
is a sham transaction. A sale deed, which is a mere sham and a
purchase, which is not bona fide, are two different things. In the case
of sham transaction, no title is conveyed to the purchaser. In the case a
sale transaction, which is not a sham, the title of the transfer is,
indeed, conveyed to the transferee. A purchase may be bona fide or not
bona fide. In a sale, which is not a bona fide, words "bona fide sale",
are used in the context of pending suit and from the point of view of
Section 19(1)(b) of the Specific Performance Act. It is difficult to dub it
as a sham transaction. A transaction cannot be a sham transaction and
a sale, which is afflicted with absence of bona fides, at the same time.
Even proceeding on the basis that the second defendant was not a bona
fide purchaser, it is not the same thing as holding that it is a sham
transaction.
141. In the plaint, which was amended, the plaintiff has averred,
inter alia, as follows:
"10C. The plaintiff submits that taking advantage of the fact that
the son was not on record, the husband accorded no objection in
favour of BDA so as to ensure that the sale deed was executed in
favour of H.K. Sudarshan alone and thereafter the second legal
representative sold the schedule property in favour of the second
defendant. The plaintiff submits that the defendants are aware of the
pendency of the suit and of the subsistence of the agreement of sale
in favour of the plaintiff. The sale deed executed in favour of the said
person i.e. the second defendant is hit by the doctrine of lis pendens
and the second defendant's title to the schedule property is subject
to the outcome of the present suit.
10D. The plaintiff submits that the second defendant is not a bona
fide purchaser for value. The sale in favour of the second defendant
is with the sole intention of complicating the matters in controversy
and to prejudice the case of the plaintiff. Therefore, the plaintiff
submits that the sale deed executed in favour of the second
defendant does not in any way restrict the right of the plaintiff to
seek specific performance of the agreement of sale executed in
favour of the plaintiff."
142. Therefore, we are inclined to hold, in the first place that the
High Court erred in finding that the transaction was a sham transaction.
As far as the question, as to whether the second defendant was not a
bona fide purchaser, it is the case of the second defendant that the
High Court has erred in not noticing that in the evidence, the second
defendant deposed that his vendor disclosed to him that the original
possession certificate was lost and produced duplicate possession
certificate. This evidence is incongruous with the finding of the High
Court that the second defendant had not made any inquiry as to why
the original possession certificate was not handed over.
143. The second defendant had deposed about inquiry being made
and being informed that the original possession certificate was lost. The
second defendant further complains that the High Court itself has found
that the vendor of the second defendant has admitted that no
information was given to the second defendant regarding the pendency
of the suit and, therefore, the High Court has erred in reversing the
finding of the trial court, which had found that inquiry as contemplated
in Section 3 of the TP Act had been made by the second defendant for
purchasing the property. The second defendant had visited the site. The
finding based on the defendant being 20 years old or the husband of
the vendor, being an MLA, was pointed out to be irrelevant. It is further
the case of the second defendant that construction was made and he is
living in the property since more than 17 years. The value of the
property is stated to be about Rs 2.5 crores.
144. Per contra, the learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff would
support the finding of the High Court. It was pointed out that the High
Court is the final fact-finding Court.
145. We have already found that the sale in favour of the second
defendant is wrongly found to be a sham transaction, a case, which
even the plaintiff did not have. If it is not a sham transaction and the
issue is, as to whether the second defendant, is not a bona fide
purchaser, the following aspect looms large.
146. We have already found that the agreement to sell dated 17-11-
1982, is to be painted with the brush of illegality and pronounced
unenforceable. It is undisputed that the plaintiff has paid Rs 50,000 on
the strength of the said agreement. It would appear to be true that a
part of this amount was received on the date of the agreement. It may
be true that further amount were received by Defendant 1(a), the
husband of the first defendant. The first defendant died pending the
suit. It is while the suit was pending that Defendant 1(b), the son of
the first defendant, had executed the sale deed on 16-9-1996 in favour
of the second defendant. It is again undisputed that at the time when
the sale deed was executed, both the second defendant and his vendor,
Defendant 1(b), were not parties in the suit. We have already found
that the sale deed in favour of the second defendant, cannot be treated
as a sham transaction and the finding, in fact, on Point 2 by the High
Court, also that the second defendant is not a bona
fide purchaser. Once we come to the conclusion that the agreement,
relied upon by the plaintiff, cannot be enforced, as to whether, even
proceeding on the basis that the sale in favour of the second defendant
was made, not in circumstances which would entitle the second
defendant to set up the case that he is a bona fide purchaser, the
question of granting relief to the plaintiff must first be decided.
147. In other words, in view of the illegality involved in enforcing
the agreement dated 17-11-1982, the question would arise, whether,
on principles, which have been settled by this Court, the Court should
assist the plaintiff or the defendant. We have noted the state of the
evidence, in particular, as it is revealed from the deposition of PW 2.
We have found that the agreement, relied upon by the plaintiff, cannot
be acted upon. In such circumstances, we would think that, even if we
do not reverse the finding of the High Court that the second defendant
is not a bona fide purchaser, it will not itself advance the case of the
plaintiff. This is for the reason that his case is in the teeth of the law, as
found by us, making it an unenforceable contract. The plaintiff is
seeking the assistance of the Court which must be refused.
148. We, therefore, need not explore further the complaint of the
second defendant that the High Court erred in arriving at the finding
that the second defendant was not a bona fide purchaser.
Not a case under Article 136?
149. Is it a case which should not be allowed under Article 136? The
argument of the plaintiff is that having regard to the facts as it
emerges this is not a fit case for this Court to exercise its jurisdiction
which originated from grant of special leave under Article 136. It is
undoubtedly true that at both the stages, namely, while granting
special leave and also even after special leave has been granted under
Article 136 that is when the Court considers an appeal the Court would
not be oblivious to the special nature of the jurisdiction it exercises. It
is not axiomatic that on a case being made otherwise that the Court
would interfere. The conduct of the parties and the question as to
whether interference would promote the interests of justice are not
irrelevant considerations. Being the final court, it is not without reason
that this Court is accordingly also clothed with the extraordinary powers
under Article 142 to do complete justice between the parties.
150. There is another aspect which is also projected by the plaintiff
which must receive our attention. The plaintiff sought to persuade us
should the Court find the agreement to sell unenforceable for the
reason that it falls foul of Section 23 of the Contract Act, it may declare
the law but not interfere with the judgment of the High Court.
151. We are of the view that on both these grounds we are not with
the plaintiff. It is not a case where the condition of the plaintiff is such
that the interests of justice would overwhelm our findings that the
agreement relied upon by the plaintiff constituted a clear intrusion into
the requirement of the law.
152. In fact, we would consider the contract an open and brazen
instance of the parties entering into a bargain with scant regard for the
law. If that were not enough, the very first letter addressed to the first
defendant dated 1-3-1983 betrays the real purpose of the contract. The
plaintiff in no uncertain terms has
declared his intention to sell the property to his nominee. It is clear as
daylight that the plaintiff had no intention whatsoever to make use of
the site for the purpose of putting up a residential building. The
communications indicate that the plaintiff was a contractor. The
evidence of PW 2 his son further indicated that he has been in the
business since 1960. What is even more revealing is the admission
relating to the properties belonging to or in the possession of the
plaintiff and his family members which we have dealt with. The final
nail in the coffin, as it were, is driven home in the case by showing the
case of the plaintiff in its true colours when PW 2 deposed that if the
suit is dismissed it would occasion "a monetary loss".
153. Thus, the bargain was to buy up precious public land which
was vested with the Bangalore Development Authority by acquiring it
from some person with the laudable object of housing a homeless
person in Bangalore. The result of the agreement being enforced would
be to clearly frustrate the object of the law and make the site the
subject-matter of a property deal with the object of making a profit.
154. The upshot of the above discussion is, we must hold that the
High Court has clearly erred in holding that the suit was maintainable.
We would find that the suit to enforce the agreement dated 17-11-
1982, should not be countenanced by the Court.
155. Then, the question would arise, as to the final order to be
passed in the facts. While, we are inclined to overturn the impugned
judgment by holding that the suit itself, was not maintainable, we
must notice that the High Court had decreed the suit on the appeal by
the plaintiff. The defendants did not challenge the decree of the trial
court. Therefore, the setting aside of the judgment1 of the High Court
would not result in dismissal of the suit. What is more, we are of the
further view that to do complete justice between the parties, while we
allow the appeals, we must pass an order, which will result in a fair
amount being paid to the plaintiff.
156. Having regard to the entirety of the evidence and the conduct
of the parties, noticing even the admitted stand of the second
defendant that the plaint scheduled property has a value of Rs 2.5
crores and the plaintiff has paid, in all, a sum of Rs 50,000, which
constituted the consideration for the agreement to sell several years
ago, while we dismiss the suit for specific performance, we should
direct the appellants to pay a sum of Rs 20,00,000 in place of the
decree of the trial court.
157. Accordingly, the appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment1
shall stand set aside. The suit for specific performance will stand
dismissed. There will be a decree, however, for payment of Rs
20,00,000 (Rupees twenty lakhs) by the appellants to the respondents
(the legal representatives of the plaintiff) within a period of three
months from today. If the aforesaid amount is not paid as aforesaid,
the appellants shall be liable to pay interest @ 8% p.a. after the expiry
of 3 months from today on the said amount as well. The parties are
directed to bear their respective costs.
+
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6857 of 2017. Arising from the impugned Final Judgment and
Court, RFA No. 1307 of 2002, dt. 24-8-2016) [Reversed]
#
Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6858 of 2017
2
Kedar Nath Motani V. Prahlad Rai, AIR 1960 SC 213 : (1960) 1 SCR 861
3
4
Holman V. Johnson, (1775) 1 Cowp 341 : 98 ER 1120
5
Mad 334
6
7 Sita Ram V. Radhabai, AIR 1968 SC 534
8
Immani Appa Rao V. Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi, (1962) 3 SCR 739 : AIR 1962 SC 370
9
10
11
14
Kar 356
16
19
20
21
Jambu Rao Satappa Kocheri V. Neminath Appayya Hanamannayar, AIR 1968 SC 1358
23
24 Gherulal Parakh V. Mahadeodas Maiya, AIR 1959 SC 781
25 Sobhag Singh V. Jai Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1328
26
27
28
31 Bellamy V. Sabine, (1857) 1 De G & J 566 : 44 ER 842
33
578
34