In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE UDAY U. LALIT, C.J. AND DINESH MAHESHWARI, S. RAVINDRA BHAT, BELA M.
TRIVEDI AND J.B. PARDIWALA, JJ.)
JANHIT ABHIYAN
Petitioner;
Versus
UNION OF INDIA (EWS RESERVATION)
Respondent.
Writ Petitions (C) No. 55 of 2019- with Nos. 69, 72-73, 76, 80, 95, 106, 122,
133, 146, 162, 168, 178, 182, 212, 222, 249, 331, 341, 343, 419, 427, 446,
473, 493, 596, 732, 798, 854 of 2019, TCs (C) Nos. 7-12 of 2021, TPs (C) Nos.
1245, 2715 of 2019, 122 of 2020 and SLP (C) No. 8699 of 2020 , decided on
November 7, 2022
A. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - Economic Disabilities or Economic
Backwardness Criterion - Economic disabilities or economic backwardness, held (per
majority), is a valid criterion for reservation or compensatory discrimination
- Reservation to deal with the deprivations arising out of economic disadvantages has
the sanction of our Constitution and our jurisprudence
- Framers of the Constitution stressed that the principle of "economic democracy" is a
complement to political democracy
- The goal of the Preamble is to secure for all its citizens : justice social, economic and
political
- The word "economic" is employed more than thirty times in the Constitution
- Equality clause in the Constitution is not merely about formal equality but embodies
the concept of real and substantive equality
- Any civilised jurisdiction differentiates between haves and have-nots, in several
walks of life and more particularly, for the purpose of differential treatment by way of
affirmative action
- Poverty, the disadvantageous condition due to want of financial resources, is a
phenomenon which is complex in origin as well as in its manifestation
- Deprivations arising from economic disadvantages are required to be addressed by
the State, to achieve the goals of an egalitarian society and social, economic and political
justice
- Per Trivedi, J. (concurring), equality of opportunity would also mean a fair opportunity not
only to one section or the other but to all sections by removing the handicaps if a particular section
of the society suffers from the same
- Economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the benefit of reservation -
With a view to fulfil the ideals lying behind Art. 46, and to ensure that economically weaker sections
of citizens get a fair chance of receiving higher education and participation in employment in the
services of the State, it was decided to amend the Constitution
- Economic criterion can be a relevant factor for affirmative action under the Constitution
- On the issue of economic criterion as an affirmative action under the Constitution, there is no
difference of opinion among us
- Economic criterion is intrinsically linked with distributive justice envisaged under the Preamble
and Arts. 38 and 46
- Economic criterion is a neutral criterion and is in harmony with the constitutional goal of a
casteless society
- It is an expansion of affirmative action to untouched groups - The test for reasonable
classification is not necessarily, or much less exclusively, the social backwardness test of Art. 15
(4) and Art. 16(4)
- Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (partly dissenting and partly concurring), the break from the past,
which was rooted on elimination of caste-based social discrimination, in affirmative action - To
now include affirmative action based on economic deprivation, through the impugned Amendment,
does not alter, destroy or damage the basic structure of the Constitution - Affirmative action on
basis of economic criteria for the purpose of Art. 15 is permissible and does not violate basic
structure - But affirmative action only on basis of economic criteria for the purpose of Art. 16,
that is, reservations in public employment is not permissible and would violate equality code under
the Constitution
(Paras 102 to 115, 207 to 209 and 290 to 294; 449 to 553 and 622)
B. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - Reservation under - Economic
criteria as the sole basis for affirmative action by reservation or compensatory
discrimination - Validity - Held (per majority), reservation structured singularly on
economic criteria does not damage the basic structure of the Constitution - Impugned
103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic structure of the
Constitution on this ground
- To end poverty in all its forms everywhere is the goal of UN resolution dated 25-9-2015 -
The impugned Amendment providing for economic criteria as the sole basis for reservation is a part
of the frontal efforts to eradicate poverty "in all its forms everywhere"
- Building a welfare State is the main objective of the Constitution - The fact that the State,
by affirmative action has removed inequalities faced by a particular section does not mean that the
State cannot take affirmative action to remove inequalities faced by another section of society
because of one particular dominating factor like poverty
- While caste may be relevant to determine backwardness, the mere exclusion of caste does
not impair the classification if it satisfies other tests
- Although there are observations in past decisions that reservations under Arts. 15(4) and/or
15(5) and/or 16(4) cannot be claimed only on the economic criteria, the said decisions cannot be
read to mean that if any class or section other than those covered by Arts. 15(4) and/or 15(5)
and/or 16(4) is suffering from disadvantage only due to economic conditions, the State can never
take affirmative action qua that class or section
- Per Trivedi, J. (concurring), Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) by enabling State to provide reservation
on sole basis of economic criteria seek to achieve the constitutional goal and ideal of an egalitarian,
casteless and classless society
- Pursuit of ideals of Constitution by Constitution Amendment should not be invalidated only
because of the possibilities of its imperfect or partial fulfilment - The ideal of an egalitarian,
casteless and classless society is difficult to achieve but achievable
- Our Constitution which is a living and organic document continuously shapes the lives of
citizens in particular and societies in general
- Per Pardiwala, J. (concurring), Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) are valid and do not destroy the basic
structure - The purpose of struggle for Independence was to achieve basic human rights and
freedom and build a welfare State - The idea of equality is the heart and soul of the Constitution
and is found in the Preamble, Pts. III and IV of the Constitution - However, equality, in general,
cannot be universally applied and is subject to reasonable classification, conditions and restrictions
as spelt out in the Constitution itself - The Constitution seeks to secure social, economic and
political justice - It seeks to achieve freedom from poverty, ignorance and disease
- A law designed to promote a directive principle, even if it comes into conflict with the
formalistic and doctrinaire of equality before the law, would most certainly advance the broader
egalitarian principles and desirable constitutional goal of social and economic justice for all
- Equality code in Art. 14 prescribes substantive and not formal equality - Reasonable
classification which satisfied the twin test is not discriminatory and violative of Art. 14 - The
differentia used for the classification in impugned Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) is to promote or uplift the
economically weaker sections of citizens who are otherwise not covered under Art. 15(4) and Art.
16(4) of the Constitution - This is keeping in mind the directive principles of State policy as
embodied under Art. 46 of the Constitution
- Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting), while the "economic criteria" per se is permissible in
relation to access to public goods (under Art. 15), the same is not true for Art. 16, the goal of
which is empowerment, through representation of the community
- The introduction of reservation in public employment by Art. 16(6) solely on basis of
economic criteria violates the right to equal opportunity, in addition to the non-discriminatory facet
of equality, both of which are part of the equality code and the basic structure
- The entire philosophy of Art. 16 is to ensure barrier-free equal opportunity in regard to public
employment - The introduction of reservations for economically weaker sections of the society is
not premised on their lack of representation (unlike backward classes) - The absence of this
condition implies that persons who benefit from the EWS reservations can, and in all probability do
belong to classes or castes, which are "forward" and are represented in public service, adequately
(Paras 117 to 128, 184.1, 186.1, 214 to 216, 225 to 258, 393 to 395; 429, 430, 554
to 563 and 526)
C. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) & 16(6) and Arts. 46, 38, 39, Pts. III, IV and
Preamble - Distributive justice - The submission that Art. 46 cannot be invoked for
reservation in favour of any economically weaker section that is not carrying other
attributes which could place it on a par with, or akin to, SCs/STs, held (per majority), is
based on a too narrow and unacceptably restricted reading of the text of Art. 46 while
totally missing on its texture and suffers from following shortcomings
- Firstly, held (per majority), it misses out on the important principle of "Distributive Justice",
which is a bedrock of the provisions like Arts. 46, 38 and 39 - Concept of distributive justice
connotes, inter alia, the removal of economic inequalities - The assumption that affirmative action
of reservation in our constitutional scheme is only reserved for SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs, is neither
valid nor compatible with our constitutional scheme of distributive justice
- Secondly, the broader expression "weaker section" in Art. 46 cannot be given a restricted
construction and cannot refer only to SCs and STs - The broader expression "other weaker
sections" in Art. 46 is disjointed from and not confined to only the particular weaker sections, SCs
and STs - Principle of ejusdem generis is not strictly applicable to interpret an organic thing like the
Constitution
- Thirdly, the fact that the Statement of Objects and Reasons in the impugned Amendment
refers to Art. 46 does not mean that other constitutional objectives were not intended to be
addressed - Moreover, it is not the requirement of our constitutional scheme that an amendment
to the Constitution has to be based on some existing provision in directive principles of State policy
- The argument that the impugned Amendment is for forward classes is not tenable -
Impugned Amendment is essentially related to the requirements of those economically weaker
sections who have hitherto not been given the benefit of the affirmative action of reservation,
which was accorded to the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs
- The argument that the impugned Amendment is in direct conflict with constitutional scheme
of reservation for SEBCs, OBCs, SCs, and STs, not tenable - Economically weaker sections other
than SEBCs, OBCs, SCs, STs are also entitled to the affirmative action of reservation besides other
forms of affirmative action - Affirmative action of reservation cannot be said to be reserved only
for SEBCs, OBCs, SCs, STs
- Per Pardiwala, J. (concurring), from the Objects and Reasons of the Constitution (103rd
Amendment) Act, 2019, it is evident that the entire edifice of the impugned Amendment is to fulfil
the mandate of Art. 46 and to ensure that economically weaker sections of the citizens get a fair
chance of being imparted higher education and participation in employment in the services of the
State
- Social justice is not a simple or single idea of a society but is an essential part of complex
social change to relieve the poor, etc. from handicaps and penury, to ward them off from distress
and to make their lives liveable for the greater good of the society at large
- Social and economic justice in the context of Indian Constitution must be understood in a
comprehensive sense to remove every inequality and to provide equal opportunity to all citizens in
social as well as economic activities and in every part of life
- Economic justice means abolition of those economic conditions which ultimately result in the
inequality of economic values between men leading towards backwardness
(Paras 129 to 134, 272 to 282 and 295 to 299)
D. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - Reservation for economically
weaker sections under - Exclusion of classes covered by Arts. 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4),
even if they comprise poor persons, held (per majority), does not destroy the basic
structure of the Constitution - Exclusion herein does not violate the equality code or
damage the basic structure of the Constitution - Said exclusion balances the
requirements of non-discrimination and compensatory discrimination - The 103rd
Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic structure of the Constitution
in excluding the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs from the scope of EWS reservation - Said
exclusion is a form of compensatory discrimination and not direct discrimination -
Concept of compensatory discrimination, and its applicability in the present context -
Explained in detail
- Per Trivedi, J. (concurring), impugned Amendment is not shocking, unconscionable or
unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of equal justice - The impugned Amendment by newly
inserted Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) creates a separate class of "economically weaker sections of the
citizens" from the general/unreserved class, without affecting the special rights of reservations
provided to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes of citizens covered
under Arts. 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) - Said exclusion cannot be said to be discriminatory or
violative of the equality code
- Treating economically weaker sections of the citizens as a separate class would be a
reasonable classification - The impugned Amendment is an affirmative action on the part of
Parliament for the benefit of said class of persons
- It must be presumed that the legislature understands and appreciates the needs of its own
people - In the present case Parliament was aware that all economically weaker sections of
citizens were not covered under benefit of reservation under Arts. 15(4), (5) and 16(4) -
Therefore, by the impugned Amendment reservation was provided to them by excluding those
already getting the benefit of reservation under Arts. 15(4), (5) and 16(4)
- Per Pardiwala, J. (concurring), if the economic criteria based on the economic indicator is
relevant for the purpose of classification and grant of benefit of reservation under Art. 15(6) then
merely because the SCs/STs/OBCs are excluded from the same, by itself, will not make the
classification arbitrary and the amendment violative of the basic structure of the Constitution
- Different approach of judicial review is followed based on the type of classification under
challenge, that is, strict interpretation if it is overclassification or overinclusiveness and liberal
interpretation if it is underclassification or underinclusiveness - The case herein is a case of
underclassification because it is alleged that SCs, STs and OBCs have been excluded from the
impugned Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - In such cases of underclassification when the question arises as
to "who should be brought in", the Court should leave it to the wisdom of the legislature because it
is essentially a stage where there should be an element of practicability - Therefore, the Court
should exercise judicial restraint
- The contention that the exclusion of these groups is discriminatory overlooks the fact that
the SC/ST and OBCs are already represented in the classes covered by Arts. 15(4), 15(5) and 16
(4)
- Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting), excluding backward classes is violative of the basic
structure - The exclusion of those sections of society, for whose benefit non-discriminatory
provisions were designed, is an indefensible violation of the non-discrimination principle, a facet that
is entwined in the Equality Code, and thus reaches to the level of offending or damaging the very
identity of the Constitution - Said exclusion strikes a death knell to the equality and fraternal
principle which permeates the equality code and non-discrimination principle - The impugned
Amendment and the classification it creates, is arbitrary, and results in hostile discrimination of the
poorest sections of the society that are socially and educationally backward, and/or subjected to
caste discrimination - Thus, Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) are struck down for being violative of the
equality code, particularly the principle of non-discrimination and non-exclusion which forms an
inextricable part of the basic structure of the Constitution
(Paras 137 to 155, 184.2, 186.3, 210 to 224, 384 to 401, 417 to 418; 505 to 529
and 590 to 625)
E. Constitution of India - Arts. 14, 15 and 16 - Constitutional Morality/Values -
Transformative Constitutionalism - Transforming the reservation policy towards an
egalitarian, casteless and classless society - Suggestions made to Government
- Per Trivedi, J., prescription of time span for cessation of special provisions of reservation
under Arts. 15 and 16 which could be a way forward leading to an egalitarian, casteless and
classless society, suggested - Court has already expressed concern for such time-limit - At the
end of seventy-five years of our Independence, we need to revisit the system of reservation in the
larger interest of the society as a whole, as a step forward towards transformative
constitutionalism
- Per Pardiwala, J., the new concept of economic criteria introduced by the impugned
Amendment for affirmative action may go a long way in eradicating caste-based reservation - It
may be perceived as a first step in the process of doing away with caste-based reservation -
Fraternity as a necessary principle for the survival of Indian democracy
(Paras 219 to 221 and 413 to 416)
F. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(4) and 16(4) - Whether categories in Arts. 15(4)
and 16(4) are different - Per Pardiwala, J., despite legal distinction drawn by the Court
between the "backward classes" referred to in Art. 16(4) and "socially and educationally
backward classes" referred to in Art. 15(4) of the Constitution, in the practice which has
developed over a period of time, such distinction has been virtually obliterated
- It is an undisputed position that the State has been categorising various classes and
communities as socially and educationally backward classes (SEBCs) often referred to in
popular terms as the Other Backward Classes or OBCs
(Paras 264 and 266)
G. Constitution of India - Arts. 16(1) and 16(4) - Art. 16(4), whether exhaustive of
the concept of reservation - Per Pardiwala, J., Art. 16(4) itself is not exhaustive of the
concept of reservation - Art. 16(1) itself, of course, in very exceptional situations and
not for all and sundry reasons, permits reservation
(Paras 267 to 269)
H. Constitution of India - Arts. 21, 21-A, 45, 46, 14 to 18, Pts. III and IV - Education
as the most fundamental requirement of development - Affirmative action needed and
duty of State in this regard - Explained, per Pardiwala, J.
- It is the duty of State to provide quality basic education to all its citizens - Art. 21-A makes
it obligatory for the State to not only provide necessary funds and facilities for free but also
compulsory education
- Thus, State is under an obligation to apply the provisions contained in Arts. 45 and 46 to
provide childhood care and primary education and promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and protect them from social injustice
(Paras 259 to 270)
I. Constitution of India - Arts. 14 to 16 - Right to equality - True meaning and scope
of - Posited, per Pardiwala, J. - Right to equal concern and right against discrimination -
Not right to identical treatment - Hence, a classification may be tested on the ground of
whether it is based on any prejudice, contempt or insult to any class or person
- Identical treatment is neither possible nor consistent with the right to equality - Therefore,
what the right to equality requires is equal concern - As long as that concern exists, the difference
of treatment is consistent with the right to equality - Not every difference of treatment is per se
inconsistent with the right to equality - Only that difference of treatment which is based on lack of
equal concern is inconsistent with that right
- The State is not prohibited from treating people differently on the basis of religion, race,
caste, sex or place of birth - It is prohibited from discriminating against them on these grounds -
Discrimination results only when religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or any of them is made
the basis of disrespect, contempt or prejudice for difference in treatment - In other words, if
difference in treatment on any of these grounds is not based on any disrespect, contempt or
prejudice, it is not discriminatory and, therefore, not against Art. 15(1) - The same is true for Art.
29(2)
(Paras 400 and 401)
J. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - Words "other than" in Arts. 15(6)
and 16(6) - Meaning and interpretation - Words "other than" in Arts. 15(6) and 16(6),
held (per curiam), cannot be read as "in addition to" so as to include SCs/STs/OBCs
within EWS - The suggested construction is plainly against the direct meaning of the
exclusionary expression "other than" as employed in, and for the purpose of, Arts. 15(6)
and 16(6) - Even otherwise, the official Hindi translation of the amendment clarifies the
said position
- Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J., the plea to read down the exclusion, is untenable because the
intention of Parliament in exercise of its constituent power is clear and unambiguous - The
implication of words "other than" in Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) is that reservation for EWS in Arts. 15
(6) and 16(6) is meant only for the newly created classes and excludes classes described in Arts.
15(4) and 16(4)
(Paras 155 and 570 to 572; 458 and 460)
K. Constitution of India - Preamble - Fraternity - Critical role of, in ensuring unity of
the nation - Its central position in the constitutional scheme and its intricate connection
with justice, liberty, equality and dignity of the individual - Discussed in detail - Per Lalit,
C.J. and Bhat, J.
(Paras 613 to 621)
The challenge herein was the constitutional validity of the Constitution (One Hundred and Third
Amendment) Act, 2019 (103rd Constitution Amendment) wherein reservation was given solely on
basis of economic criterion. And persons already covered under reservations under Articles 15(4),
15(5) and 16(4) were excluded. The principal issues herein were as follows:
(a) As to whether reservation is an instrument for inclusion of socially and educationally
backward classes to the mainstream of society and, therefore, reservation structured singularly
on economic criteria violates the basic structure of the Constitution?
(b) As to whether the exclusion of classes covered under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4)
from getting the benefit of reservation as economically weaker sections violates the Equality
Code and thereby, the basic structure doctrine?
(c) As to whether reservation for economically weaker sections of citizens up to ten per
cent in addition to the existing reservations results in violation of basic structure on account of
breaching the ceiling limit of fifty per cent?
(d) As to whether said reservation for the economically weaker section EWS category
enabling the State to provide said reservation in private unaided educational institutions is
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution?
Answering all the four questions in the negative and affirming the 103rd Constitution
Amendment, by a 3 : 2 majority, the Supreme Court
Held :
Per Maheshwari, J. (Trivedi and Pardiwala, JJ. concurring; Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J.
dissenting)
Reservation Jurisprudence - Economic Disabilities criteria - Permissibility of
The social revolution was put at the top of the national agenda by the Constituent Assembly
when it adopted Objectives Resolution.
(Para 102)
The Chief Architect of the Constitution Dr B.R. Ambedkar, on 19-11-1948, had stressed in the
Constituent Assembly that the Constitution was committed to the principle of "economic
democracy" as a compliment to political democracy.
(Para 103)
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, pp. 494-95; H.M. Seervai : Constitutional Law of India, A
Critical Commentary, 4th Edn., (1991-reprinted 1999) at p. 280, referred to
The Preamble to our Constitution sets the ideals and goals which the makers of the
Constitution intended to achieve. Therefore, it is also regarded as "a key to open the mind of the
makers" of the Constitution which may show the general purposes
for which several provisions in the Constitution are enacted. The Preamble is held to be a part of
the Constitution and its basic structure. The Preamble indicates the intent of the makers of the
Constitution "to secure to all its citizens : justice, social, economic and political
"
(Para 105)
V.N. Shukla's Constitution of India, Eastern Book Company, Lucknow, 13th Edn. (2017), pp. 4-5,
referred to
The word "economic" is employed more than thirty times in the Constitution. The relevant
provisions in which it prominently occurs are the Preamble and Article 38 (economic justice);
Article 39-A (legal aid with the neutrality of economic disability); Article 46 (promotion of economic
interests of weaker sections), Articles 243-G and 243-W (economic development to be
undertaken by local bodies).
(Para 106)
Our jurisprudence supports the making of a provision for tackling the disadvantages arising
because of adverse economic conditions. Article 38 of the Constitution, inter alia, provides for
securing economic justice and for striving to minimise the inequalities in income amongst individuals
and groups of people.
(Para 107)
The equality clause in the Constitution does not speak of mere formal equality but embodies
the concept of real and substantive equality, which strikes at inequalities arising on account of vast
social and economic differentials; and the dynamic principle of egalitarianism furthers the concept
of social and economic justice.
(Para 108)
In almost all references to real and substantive equality, the concept of economic justice has
acquired equal focus alongside the principles of social justice.
(Para 112)
In giving effect to the rule of equality enshrined in Article 14, the Courts have also been guided
by the jurisprudence evolved bythe USSupremeCourt in the lightof the amendments made to
their Constitution, which were founded on economic considerations. This is to highlight that the
economic backwardness of citizens can also be the sole ground for providing reservation by
affirmative action. Any civilised jurisdiction differentiates between haves and have-nots, in several
walks of life and more particularly, for the purpose of differential treatment by way of affirmative
action.
(Para 113)
Richard A. Posner: "The Constitution as an Economic Document", 56 George Washington Law
Review 4 (1987), referred to
Poverty, the disadvantageous condition due to the want of financial resources, is a
phenomenon which is complex in origin as well as in its manifestation.
(Para 114)
The United Nations General Assembly, "Final draft of the guiding principles on extreme poverty and
human rights, submitted by the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights,
Magdalena Sepulveda Carmona", A/HRC/21/39, 18-7-2012, referred to
If an egalitarian socio-economic order is the goal so as to make social and economic rights a
meaningful reality, which indeed is the goal of our Constitution, the deprivations arising from
economic disadvantages, including those of discrimination and exclusion, need to be addressed by
the State; and for that matter, every affirmative action has the sanction of our Constitution, as
noticeable from the frame of the Preamble as also the text and texture of the provisions contained
in Part III and Part IV.
(Para 115)
Economic Criteria as the sole basis for affirmative action does not violate the basic
structure of the Constitution
The expression "economically weaker sections of citizens" is not a matter of mere semantics
but is an expression of hard realities. Poverty is not merely a state of stagnation but is a point of
regression. Of course, mass poverty cannot be eliminated within a short period and it is a question
of progress along a time path. The United Nations General Assembly, by its Resolution dated 25-9-
2015, set forth seventeen Sustainable Development Goals and the first of them is to "End poverty
in all its forms everywhere". The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by one hundred and
ninety-three countries of the United Nations General Assembly, including India, brought
institutionalised focus in measuring and addressing poverty in all its forms, as expounded under the
aforesaid Goal 1. The impact of this was also reflected in the work of World Bank which is the
custodian of the International Poverty Line Statistics. In this backdrop, the insertion of enabling
provisions, within the framework of the Constitution of India, to remedy the evil effects of poverty
by way of reservation, is primarily to be regarded as a part of the frontal efforts to eradicate
poverty "in all its forms everywhere". The only question is as to whether providing for economic
criteria as the sole basis for reservation is a violation of the basic structure of the Constitution.
(Para 117)
National Multidimensional Poverty Index, Baseline Report, NITI Aayog (2021), referred to
Building a welfare State is held to be one of the main objectives of the Constitution. In the
welfare State, public power becomes an instrumentality for the achievement of purposes beyond
the minimum objectives of domestic order and national defence. It is not enough that the society
be secured against internal disorder and/or external aggression; a society can be thus secured and
well-ordered but, could be lacking in real and substantive justice for all. Equally, providing for
affirmative action in relation to one particular segment or class may operate constructively in the
direction of meeting with and removing the inequalities faced by that segment or class but, if
another segment of society suffers from inequalities because of one particular dominating factor
like that of poverty, the question arises as to whether the said segment could be denied of the
State support by way of affirmative action of reservation only because of the fact that that
segment is otherwise not suffering from other disadvantages. The answer could only be in the
negative for, in the State's efforts of ensuring all-inclusive socio-economic justice, there cannot be
a competition of claims for affirmative action based on disadvantages in the manner that one
disadvantaged section would seek denial of affirmative action for another disadvantaged section.
(Para 118)
While caste may be relevant to determine backwardness, the mere exclusion of caste does not
impair the classification if it satisfies other tests.
(Para 121)
On a contextual reading, it could reasonably be culled out that the observations, wherever
occurring in the decisions of the Supreme Court, to the effect that reservation cannot be availed
only on economic criteria, were to convey the principle that to avail the benefit of this affirmative
action under Articles 15(4) and/or 15(5) and/or 16(4), as the case may be, the class concerned
ought to be carrying some other disadvantage too and not the economic disadvantage alone. The
said decisions cannot be read to mean that if any class or section other than those covered by
Articles 15(4) and/or 15(5) and/or 16(4) is suffering from disadvantage only due to economic
conditions, the State can never take affirmative action qua that class or section.
(Para 127)
In view of the principles discernible from the decisions aforesaid as also the background
aspects, including the avowed objective of socio-economic justice in the Constitution, the
observations of the Supreme Court in the past decisions that reservations cannot be claimed only
on the economic criteria, apply only to class or classes covered by or seeking coverage under
Articles 15(4) and/or 15(5) and/or 16(4); and else, the Supreme Court has not put a blanket ban
on providing reservation for other sections who are disadvantaged due to economic conditions.
(Para 128)
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; R. Chitralekha V.
State of Mysore, (1964) 6 SCR 368 : AIR 1964 SC 1823, followed
"Developments in the Law of Equal Protection", 82 Harv LR 1065 (1969), referred to
The submission that Article 46 cannot be invoked for reservation in favour of any economically
weaker section that is not carrying other attributes which could place it on a par with, or akin to,
SCs/STs is based on a too narrow and unacceptably restricted reading of the text of Article 46
while totally missing on its texture; and suffers from at least three major shortcomings.
(Para 129)
The first and apparent shortcoming is that this line of arguments not only goes off at a tangent
but also misses out on the important principle of "Distributive Justice", which is a bedrock of the
provisions like Article 46 as also Articles 38 and 39 of the Constitution. The principle of distributive
justice has been explained and put into effect by the Supreme Court.
(Para 130)
The mandate of the Constitution to the State is to administer distributive justice; and in the law
-making process, the concept of distributive justice connotes, inter alia, the removal of economic
inequalities. There could be different methods of distributive justice; and it comprehends more than
merely achieving the lessening of inequalities by tax or debt relief measures or by regulation of
contractual transactions or redistribution of wealth, etc. This discussion need not
be expanded on all other means of distributive justice but, it is more than evident that the
philosophy of distributive justice is of wide amplitude which, inter alia, reaches to the requirements
of removing economic inequalities; and then, it is not confined to one class or a few classes of the
disadvantaged citizens. The wide spectrum of distributive justice mandates the promotion of
educational and economic interests of all the weaker sections, in minimising the inequalities in
income and also providing adequate means of livelihood to the citizens. In this commitment,
leaving one class of citizens to struggle because of inequalities in income and want of adequate
means of livelihood may not serve the ultimate goal of securing all-inclusive socio-economic
justice.
(Para 130.1)
In fact, the argument that the State may adopt any poverty alleviation measure but cannot
provide reservation for EWS by way of affirmative action proceeds on the assumption that the
affirmative action of reservation in our constitutional scheme is itself reserved only for
SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs in view of the existing text of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the
Constitution. Such an assumption is neither valid nor compatible with our constitutional scheme.
This line of argument is wanting on the fundamental constitutional objectives, with the promise of
securing "justice, social, economic and political" for "all" the citizens; and to promote fraternity
among them "all". Thus viewed, the challenge to the amendment in question fails on the principle
of distributive justice.
(Para 130.2)
Secondly, this argument concerning Article 46 crumbles down on the basic rules
of
interpretation of the text of a constitutional provision.
(Para 131)
It remains trite that a Constitution, unlike other enactments, is intended to be an enduring
instrument. The great generalities of the Constitution have a content and a significance that vary
from age to age. The Constitution is recognised as a living organic thing to be required to meet the
current needs and requirements. Ergo, the provisions of the Constitution cannot be put in a
straitjacket.
(Para 131.1)
Therefore, it cannot be said that the eclectic expression "other weaker sections" in Article 46 is
not to be given the widest possible meaning or that this expression refers only to those weaker
sections who are similarly circumstanced to SCs and STs.
(Para 131.2)
Though, the text and the order of the expressions used in the body of Article 46 have been
repeatedly recounted on behalf of the petitioners to emphasise the arguments based on ejusdem
generis principle of interpretation but, as aforesaid, that principle does not fit in the interpretation of
an organic thing like the Constitution. This apart, when traversing through the principles of
interpretation, it could also be noticed that in case of any doubt, the heading or sub-heading of a
provision could also be referred to as an internal aid in construing the provision, while not cutting
down the wide application of clear words used in the provision. What is interesting to notice is that
in the heading of Article 46, the chronology of the description of target groups for the promotion of
educational and economic interests is stated in reverse order than the contents of the provision.
The heading signifies "Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections" whereas the contents of the main provision are
framed with the sentence "interest of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes". A
simple reading of the heading together with the contents would make it clear that the broader
expression "other weaker sections" in Article 46 is disjointed from the particular weaker sections
(Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes); and is not confined to only those sections who are
similarly circumstanced to SCs and STs.
(Para 131.3)
Benjamin N. Cardozo : The Nature of the Judicial Process, Yale University Press (1921), p. 17,
referred to
Thirdly, the restricted construction or operation of the measures contemplated by Article 46 is
not tenable when the same is examined in the context of a constitutional amendment. The
fundamental flaw in this argument is that even if the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the
amendment in question refers to Article 46, such a reference is only to one part of DPSP to
indicate the constitutional objective which is sought to be addressed to, or fulfilled. However, the
amendment in question could be correlated with any other provision of the Constitution, including
the Preamble as well as Articles 38 and 39. Moreover, it is not the requirement of our
constitutional scheme that an amendment to the Constitution has to be based on some existing
provision in DPSP. In fact, an amendment to the Constitution (of course, within the bounds of basic
structure) could be made even without any corresponding provision in DPSP.
(Para 132)
In the aforesaid view of the matter, there appears no reason to analyse another unacceptable
line of arguments adopted by the petitioners that the amendment in question provides for
compensatory discrimination in favour of the so-called forward class/caste. Suffice it to observe
that the amendment in question is essentially related to the requirements of those economically
weaker sections who have hitherto not been given the benefit of such an affirmative action
(particularly of reservation), which was accorded to the other class/classes of citizens, namely, the
SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs. Viewing this affirmative action of EWS reservation from the standpoint of
backward class versus forward class is not in accord with the very permissibility of compensatory
discrimination towards the goal of real and substantive justice for all.
(Para 133)
There has been another ground of challenge that if at all reservation on economic criteria is to
be given, keeping the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs out of this affirmative action is directly in conflict with
the constitutional scheme and hits the Equality Code. This line of arguments shall be dealt with in
the next segment. Enough to say for the present purpose that the challenge to the amendment in
question on the ground that though the State could take all the relevant measures to deal with
poverty and the disadvantages arising therefrom but, the affirmative action of reservation is
envisaged by the Constitution only for the socially and educationally backward class of citizens;
and economic disadvantage alone had never been in contemplation for this action of reservation, is
required to be rejected. In any case, any legitimate effort of the State towards all-inclusive socio-
economic justice, by way of affirmative action of reservation in support of economically weaker
sections of citizens, who had otherwise not been given the benefit of this affirmative action, cannot
be lightly interfered with by the Court.
(Para 134)
Reservation for economically weaker sections under impugned Articles 15(6) and 16(6)
- Exclusion of classes covered by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4), even if they comprise
poor persons, does not destroy the basic structure of the Constitution
No doubt the classes covered by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) would also be comprising of
poor persons. However, there is a definite logic in this exclusion; rather, this exclusion is inevitable
for the true operation and effect of the scheme of EWS reservation.
(Para 137)
It is true that in identifying the classes of persons for the purpose of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and
16(4) of the Constitution i.e. Other Backward Classes (Non-creamy layer), Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, the social and educational backwardness predominantly figures but then, it needs
no great deal of research to demonstrate that the poverty too is thickly associated with these
factors.
(Para 138)
In fact, poverty was recognised as the primary source of social and educational backwardness.
(Para 139)
Though, the principal factor in the observations aforesaid is class poverty which is indicated to
be different than individual poverty but, it cannot be denied that poverty is a material factor taken
into consideration along with caste, residence, occupation or other dominant features while
recognising any particular class/caste's entitlement to the affirmative action by way of reservation
enabled in terms of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4). If Parliament has considered it proper not to
extend those classes covered by the existing clauses of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) another
benefit in terms of affirmative action of reservation carved out for other economically weaker
sections, there is no reason to question this judgment of Parliament. Obviously, for the reason that
those classes are already provided with affirmative action in terms of reservation, in the wisdom of
Parliament, there was no need to extend them or any of their constituents yet another benefit in
the affirmative action of reservation carved out for other economically weaker sections.
(Para 140)
Moreover, the benefit of reservation avails to the excluded classes/castes under the existing
clauses of Articles 15 and 16; and by the amendment in question, the quota earmarked for them
is not depleted in any manner. The amendment in question makes a reasonable classification
between "economically weaker sections" and other weaker sections, who are already mentioned
in Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution and are entitled to avail the benefits of
reservation thereunder. The moment there is a vertical reservation, the exclusion is the vital
requisite to provide benefit to the target group. In fact, the affirmative action of reservation for a
particular target group, to achieve its desired results, has to be carved out by the exclusion of
others. The same principle has been applied to the affirmative action of reservation qua the groups
of SEBCs, OBCs, SCs, and STs. Each of them takes reservation in their vertical column in exclusion
of
others. But for this exclusion, the purported affirmative action for a particular class or group
would be congenitally deformative and shall fail at its inception. Therefore, the
claim of any particular class or section against its exclusion from the affirmative action of
reservation in favour of EWS has to be rejected.
(Paras 141 and 142)
In fact, it follows as a necessary corollary to the discussion in the preceding segments of this
judgment that looking to the purpose and the objective of the present affirmative action, that is,
reservation for the benefit of economically weaker sections, the other classes, who are already
availing the benefit of affirmative action of reservation by virtue of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4),
are required to be kept out of the benefits of EWS reservation in Articles 15(6) and 16(6). It could
easily be seen that but for this exclusion, the entire balance of the general principles of equality and
compensatory discrimination would be disturbed, with the extra or excessive advantage being
given to the classes already availing the benefit under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4). In other
words, sans such exclusion, reservation by way of the amendment in question would only lead to
an incongruous and constitutionally invalid situation.
(Para 143)
The classes who are already the recipient of, and beneficiary of, compensatory discrimination by
virtue of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4), cannot justifiably raise the grievance that in another set
of compensatory discrimination for another class, they have been excluded. It gets, perforce,
reiterated that the compensatory discrimination, by its very nature, would be structured as
exclusionary in order to achieve its objectives. Rather, if the classes for whom affirmative action is
already in place are not excluded, the present exercise itself would be of unjustified discrimination.
(Para 144)
Even a slightly different angle of approach would also lead to the same result. The case sought
to be made out on behalf of the class or classes already availing the benefit of Articles 15(4), 15
(5) and 16(4) is that their exclusion from EWS reservation is of inexplicable discrimination. What
this argument misses out is that in relation to the principles of formal equality, both the
reservations, whether under the pre-existing provisions or under the newly inserted provisions, are
of compensatory discrimination which is permissible for being an affirmative action; and is to be
contradistinguished from direct discrimination, which is not permissible.
(Para 145)
SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs are having the existing compensatory discrimination in their favour
wherein the presently supported EWS are also excluded along with all other excluded
classes/persons. As a necessary corollary, when EWS is to be given support by way of
compensatory discrimination, that could only be given by exclusion of others, and more particularly
by the exclusion of those who are availing the benefit of the existing compensatory discrimination
in exclusion of all others. The exclusion of SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs from EWS reservation is the
compensatory discrimination of the same species as is the exclusion of general EWS from
SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs reservation. Compensatory discrimination, wherever applied, is exclusionary
in character and could acquire its worth and substance only by way of exclusion of others. Such
differentiation cannot be said to be legally impermissible; rather it is inevitable. When that be so,
clamour against exclusion in the present matters could only be rejected as baseless.
(Para 146)
The fact that exclusion is innate in compensatory discrimination could further be exemplified by
the fact that in Indra Sawhney case, the Supreme Court excluded the creamy layer of OBCs from
the benefit of reservation. In the complex set-up of formal equality on one hand (which debars
discrimination altogether) and real and substantive equality on the other (which permits
compensatory discrimination so as to upset the disadvantages), exclusion is as indispensable as
the compensatory discrimination itself is.
(Para 147)
In fact, the "creamy layer" principle itself was applied to make a true compact of socially and
educationally backward classes. Two features strikingly come to the fore with the creamy layer
principle. One is that to make a real compact of socially and educationally backward classes,
economic factors play an equally important role; and then, the exclusionary principle applies therein
too. These two features, when applied to the present case, make it clear that the use of economic
criteria is not contra-indicated for the exercise of reservation, rather it is imperative; and second,
to make the exercise of compensatory discrimination meaningful so as to achieve its desired
result, exclusion of every other class/person from the target group is inevitable. Thus viewed, the
amendment in question remains unexceptionable in the accepted principles of constitutional law
presently in operation.
(Para 148)
The Court has observed that so far as the classes availing the benefit of compensatory
discrimination in the form of reservation under Article 16(4) are concerned, no further classification
or special treatment is to be given to them. A fortiori, they cannot make a claim to intrude into
other compensatory discrimination in favour of another deserving group.
(Para 149)
Even if it be assumed for the sake of argument that the amendment in question alters the
existing equality principles, it is not of abrogation or annulment of the existing rights but could only
be treated to be of moderate abridgement thereof for a valid purpose. It cannot be said that the
amendment in question leads to such a violation of the rule of equality which is shocking or is an
unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of equal justice.
(Para 150)
Viewed from any angle, the amendment in question cannot be declared invalid as being violative
of the basic structure of the Constitution of India.
(Para 151)
In the ultimate analysis, the questions as to how all the requirements of socio-economic justice
are to be balanced in our constitutional scheme and, for that purpose, whether any constitutional
amendment is to be made or not, are essentially in the domain of Parliament. Any constitutional
amendment cannot be disturbed by the Court only for its second guess as to the desirability of a
particular provision or by way of synthesis of advantages or disadvantages flowing from an
amendment.
(Para 152)
Law, Liberty and Social Justice, Asia Publishing House, Bombay (1965), p. 120, referred to
Even if the provisions in question are said to be of an experiment, Parliament is entitled to do
any such experiment towards the avowed objective of socio-economic justice. Such an action (or
say experiment) of Parliament by way of a constitutional
amendment can be challenged only on the Doctrine of Basic Structure and not otherwise.
(Para 153)
Thus, the exclusion of other groups and classes from the ten per cent reservation earmarked
for EWS does not make them constitutionally aggrieved parties to invoke the general doctrine of
equality for assailing the amendment in question. In other words, their grievance cannot be said to
be a legal grievance so as to be agitated before the Court.
(Para 154)
One of the submissions that the words "other than" in Articles 15(6) and 16(6) of the
Constitution should be read as "in addition to", so as to include SCs/STs/OBCs within EWS has also
been noted only for rejection for the simple reason that the suggested construction is plainly
against the direct meaning of the exclusionary expression "other than" as employed in, and for the
purpose of, the said Articles 15(6) and 16(6). If there is any doubt yet, the official Hindi translation
of the amendment in question, as published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section
1-A dated 17-7-2019 would remove any misconception where the exclusionary Hindi expression
"AH" (bhinn) has been employed in relation to the expression "other than". No further comment
appears requisite in this regard.
(Para 155)
Reservation structured singularly on economic criteria does not damage the basic
structure of the Constitution
The 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic structure of the
Constitution by permitting the State to make special provisions, including reservation, based on
economic criteria.
(Para 186.1)
Reservation is an instrument of affirmative action by the State so as to ensure an all-inclusive
march towards the goals of an egalitarian society while counteracting inequalities; it is an
instrument not only for the inclusion of socially and educationally backward classes to the
mainstream of society but, also for the inclusion of any class or section so disadvantaged as to be
answering the description of a weaker section. In this background, reservation structured singularly
on economic criteria does not violate any essential feature of the Constitution of India and does
not cause any damage to the basic structure of the Constitution of India.
(Para 184.1)
Exclusion herein does not violate the equality code or damage the basic structure of the
Constitution - Said exclusion balances the requirements of non-discrimination and
compensatory discrimination
The 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic structure of the
Constitution in excluding the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs from the scope of EWS reservation.
(Para 186.3)
Exclusion of the classes covered by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) from getting the benefit of
reservation as economically weaker sections, being in the nature of balancing the requirements of
non-discrimination and compensatory discrimination, does not violate Equality Code and does not
in any manner cause damage to the basic structure of the Constitution of India.
(Para 184.2)
Economic criteria as a basis for affirmative action by reservation
While considering the constitutionality of social justice legislation, it is worthwhile to note the
objectives which have been incorporated by the Constitution makers in the Preamble to the
Constitution and how they are sought to be secured by enacting fundamental rights in Part III and
directive principles of State policy in Part IV of the Constitution. The fundamental rights represent
the civil and political rights and the directive principles embody social and economic rights. Together
they are intended to carry out the objectives set out in the Preamble to the Constitution. Article 46
enjoins upon the State to promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the
weaker sections of the people and to protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation. The theory of reasonable classification is implicit and inherent in the concept of
equality. Equality of opportunity would also mean a fair opportunity not only to one section or the
other but to all sections by removing the handicaps if a particular section of the society suffers
from the same.
(Para 207)
As transpiring from the Statement of Objects and Reasons for introducing the Bill to the
impugned Amendment, Parliament has taken note that the economically weaker sections of the
citizens have largely remained excluded from attaining higher educational institutions and public
employment on account of their financial incapacity to compete with the persons who are
economically more privileged. The benefits of existing reservations under clauses (4) and (5) of
Article 15 and clause (4) of Article 16 are generally unavailable to them unless they meet the
specific criteria of social and educational backwardness. Economically weaker sections of citizens
were not eligible for the benefit of reservation. With a view to fulfilling the ideals lying behind Article
46, and to ensure that economically weaker sections of citizens get a fair chance of receiving
higher education and participation in employment in the services of the State, it was decided to
amend the Constitution of India.
(Para 209)
What is wrong with the law, Published in book form - Edited by Micheel Zander - BBC, 1970 -
quoted in Mod Law Rev, Vol 33, Sept 1970, pp. 579, 580, referred to
Per Trivedi, J. (concurring)
I have had the benefit of perusing the opinion of Maheshwari, J. and I am in respectful
agreement with him. However, having regard to the importance of the constitutional issues
involved, I deem it appropriate to pen down my few views, in addition to his opinion.
(Para 189)
Reservation of economically weaker sections - Exclusion of other classes by impugned
Amendment - Validity
It must be presumed that the legislature understands and appreciates the needs of its own
people. Its laws are directed to the problems made manifest by experience, and its discriminations
are based on adequate norms. Therefore, the constitutional amendment could not be struck down
as discriminatory if the state of facts are reasonably conceived to justify it. In the instant case, the
legislature
being aware of the exclusion of economically weaker sections of citizens from having the benefits
of reservations provided to the SCs/STs and SEBCs citizens in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15 and
clause (4) of Article 16, has come out with the impugned Amendment empowering the State to
make special provision for the advancement of the "economically weaker sections" of citizens
other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15 and further to make special
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of the economically weaker
sections of the citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4) of Article 16.
(Para 210)
The impugned Amendment enabling the State to make special provisions for the "economically
weaker sections" of the citizens other than the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Socially
and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens, is required to be treated as an affirmative action
on the part of Parliament for the benefit and for the advancement of the economically weaker
sections of the citizens. Treating economically weaker sections of the citizens as a separate class
would be a reasonable classification, and could not be termed as an unreasonable or unjustifiable
classification, much less a betrayal of basic feature or violative of Article 14. Just as equals cannot
be treated unequally, unequals also cannot be treated equally. Treating unequals as equals would
as well offend the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
(Para 211)
The Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and the backward class for whom the special provisions
have already been provided in Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) form a separate category as
distinguished from the general or unreserved category. They cannot be treated on a par with the
citizens belonging to the general or unreserved category. The impugned Amendment creates a
separate class of "economically weaker sections of the citizens" from the general/unreserved
class, without affecting the special rights of reservations provided to the Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes and backward class of citizens covered under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and
16(4). Therefore, their exclusion from the newly created class for the benefit of the "economically
weaker sections of the citizens" in the impugned Amendment cannot be said to be discriminatory
or violative of the equality code. Such an amendment could certainly be not termed as a shocking,
unconscionable or unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of equal justice as sought to be
submitted by the petitioners.
(Para 212)
Articles 15(6) and 16(6) by enabling State to provide reservation on sole basis of
economic criteria seek to achieve the constitutional goal and ideal of an egalitarian,
casteless and classless society
Before parting, let me say something about the time span of the reservation policy.
(Para 214)
It is said that no document can be perfect and no ideals can be fully achieved. But does that
mean we should have no ideals? No vision?
(Para 215)
CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 272, 25-5-1949, referred to
Can we not move towards an ideal envisaged by the framers of our Constitution to have an
egalitarian, casteless and classless society? Though
difficult, it is an achievable ideal. Our Constitution which is a living and organic document
continuously shapes the lives of citizens in particular and societies in general.
(Para 216)
CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 272, 25-5-1949, referred to
Transformative Constitutionalism
The concern for continuing the reservation as an affirmative action only for a limited period was
also expressed by the Court.
(Para 219)
What was envisioned by the framers of the Constitution, what was proposed by the
Constitution Bench in 1985 and what was sought to be achieved on the completion of fifty years
of the advent of the Constitution i.e. that the policy of reservation must have a time span, has still
not been achieved even till this day i.e. till the completion of seventy-five years of our
Independence. It cannot be gainsaid that the age-old caste system in India was responsible for the
origination of the reservation system in the country. It was introduced to correct the historical
injustice faced by the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes, and to provide them with a level playing field to compete with the persons
belonging to the forward classes. However, at the end of seventy-five years of our Independence,
we need to revisit the system of reservation in the larger interest of the society as a whole, as a
step forward towards transformative constitutionalism.
(Para 220)
Be it noted that as per Article 334 of the Constitution, the provisions of the Constitution relating
to the reservation of seats for the SCs and the STs in the House of the People and the Legislative
Assemblies of the States would cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of eighty years
from the commencement of the Constitution. The representation of Anglo-Indian community in the
House of Parliament and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination has already
ceased by virtue of the 104th Amendment w.e.f. 25-1-2020. Therefore, a similar time-limit if
prescribed, for the special provisions in respect of the reservations and representations provided in
Article 15 and Article 16 of the Constitution, it could be a way forward leading to an egalitarian,
casteless and classless society.
(Para 221)
Per Pardiwala, J. (concurring)
Articles 15(6) and 16(6) are valid and do not destroy the basic structure
&
Maheshwari, J., in his separate judgment, has taken the view that clause (6) in Article 15 and
clause (6) in Article 16 do not violate the basic structure of the Constitution in any manner and are
valid.
(Para 225)
I regret my inability to agree with my esteemed Brother Bhat, J. that clause (6) in Article 15
and clause (6) in Article 16 are unconstitutional and void. Whereas, I agree with the final decision
taken by Maheshwari, J. that the impugned Amendment is valid, I would like to assign my own
reasons as I have looked into the entire issue from a slightly different angle.
(Para 226)
The struggle for independence - Purpose - Welfare State - Social, economic and
political justice - Freedom from poverty, ignorance and disease
The idea of equality is the heart and soul of the Constitution. India achieved Independence on
15th August, 1947 after a long political struggle in which a number of patriots laid down their lives
and countless suffered to secure self-government and to throw off the foreign yoke. But self-
government was not an end in itself. It was a means to an end. They struggled and suffered not
merely to be ruled by their chosen representatives in the place of foreign rulers, but to achieve
basic human rights and freedom and to secure social, economic and political justice so as to build
up a welfare State from which poverty, ignorance and disease may be banished and to lay the
foundation of a strong and independent country which may command respect in the world.
(Para 228)
Equality in general cannot be universally applied and is subject to the condition and
restrictions as spelt out in the Constitution itself
The aspirations of the people are reflected in the Preamble to the Constitution.
(Para 229)
The Preamble of our Constitution promises equality, which is explained in detail in Articles 14
and 15, respectively, as enshrined in Part III of the Constitution. Equality, as contemplated under
our constitutional system, is "among equal and similarly situated". Equality in general cannot be
universally applied and is subject to the condition and restrictions as spelt out in the Constitution
itself. The Preamble to the Constitution does not grant any power but it gives direction and
purpose to the Constitution. It outlines the objective of the whole Constitution. The Preamble
contains the fundamentals of the Constitution. It serves several important purposes, for example:
(i) It contains the enacting clause which brings the Constitution into force.
(ii) It declares the great rights and freedoms which the People of India intended to secure
for all its citizens.
(iii) It declares the basic type of Government and polity which is sought to be established in
the country.
(iv) It throws light on the source of the Constitution viz. the People of India.
(para 230)
Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, deal with the various facets of the right to equality.
(Para 231)
These three Articles form part of the same constitutional code of guarantees and, in the sense,
supplement each other. Article 14 on the one hand, and Articles 15 and 16, respectively, on the
other, have frequently been described as being the genesis and the species respectively.
(Para 232)
Directive principles of State policy and Fundamental rights
In Article 15, there are two words of very wide import - (1) "discrimination" and (2) "only".
The expression "discriminate against", according to the Oxford Dictionary means, "to make an
adverse distinction with regard to; to distinguish
favourably from others". The true purport of the word "discrimination" has been very well
explained by the Court.
(Para 237)
considered
Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, are all different facets of the concept of equality. In
different forms, such Articles guarantee equality of opportunity and equal treatment to all citizens
while specifically mandating that the State shall not discriminate against the citizens only on the
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth or any of them. Like Article 14, neither
Article 15(1) nor Article 16(1) prohibits reasonable classification. In other words, the clauses of
Articles 15 and 16, respectively, guaranteeing non-discrimination on the grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of public
employment prohibit hostile discrimination, but not reasonable classification. As in Article 14, as
well as in Article 15(1), if it is demonstrated that special treatment is meted out to a class of
citizens, not only on the ground of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them but due
to some special reasons and circumstances, the enquiry would be, does such a classification stand
the test of reasonableness and in the process, it would be the duty of the court to examine
whether such classification fulfils the above-noted twin conditions, namely, it must be founded on
an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from
others left out of the group and that the differentia must have a rational relation to the object
sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
(Para 251)
134 US 594 (1890), cited
"The Equal Protection of the Laws", 37 California Law Review 341, referred to
The fundamental guarantee is of equal protection of the laws and the doctrine of classification is
only a subsidiary rule evolved by the courts to give a practical content to that guarantee by
accommodating it with the practical needs of the society and it should not be allowed to submerge
and drown the precious guarantee of equality.
(Para 253)
There is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who complains of discrimination
is equally situated with the person or persons who are alleged to have been favoured. Article 16(1)
does not bar a reasonable classification.
(Para 258)
Narasinga Rao, (1968) 1 SCR 407 : AIR 1968 SC 349; State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas, (1976)
All India Station Masters' & Asstt. Station Masters' Assn. V. Central Railway, (1960) 2 SCR 311 :
AIR 1960 SC 384, cited
No surviving distinction in practice between the "backward classes" referred to in Article
16(4) and "socially and educationally backward classes" referred to in Article 15(4) of
the Constitution
Despite the legal distinction drawn by the Supreme Court between the "backward classes"
referred to in Article 16(4) and "socially and educationally backward classes" referred to in Article
15(4) of the Constitution, in the practice which has developed over a period of time, such
distinction has been virtually obliterated. It is an undisputed position that the State has been
categorising various classes and communities as socially and educationally backward classes
(SEBCs) often referred to in popular term as the Other Backward Classes or OBCs. Such list is
common for both the benefits envisaged under Article 16(4) of the Constitution as well as Article
15(4). In other words, it is this very list of SEBCs which is utilised by the State organs for the
purpose of granting reservation in public employment in terms of Article 16(4) of the Constitution.
This very classification of the SEBC status also qualifies the member of the community to
reservation in education including professional courses which would flow from the provisions made
in Article 15(4) of the Constitution.
(Para 266)
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; Janki Prasad Parimoo
Article 16(1) permits reservation - Article 16(4) itself is not exhaustive of the concept
of reservation
Though previously Articles 15(4) and 16(4) were seen as exceptions to the equality enshrined
&
in Articles 15(1) and 16(1), respectively, this understanding of the constitutional provisions
underwent a major change by judicial pronouncements.
(Para 267)
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179; M.R. Balaji V. State of
Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; State of Madras V. Champakam
The Supreme Court has answered the question whether Article 16(4) is exhaustive of the very
concept of reservation. It has been held that though Article 16(4) is exhaustive for reservation in
favour of backward classes and no further special treatment is permissible in their favour outside of
Article 16(4), Article 16(4) itself is not exhaustive of the concept of reservation. Article 16(1) itself,
of course, in very exceptional situations and not for all and sundry reasons permits reservations.
The contention that Article 16(1) permits preferential treatment and not reservation was rejected.
(Para 269)
Education as the most fundamental requirement of development - Affirmative action and
duty of State
Education, by now, which is well recognised through judicial pronouncements and outside, is
perhaps the most fundamental requirement of development. Without access to quality basic
education, it would be impossible in the modern world to expect any individual, race, class or
community to make any real advancement.
While recognising the role of education to achieve development and to provide equality of
opportunity, the Courts have also recognised that the State has an important role, in fact, an
obligation, to provide quality basic education to all citizens. Long before the Constitution was
amended by the introduction of Article 21-A, providing for free and compulsory education to
children between ages of 6 and 14 years, the Supreme Court had been expanding this principle
through purposive interpretation and meaningful construction of guarantee to life and liberty
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution.
(Para 259)
(1972), considered
overruled on a different point
point
John Adams : Dissertation on Canon and Feudal Law, 1765; Rauschning : The Voice of
Destruction : Hitler Speaks; Gunnar Myrdal : Asian Drama (Abridged Edn., 1972) at p. 325;
&
Gunnar Myrdal : Challenge of World Poverty, 1970, Chapter 6, referred to
According to the constitutional scheme, the right to education forms part of the right to life
under Article 21 and the right to education is incorporated separately and in clear terms as an
independent fundamental right in the form of Article 21-A. That Article is couched in the language
which is mandatory insofar as the State is obliged to provide free and compulsory education to all
children of the age of 6 to 14 years. The matter of free and compulsory primary education has
been perceived to be so important even at the time of the drafting of the Constitution that Articles
45 and 46 were incorporated in Part IV of the Constitution to lay the principles fundamental to the
governance of the country and they were made the duty of the State to apply those principles in
making laws by virtue of Article 37. Now that the right to education is not only declared as a
fundamental right of every child but the State has been obliged to provide free and compulsory
education, no authority which is the State within the definition contained in Article 12 could
legitimately renege on the constitutional covenant. The phrase "free and compulsory education" in
Article 21-A clearly makes it obligatory on the State to not only provide necessary funds and
facilities for free but also compulsory education. Thus, the State is under an obligation to apply the
provisions contained in Articles 45 and 46 to provide childhood care and primary education and
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the
people and protect them from social injustice.
(Para 270)
The rationale why the Court upheld the validity of Article 15(5) is also relevant for the
determination of the validity of the impugned Article 15(6)
The constitutional validity of clause (5) in Article 15 was essentially challenged on the ground
that the same is violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, inasmuch as it compels the
private educational institutions to give
up a share of the available seats to the candidates chosen by the State and such appropriation of
seats would not be a regulatory measure and not a reasonable restriction on the right under Article
19(1)(g) of the Constitution within the meaning of Article 19(6) of the Constitution. It was further
argued that clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution, as its very language, indicates would not
apply to the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 of the
Constitution. It was argued that thus it violated Article 14 because aided minority institutions and
unaided minority institutions cannot be treated alike. It was also argued that clause (5) of Article
15 of the Constitution is discriminatory and violative of the equality clause in Article 14 of the
Constitution, which is a basic feature of the Constitution.
(Para 272)
The Supreme Court held that the Constitution (93rd Amendment) Act, 2005 inserting clause
(5) of Article 15 of the Constitution could not be said to have altered the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution and is constitutionally valid.
(Para 276)
If Article 15(5) of the Constitution has been found to be consistent with the socialistic goals set
out in the Preamble and the directive principles in Part IV and to ensure the march and progress of
the weaker sections resulting in progress to Socialistic Democratic State establishing the egalitarian
ethos/egalitarian equality which is the mandate of the Constitution and has also been approved by
the Court, then clause (6) in Article 15 of the Constitution could also be said to be consistent with
the socialistic goals set out in the Preamble and the directive principles in Part IV. Article 15(6),
brought in by way of the Constitution (103rd Amendment) Act, 2019, which provides for identical
reservation for the economically weaker sections of the citizens in private unaided educational
institutions. The Court was not impressed with the challenge to Article 15(5) on the ground of
breach of basic structure so far as it relates to the unaided private educational institutions.
(Para 275)
In view of the aforesaid, Article 15(6), which is the subject-matter of challenge and which
provides for reservation for the "EWS other than the SC, ST and OBC-NCL" in private unaided
educational institutions, cannot be said to be altering the basic structure. It is constitutionally valid.
However, the question whether the exclusion clause is violative of the equality code, particularly
the principle of non-discrimination and non-exclusion which forms an inextricable part of the basic
structure of the Constitution, shall be answered by me a little later.
(Para 277)
The Supreme Court held that with a view to establish an egalitarian social order, the trinity, the
Preamble, the Fundamental Rights in Part III and the directive principles of State policy in Part IV of
the Constitution delineated social economic justice. The word "justice" envisioned in the Preamble
is used in a broad spectrum to harmonise the individual right with the general welfare of society.
The Constitution is the supreme law. The purpose of law is the realisation of justice whose content
and scope vary depending on the prevailing social environment. Every social and economic change
causes a change in the law. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, it is not possible to
change the legal basis of social and economic life of the community without bringing about any
corresponding
change in the law. Social justice is not a simple or single idea of a society but is an essential part of
complex social change to relieve the poor, etc. from the handicaps, and penury, to ward them off
from distress and to make their lives liveable for the greater good of the society at large.
Therefore, social and economic justice in the context of our Indian Constitution must, be
understood in a comprehensive sense to remove every inequality and to provide equal opportunity
to all citizens in social as well as economic activities and in every part of life. Economic justice
means abolition of those economic conditions which ultimately result in the inequality of economic
values between men leading towards backwardness.
(Para 279)
In this country with a population of around 1.41 billion, the economic backwardness is not
confined only to those who are covered by Article 15(4) or Article 16(4) of the Constitution. In a
country where only a small percentage of the population is above the poverty line, to deny
opportunities of higher education (which secures employment) and employment is to deny to
those who are qualified and deserving what is or at least should be their due.
(Para 281)
When the 42nd Constitutional Amendment was on the anvil, there was a suggestion for the
inclusion of the "right to work" which carries with it the natural corollary of assured employment as
a fundamental right. This, understandably, could not be done in a political system which is based on
mixed economy. The natural effect of the scheme of reservation as it stood before the impugned
Amendment was to close the door of betterment or even employment to even a portion of
economically weak section of community. This all the more emphasises the urgent necessity of
eliminating or at least substantially reducing the causes which have contributed to the creation of
socially and educationally backward section of the community, thus, creating a situation when the
need of reservation would be no more. Then alone the promise of equality for all would become a
reality. And, it is to be remembered that the right to equality is the "Cornerstone of the
Constitution". It is a right which more than any other is a basic postulate of our Constitution. It is
the "most fundamental postulate of republicanism".
(Para 282)
Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas, (1976) 2
Economic criterion can be a relevant factor for affirmative action under the Constitution
Economic criteria can be a relevant factor for affirmative action under the Constitution.
(Para 290)
On the issue of economic criteria as an affirmative action under the Constitution, there is no
difference of opinion amongst us. Bhat, J., in his dissenting judgment, has beautifully observed that
economic emancipation is a facet of economic justice which the Preamble as well as Articles 38
and 46 promise to all Indians. It is intrinsically linked with distributive justice - ensuring a fair share
of the material resources, and a share of the progress of the society as a whole, to each individual.
Bhat, J. has rightly observed that the break from the past - which was rooted on the elimination
of caste-based social discrimination, in affirmative action - to now include affirmative action based
on deprivation, through impugned Amendment, does not alter, destroy or damage the basic
structure of the Constitution. On the contrary, it adds a new dimension to the constitutional
project of uplifting the poorest segments of the society.
(Para 291)
The following principles may be summarised:
(i) When substantive equality is the avowed constitutional mandate, the State is obliged to
provide a level playing field.
(ii) The test for such reasonable classification is not necessarily, or much less exclusively,
the social backwardness test of Article 15(4) and Article 16(4).
(iii) Article 16(4) [and Article 15(4)] provision is rooted as historical reasons of exclusion
from service. The provision was thus fulcrumed on the Constituent Assembly's clear intent
(expressed through Dr B.R. Ambedkar's speech) to redress the specific wrong.
construed the meaning of "socially" backward classes for the purpose of Article 16(4).
(v) Indra Sawhney case was thus undertaking a "schematic interpretation" of Article 16(4)
[subsequently held equally applicable for Article 15(4)].
(vi) The special "schematic interpretation" based on the original intent doctrine led to the
amendment of the Constitution and introduction of Article 16(4-A) [77th Amendment], Article
16(4-B) [81st Amendment] and Article 15(5) [91st Amendment] all of which have been upheld
by the Supreme Court.
(vii) The recurring feature of such constitutional progression is Parliament's freedom and
liberty from the "original intent" doctrine. It is the same theme that enables Parliament to
constantly innovate and improvise to better attend to the directive principles' mandate of
Articles 38 and 46 or of the equality code itself.
(para 292)
The march from the past is also discernible from the judicial approach. If adequate
representation in services of the under-represented class was the sole purpose of Article 16(4),
any person from that class would be representative of that class. When Indra Sawhney case read
the necessity of excluding Creamy Layer from the "backward class" in Article 16(4) - it took note
of the events 42 years post the adoption of the Constitution. It is 30 years since the seminal
judgment of Indra Sawhney case. Time enough for Parliament to feel the necessity of attending to
another section of deprived classes.
(Para 293)
Therefore, the 103rd Constitutional Amendment signifies Parliament's intention to expand
affirmative action to hitherto untouched groups - who suffer from similar disadvantages as the
OBCs competing for opportunities. If economic advance can be accepted to negate certain social
disadvantages for the OBCs [Creamy Layer concept] the converse would be equally relevant. At
least for considering the competing disadvantages of Economically Weaker Sections. Economic
capacity has been upheld as a valid basis for classification by the Supreme Court in various other
contexts. It has also been implored to be considered as a relevant facet of the "Equality Code"
provisions. The 103rd Amendment offers a basis not frowned upon by Article 15(1) or Article 16
(2) for providing a population generic and caste/religion/community neutral criteria. It also
harmonises with the eventual constitutional goal of a casteless society. Indra Sawhney case holds
that R. Chitralekha, (1964) 6 SCR 368 propounded occupation-cum-means test can be a basis of
social backwardness even for the purposes of Article 16(4). Article 15(6)(b) Explanation defining
"EWS" could be said to be fully compliant with this norm.
(Para 294)
&
372 US 353 (1963), cited
Contract Social ii, 11; "Developments in the Law of Equal Protection", 82 Harv LR 1065 (1969),
referred to
The entire edifice of the impugned Amendment is to fulfil the mandate of Article 46 and to
ensure that economically weaker sections of the citizens get a fair chance of being
imparted higher education and participation in employment in the services of the State
The Constitution (103rd Amendment) Act, 2019 which came into effect on 14-1-2019
amended Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution by adding new clauses which empowered the
State to provide a maximum of 10% reservation for the "weaker sections" (EWS) of citizens other
than the Scheduled Castes ("SCs"), Scheduled Tribes ("STs") and Non-Creamy Layer of the Other
Backward Classes ("OBCs-NCL").
(Para 295)
From the Objects and Reasons it is evident that the entire edifice of the impugned Amendment
is to fulfil the mandate of Article 46 of the Constitution. What was looked into by Parliament was
the fact that the economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the benefit of
reservations. However, with a view to fulfil the mandate of Article 46 and to ensure that
economically weaker sections of the citizens get a fair chance of being imparted higher education
and participation in employment in the services of the State, the Constitution (103rd Amendment)
Act was brought into force.
(Para 298)
The reservation for the new category will be in addition to the existing scheme of 15%, 7.50%
and 27% reservations for the SC, ST and OBC-NCL respectively, thus, bringing the total
reservation to 59.50%. An "Explanation" appended to Article 15 states that the EWS shall be such
as may be notified by the State from time to time based on the family income and other indicators
of economic
disadvantage. A Notification dated 17-1-2019 under Article 15(6) Explanation stipulated that only
persons whose families have a gross annual income less than Rs 8 lakhs, agricultural land less than
5 acres, or residential flat less than 1000 sq ft, or residential plot less than 100 sq yd in the notified
municipalities, or residential plot less than 200 sq yd in the areas other than the notified
municipalities, are to be identified as EWS for the benefit of reservation.
(Para 299)
It cannot be said that Article 46 of the Constitution cannot be brought in aid to defend the
constitutional validity of the impugned Amendment
The words "weaker sections" used in Article 46 cannot be read to mean only the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes nor the same can be interpreted on the principle of ejusdem
generis, as argued. The expression refers to all weaker sections and in particular the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. If the meaning of the expression "weaker sections" is confined
only to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the likes, namely, backward class, then it
will expose the weaker sections of citizens, other than the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes and backward class people to exploitation without any protection from it. Social welfare or
the welfare of the State is the onus of the State itself. Thus, Part IV has been given the status and
expression in the Constitution which lays down the constitutional policy that the State must strive
for, if the country is to develop as a welfare State. The weaker section of the people is the lowliest
class of people (poorest of the poor), economically and educationally weak who have been given
constitutional protection. Their welfare is paramount as can be read from the conjoint reading of
Articles 21 and 46 of the Constitution.
(Para 304)
Article 21 encompasses the right to live with dignity. The right to live with dignity is not an
ordinary expression. It has serious meaning attached to it.
(Para 306)
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; Shantistar Builders V.
All 877, considered
It is evident from the precedents that there can be reservation for certain weaker sections
other than the SCs/STs and socially and educationally backward classes. The impugned
Amendment is meant for weaker sections of the society who are economically weak and cannot
afford to impart education to their children or are unable to secure employment in the services of
the State.
(Para 307)
Thus, it cannot be said that Article 46 of the Constitution cannot be brought in aid to defend the
constitutional validity of the impugned Amendment.
(Para 308)
Article 15(6) and Article 16(6) - Validity - Denial of reservation under EWS category to
SCS/STs/OBCs, does not make the classification arbitrary and the amendment violative
of the basic structure of the Constitution
Article 14 has two clear facets which are invalid. One is overclassification and the other is
underclassification, which is otherwise overinclusiveness or underinclusiveness. The judicial review
of overclassification should be undertaken very strictly. In the cases of underclassification when the
complaint is either by
those who are left out or those who are in i.e. that the statute has roped him in, but a similarly
situated person has been left out, it would be underinclusiveness. It is to say that you ought to
have brought him in to make the classification reasonable. It is in such cases that the courts have
said that "who should be brought in" should be left to the wisdom of the legislature because it is
essentially a stage where there should be an element of practicability. Therefore, the cases of
under-inclusion can be reviewed in a little liberal manner. The under-inclusion argument should not
be very readily accepted by the courts because the stage could be experimental.
(Para (390)
For instance, in the case on hand, the argument in the context of the 103rd Constitution
Amendment is that SCs, STs and OBCs have been left out, the Court would say that it is
underinclusiveness. The legislature does not have to bring any and everybody to make it
reasonable. The case on hand is not one of active exclusion. The SCs, STs and OBCs who have
been left out at the first instance are telling the Court that they ought to have been included. In
such circumstances, the test would be very strict, not that it would be impervious to review. Had
they been included in Article 15(6) and Article 16(6), respectively, at any point of time and
thereafter, excluded, it would be legitimate for them to argue that having treated them as one,
they cannot be excluded in an arbitrary manner.
(Paras 390 to 392)
US 267 (1904), followed
A law designed to promote a directive principle, even if it comes into conflict with the
formalistic and doctrinaire of equality before the law, would most certainly advance the
broader legalitarian principles and desirable constitutional goal of social and economic
justice for all
The equality code in Article 14 of the Indian Constitution prescribes substantive and not formal
equality. It is now a settled position that classification per se is not discriminatory and violative of
Article 14. Article 14 only forbids class legislation and not reasonable classification. A classification is
reasonable when the following twin tests as laid down are fulfilled:
(i) The classification must be based on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons
or things that are grouped, from others left out of the group.
(ii) The differentia must have a rational relationship to the object sought to be achieved by
the statute.
(para 393)
There must be some yardstick to differentiate the class included and the others excluded from
the group. The differentia used for the classification in the amendment is to promote or uplift the
economically weaker sections of citizens who are otherwise not covered under Article 15(4) and
Article 16(4) of the Constitution. This is keeping in mind the directive principles of State policy as
embodied under Article 46 of the Constitution.
(Para 394)
The broad egalitarian principle of social and economic justice for all is implicit in every directive
principle and, therefore, a law designed to promote a directive principle, even if it comes into
conflict with the formalistic and doctrinaire of equality before the law, would most certainly
advance the broader egalitarian
principles and desirable constitutional goal of social and economic justice for all.
(Para 395)
&
The contention that the exclusion of these groups is discriminatory overlooks the fact
that the SC/ST and OBCs are already represented in the classes covered by Articles 15
(4), 15(5) and 16(4)
The contention that the exclusion of these groups is discriminatory overlooks the fact that by
the exclusion of the creamy layer, the lower economic strata of the SC/ST and OBCs are already
represented in the classes covered by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4).
(Para 398)
True meaning of right to equality explained
Identical treatment is neither possible nor consistent with the right to equality. Therefore, what
the right to equality requires is an equal concern. As long as that concern exists, the difference in
treatment is consistent with the right to equality. Not every difference in treatment is per se
inconsistent with the right to equality. Only that difference in treatment which is based on a lack of
equal concern is inconsistent with that right. To illustrate, different treatment on the basis of race,
religion or caste is not, in itself, bad so long as equal concern or respect is shown to every race,
religion or caste. It becomes vulnerable only when it is based on disrespect, contempt or prejudice
to a race, religion or caste. Article 15 prohibits only such and not every difference of treatment
based on religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. This is very much obvious from
the expression "discriminate against" in Article 15 of the Constitution. The State is not prohibited
from treating people differently on the basis of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth; it is
prohibited from discriminating against them on these grounds. Discrimination results only when
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or any of them is made the basis of disrespect, contempt
or prejudice for difference in treatment. In other words, if difference in treatment on any of these
grounds is not based on any disrespect, contempt or prejudice, it is not discriminatory and,
therefore, not against Article 15(1). The same is true for Article 29(2).
(Para 400)
Articles 15(1) and 29(2), respectively, while thus prohibiting discrimination or prejudicial or
contemptuous difference of treatment on the grounds mentioned in those Articles, Article 15(4)
sanctions "special provisions for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes". Could it be said or argued that
any provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward class or for SCs and
STs can be termed or characterised as the one based on any prejudice, contempt or insult to any
forward class? If the answer is in negative, then why any provision for the advancement of any
economically weaker section of the society excluding SCs and STs should be termed or
characterised as one based on any prejudice, contempt or insult to any backward class? The
aforesaid would equally apply to Article 16 of the Constitution.
(Para 401)
1 AC 173 : (2005) 2 WLR 1369 : 2005 UKHL 37 (HL), followed
V. Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, 2003 UKHL 11 : 2003 ICR 337 (HL);
Hewage V. Grampian Health Board, 2012 UKSC 37 : 2013 SC (UKSC) 54; R (RJM) V. Secy. of
State for Work & Pensions, 2009 AC 311 : (2008) 3 WLR 1023 : 2008 UKHL 63 (HL); Bah V.
United Kingdom, (2011) 31 BHRC 609; Berubari Union (1), In re, (1960) 3 SCR 250 : AIR
Prof. Mahendra P. Singh, Professor of Law, Delhi University: 'Are Articles 15(4) and 16(4)
United States on "Equality and Human Rights", Oxford Equality Lecture 2018, Lady Hale dated
29-10-2018, referred to
As larger percentages of backward class members attain acceptable standards of
education and employment, they should be removed from the backward categories so
that the attention can be paid to those classes which genuinely need help
The new concept of economic criteria introduced by the impugned Amendment for affirmative
action may go a long way in eradicating caste-based reservation. It may be perceived as a first
step in the process of doing away with caste-based reservation.
(Para 413)
Baba Saheb Ambedkar recognised fraternity as a necessary principle for the survival of Indian
democracy. He defined fraternity as the "common brotherhood of all Indians". In his revolutionary,
yet undelivered speech titled "Annihilation of Caste", he described fraternity as the "essential
attitude of respect and reverence towards fellowmen".
(Para 414)
Reservation is not an end but a means - a means to secure social and economic justice.
Reservation should not be allowed to become a vested interest. The real solution, however, lies in
eliminating the causes that have led to the social, educational and economic backwardness of the
weaker sections of the community. This exercise of eliminating the causes started immediately
after the Independence i.e. almost seven decades back and it still continues. The long-standing
development and the spread of education have resulted in tapering the gap between the classes to
a considerable extent. As larger percentages of backward class members attain acceptable
standards of education and employment, they should be removed from the backward categories
so that the attention can be paid to those classes which genuinely need help. In such
circumstances, it is very much necessary to take into review the method of identification and the
ways of determination of backward classes, and also, ascertain whether the criteria adopted or
applied for the classification of backward is relevant for today's conditions. The idea of Baba Saheb
Ambedkar was to bring social harmony by introducing reservation for only ten years. However, it
has continued past seven decades. Reservation should not continue for an indefinite period of time
so as to become a vested interest.
(Para 416)
Impugned Amendment is valid
Thus, I hold that the impugned Amendment is valid and in no manner alters the basic structure
of the Constitution.
(Para 417)
I am of the view that all the petitions challenging the impugned Amendment should fail.
(Para 418)
Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting)
The principles of non-discrimination and fraternity in the constitutional ethos
It is essential that for the unity of this great nation, that we all recognise that fraternity is the
integrator, and unifier, which needs active propagation and practice, in tune with our preambular
resolve to preserve our Republic. Therefore, divisiveness of any form : in the polity, social
hierarchy, religion, origin, or regional destroys fraternity and undermines unity. Divisiveness tends
to polarise people and is likely to foster distrust. Weakening fraternity, therefore, undermines
justice, liberty, and equality.
(Para 615)
Thus, one-ness, inclusiveness, humanism and the idea that not only are all equal, and should
have equal opportunities, and the content of each one's rights be no different from the other, but
also that all stand together, and for each other, is a powerful precept.
(Para 618)
This intrinsic value of fraternity, its intricate connection with justice, liberty, and equality,
assuring the dignity of the individual are steeped in the constitutional jurisprudence of this nation.
The Constitution does not merely bind the institutions it creates and regulate their action, and
confer rights on individuals, but it is also a "pact between people" and is a charter given to
themselves defining their conduct with each other. The value of fraternity is as much a part of the
equality code, and its facets - equality of opportunity, the principle of non-discrimination and the
non-exclusionary principle, as it inextricably binds them with the concepts of liberty and freedom.
Building upon the simile used by Chandrachud, J. of the basic structure of the Constitution being
"woven out of the conspectus of the Constitution" - equality and justice are the warp and weft of
the constitutional fabric : with liberty, fraternity, and dignity, lending its richness in colour.
(Para 619)
The exclusionary clause (in the impugned Amendment) that keeps out from the benefits of
economic reservation, backward classes and SC/STs therefore, strikes a death knell to the equality
and fraternal principle which permeates the equality code and non-discrimination principle.
(Para 620)
The concepts which our Constitution fosters and the principles it engenders - equality,
fraternity, egalitarianism, dignity, and justice (at individual and social levels) are all inclusive, all
encompassing. The equality code in its majestic formulation (Articles 14, 15, 16 and 17) promotes
inclusiveness. Even provisions enabling reservations foster social justice and equality, to ensure
inclusiveness and participation of all sections of society. These provisions assure representation,
diversity, and empowerment. Conversely, exclusion, with all its negative connotation - is not a
constitutional principle and finds no place in our constitutional ethos. Therefore, to admit now, that
exclusion of people based on their backwardness, rooted in social practice, is permissible, destroys
the constitutional ethos of fraternity, non-discrimination, and non-exclusion.
(Para 621)
Summary of findings
The States' compelling interest to fulfil the objectives set out in the directive principles, through
special provisions on the basis of economic criteria, is legitimate. That reservation or special
provisions have so far been provided in favour of historically disadvantaged communities, cannot
be the basis for contending that other disadvantaged groups who have not been able to progress
due to the ill-effects of abject poverty, should remain so and the special provisions should not be
made by way of affirmative action or even reservation on their behalf. Therefore, special provision
based on objective economic criteria (for the purpose of Article 15), is per se not violative of the
basic structure.
(Para 622)
However, in answer to Question 3, the framework in which it has been introduced by the
impugned Amendment-by excluding backward classes-is violative of the basic structure. The
identifier for the new criteria-is based on the deprivation faced by individuals. Therefore, which
community the individual belongs to is irrelevant. An individual who is a target of the new 10%
reservation may be a member of any community or class. The State does not-and perhaps justly
so-will not look into her background. Yet in the same breath, the State is saying that members of
certain communities who may be equally or desperately poor (for the purposes of classification
identification) but will otherwise be beneficiaries of reservation of a different kind, would not be able
to access this new benefit, since they belong to those communities. This dichotomy of on the one
hand, using a neutral identifier entirely based on economic status and at the same time, for the
purpose of exclusion, using social status i.e. the castes or socially deprived members, on the
ground that they are beneficiaries of reservations [under Articles 15(4) and 16(4)] is entirely
offensive to the Equality Code.
(Para 623)
A universally acknowledged truth is that reservations have been conceived and quotas created,
through provisions in the Constitution, only to offset fundamental, deep-rooted generations of
wrongs perpetrated on entire communities and castes. Reservation is designed as a powerful tool
to enable equal access and equal opportunity. Introducing the economic basis for reservation - as
a new criterion is permissible. Yet, the "othering" of socially and educationally disadvantaged
classes - including SCs/STs/OBCs by excluding them from this new reservation on the ground
that they enjoy pre-existing benefits, is to heap fresh injustice based on past disability. The
exclusionary clause operates in an utterly arbitrary manner. Firstly, it "others" those subjected to
socially questionable, and outlawed practices - though they are amongst the poorest sections of
the society. Secondly, for the purpose of the new reservations, the exclusion operates against the
socially disadvantaged classes and castes, absolutely, by confining them within their allocated
reservation quotas (15% for SCs, 7.5% for STs, etc.). Thirdly, it denies the chance of mobility
from the reserved quota (based on past discrimination) to a reservation benefit based only on
economic deprivation. The net effect of the entire exclusionary principle is Orwellian, (so to say)
which is that all the poorest are entitled to be considered, regardless of their caste or class, yet
only those who belong to forward classes or castes, would be considered, and those from socially
disadvantaged classes for SC/STs would be ineligible. Within the narrative of the classification
jurisprudence, the differentia (or marker) distinguishing one person from another is deprivation
&
alone. The exclusion, however, is not based on deprivation but on social origin or identity. This
strikes at the essence of the non-discriminatory rule. Therefore, the total and absolute exclusion of
constitutionally recognised backward
classes of citizens - and more acutely, SC and ST communities, is nothing but discrimination which
reaches the level of undermining, and destroying the equality code, particularly the principle of non-
discrimination.
(Para 624)
Therefore, it is clear that the impugned Amendment and the classification it creates is arbitrary,
and results in hostile discrimination of the poorest sections of the society that are socially and
educationally backward, and/or subjected to caste discrimination. For these reasons, the insertion
of Articles 15(6) and 16(6) is struck down and is held to be violative of the equality code,
particularly the principle of non-discrimination and non-exclusion which forms an inextricable part of
the basic structure of the Constitution.
(Para 625)
While this reasoning is sufficient to conclude that Article 16(6) is liable to be struck down, it
must be clarified that while the "economic criteria" per se is permissible in relation to access of
public goods (under Article 15), the same is not true for Article 16, the goal of which is
empowerment, through representation of the community.
(Para 626)
OnLine SC 1771, referred to
Giri V. D. Suri Dora, (1960) 1 SCR 426 : AIR 1959 SC 1318; Saurav Yadav V. State of U.P.,
Tarunabh Khaitan : A Theory of Discrimination Law (Oxford University Press, 2015), referred to
ORDER OF THE COURT
In view of the decision rendered by the majority the challenge raised to the 103rd Amendment
to the Constitution fails and the opinion rendered by Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. remains in a minority.
(Para 632)
L. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - 50% ceiling re reservation laid
down by the Supreme Court in decisions preceding the insertion of Arts. 15(6) and 16(6)
- Applicability of the said ceiling - Basic structure of the Constitution, and the said ceiling
- Whether violated by Arts. 15(6) and 16(6)
- Constitutional amendment inserting Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) enabling State to make a
reservation on a new criterion, that is, economically weaker section (EWS) and excluding
classes already getting the benefit of reservation under Arts. 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4)
thereby taking total reservation to 59.5%, held (per majority), valid and does not violate
the basic structure of the Constitution - Ceiling limit 50% reservation is not inflexible and
in any case, applies only to the reservations envisaged by Arts. 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4)
of the Constitution
- Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting), the issue of breach of the 50% cap on reservation
should be kept open because it is directly in issue in another pending Constitution Bench case
(Paras 184.3, 156 to 175, 300.1 to 300.3; and 608 to 611)
M. Constitution of India - Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - Reservation for economically
weaker sections (EWS) under, being person specific while existing reservations being
class-specific - Whether can be a ground to invalidate constitutional amendment inserting
Arts. 15(6) and 16(6) - Held (per majority), arguments that while the existing
reservations are class-specific, the impugned reservation is person-specific, not tenable
as the limited permissible challenge to the impugned Amendment is on the question of the
destruction of basic structure
- Questioning Art. 16(6) only on the ground of it being not representation-oriented,
further held (per majority), not a sustainable argument vis--vis the doctrine of the basic
structure
- Even otherwise, further held (per majority), the fact that "representation" alone is
not the purpose of enabling provisions of Art. 16 can be directly seen from Art. 16(4-B)
(Paras 156 to 177)
Held :
Per Maheshwari, J. (Trivedi and Pardiwala, JJ. concurring; Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J.
dissenting)
Breach of 50% Ceiling of Reservations and Basic Structure
The arguments challenging the amendment in question had also been against the prescription of
ten per cent reservation for EWS on the ground that it exceeds the ceiling limit of fifty per cent laid
down by the Supreme Court. The argument is not precisely in conformity with the law declared by
the Supreme Court. It runs counter to the other argument that this EWS reservation is invalid
because of exclusions. If at all the cap of fifty per cent is the final and inviolable rule, the classes
already standing in the enabled bracket of fifty per cent cannot justifiably claim their share in the
extra ten per cent, which is meant for a separate class and section i.e. economically weaker
section.
(Para 156)
The fifty per cent ceiling proposition would obviously be applied only to those reservations which
were in place before the amendment in question. No decision of the Supreme Court could be read
to mean that even if Parliament finds the necessity of another affirmative action by the State in the
form of reservation for a section or class in need, it could never be provided. The decisions of the
Court are rather to the contrary and provide that flexibility within which Parliament has acted for
putting in place the amendment in question.
(Para 157)
In the above backdrop, the relevant decisions in regard to this fifty per cent ceiling limit could be
referred but, while reiterating that these decisions are applicable essentially to the class/classes
who are to avail the benefits envisaged by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution.
(Para 158)
T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179; State of Kerala V. N.M.
(1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649, considered and distinguished
reservation contemplated by Article 16(4) should not exceed fifty per cent, yet left that small
window open where some relaxation to the strict rule may become imperative in view of the
extraordinary situations inherent in the great diversity of
our country. As an example, it was pointed out that the population inhabiting far-flung and remote
areas might, on account of their being out of the mainstream of national life and in view of the
conditions peculiar to them, need to be treated in a different way. However, a caveat was put that
a special case has to be made out and extreme caution has to be exercised in this regard.
(Para 164)
Fazal Ali and Krishna Iyer, JJ.), considered
Having examined the permissible limits of affirmative action in light of the possible harm of
preferential treatment qua other innocent class of competitors i.e. general merit candidates, the
Supreme Court has expressed the desirability of fifty per cent as the ceiling limit for reservation in
education and public employment but, all such observations are required to be read essentially in
the context of the reservation obtaining under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) or other areas of
affirmative action like that in relation to local self-government and cannot be overstretched to the
reservation provided for an entirely different class, consisting of the economically weaker sections.
(Para 171)
Moreover, this ceiling limit, though held attached to the constitutional requirements, has not
been held to be inflexible and inviolable for all times to come. Reservation by affirmative action is
not having trappings of any such essential feature of the Constitution, collectively enumerated by
reference to any particular compelling reason or requirement could damage the basic structure of
the Constitution.
(Para 172)
In another view of the matter, the prescription of a ceiling limit of fifty per cent, being
apparently for the benefit of general merit candidates, does not provide any justified cause to the
candidates standing in the bracket of already available reservation to raise any grievance about
extra ten per cent reservation for the benefit of another section of society in need of affirmative
action. In any case, there is no question of violation of any such basic feature of the Constitution
that the entire structure of equality of opportunity in Article 16 would collapse by this EWS
reservation.
(Para 173)
Arguments that while the existing reservations are class-specific, the impugned
reservation is person-specific, not tenable
There have been several suggestions during the course of arguments that while the existing
reservations are class-specific, the impugned reservation is person-specific and even the eligibility
factor, that is of "economic weakness", is itself
uncertain, fortuitous and mutable. All these submissions have only been noted to be rejected in the
context of the limited permissible challenge to the amendment in question on the Doctrine of Basic
Structure. None of these submissions makes out a case of violation of any such essential feature
of the Constitution that leads to destroying the basic structure.
(Para 174)
It may, however, be observed that as per the Explanation to Article 15(6), the reservations in
relation to economically weaker sections would avail to such sections/persons as may be notified
by the State from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic
disadvantage. The question as to whether any particular section or person falls in or is entitled to
stand within the class of "economically weaker sections of citizens" may be a question to be
determined with reference to the parameters laid down and indicators taken into consideration by
the State. Coupled with this, even the extent of reservation provided therein may also be a
question to be determined with reference to the relevant analysis of the material data justifying a
particular percentage. In other words, the question as to whether any particular classification as
the economically weaker section is based on relevant data and factors as also the extent of
reservation for that section could be the matters of consideration as and when arising but, for
these and akin grounds, the constitutional amendment, moderately expanding the enabling power
of the State, cannot be questioned.
(Para 175)
The object of enabling provisions is not representation alone
The fact that "representation" alone is not the purpose of enabling provisions of Article 16 could
be directly seen from clause (4-B) of Article 16, inserted later and upheld by the Supreme Court
ensuring that the ceiling on reservation quota to carried forward posts does not apply to
subsequent years. Interestingly, clause (5) of Article 16, protecting the operation of any law in
relation to any incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution as regards eligibility, operates in an entirely different field but finds
mention in Article 16 for being an exception to the general rule of equality of opportunity. Viewed
as a whole, it is difficult to say that permissible deviation from the rule of equality in matters of
employment is having the objective of representation alone.
(Para 176)
Moreover, even if it be assumed that the existing provisions concerning reservation are
correlated with "representation", such a correlation would only remain confined to the classes
availing benefit under Article 16(4); and it cannot be said that for any other deserving section or
class reservation could be provided only for the purpose of representation. Real and substantive
equality takes myriad shapes, depending on the requirements. Therefore, questioning Article 16(6)
only on the ground of it being not representation-oriented, does not appear to be a sustainable
argument vis--vis the Doctrine of Basic Structure.
(Para 177)
Thus, it is held that reservation for economically weaker sections of citizens up to ten per cent
in addition to the existing reservations does not result in violation of any essential feature of the
Constitution of India and does not cause any damage to the basic structure of the Constitution of
India on account of breach of the ceiling limit of fifty per cent because, that ceiling limit itself is not
inflexible and in any case, applies only to the reservations envisaged by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and
16(4) of the Constitution.
(Para 184.3)
Per Pardiwala, J. (concurring)
The total reservation is now to the extent of 59.50%. The hue and cry is that the same is in
excess of the ceiling of 50% fixed by the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney case.
(Para 300.1)
It excludes the Scheduled Castes ("SCs"), the Scheduled Tribes ("STs") and the Non-Creamy
Layer of Other Backward Classes ("OBCs-NCL"). The hue and cry is that the same has abridged
the equality code. In other words, the exclusion is violative of Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the
Constitution.
(Para 300.2)
Reservation of 10% of the vacancies among the open competition candidates means the
exclusion of those above the demarcating line from those 10% seats. In other words, the
competition will now be within 40%. The hue and cry in this regard is that it is not permissible to
debar a citizen from being considered for appointment to an office under the State solely on the
basis of his income or property-holding.
(Para 300.3)
Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting)
In view of my conclusions as recorded in this opinion - that the impugned Amendment is
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution, I find that there is no need for a specific finding
on the 50% cap or its breach of the basic structure; however I deem it necessary to sound a note
of caution, on the consequence of upholding the reservation, thereby, breaching the 50% limit.
(Para 608)
It is pertinent to note that the breach of the 50% limit is the principal ground of attack, of the
76th Constitutional Amendment, 1994 which inserted as Entry 257-A - the Tamil Nadu Backward
Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions
and of Appointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1993 in the Ninth Schedule.
The validity of that enactment - and whether the inclusion by the constitutional amendment
violates basic structure, is directly in issue in a batch of cases pending before the Supreme Court.
The view of the members of this Bench constituting the majority - that creation of another class
which can be a recipient of up to 10% of the reservation, over and above 50%, which is permitted
under Articles 15(4) or 16(4), in my considered opinion, therefore, has a direct bearing on the
likely outcome in the challenge in that proceeding. I would therefore sound this cautionary note
since this judgment may well seal the fate of the pending litigation - without the benefit of hearing
in those proceedings.
(Para 609)
The last reason why I find myself unpersuaded to agree with the opinion that the impugned
Amendments by creating a different kind of criteria, have to be viewed separately and that Indra
Sawhney case was confined to reservations in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is that permitting the
breach of the 50% rule as it were through this reasoning, becomes a gateway for further
infractions whereby which in fact would result in compartmentalisation; the rule of reservation
could well become rule of equality or the right to equality, could then easily be reduced to right to
regard, the observations of Dr Ambedkar have to be kept in mind that the reservations are to be
seen temporary and exceptional or else they would "eat up the rule of equality".
(Para 610)
In view of the above discussion, and given my conclusion on the validity of the impugned
Amendment, I would respectfully prefer to keep the question of violation of the 50% rule open.
(Para 611)
N. Constitution of India - Art. 15(6) and Arts. 19(1)(g) & (6) and 14 - Reservation
for economically weaker sections (EWS) - Enabling State to make reservation in
admissions to private unaided educational institutions - Whether violates basic structure
- Held (per majority), the 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the
basic structure of the Constitution by permitting the State to make special provisions in
relation to admission to private unaided institutions
- Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (partly concurring and partly dissenting), special provisions based
on economic criterion can also be made applicable in relation to admission to private unaided
institutions - However, given that the analysis herein that the "exclusion" in the Amendment is
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution, the question of applicability of EWS reservation
in relation to admission to private unaided institutions has been rendered moot
(Paras 185, 186.2; 564 to 568 and 627)
Held :
Per Maheshwari, J. (Trivedi and Pardiwala, JJ. concurring)
The 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic structure of the
Constitution by permitting the State to make special provisions in relation to admission to private
unaided institutions.
(Para 186.2)
Not much of the contentions have been urged in relation to the impact of the amendment in
question on admissions to private unaided institutions. However, it could at once be clarified that
what has been observed hereinabove in relation to the principal part of the challenge to the
amendment in question, read with the decision of the Supreme Court in Pramati Educational &
against the challenge.
(Para 185)
Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (partly concurring and partly dissenting)
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution embraces the right to establish private educational
institutions as an avocation. The insertion of Article 21-A, and later Article 15(5) added a new
dimension. These amendments are to be viewed as the society's resolve that all institutions-public
and private-have to join in the national endeavour to promote education at all levels. Education in
this context is to be seen as a "material resource" of the society, meant to benefit all its
segments.
(Para 564)
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 by Section 12(a) in fact
introduces an all-encompassing quota which is inclusive, under the broad rubric of "economically
weaker sections of the society". Parliament had this model, and was also aware that the Supreme
Court had upheld it and further that Article 15(5) too was upheld.
(Para 565)
Unaided private institutions, including those imparting professional education, cannot be seen as
standing out of the national mainstream. As held in the aforementioned judgments, reservations in
private institutions are not per se violative of the basic structure. Thus, reservations as a concept
cannot be ruled out in private institutions where education is imparted. They may not be State or
State instrumentalities, yet the value that they add is part of the national effort to develop skills
and disseminate knowledge. These institutions therefore also constitute material resources of the
community in which the State has a vital interest, and are not merely bodies set up to further the
private objective of their founders, unlike in case of the shareholders of a company. Such
institutions are seen as part of the State's endeavour to bring the educational levels of the country
up, and foster fraternity.
(Para 566)
No better articulation than the aforementioned is warranted to hold the EWS reservation equally
applicable to unaided private institutions. However, given that the analysis herein that the
"exclusion" in the Amendment is violative of the basic structure, the question of applicability of EWS
reservation in relation to admission to private unaided institutions has been rendered moot.
(Para 568)
Thus, unaided private educational institutions would be bound under Article 15(6) to provide for
EWS reservations. However, given that the analysis on "exclusion" leads to the conclusion that the
Amendment is violative of the basic structure, the question herein has been rendered moot.
&
(Para 627)
O. Constitution of India - Art. 368 and Pt. III - Amending power - Amendment of
fundamental rights - New enabling provisions providing reservation for economically
weaker sections (EWS) excluding backward classes or castes already getting reservation
- Validity of - Scope, grounds, approach of judicial review to determine said validity
- Nature of the provisions introduced by impugned Amendment - Provisions in
question being enabling in nature - Relevance of - Principles elucidated
- Impugned 103rd Constitutional Amendment adding new enabling provisions for
affirmative action viz. Arts. 15(6) and 16(6), held (per majority), not violative of any part
of the basic structure or core values or overarching principles of the Constitution
(Paras 41 to 81, 179 to 213, 309 to 383, 408 to 412; 587, 589, 419, 420 and 628 to
633)
P. Constitution of India - Art. 368 and Pt. III - Basic features or structure of the
Constitution - Extent to which fundamental rights constitute basic structure -
Amendability of fundamental rights - Discussed, per Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 358 to 412)
Q. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Basic features or structure of the Constitution -
Whether a basic feature of the Constitution has been destroyed or materially altered -
Determination of - Scope of judicial review - Approach and material factors for
appropriate determination - In respect of application of the Doctrine of Basic Structure,
no cut-and-dried formula or ready-made answer can be provided, however, the material
factors and tests for appropriate determination - Elucidated
(Paras 41 to 81, 179 to 183, 380 to 383; 431 to 456, 576 and 577)
R. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Amending power - Constitutional amendment to
give effect to international conventions - Manner of construction - Constitutional
amendment to give to international conventions, per Maheshwari, J., have to be broadly
construed - They may be read as part of the domestic law as long as there is no
inconsistency - Laws (including constitutional amendment) enacted to give effect to
international convention must be broadly construed and cannot be struck down for
askance
(Para 179)
S. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Amending power - Living tree doctrine or the
doctrine of progressive interpretation and the Doctrine of Basic Structure - Meaning and
method of identifying basic structure of the Constitution - Explained, per Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 323 to 328)
T. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Amending power - Whether a constitutional
provision is amendable or not - Three different standards, suggested by Yaniv Roznai,
discussed, per Pardiwala, J. viz. - (i) Minimal Effect Standard is the most stringent
standard of the judicial review of amendments - (ii) Disproportionate Violation Standard
is the intermediate standard of review - (iii) Fundamental Abandonment Standard is the
lowest level of scrutiny
&
(Paras 329 to 332)
U. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Basic features or structure of the Constitution -
Basic structure of German Constitution, discussed, per Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 334 to 338)
V. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Basic features or structure of the Constitution -
Basic structure of Constitution in India, a judicial innovation - Scope of application of the
Doctrine of Basic Structure in India, discussed per Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 330 to 354)
W. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Basic features or structure of the Constitution -
Basic structure of Constitution in India - Identification of basic structure - Involvement
of subjective preferences and choices with changing values over time - Discussed, per
Pardiwala, J.
- There are no objective tests to distinguish which part of the Constitution is more basic than
the other - The whole Constitution is the basic law - There are bound to be subjective
preferences and choices in deciding what constitutes the basic structure of the Constitution -
Values also keep changing with time according to the needs of society - No generation has a right
to bind future generations by its own beliefs and values - It must, therefore, be presumed that the
word amendment in Art. 368 has been used in the same broad sense as has been used in the
Constitutions of other countries from where it was borrowed
(Paras 355 to 357)
X. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Basic features or structure of the Constitution -
Basic structure of Constitution in India - The balance of the two rival philosophies - One
favouring the complete sanctity of fundamental rights while the other supporting the
complete flexibility of the Constitution, discussed, per Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 360 to 376)
Y. Constitution of India - Art. 368 - Exercise of constituent power under - Nature,
Scope and limitations or safeguards - Power of judicial review vis--vis constituent
power of Parliament under Art. 368 to amend the Constitution - Scope and limits -
Elucidated, per Trivedi, J. and Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 377 to 388, 193 and 196)
Z. Constitution of India - Art. 368 and Arts. 15(6) & 16(6) and Arts. 338, 338-A, 338
-B and 340 - Amending power - Constitutional amendment - Enabling provision -
Absence of institutional guarantee in the form of Commissions or bodies akin to those
provided for in Arts. 338, 338-A, 338-B and 340, to provide affirmative action for the
EWS category, per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (majority expressing no view) does not mean
that basic structure of the Constitution has been violated only for that reason
(Paras 573 to 575)
ZA. Constitutional Interpretation - Generally - How differs from statutory
interpretation - Discussed, per Pardiwala, J.
(Paras 309 to 317)
Held :
Per Maheshwari, J. (Trivedi and Pardiwala, JJ. concurring; Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J.
dissenting)
Vital elements of the Doctrine of Basic Structure of the Constitution
The Doctrine of Basic Structure was not as such discussed in the Constituent Assembly while
formulating the enabling provisions for amending the Constitution.
(Para 52)
The expositions on the Doctrine of Basic Structure could be traced to the thought process
stimulated by the thinkers like Prof. Conrad. However, there had been voices of concern about the
exact nature and implications of this doctrine.
(Para 54)
However, when the enquiry itself is into the effect of the amendment of the supreme and
organic document, which is fundamental to everything related to the country, the amorphous state
of the Doctrine of Basic Structure, leaves every option open for purposive approach, in tune with
the dynamics of change while ensuring that the fundamental ethos remains unscathed.
(Para 55)
The Supreme Court has asserted its power of judicial review to scrutinise any amendment to
see if it violated the basic structure of the Constitution; and asserted its right to strike down
amendments to the Constitution that violated the fundamental architecture of the Constitution.
There is no, and there cannot be any, cut-and-dried formula or a theorem which could supply a
ready-made answer to the question as to whether a particular amendment to the Constitution
violates or affects the basic structure. The nature of the amendment and the feature(s) of the
Constitution sought to be touched, altered, modulated, or changed by the amendment would be
the material factors for an appropriate determination of the question. The amorphous state of the
Doctrine of Basic Structure is rather pertinent in this quest, so as to keep in tune with the organic
nature of the Constitution.
(Paras 57 and 76)
Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643, held, partly overruled
Prof. Dietrich Conrad : Implied Limitations of the Amending Power, (1932-2001); A.G. Noorani :
Constitutional Questions and Citizens' Rights (Oxford University Press, 2006); Indian Year Book
of International Affairs, 1966-7, at p. 420, The Court and the Constitution of India : Summits
and Shallows, Oxford University Press, 2008 at p. 54, referred to
Judicial review of constitutional amendments - Minimal interference
The Doctrine of Basic Structure is not so open-ended that it would be readily applied to every
constitutional amendment. Quite to the opposite, the Court has applied the same only against such
hostile constitutional amendments which were found to be striking at the very identity of the
Constitution, like direct abrogation of the features of judicial review, free and fair elections, plenary
jurisdiction of constitutional courts, and independence of the judiciary. Most of the other attempts
to question the constitutional amendments have met with disapproval of the Court even when
there had been a departure from the existing constitutional provisions and scheme.
(Para 77)
In our constitutional set-up of parliamentary democracy, even when the power of judicial
review is an essential feature and thereby an immutable part of the basic structure of the
Constitution, the power to amend the Constitution, vested in Parliament in terms of Article 368, is
equally an inherent part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Both these powers, of amending
the Constitution (by Parliament) and of judicial review (by a constitutional court) are subject to
their own limitations. The interplay of amending powers of Parliament and judicial review by the
constitutional court over such exercise of amending powers may appear a little bit complex but
ultimately leads towards strengthening the constitutional value of separation of powers. This
synergy of separation is the strength of our Constitution.
(Para 78)
Judicial review of constitutional amendments - Application of the Doctrine of Basic
Structure - Material factors for appropriate determination
The power to amend the Constitution essentially vests with Parliament and when a high
threshold and other procedural safeguards are provided in Article 368, it would not be correct to
assume that every amendment to the Constitution could be challenged by theoretical reference to
the basic structure doctrine.
(Para 79.1)
The amending power can even be used by Parliament to reshape the Constitution to fulfil the
obligation imposed on the State, subject, of course, to the defined limits of not damaging the basic
structure of the Constitution.
(Para 79.2)
Again, judicial review of the constitutional amendment is a matter of great circumspection for
the judiciary where the Courts cannot be oblivious to the practical needs of the Government and
the door has to be left open even for "trial and error", subject, again, to the limitations of not
damaging the identity of the Constitution.
(Para 79.3)
The expressions "basic features" and "basic structure" convey different meanings, even though
many times they have been used interchangeably. It could reasonably be said that the basic
structure of the Constitution is the sum total of its essential features.
(Para 79.4)
As to when abrogation of any particular essential feature would lead to damaging the basic
structure of the Constitution would depend upon the nature of that feature as also the nature of
the amendment.
(Para 79.5)
As regards Part III of the Constitution, every case of amendment of the fundamental rights may
not necessarily result in damaging or destroying the basic structure. The issue would always be as
to whether what is sought to be withdrawn or altered is an inviolable part of the basic structure.
(Para 79.6)
Mere violation of the rule of equality does not violate the basic structure of the Constitution
unless the violation is shocking, unconscionable or unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of
equal justice.
(Para 79.7)
If any constitutional amendment moderately abridges or alters the equality principles, it cannot
be said to be a violation of the basic structure.
(Para 79.8)
International conventions have to be broadly construed and cannot be struck down for
askance - They may be read as part of the domestic law as long as there is no
inconsistency
Our country is and has been a participant in various international conventions having a co-
relation with the questions pertaining to economic disabilities. The enforceability of International
Conventions takes place when they elucidate and effectuate the fundamental rights and such
conventions may also be read as part of domestic law as long as there is no inconsistency
between them. Thus understood, it hardly needs elaboration that the laws (including constitutional
amendments) enacted, inter alia, for giving effect to International Conventions, have to be broadly
construed and cannot be struck down for askance.
(Para 179)
Airways Inc., (1969) 1 QB 616 : (1968) 3 WLR 1273 (CA), followed
Constitutional amendment - Limited scope of judicial review
Parliament, whilst enacting amendments to the Constitution, exercises constituent power, as
distinguished from ordinary legislative power. Parliament is not at liberty to destroy the basic
structure of the Constitution. The constitutional court is also not at liberty to declare constitutional
amendments void because of their perceived injustice or impolicy or where they appear to the
Court to be violating fundamental principles of governance unless such principles are placed beyond
legislative encroachment by the Constitution itself. The power to amend the Constitution can be
used to reshape the Constitution to fulfil the obligation imposed on the State. Starting from the
insertion of Article 15(4) by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951; moving on to the
insertion of Article 16(4-A) by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 to the
insertion of Article 16(4-B) by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000 and further
amendment of Article 16(4-A) by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001; yet further
with the insertion of Article 15(5) by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005; and
lately with insertion of Articles 366(26-C) and 342-A by the Constitution (One Hundred and
Second Amendment) Act, 2018, Parliament has indeed brought about certain modulations, within
the framework of the Constitution of India, to cater to the requirements of the citizenry with real
and
substantive justice in view. In the same vein, if Parliament has considered it fit to make provisions
in furtherance of the objectives of socio-economic justice by the amendment in question for
economically weaker sections, the amendment cannot be condemned as being violative of any of
the basic features of the Constitution and thereby damaging the basic structure.
(Para 182)
Benjamin N. Cardozo : The Nature of the Judicial Process, Yale University Press (1921), p. 94;
T.M. Cooley : A Treatise on the Constitutional Limitations, Hindustan Law Book Company
(2005), p 168, referred to
Affirmative action being an exception to the general rule of equality cannot be treated as
a basic feature of the Constitution
Using the Doctrine of Basic Structure as a sword against the amendment in question and
thereby stultifying State's effort to do economic justice as ordained by the Preamble and directive
principles of State policy and, inter alia, enshrined in Articles 38, 39 and 46, cannot be
countenanced. This is essentially for the reason that the provisions contained in Articles 15 and 16
of the Constitution, providing for reservation by way of affirmative action, being of exception to
the general rule of equality, cannot be treated as a basic feature. Moreover, even if reservation is
one of the features of the Constitution, it being in the nature of enabling provision only, cannot be
regarded as an essential feature of that nature whose modulation for the sake of other valid
affirmative action would damage the basic structure of the Constitution. Therefore, the Doctrine of
Basic Structure cannot be invoked for laying a challenge to the 103rd Amendment. Thus, the other
contentions and submissions need not be dilated herein.
(Para 183)
Per Trivedi, J. (concurring)
Checks and balances - Power of judicial review vis--vis constituent power of Parliament
under Article 368 to amend the Constitution - Scope and limits, clarified
The sole fountainhead of the constituent power conferred upon Parliament to amend the
provisions of the Constitution is Article 368 thereof. It is the Constitution and not the constituent
power which is supreme. The Constitution which reflects the hopes and aspirations of the people
also provides for the framework of the different organs of the State viz. the Executive, the
Legislature and the Judiciary. The Judiciary is entrusted with the responsibility of upholding the
supremacy of the Constitution. That does not mean that such power of judicial review makes the
judiciary supreme. The Constitution itself has created a system of checks and balances by which
the powers are so distributed that none of the three organs it sets up, can become so
predominant as to disable the others from exercising and discharging powers and functions
entrusted to them. Yet the power of judicial review is provided expressly in our Constitution by
means of Articles 226 and 32, which is one of the features upon which hinges the system of
checks and balances. This power is of paramount importance in a federal Constitution like ours and
is the heart and core of democracy.
(Para 193)
Constitution is said to be a living document or a work in progress only because the
plenary power to amend is conferred upon Parliament under Article 368
Parliament has been empowered to amend the Constitution in accordance with the procedure
laid down in Article 368 of the Constitution. The Constitution is said to be a living document or a
work in progress only because of the plenary power to
amend is conferred upon Parliament under the said provision. Of course, the said power is subject
to the constraints of the basic structure theory.
(Para 194)
Deriving inspiration from the Preamble and the whole scheme of the Constitution, the Court
held that every provision of the Constitution can be amended so long as the basic foundation and
structure of the Constitution remain the same. Some of the basic features of the constitutional
structure carved out by the Court were, the supremacy of the Constitution, republican and
democratic form of Government, separation of powers, judicial review, sovereignty and the
integrity of the nation, federal character of the Government, etc. A multitude of features has been
acknowledged as the basic features in various judicial pronouncements. Accordingly, any
amendment made by Parliament is open to judicial review and is liable to be interfered with by the
Court on the ground that it affects one or the other basic feature of the Constitution.
(Para 195)
If Parliament amends the Constitution in disregard of the limitations imposed on its
constituent powers, whether the disregard is with regard to substantive limitations or
procedural limitations, in both cases, the Court, in the exercise of its power of judicial
review, can invalidate the said amendment
The Court explaining the limitations imposed on the constituent power observed that the
&
limitations imposed are substantive limitations and procedural limitations. Substantive limitations
are those which restrict the field of exercise of the amending power and exclude some areas from
its ambit. Therefore, a violation of the basic structure of the Constitution would be a substantive
limitation restricting the field of exercise of the amending power under Article 368 of the
Constitution. Procedural limitations are those which impose restrictions with regard to the mode of
exercise of the amending power. Both these limitations touch and affect the constituent power
itself, the disregard of which invalidates its exercise.
(Para 196)
Width of the constituent power
While examining the width of the constituent power, it is essential to see its limits, the
maximum and the minimum; the entire ambit and the magnitude of it. Parliament could under
Article 368 amend Article 13 and also the fundamental rights, and that the power of amendment
under Article 368 is wide, but it is not wide enough to totally abrogate any of the fundamental
rights or other essential elements of the basic structure of the Constitution and destroy its identity.
(Para 197)
Article 16(1) is only part of a comprehensive scheme to ensure equality in all spheres and is an
instance of the larger concept of equality of law. Article 16(4) cannot be viewed as an exception to
Article 16(1), but only as something which logically emanates from Article 16(1).
(Para 201)
Every case in which the protection of a fundamental right is withdrawn will not necessarily result
in damaging or destroying the basic structure of the Constitution. The question as to whether the
basic structure is damaged or destroyed in any given case would depend upon which particular
article of Part III is in issue and whether what is withdrawn is quintessential to the basic structure of
the Constitution.
(Para 202)
Joseph Tussman and Jacobusten Brook:" The Equal Protection of the Law", 37 California Rev 341,
referred to
Conclusions
The sum and substance is that the limitations-substantive or procedural-imposed on the
exercise of constituent power of the State under Article 368 could not be said by any stretch of
imagination, to have been disregarded by Parliament. Neither the procedural limitation i.e. the
mode of exercise of the amending power has been disregarded nor the substantive limitation i.e.
the restricted field has been disregarded, which otherwise would invalidate the impugned
Amendment. What is visualised in the Preamble and what is permissible both in Part III and Part IV
&
of the Constitution could not be said to be violative of the basic structure or basic feature of the
Constitution. In absence of any obliteration of any of the constitutional provisions and in absence
of any alteration or destruction in the existing structure of equality code or in the basic structure of
the Constitution, neither the width test nor the identity test as propounded in Kesavananda case
could be said to have been violated in the impugned Amendment. Accordingly, the challenge to the
constitutional validity of the 103rd Amendment fails, and the validity thereof is upheld.
(Para 213)
Per Pardiwala, J. (concurring)
Validity of Constitution itself cannot be assailed, but amendments thereto can be assailed
- Manner of interpretation of Constitution
There are certain important differences in the theory of interpretation of a Constitution
contrasted with the theory of interpretation of statutes. These differences arise from the very
nature and quality of a Constitution. Although the validity of a statute can be assailed on the
ground that it is ultra vires (beyond the powers), yet the legislature which enacted it, the validity of
the Constitution cannot be assailed on any ground whatsoever.
(Para 309)
The framing of the Constitution of a State is a capital political fact and not a juridical act. No
court or other authority in the State under the Constitution can determine the primordial question
of whether the Constitution has been lawfully framed according to any standards. Even if a
Constitution is framed under violence, rebellion or coercion, it stands outside the whole area of
law, jurisprudence and justiciability. The basic principle of constitutional jurisprudence is that the
Constitution is the supreme law of the land, even supreme above the law and itself governing all
other laws. But this principle is not applicable to an amendment of the Constitution. The
Constitution can be amended only in accordance with the provisions thereof by the authority
empowered to do so in accordance with the procedure laid down therein. The validity of a
constitutional amendment can, therefore, be challenged on the ground that it is ultra vires.
(Para 310)
The interpretation of a Constitution involves more than a passing interest concerning the actual
litigants and being a pronouncement of the courts on the Government and administration, has a
more general and far-reaching consequence. The policy of a particular State is more easily
discernible and interpreted than the policy of a Constitution, which is a charter for the government
and administration of a whole nation and a country. It is that policy consideration which makes the
statutory interpretation different from the interpretation of the Constitution. More foresight in the
nature of judicial statesmanship, therefore, is required in interpreting a Constitution than in
construing a statute. The Constitution is not to be construed in any narrow pedantic sense and a
broad liberal spirit should inspire those whose duty it is to interpret it, for a Constitution, which
provides for the government of a country, is a living and organic thing, which of all instruments has
the greatest claim to be construed ut res magis valeat quam pereat (it is better for a thing to have
effect than to be made void). But this does not mean that a court is free to stretch or pervert the
language of a Constitution in the interests of any legal or constitutional theory, or even for the
purpose of supplying omissions or to correct supposed errors.
(Para 311)
If there is an apparent or real conflict between two provisions of the Constitution, it is to be
resolved by applying the principle of harmonious construction.
(Para 312)
This has been sometimes called as "flexible" or "progressive" interpretation of the Constitution
which Dr Wynes refers to as the doctrine of "generic interpretation".
(Para 314)
The rules of interpretation of the Constitution have to take into consideration the problems of
Government, the structure of a State, dynamism in operation, caution about checks and balances,
not ordinarily called for in the interpretation of statutes.
(Para 315)
Although a Constitution is not to be fettered by past history, yet it is relevant for properly
interpreting the Constitution. The Court accepted the logic that the Indian Constitution was not
written on a "blank slate" and because the Government of India Act, 1935 provided the basic fabric
for the Indian Constitution, it was invoked to interpret the Constitution in the light of the provisions
of the Act.
(Para 316)
The principle of ejusdem generis, a rule of statutory interpretation, has been applied to the
Indian Constitution. The statutory rule of interpretation expressed expressio unius est exclusio
alterius (the express mention of one person or thing is the exclusion of another) is not strictly
applicable to constitutional interpretation.
(Para 317)
Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R. Tendolkar, 1959 SCR 279 : AIR 1958 SC 538; R.C. Poudyal V. Union
OnLine US SC 24 : 41 L Ed 715 : 17 S Ct 326 : 165 US 275 (1897); M.P.V. Sundararamier &
Co. V. State of A.P., 1958 SCR 1422 : AIR 1958 SC 468, considered
McCulloch V. Maryland, 4 L Ed 579 : 4 Wheat 316 : 17 US 316 (1819); James V. Commonwealth
of Australia, 1936 AC 578 (PC); Central Provinces & Berar Sales of Motor Spirit & Lubricants
to
Mukharji : The New Jurisprudence at pp. 103, 105, 106, 110; S.M.N. Raina : Law, Judges and
Justice, First Edn.; Seervai : Constitutional Law of India, pp. 25-27 (Vol. I); Salmond
:
Jurisprudence, at p. 32, referred to
Living tree doctrine or the doctrine of progressive interpretation and the Doctrine of Basic
Structure - Meaning and method of identifying the basic structure of the Constitution
The Doctrine of Basic Structure includes general features of the broad democracy, the
supremacy of the Constitution, rule of law, separation of powers, judicial review, freedom and
dignity of the individual, unity and integrity of the nation, free and fair education, federalism and
secularism. The Basic Structure Doctrine admits to identifying a philosophy upon which a
Constitution is based. A Constitution stands on certain fundamental principles which are its
structural pillars and if those pillars are demolished or damaged, the whole constitutional edifice
may fall down.
(Para 323)
The metaphor of a living Constitution is usually used in its interpretive meaning i.e. that the
language of the document should evolve through judicial decisions according to the changing
environment of society. A Constitution's amendment process provides another mechanism for
such evolution, as a "built-in provision for growth". Prima facie, the view that a Constitution must
develop over a period of time supports a broad use of the amendment power. Nevertheless, even
if we conceive of the Constitution as a living tree, which must evolve with the nation's growth and
develop with its philosophical and cultural advancement, it has certain roots that cannot be
uprooted through the growth process. In other words, the metaphor of a living tree captures the
idea of certain constraints: "trees, after all, are rooted, in ways that other living organisms are not".
These roots are the basic principles of a given Constitution.
(Para 323)
"Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments : A Study of the Nature and Limits of Constitutional
Amendment Powers", Yaniv Roznai, Thesis, February 2014, referred to
Therefore, it is not merely a matter of which principles are more fundamental than the others. It
is not an exercise of "ranging over the constitutional scheme to pick out elements that might
arguably be more fundamental in the hierarchy of values". A constitutional provision would be
fundamental only in terms of some articulated political theory that makes sense of the whole
Constitution. The idea of a hierarchy of norms within the foundational structuralism is to examine
whether a constitutional principle or institution is so basic to the constitutional order that changing
it - and looking at the whole Constitution - would be to change the entire constitutional identity.
(Para 325)
Constitutional identity is never a static thing, as it emerges from the interplay of inevitably
disharmonic elements. But changes to the constitutional identity, "however significant, rarely
culminate in a wholesale transformation of the
Constitution". This is because a nation usually aims to remain faithful to a "basic structure", which
comprises its constitutional identity. It is changeable but resistant to its own destruction.
(Para 326)
In other words, constitutional changes should not be tantamount to constitutional
metamorphosis. Conversely, one should not confuse constitutional preservation with constitutional
stagnation.
(Para 328)
Constitutional amendment - Standard of judicial review - Three different standards,
suggested by Yaniv Roznai
While considering the appropriate standards of review of the constitutional amendments vis--
vis unamendable principles, Yaniv Roznai has suggested three different levels of standards:
(Para 329)
The first option is the Minimal Effect Standard. This is the most stringent standard of the judicial
review of amendments. According to this standard, any violation or infringement of an
unamendable principle is prohibited no matter how severe the intensity of the infringement is,
including amendments that have only a minimal effect on the protected principles. On the one
hand, one may claim that the importance of the protected unamendable principles - as pillars of
the Constitution - necessitates the most stringent protection. If the aim of unamendability is to
provide for the hermetic protection of a certain set of values or institutions, then any violation of
these principles ought to give rise to grounds for judicial intervention. On the other hand, such a
standard would not only bestow great power to the courts but also would place wide - perhaps
too wide - restrictions on the ability to amend the Constitution. The theory of unamendability
should not be construed as a severe barrier to change. It should be construed as a mechanism
enabling constitutional progress, permitting certain flexibility by allowing constitutional
amendments, while simultaneously shielding certain core features of the Constitution from the
amendment, thereby preserving the constitutional identity.
(Para 330)
The intermediate standard of review is the Disproportionate Violation Standard. It is an
examination of the proportionality of the violation. The principle of proportionality is nowadays
becoming an almost universal doctrine in constitutional adjudication. Proportionality generally
requires that a violation of a constitutional right has a "proper purpose"; that there is a rational
connection between the violation and that purpose; that the law is narrowly tailored to achieve
that purpose; and that the requirements of the proportionality stricto (balancing) test are met. A
disproportionate violation of a constitutional right would be considered unconstitutional and thus
void. This standard emphasises the balancing of conflicting interests.
(Para 331)
The Fundamental Abandonment Standard is the lowest level of scrutiny. According to this
standard, only an extraordinary infringement of unamendable principles, one that changes and
"fundamentally abandons" them, would allow judicial annulment of constitutional amendments.
This seems to be the approach taken by the German Constitutional Court.
(Para 332)
Basic structure doctrine - Basic structure of the German Constitution
The concept of basic structure, as such gives coherence and durability to a Constitution, for it
has a certain intrinsic force in it.
(Para 334)
The Doctrine of Basic Structure enshrined in Articles 1 to 19 of the German Constitution, 1949
where the principles are based on the premise that democracy is not only a parliamentary form of
government but also is the philosophy of life, based on the appreciation of dignity, the value and
the inalienable rights of each individual human being; such as that of right to life and physical
integrity; equality before the law; rights to personal honour and privacy; occupational freedom;
inviolability of the home; right to property and inheritance. The essence of basic rights could, under
no circumstance, be affected.
(Para 335)
The provisions under the German Constitution deal with rights, which are not mere values,
rather, they are justiciable and capable of interpretation. Thus, those values impose a positive duty
on the State to ensure their attainment as far as practicable. The State must facilitate the rights,
liberties and freedoms of individuals.
(Para 338)
The basic structure of the Constitution in India - a judicial innovation - Scope of
application of the Doctrine of Basic Structure in India
In India, the Doctrine of Basic Structure is a judicial innovation, and it continues to evolve via
judicial pronouncements of the Supreme Court. The contours of the expression have been looked
into by the Court from time to time, and several constitutional features have been identified as the
basic structure of the Constitution, but there is not an exhaustive definition or list of what
constitutes the "basic structure" of the Constitution - the Court decides from case to case if a
constitutional feature can be regarded as basic or not.
(Para 339)
There are no limitations on the exercise of Article 368 (which is a constituent power), yet it is
subject to the "Basic Structure Doctrine". The origin of the "Doctrine of Basic Features" lies in the
fear of apprehension of constitutional collapse, and anxiety which is exceptional in the life of a
Constitution. The "Basic Structure Doctrine" was meant for special use in times when constitutional
amendments threatened the fundamental structure of the Constitution. The special stature
anticipates a careful use of the doctrine so as to ensure that its unique place is preserved. Vital as
the doctrine was, even more important was to exercise some restraint and to ensure its
meaningful use. The "Basic Structure Doctrine" has been taken recourse to over and over again
with little concern about its restrained use. The doctrine has been extensively used in affecting
policy decisions and its indifferent use is the root cause of the resentment that has brewed against
it. Over a period of time, it has been used less for constitutional gatekeeping in times of crisis and
more for decisively influencing the course which State policy might take in the future. The repeated
use of the Doctrine of Basic Structure may impair the doctrine itself and it is likely that the idea of
constitutional essentialism might not get the respect it deserves from the political institutions. The
"Basic Structure Doctrine" is indeed special, it is a powerful tool we have for constitutional
preservation but
its special character as well as its authority is severely threatened in a culture of unresponsive use.
(Paras 344 to 354)
Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643, held, partly overruled
Essay titled "Today's Promise, Tomorrow's Constitution "Basic Structure", Constitutional
Transformations and the Future of Political Progress in India" by Professor Satya Prateek, former
Assistant Professor, O.P. Jindal Global University, referred to
The basic structure of the Constitution of India - Identification of the basic structure
According to the widely accepted principles of constitutional interpretation, the provisions of a
Constitution should be construed in the widest possible manner. Constitutional law is the basic law.
It is meant for people of different opinions. It should be workable by people of different ideologies
and at different times. Since it provides a framework for the organisation and working of a State in
a society which keeps on changing, it is couched in elastic terms and, therefore, it has to be
interpreted broadly. No generation has a right to bind future generations by its own beliefs and
values. Each generation has to choose for itself the ways of life and social organisation. The
Constitution should be so adaptable that each generation may be able to make use of it to realise
its aspirations and ideals. An amending clause is specifically provided to adapt the Constitution
according to the needs of society and the times. In view of this, no implied limitation can be
imposed on the amending power. To do so would be to defeat the very purpose of it. The
Constitution-makers had before them the Constitutions of the United States, Australia, Canada,
Ireland, South Africa and Germany which they were constantly referring to while discussing and
drafting the amending provisions. In all these Constitutions the word "amendment" is used in the
widest possible sense. Therefore, our Constitution-makers may be presumed to have used this
word in the same broad sense in the absence of any express limitations.
(Para 355)
Burke : Recollections on the Revolution in France and other Writings (Oxford University Press,
1958 Reprint), p. 23; B.N. Rau : Table of Amending Process, Constitutional Precedents, 1st
Series (1947) cf.; Hari Chand : Amending Process in the Indian Constitution 96 (1972),
referred to
The whole Constitution is the basic law. It is not easy to distinguish which part is more basic
than the other as there is no objective test to distinguish. Since there are no objective criteria to
distinguish, there are bound to be subjective preferences and choices in deciding what constitutes
this so-called basic structure. Even, if it were possible to distinguish essential features from non-
essential features, it is not possible to assert that the essential features are necessarily eternal and
immutable. Judging from past history one may doubt if any feature of law and society is
unchangeable. What was considered fundamental by one society at one time was abandoned later
as an outmoded impediment.
(Para 357)
The basic structure of the Constitution of India - Extent to which fundamental rights
constitute the basic structure
Fundamental rights, no doubt, are very important and constitute the bedrock of civilisation. But
society keeps on changing with the changes in socio-economic conditions. The limits of these
rights may need constant redefinition. Even their essential content may undergo a radical
transformation. To enable necessary adjustments in the legal relationships and to bring them in
harmony with social realities, an amending power is provided in all Constitutions. The easier the
mode of an amendment, the more flexible the Constitution is. In the absence of some amending
provision, a Constitution will fail to contain the social changes and is bound to break down. It is a
necessary safety valve to allow radical changes through constitutional processes. If the necessary
changes cannot be brought through constitutional means, revolution becomes a necessity. Thus,
an unlimited amending power and a simple procedure of amendment are effective means to bring
about social revolution through law.
(Para 358)
The British Constitution offers a very good example of a flexible Constitution with an easy
procedure of a simple majority vote to bring about any changes in the law including constitutional
law. Perhaps, this aspect of constitutional law and strong democratic traditions in Britain prompted
even Marx to say that probably Britain is the only country where revolution may be brought about
through peaceful and democratic means. Thus, to have wide amending power and easy procedure
of amendment is not to undervalue fundamental rights, nor is it an invitation to abolish them but is
a means to preserve them through necessary adaptations in harmony with the changed social
realities. The stability of fundamental rights lies not in the absence of legal power to remove them
but in the social and political support for them.
(Para 358)
Friedrich Engels (Ed.) Karl Marx : Capital, (1952. 50 Britannic Great Book Series); "Phantom
of
Basic Structure of the Constitution", Source : Journal of the Indian Law Institute, April-June
1974, Vol. 16; N. Palkhivala : Our Constitution Defaced and Defiled, referred to
Basic structure doctrine in India - The balance of the two rival philosophies - one
favouring the complete sanctity of fundamental rights while the other supporting the
complete flexibility of the Constitution
The Supreme Court has struck a balance between the rights of the individuals and the powers
of the State to curtail those rights. It found a suitable via media between the two rival philosophies
- one favouring the complete sanctity of fundamental rights while the other supporting the
complete flexibility of the Constitution.
(Para 360)
The wall around fundamental rights built by the framers of the Constitution has to remain
forever, limiting the ability of the majority to intrude upon them. That wall is a part of the basic
structure.
(Para 367)
When an issue is raised regarding the basic structure, the question does arise as to whether the
amendment alters the structure of the constitutional provisions.
(Para 369)
The dignity and freedom of the individual is of supreme importance. This cannot be destroyed
by any form of amendment. Parliament cannot expand its
power of amendment under Article 368 so as to confer on itself the power to repeal, abrogate the
Constitution or damage, emasculate or destroy any of the fundamental rights or essential
elements of the basic structure of the Constitution or of destroying the identity of the Constitution.
(Para 370)
Articles 14, 19 and 21, respectively, represent the fundamental values and form the basis of
rule of law, which is a basic feature of the Constitution. For instance, Parliament, in the exercise of
its amending power under Article 368, can make additions to the three legislative lists contained in
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, but it cannot abrogate all the lists as that would
abrogate the federal structure, which is one of the basic features of the Constitution.
(Para 372)
To qualify to be a basic structure it must be a "terrestrial concept having its habitat within the
four corners of the Constitution". What constitutes basic structure is not like "a twinkling star up
above the Constitution". It does not consist of any abstract ideals to be found outside the
provisions of the Constitution. The Preamble no doubt enumerates great concepts embodying the
ideological aspirations of the people but these concepts are particularised and their essential
features delineated in the various provisions of the Constitution. It is these specific provisions in the
body of the Constitution which determine the type of democracy which the founders of that
instrument established; the quality and nature of justice, political, social and economic which they
aimed to realise, the content of liberty of thought and expression which they entrenched in that
document and the scope of equality of status and of opportunity which they enshrined in it. These
specific provisions enacted in the Constitution alone can determine the basic structure of the
Constitution. These specific provisions, either separately or in combination, determine the content
of the great concepts set out in the Preamble. It is impossible to spin out any concrete concept of
basic structure out of the gossamer concepts set out in the Preamble. The specific provisions of
the Constitution form the yarn from which the basic structure has to be woven.
(Para 373)
There are declared limitations on the amending power conferred on Parliament which cannot be
breached. Breach of a single provision of the Constitution is sufficient to render the entire legislation
ultra vires the Constitution. The Court held that the basic structure of the Constitution includes
supremacy of the Constitution, the republican and democratic form of Government, the federal
character of distribution of powers, secularism, separation of powers between the Legislatures,
Executive and the Judiciary, and independence of the Judiciary.
(Para 374)
"Basic" means the base of a thing on which it stands and on the failure of which it falls. Hence,
the essence of the "basic structure of the Constitution" lies in such of its features, which if
amended would amend the very identity of the Constitution itself, ceasing its current existence. It
is, not a "vague concept" or "abstract ideals found to be outside the provisions of the
Constitution". Therefore, the meaning/extent of "basic structure" needs to be construed in view of
the specific provision(s) under consideration, its object and purpose, and the consequences of its
denial on the integrity of the Constitution as a fundamental instrument of governance of the
country.
(Para 376)
S.M.N. Raina, J. : Law, Judges and Justice; Justice B.S. Chauhan : Doctrine of Basic Structure :
Contours, paras 108-114 & 135-150, referred to
The power to amend the Constitution is a derivative power
In a rigid Constitution (Article 368) power to amend the Constitution is a derivative power,
&
which is an aspect of the constituent power.
(Para 379)
In the case on hand also, the challenge is to the exercise of derivative power of Parliament in
the matter of the 103rd Constitution Amendment.
(Para 380)
The exercise of the power to amend the Constitution is subject to two limitations,
namely, the Doctrine of Basic Structure and lack of legislative competence - Amendment
of constitutional law is different from that of ordinary law
Since the power to amend the Constitution is a derivative power, the exercise of such power to
amend the Constitution is subject to two limitations, namely, the Doctrine of Basic Structure and
lack of legislative competence. The Doctrine of Basic Structure is brought in as a window to keep
the power of judicial review intact as an abrogation of such a power would result in a violation of
basic structure. When we speak of discrimination or arbitrary classification, the same constitutes a
violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. The distinction between constitutional law and ordinary
law in a rigid Constitution like ours is relevant. The said distinction proceeds on the assumption that
ordinary law can be challenged on the touchstone of the Constitution. Therefore, when an ordinary
law seeks to make a classification without any rational basis and any nexus with the object sought
to be achieved, such ordinary law could be challenged on the touchstone of Article 14 of the
Constitution. However, when it comes to the validity of a constitutional amendment, one has to
examine the validity of such an amendment by asking the question as to whether such an
amendment violates any overarching principle in the Constitution.
(Para 380)
Overarching principle - Effect test or degree test to identifying an overarching principle
What is an overarching principle? Concepts like secularism, democracy, separation of powers,
and power of judicial review fall outside the scope of amendatory powers of Parliament under
Article 368. If any of these were to be deleted, it would require changes to be made not only in
Part III of the Constitution but also in Article 245 and the three Lists of the Constitution resulting in
the change of the very structure or framework of the Constitution. When an impugned Act creates
a classification without any rational basis and has no nexus with the objects sought to be achieved,
the principle of equality before the law is violated undoubtedly. Such an Act can be declared to be
violative of Article 14. Such a violation does not require rewriting of the Constitution. This would be
a case of violation of the ordinary principle of equality before the law. Similarly, "egalitarian
equality" is a much wider concept. It is an overarching principle. The term "egalitarianism" has a
distinct definition that all people should be treated as
equal and have the same political, economic, social and civil rights or have a social philosophy
advocating the removal of economic inequalities among the people, economic egalitarianism or the
decentralisation of power.
(Para 380)
In the context of Parliament increasing its amending power by amending Article 368 so as to
conferring on itself the unlimited power of amendment and destroying and damaging the
fundamentals of the Constitution, the Court noted that when constitutional law is challenged, one
has to apply the "effect test" to find out the degree of abrogation. This is the "degree test" which
has been referred to earlier. If one finds that the constitutional amendment seeks to abrogate core
values/overarching principles like secularism, egalitarian equality, etc. and which would warrant
rewriting of the Constitution, then such constitutional law would certainly violate the basic
structure. In other words, such overarching principles would fall outside the amendatory power
under Article 368 in the sense that the said power cannot be exercised even by Parliament to
abrogate such overarching principles. The expression "rule of law" describes a society in which the
Government must act in accordance with the law. A society governed by law is the foundation of
personal liberty. It is also the foundation of economic development since investment will not take
place in a country where rights are not respected. The Court said that it is in that sense that the
expression "Rule of Law" constitutes an overarching principle embodied in Article 21, one aspect of
which is equality.
(Paras 382 and 381)
The amending power under Article 368 of the Constitution is a derivative power. The Doctrine
of Basic Structure provides a touchstone on which the validity of the Constitutional Amendment
Act could be judged. While applying this doctrine, one need not go by the content of a "right" but
by the test of justifiability under which one has to see the scope and the object of the
constitutional amendment. The doctrine of classification under Article 14 has several facets.
Equality is a comparative concept.
(Para 383)
The enabling provisions, varying enforcement mechanisms and the State opinion on
backwardness, reservation, adequate representation, etc. in any circumstances cannot
be recognised as the fundamental or basic structure of the Constitution
The enabling provisions, varying enforcement mechanisms and the State opinion on
backwardness, reservation, adequate representation, etc. in any circumstances cannot be
recognised as the fundamental or basic structure of the Constitution. By their very nature, they are
bound to change, with time, location and circumstances. On the other hand, the fundamental
tenets or the core principles of the Constitution are foundational - they are at the core of its
existence. They are seminal to the Constitution's functioning. The Constitution retains its existence
on these foundations as they preserve the Constitution in its essence. This is not to mark out the
possibilities of structural adjustments in the foundations with time. The foundations may shift, and
fundamental values may assume a different meaning with time but they would still remain to be
integral to the constitutional core of principles, the core on which the Constitution would be
legitimately sustained.
(Para 408)
Virendra Kumar:) 'Basic Structure of the Indian Constitution : Doctrine of Constitutionally Controlled
Governance", 49 : 3, Journal of the Indian Law Institute, 365, 385 (2007), referred to
There is no duty on the Government to provide reservation - Both Articles 16(4) and 16
(4-A) are only in the nature of enabling provision vesting a discretion in the State to
consider providing reservation if the circumstances mentioned in those articles so
warranted
There is a difference between the fundamental rights and the values that structure such
fundamental rights. The values have an overarching influence and it is totally possible to hold that
violation of fundamental rights in certain situations, may not infringe the fundamental values in their
backdrop.
(Para 409)
The ad hoc policies of the State directed towards achieving a larger, fundamental standard of
equality, cannot by itself become fundamental. Fundamental would only be the principle and not
the way these principles are sought to be realised. Such mechanisms which facilitate "equality of
opportunity in public employment" as guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution are ad hoc
arrangements. They could be suitably modified with the passage of time or even be done away
with for a more suitable, convenient and efficient reservation policy, largely dependent on the
State's own understanding of the best way to pursue the constitutional ends.
(Para 410)
There is no duty on the Government to provide reservation. Both Articles 16(4) and 16(4-A),
respectively, do not confer any fundamental rights nor do they impose any constitutional duties
but are only in the nature of enabling provision vesting a discretion in the State to consider
providing reservation if the circumstances mentioned in those articles so warranted.
(Para 411)
Union of India, (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC 507; M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963
Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649, considered
Each one of these constitutional provisions that are categorised as rights under Part III has
intrinsic value content. Many of these rights are a part of the mechanism geared towards realising
a common constitutional principle. For example, Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, of the
Constitution are committed to the common principle of equality. Reasonably then, if an
amendment is to be struck down under the "basic structure" formulation, the central principle of
these interrelated provisions should be at threat. A mere violation of one of these enabling
provisions would not be of much consequence under the Doctrine of Basic Structure as long as
such violation does not infringe upon the central thesis of equality. Redress for marginal
encroachment cannot be found under the "Basic Structure Doctrine". In considering the effect of an
amendment on the constitutional core, it is important to keep in mind the widest ramifications of
the amendment. It is imperative to contemplate and consider every way in which the "basic
structure" of the Constitution might be threatened through the impugned Amendment. The
amendment would stand as constitutional only after a satisfactory understanding as to its effect on
the constitutional core is reached by the courts. To sustain itself, the amendment should not
violate such core in the widest interpretation given to it.
(Para 412)
Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting)
Manner of exclusion in impugned Articles 15(6) and 16(6), damages the basic structure
- Our Constitution does not speak the language of exclusion
I regret mv inability to concur with the views expressed bv the maiority opinion on the validitv
of the 103rd Amendment, since I feel-for reasons set out elaborately in the following opinion-
that the Supreme Court has for the first time, in the seven decades of the Republic, sanctioned an
avowedly exclusionary and discriminatory principle. Our Constitution does not speak the language
of exclusion. The Amendment, by the language of exclusion, undermines the fabric of social justice,
and thereby, the basic structure.
(Para 419)
I am in agreement that the addition, or insertion of the "economic criteria" for affirmative action
in aid of the section of the population who face deprivation due to poverty, in furtherance of Article
46, does not per se stray from the constitutional principles, so as to alter, violate, or destroy its
basic structure. As long as the State addresses deprivation resulting from discriminatory social
practices which have kept the largest number of our populace in the margins, and continues its
ameliorative policies and laws, the introduction of such deprivation-based affirmative action is
consistent with constitutional goals. What, however, needs further scrutiny, (which this opinion
proposes to address presently) is whether the manner of implementing - i.e. the implicit exclusion
of those covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) [Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs),
and Socially and Educationally Backward Classes ("SEBCs")], cumulatively referred to as
"backward classes"] violates, or damages the basic structure or essential features of the
Constitution.
(Para 420)
Whether an enabling provision can violate the basic structure
It is inaccurate to say that provisions that enable, the exercise of power, would not violate the
basic structure of the Constitution. The enabling provision in question's basic premise, its potential
to overbear the constitutional ethos, or overcome a particular value, would be in issue. The Court's
inquiry, therefore, cannot stop at the threshold, when an enabling provision is enacted. Its potential
for violating the basic structure of the Constitution is precisely the power it confers, on the
legislature, or the executive.
(Para 587)
214 (1944), referred to
Therefore, the fact that impugned Amendments have introduced provisions which are merely
enabling, does not protect it from basic structure scrutiny. To view a newly added provision as
only "enabling" can be an oversimplification in constitutional parlance. The Court's concern is not
with the conferment of power per se, but with the width of it, lack of constitutional control, and the
direct impact it can have on principles constituting the basic structure.
(Para 589)
ZB. Constitution of India - Arts. 14 to 18 - Doctrine of equality - Meaning, purpose,
obligation of State - Content of equality code - Elucidated in detail
(Paras 83 to 88, 203; and 461 to 487)
ZC. Constitution of India - Arts. 14 to 18, Pts. III and IV and Art. 368 - Doctrine of
equality - Proportional equality and affirmative action - Practical difficulties faced by the
State while making classification to identify disadvantaged or deprived class or persons
and taking affirmative action for their betterment - Approach of Court while applying the
tests of a valid classification in such situations - Clarified (per majority)
(Paras 83 to 88 and 205)
ZD. Constitution of India - Arts. 14 to 18 - Reservation jurisprudence - Affirmative
action by reservation or compensatory discrimination or positive discrimination -
Explained in detail (per majority)
(Paras 89 to 100 and 206)
ZE. Constitution of India - Art. 17 and Arts. 15(2), 23, 24, 35 - Link between Art. 17
and other articles indicated, per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (majority expressing no view)
- The centrality of Art. 17 and the constitutional resolve to eliminate untouchability in all forms
to any debate on equality involving SC/ST communities is undeniable - Other provisions such as
Art. 15(2), Arts. 23 and 24 also contain links to Art. 17, because the Constitution aimed not
merely at outlawing untouchability, but ensuring access to public amenities and also guaranteeing
that the stigma of caste discrimination should not result in exploitation
(Paras 473 to 480)
Held :
Per Maheshwari, J. (Trivedi and Pardiwala, JJ. concurring; Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J.
dissenting)
Doctrine of "Equality" - Substantive equality - Valid classification
Articles 14 to 18 of the Constitution are to ensure the right to equality. The makers of our
Constitution noticed the widespread social and economic inequalities in society that obtained ever
since a long past, often sanctioned by public policies, religion and other social norms and practices.
Therefore, they enacted elaborate provisions for the eradication of inequalities and for establishing
an egalitarian society. The first expression "equality before the law" of Article 14 is taken from the
all-time wisdom as also from English Common Law, implying the absence of any special privilege in
any individual; and the other expression "the equal protection of the laws", referable to the 14th
Amendment to the US Constitution, is a constitutional pledge of protection or guarantee of equal
laws. Both these expressions occur in Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.
(Para 83)
The principle of equality can be stated thus : equals must be treated equally while unequals
need to be treated differently, inasmuch as for the application of this principle in real life, we have
to differentiate between those who being equal, are grouped together, and those who being
different, are left out from the group.
This is expressed as reasonable classification. Now, a classification to be valid must necessarily
satisfy two tests : first, the distinguishing rationale should be based on a just objective and
secondly, the choice of differentiating one set of persons from another should have a reasonable
nexus to the object sought to be achieved. However, a valid classification does not require
mathematical niceties and perfect equality; nor does it require identity of treatment. If there is
similarity or uniformity within a group, the law will not be condemned as discriminatory, even
though due to some fortuitous circumstances arising out of a particular situation, some included in
the class get an advantage over others left out, so long as they are not singled out for special
&
treatment. In spite of certain indefiniteness in the expression "equality", when the same is sought
to be applied to a particular case or class of cases in the complex conditions of a modern society,
there is no denying the fact that the general principle of "equality" forms the basis of a Democratic
Government.
(Para 84)
Since the early 1970s, equality in Article 14 being a dynamic concept, has acquired new
dimensions.
(Para 85)
Indian constitutional jurisprudence has consistently held the guarantee of equality to be
substantive and not a mere formalistic requirement. Equality is at the nucleus of the unified goals of
social and economic justice.
(Para 87)
Thus, equality is a feature fundamental to our Constitution but, in the true sense of terms,
equality envisaged by our Constitution as a component of social, economic and political justice is
real and substantive equality, which is to organically and dynamically operate against all forms of
inequalities. This process of striking at inequalities, by its very nature, calls for reasonable
classifications so that equals are treated equally while unequals are treated differently and as per
their requirements.
(Para 88)
H.M. Seervai : Constitutional Law of India, A Critical Commentary, 4th Edn., (1991-reprinted
1999) at p. 435; M. Rama Jois : Legal and Constitutional History of India, N.M. Tripathi Pvt. Ltd.
1984, Vol. 1, at p. 582; Friedrich A. Hayek : The Constitution of Liberty, (1899-1992), 1960,
University of Chicago at p. 87; Dr Alladi Krishnaswami Aiyar : The Constitution and Fundamental
Rights, The Srinivasa Sastri Institute of Politics, Mylapore, Madras (1955), at p. 28, referred to
Reservation Jurisprudence - Affirmative action by reservation or compensatory
discrimination
In the multifaceted social structure, ensuring substantive and real equality, perforce, calls for
consistent efforts to remove inequalities, wherever existing and in whatever form existing. Hence,
the State is tasked with affirmative action. And, one duly recognised form of affirmative action is
by way of compensatory discrimination, which has the preliminary goal of curbing discrimination
and the ultimate goal of its eradication so as to reach the destination of real and substantive
equality. This has led to what is known as the reservation and quota system in State activities.
(Paras 89 and 90)
Reservation and the quota system was introduced in Malta much before it was mentioned in
India. Reservation in India was introduced in the last decades of the 19th century at a time when
the Indian sub-continent was broadly divided, according to two main forms of governance, into
British India and about 600 Princely States. Some of the progressive States had modernised the
&
society through the promotion of education and industry. For example, the Princely States of
Mysore, Baroda and Kolhapur took considerable interest in the awakening and advancement of
deprived sections of society. Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj, the Ruler of the Princely State of
Kolhapur, is said to have been influenced by the thoughts of egalitarian thinker Jyotirao Phule and is
said to have introduced affirmative action in 1902, reserving a part of administrative posts for
"depressed classes".
(Para 90)
The "doctrine of equality", as collectively enshrined in Articles 14 to 18, happens to be the
principal basis for the creation of a reasonable classification whereunder "affirmative action", be it
legislative or executive, is authorised to be undertaken. The constitutional courts too, precedent by
precedent, have constructively contributed to the evolution of what we may term as "reservation
jurisprudence".
(Para 91)
The Constitution of India has about two dozen articles providing for compensatory or special
treatment for disadvantaged citizens or for protecting them against discrimination. Part III specifies
the fundamental rights that are constitutionally guaranteed. Part XVI of the Constitution, making
"Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes", provides for the reservation of seats in legislatures
for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and so on.
(Para 92)
Thus, Article 15 enacts the principle of equality before the law to specific situations. While it
prohibits certain classifications, it expressly requires the making of certain classifications which
would impliedly be within the broad reach of Article 14. Clause (4) was added to Article 15 by the
Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, w.e.f. 18-6-1951 to nullify the effects of the decision in
prohibits discrimination in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the
State on almost the same grounds as in Article 15. Clauses (4) and (4-A) of Article 16 carve out
another exception to the rule of equality and enable the State to make provisions for reservations
of appointment in favour of any backward class of citizens. Such provisions include reservations or
quotas that can be made in the exercise of executive powers and even without any legislative
(Para 95)
The reference to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Articles 15 and 16 takes us to
Articles 341 and 342, which authorise the President to issue a notified order in respect of each of
the States/Union Territories specifying the castes, races or tribes which are to be regarded as
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Articles 338 and 338-A respectively provide for the
establishment of a National Commission for Scheduled Castes and a National Commission for
Scheduled
Tribes. Similarly, Article 338-B provides for the establishment of a National Commission for
Backward Classes. These constitutional bodies, inter alia, have the duty to participate in and advise
on the socio-economic development of the communities concerned. Article 342-A introduced by
the 102nd Constitutional Amendment w.e.f. 15-8-2018 authorises the President in consultation
with the Governor of the State concerned to notify socially and educationally backward classes.
(Para 96)
Although several articles are relevant as expressing the spirit of the Constitution, three of them
are predominantly germane i.e. Article 14 as embodying the generic principle of equality (as genus)
and Articles 15 and 16, as enacting the facets of general equality (as species).
(Para 93)
It is evident that the normal process of development benefits only that section of society which
already possesses land, education, and social status/respect. For those who have none of these,
or are deprived of any of these, there was the task of making sure that they, who had been unable
to enjoy these rights due to myriad reasons, were given special facilities, privileges and
encouragement so that they could participate as equals in the mainstream of socio-economic
system, taking them to the path of Liberty and Justice and thereby promoting Fraternity among all
the citizens, assuring the dignity of the individual. Given these objectives, the Indian constitutional
structure, unlike the US Constitution, specifically provides for "compensatory discrimination", and,
in that context, reservation is the basic gateway to tread the path of all-round development.
(Para 94)
The twin objectives of Articles 15 and 16 are to provide adequate protection to the
disadvantaged and, through special measures, to raise their capabilities so that they would, on
their own, compete with the rest.
(Para 95)
Articles 15 and 16, it could at once be noticed that the provisions concerning reservation were
crafted carefully to be just "enabling provisions". They were worded to confer no more than a
discretionary power on the State. They did not cast a duty on the State to the effect that it must
set apart such and such proportion of seats in educational institutions or of posts in government
services by way of reservation. The provisions were written so as to obviate a challenge to the
steps that the State may take to raise the downtrodden. However, they were, as such, not to
confer a right on anyone.
(Para 97)
However, reservation, one of the permissible affirmative actions enabled by the Constitution of
India, is nevertheless an exception to the general rule of equality and hence, cannot be regarded as
such an essential feature of the Constitution that cannot be modulated; or whose modulation for a
valid reason, including the benefit of any section other than the sections who are already availing
its benefit, may damage the basic structure.
(Para 100)
summarised and relied on
(L&S) 355, affirmed
Bhagwan Das : Moments in a History of Reservations, Economic and Political Weekly, 28-10-
2000; Dr Sanjay Paswan & Dr Pramanshi Jaideva : Encyclopaedia of Dalits in India, Kalpaz
&
Publications, New Delhi (2003), referred to
Per Trivedi, J. (concurring)
Proportional equality - Affirmative steps - Egalitarian equality is proportional equality
The Supreme Court classified equality into two parts - "Formal equality" and "Proportional
equality". Proportional equality is equality "in fact", whereas formal equality is equality "in law".
Formal equality exists in the rule of law. In case of proportional equality, the State is expected to
take affirmative steps in favour of disadvantaged sections of the society within the framework of
liberal democracy. Egalitarian equality is proportional equality. The Court upheld the validity of
Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B) as well as the 77th, 82nd and 85th Amendments of the Constitution.
(Para 203)
Affirmative action or compensatory discrimination or positive discrimination - Meaning
and constitutional basis
The Preamble, Part III-Fundamental Rights and Part IV-directive principles of State policy-the
Trinity are the conscience of the Constitution. The Preamble visualises to remove economic
inequalities and to secure for all citizens of India, Justice - Social, Economic and Political, which is
the sum total of the aspirations incorporated in Part IV. Economic empowerment to the weaker
sections of the society is the fundamental requirement for ensuring equality of status and to
promote fraternity assuring dignity as visualised by the framers of our Constitution. And therefore
any positive discrimination in favour of the weak or disadvantaged class of people by means of a
valid classification has been treated as an affirmative action on the part of the State. The Preamble
to the Constitution and the directive principles of the State policy give a positive mandate to the
State and the State is obliged to remove inequalities and backwardness from the society.
(Para 206)
Per Lalit, C.J. and Bhat, J. (dissenting)
Analysis of the Equality Code
The centrality of Article 17 and the constitutional resolve to eliminate untouchability in all forms
to any debate on equality involving SC/ST communities is undeniable. Other provisions such as
Article 15(2), Articles 23 and 24 also contain links to Article 17, because the Constitution aimed
not merely at outlawing untouchability, but ensuring access to public amenities and also
guaranteeing that the stigma of caste discrimination should not result in exploitation.
(Para 480)
&
Houses V. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA), referred to
Content of Equality Code
The equality code (Articles 14, 15, 16, and 17), so referred to in various previous decisions of
the Supreme Court, does not merely visualise a bland statement of equality before the law and
equal protection of the law but also contains specific injunctions against the State from
discriminating on proscribed grounds [such as caste, race, sex, place of birth, religion, or any of
them, in Article 15; and caste, sex, religion, place of residence, descent, place of birth, or any of
them, in Article 16]. The engraining of these specific heads - enjoining the State not to
discriminate on such specific heads, such as caste, religion or sex is therefore, as much part of the
equality code, as the principle of equality enacted in general terms, in Article 14. The inclusion of
Article 17 - as an unequivocal injunction, against untouchability, of any form, enjoins the State to
forbear caste discrimination, overtly, or through classification, and looms large as a part of the
equality code and indeed the entire framework of the Constitution.
(Para 483)
Joseph Raz : The Morality of Freedom (OUP, 1986), p. 369; Dr B.R. Ambedkar : Annihilation of
Caste (1939), referred to
Equality Code is a part of the basic structure
That the principle of equality is the most important indispensable feature of the Constitution and
destruction thereof will amount to changing the basic structure of the Constitution has been held in
numerous cases. That it is an inextricable part of the basic structure.
(Para 488)
The State's obligation under directive principles is to fulfil the mandate of substantive
equality
A perusal of the directive principles of State policy, reveals the State's obligations, as intended
by the Constituent Assembly. Articles 38 and 39 read with Articles 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47 and 48,
holistically, contribute to economic justice.
(Para 536)
Social justice implies removing all inequalities and affording equal opportunities to citizens in
social as well as economic affairs. Directive principles of State policy, through Articles 38, 39, 41
and 43, mandate the State to establish an "economically just" social order. The preambular aims
of justice (economic, social and political), and equality of status and opportunity, find articulation in
both Part III and Part IV of the Constitution. Till now, the State pursued the goal of achieving
equality of status and opportunity, substantively, by employing some form of protective
discrimination, to eliminate past discrimination, which had set up barriers to the most marginalised
sections of society, thereby denying them access to resources and public employment. The
structuring of enabling provisions [Articles 15(4) and 16(4)] is such that the target group were
only those who fell within the description of classes that suffered social and educational
backwardness. These included the most disadvantaged among the disadvantaged and oppressed
i.e. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The inclusion of any other people, therefore, could not
be contemplated in the context of the Constitution, as well as its text, as it stood.
(Para 537)
Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR
Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA); Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union of India,
Southern Railway V. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36; Jarnail Singh V. Lachhmi Narain Gupta,
(L&S) 235, referred to
Gokulesh Sharma : Human rights and Social Justice Fundamental Rights vis--vis Directive
Principles, Deep and Deep Publication Ltd. (1997); Cooley on Constitutional Limitations, 8th Edn.
Vol. 1 p. 129; National Crime Record Bureau Report titled-"Crime in India 2021"
Source:<https://ncrb.gov.in/en/node/3721>; Rabindranath Tagore:"Where the Mind is Without
Fear", Gitanjali (1910), referred to
SS-D/69721/C
Advocates who appeared in this case:
K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General, Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, K.M. Nataraj,
Additional Solicitor General, Sourabh Mishra, Additional Advocate General, Ms
Meenakshi Arora, Sanjay Parikh, Prof. (Dr) Ravi Verma Kumar, Salman Khurshid, P.
Wilson, Dr K.S. Chauhan, Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Mahesh Jethmalani, S. Niranjan
Reddy, Ms Vibha Datta Makhija, R. Balasubramanian, A.D.N. Rao, Shekhar Naphade,
Dr Milind Sathe, Soumya Chakarborty, K.S. Kulkarni, Jayanth Muth Raj and Ravi K.
Deshpande, Senior Advocates [(Dr) G. Mohan Gopal, Yadav Narender Singh
(Advocate-on-Record), Shadan Farasat (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Diya Kapur, Dr
M.P. Raju, Kaleeswaram Raj, Pratik R. Bombarde (Advocate-on-Record), Akash
Kakade, Kanu Agrawal, V.K. Biju (Advocate-on-Record), Sanjay Jain, Apoorv Kurup,
Saurabh Pandey, Digvijay Dam, Chinmayee Chandra, Ankur Talwar, Ms Shraddha
Deshmukh, Amrish Kumar (Advocate-on-Record), Rajat Nair, Arvind Kr. Sharma
(Advocate-on-Record), Ms Devyani Bhatt, Ms Deepanwita Priyanka, Ms Swati
Ghildiyal (Advocate-on-Record), Senthil Jagadeesan (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Jhanvi Dubey, Ms Ishita Choudhury, Ms Shivani Vij, Ms Tanya Srivastava, Ms Aditi
Gupta, Priyanshu Maheshwari, Ashutosh Dubey (Advocate-on-Record), Abhishek
Chauhan, Amit P. Shahi, Rajshri A. Dubey, H.B. Dubey, Amit Kumar, D. Shiva
Shankar, Ms Agrimaa Singh, Manish Dhingra, Ms Ritambhara, Mahesh Agarwal, Rishi
Agarwal, Ankur Saigal, Anshuman Srivastava, Sunil Mittal, Digit Saikia, Suneet
Tyagi, Ms Reshma Kalsekar, E.C. Agrawala (Advocate-on-Record), D. Kumanan
(Advocate-on-Record), Sheikh F. Kalia, Ms Aishwarya Dash, Dr Prashant Pratap, Ms
Farah Hashmi, Kumar Mitakshar, Ms Racheeta Chawala, Ms Naghma Imtiaz, Ahmed
Zargham, Saif Naseem, Ms Aadya Mishra, Ms Asifa Rashid Mir, Ms Maria Kousar, M/s
Equity Lex Associates (Advocate-on-Record), Prasanna S., Rahul Narayan (Advocate-
on-Record), Gautam Bhatia, Vishal Kr. Kaushik, Tushar Arora, Chandra Tanay
Choubey, Prof. (Dr) K. Elumalai, Ajit Kr. Ekka (Advocate-on-Record), Ravi Prakash,
Ajit Kumar, Sumit Kishore, Shashank Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Disha
Wadekar, Anupam Chaudhary, Satwik Parik, Adil Sharfuddin, Ujjaval Kumar, Varun
Singh, Rijive Ke Sinha, Mohd. Asad Khan, Ms Savita Devi, Mrinal Kr. Sharma, Ashish
Kr. Sharma, Manoj Kumar, Yashraj Singh Bundela G.A., Sunny Chaudhary (Advocate
-on-Record), Ajay Awasthi, Ravi Sharma, Ms Mugdha Pandey, Wedo Khalo, V.C.
Shukla, Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki (Advocate-on-Record), Polanki Gowtham, Shaik
Mohamad Haneef, T. Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy, K.V. Girish Chowdary, Ms Rajeswari
Mukherjee, Ms Akhila Palem, Abhishek Sharma, Sahil Raveen, Prashant Shukla,
Praveen Gour, Ms Sampriti Baksi, Suyash Shrivastava, Ms Baani Khanna, Ms Shreya
Mishra, Shankar Singh, Ms Mamta Pandey, Anurag Tripathi, Satyajeet Kumar
(Advocate-on-Record), Shobhit Tiwari, Lal Pratap Singh, Umesh Pratap Singh, Vishal
Sinah. R.C. Kohli (Advocate-on-Record). Ms Yamini Sharma. Ms Niharika Dewivedi.
Ms Shweta Sand, Anubhav Gupta, C.M. Jha, Ms Kaveri S. Kulkarni, Rakesh Kumar
(Advocate-on-Record), Jaimon Andrews, Ameen Hassan, Piyo Harold Jaimon,
Firdouse C.P., Ashwati M.K. (Advocate-on-Record), Roy Abraham, Ms Malavika
Jayanth, Ms Seema Jain, Akhil Abrahim Roy, Yaduvidner Lal, Ms Purva, Himinder
Lal
(Advocate-on-Record), R. Nedumaran (Advocate-on-Record), Apoorv Malhotra, Baij
Nath, Dinesh P. Rajbhar, Ranbir Singh Yadav, Ms Anzu. K. Varkey (Advocate-on-
Record), Anshu R. Deshpande, Ms Anu Tiwari, S.S. Nehra (Advocate-on-Record), P.I.
Jose, Rajendra Verma, Manoj Swarup, Dr K.S. Bhati, Arun Dagar, Subhash Chandra
Sagar, Monish Rana, Mahendra Singh, Prof. Shishir Pinaki, Muzaffar Khan,
Vijendra Mishra, V. Ramchander Goud, Ms Mallika Das, B. Ramakrishna Rao, Kasoju
Mahesh Acharya, D. Mahesh Babu (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Hrishika Jain, Bharat
Gupta, Shourya Dasgupta, Aman Naqvi, Dhruv Bhatnagar, Ms Ujjwala Uppaluri, Ms
Anu K. Joy, Alim Anvar, Ms Thulasi K. Raj, Mohammed Sadique T.A. (Advocate-on-
Record), Ms Liz Mathew (Advocate-on-Record), Siddharth Nath, Raghav Kumar,
Aditya Lodha, Ms Vasudha Jain, Ms Khushboo Hora, Sachin Patil, Geo Joseph, Risvi
Muhammed, Kailas Bajirao Autade (Advocate-on-Record), Durgesh Gupta,
Somanatha Padhan (Advocate-on-Record), Ashok Anand, Rakesh Kr. Singh, Ms
Sukhada Kakade, Swetab Kumar, A. Selvin Raja (Advocate-on-Record), A. Raja
Mohamed, A. Mohamed Yusuf, Ms V. Shahira Banu, S.A.S. Alandeen, Ms Nikita
Kumari, Varun Thakur, Shashan Ratnoo, Brajesh Pandey, Varinder Kr. Sharma
(Advocate-on-Record), P.A. Noor Muhamed (Advocate-on-Record), K.P. Mohamad
Shareef, Ms Giffara S., Abdul Shukoor, Shereef K.A., A.N. Rajan Babu, Ms Reena
Roy, Akhil Abraham Roy, Yaduinder Lal, Shashank Ratnoo, K.K.L. Gautam, Ms Saroj
Bala, Ms Vaishali Nariyala, Kaushal Jeet Kait, Kritagya Kr. Kait, Manoj Sharma, Rahul
Mohod, Abhishek Gurawa, Ms Vasundhara Rana, Rajbeeer Baudh, S.J. Amith,
Sanjeev Malhotra (Advocate-on-Record), Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar (Advocate-on
-Record), Karun Sharma, Ms Anupam Ngangom, Wahengbam Immanuel Maitei, M.
Vijaya Bhaskar (Advocate-on-Record), Murari Lal, R.S.M. Kalky, S.P. Singh, Ramesh
Kumar, Vishnu Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Anupama Sharma, Amar Jyoti
Sharma, Bir Inder Singh Gurm, Milind Singh, S. Gowthaman (Advocate-on-Record),
Ms M. Venmani, Abhisar Thakral, D. Venkata Krishna, Sudhansu Palo (Advocate-on-
Record), Raj Kr. Yadav, Budhadev Palo, Sanjeev Kumar, Gautam Das, Rajesh Kr.
Maurya, Ms Ipsita Behura, Dr Charu Mathur, Ms Tanvi Dubey, Rahul Unnikrishnan,
Malak Bhatt, Sanjay Kr. Dubey, Haris Beeran, Mustaq Salim, Usman Ghani Khan,
Azhar Assees, Radha Shyam Jena (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Ria Sachthey, Chetanya
Singh, Abhay Pratap Singh, Amlendu Kr. Akhilesh Kr. Jha, Dr Ranjeet Bharti, Ms
Rubina Jawed, Parthsarathi M. Saraf, N.P. Rakesh Paniker, Subhash Chandran, Ms
Kavitha K.T., Himanshu Tyagi (Advocate-on-Record), Ayush Negi, Ms Disha Mittal,
Saurabh Kumar, Vijay Kr. Sharma, Ashutosh Yadav, Abhishek Yadav, Pradeep Kr.
Yadav, Amarkant Patel, Ajay Sharma, Varun Mishra, Gulab Chandra Yadav,
Siddharath Dharmadhikari, Aaditya A. Pande (Advocate-on-Record), Bharat Bagla,
Ms Kirti Dadheech, K.V. Mohan (Advocate-on-Record), K.V. Balakrishnan, Rahul Kr.
Sharma, Ravichandran Iyer, Amol B. Karande (Advocate-on-Record), Rajasaheb
Patil, Ms Vanshaja Shukla (Advocate-on-Record), Sajal Singhai, Reepak Kansal,
Abhishek Kumar, Jitendra Kumar, Satya Mitra (Advocate-on-Record), Purvish J.
Malkan, Ankur Mittal, Nirmal Kr. Ambastha (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Ashmita
Bisariya, Sandeep Sudhakar Deshmukh, Hitesh Kr. Sharma, S.K. Rajora, Akhileshwar
Jha, Ms Deepti Hooda, Ms Sawati Singh, Amit Kr. Chawla, Sanjay Singh, Ms Manju
Jetley (Advocate-on-Record), Santosh Krishnan, Zulfiker Ali P.S. (Advocate-on-
Record), Faisal M. Aboobacker, Augustine Peter, Ms Lakshmi Sree P., Sanjay Kr.
Yadav, Gopi Chand, Anand Prakash, Namit Saxena (Advocate-on-Record), Ms
Niranjana Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Annam Venkatesh (Advocate-on-Record),
Nishant Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar (Advocate-on-Record), V.N. Raghupathy
(Advocate-on-Record), Gaurav Sharma (Advocate-on-Record), Dhawal Mohan,
Prateek Bhatia, Ms Mitushi Goyal, Ms Savita Singh (Advocate-on-Record), Subodh S.
Patil (Advocate-on-Record), A. Karthik (Advocate-on-Record), Dhawal Uniyal
(Advocate-on-Record), Ajay Bansal, Gaurav Yadava, Ms Veena Bansal, Sourav Jindal,
Sujeet Kumar, Vijendra Karana, C.P. Singh, Karunakar Mahalik, Anilendra Pandey,
Ms Kumudini Priyadarshini Singh, Chand Qureshi (Advocate-on-Record), Anand,
Mohammad Usman Siddiqui, Ms Aisha Siddiqui, Ms Sakeena Quidwai, Prakash
Sharma, Pawan Prakash Pathak (in Person) and Ms Prakrati Raj, Advocates], for the
appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Katchi V. A. Mayilerumperumal
312c-d
80d-e, 79e-f
237d, 238e-f
295a-b
Leela Prasad Rao V. State of A.P.
281d
79g, 80d
Maharashtra
127f-g, 128b, 129c, 136f-g,
138a, 173d, 174a, 281d,
303a, 303a-b
V. State of U.P.
92f
Rakesh Sharma
295a-b
Defence V. Babita Puniya
295a-b
Chauhan V. Union of India
82f, 346f-g
V. Union of India
84a, 327e-f
Temple-5 J.) V. State of Kerala
295a-b, 300a, 314a-b
V. Lachhmi Narain Gupta
327e
90b-c
of India
92d-e, 300d-e
C.D. Commachen
299f-g
Sankhala V. Vikas Kumar Agarwal
305d-e, 305g
Assn. V. Union of India
126g, 130a, 255b-c, 289f,
332g
State of Gujarat
87g
of India V. SC/ST Employees Welfare Assn.
137a
225e-f
Khurana V. Union of India
314b-c
264d, 339g, 340a
(Cri) 42, Subramanian Swamy V. CBI
312g
97b, 98c-d, 124e-f, 124f-g,
Cultural Trust V. Union of India
178g-h, 218d-e, 219d, 223a
-b, 222e-f, 280c-d, 285c-d,
307f, 328b, 329b-c
V. Union of India
158b, 158b-c
Union of India
226d-e, 295a-b, 313e-f
Schools of Rajasthan V. Union of India
97a-b, 213a-b, 308d-e, 328f-g
30. 2012 UKSC 37 : 2013 SC (UKSC) 54, Hewage V. Grampian
Health Board
269a
Narmada Bachao Andolan
268b, 267c
306e, 328e
India
192a-b
237e
202a, 218c-d
36. (2011) 31 BHRC 609, Bah V. United Kingdom
270a
259d-e
Murthy V. Union of India
315d-e
Chandra V. Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board
95b-c
40. 2009 AC 311 : (2008) 3 WLR 1023 : 2008 UKHL 63 (HL), R
(RJM) V. Secy. of State for Work & Pensions
268f
Union of India
124g-h, 185f-g, 190a-b,
221e, 222f, 238e-f, 270d,
280c
295a-b
Upadhyay V. State of A.P.
176b
253e-f, 254c, 258b, 258c, 285c
-d, 291a, 291b, 291b-c,
303c-d, 304c-d, 317b-c,
334a, 334b, 334b-c
Union of India
98d-e, 120a, 120d, 122g,
137b, 155c, 155c, 171g-h,
184c-d, 218e, 223a, 230e,
241e-f, 253c, 253f-g, 254b,
281c, 281d-e, 282a, 284d-
e, 285a, 285c-d, 286f, 288b
-C, 291b, 303c-d, 304c,
305b, 306g, 308e, 315h,
327a, 327e, 338f
255d, 255e
47. (2006) 1 AC 173 : (2005) 2 WLR 1369 : 2005 UKHL 37 (HL),
R (Carson) V. Secy. of State for Work & Pensions
269c
of India
303f
V. Union of India
158b, 158d
50. 2003 UKHL 11 : 2003 ICR 337 (HL), Shamoon V. Chief
Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary
268f-g
92a-b, 213a, 219g-h, 222a,
State of Karnataka
222a-b, 328d-e
State of Rajasthan
198a-b
V. Union of India
90c, 303c
State of Punjab
272g
Khan Gulab Khan
141c
Dina Nath Shukla
140a
306b
Rajasthan
295a-b
119d-e, 130a, 284b, 308a,
Kumar V. Union of India
332b-c, 334d-e, 335c-d
of India
223b-c, 224a
Cochin University
299d-e
Thakur V. State of Bihar
95b-c
P.B. Vijayakumar
204e
State of Punjab
121g-h, 173a
Karnataka V. Appa Balu Ingale
298d-e
221f-g
253b, 304b, 338a
241c, 288g, 290d, 303c, 337a,
337d, 337f
of India
287g-h, 291b, 291b-c,
303c, 307g-h, 333b
A.P. (held, partly overruled)
209a, 209a, 213a, 237f
Karnataka (held, partly overruled)
207e-f, 209a, 210a, 210b-c
Sawhney V. Union of India
86g, 87a-b, 87f-g, 88d, 89b,
91a-b, 91f-g, 93e, 93b, 94e-
f, 95b-c, 96f, 96g, 98e, 98e-
f, 98g, 99a, 99g-h, 120b,
121g-h, 136c-d, 151c, 151c
-d, 152d-e, 153g-h, 155e,
155e, 155f-g, 155f-g, 164d-
e, 165a, 170f-g, 171c-d,
171e, 172g-h, 173d, 173e,
174a, 174b, 174b-c, 199e-f,
204b, 214c, 215f, 224c,
226a, 226a, 230f-g, 230g,
231e-f, 231f, 232a-b, 235c-
d, 274e-f, 274f-g, 280e-f,
281d-e, 291g-h, 303a-b,
303c, 308a, 318e, 318f,
318g, 319c, 319d, 320b-c,
320d, 326c, 326e, 327e,
332e, 339b-c, 340f-g, 342e-
f, 343a, 343b, 345d-e
118c-d, 130a, 182f, 241d-e,
255f-g, 283b-c, 284c-d,
288g, 290c, 308a, 322a,
323g
Mazdoor Congress
330g
Medical College
299b
(P) Ltd. V. State of Punjab
267d-e
Totame
150g, 151a, 236a
Union of India
158f-g
Adlakha V. DDA
340d
118b-c, 130a, 284b, 308a,
332b-c, 336a-b, 336e
Maharashtra
156f, 157b-c
90c-d, 94e-f, 95d-e, 136a,
Karnataka
162b, 169e-f, 169f, 170d,
174a, 188e, 189b, 189c-d,
339a
Coal Ltd.
264b
for Democratic Rights V. Union of India
141f-g
of India
340c
Nergesh Meerza
295a-b
94f-g, 116b-c, 116e, 184b,
287d-e, 307a-b, 308b, 334a
-b
Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) V. Union of India
168g-h, 169a, 169c
95e, 96a, 97c-d, 131b-c, 183d,
307g-h, 308b, 333e, 333e-f,
334a-b
91a, 95c, 101d-e, 102b, 115e-
f, 115f, 126e, 130a, 134a,
140g, 252e, 252g-h, 282d,
283f, 289f-g, 302d, 305b-c,
330f-g, 332b-c, 334a-b
242a-b
140f
Balasubramanyam
313a
P.L. Dani
325b
266, Padmraj Samarendra V. State of Bihar
224d-e
110c
N.M. Thomas
h, 147e, 148e-f, 149d, 150d
-e, 168b, 168c, 168e-f,
169f, 173g-h, 184a-b, 186b,
204a, 206a, 216a, 216e-f,
216g, 223d-e, 224e, 227e,
237b, 280a, 280d, 280g,
309f, 312f-g, 318e, 343a
Union of India
202a, 203g, 312a-b
97c-d, 115d-e, 126e, 130a,
183g, 251g, 252a-b, 252d,
257g-h, 272a, 272a-b,
272e, 283a, 283b, 285d-e,
286a, 286c, 289f-g, 303c-d,
304f-g, 305b-c, 308a, 332f-
g, 332g
V. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd.
339g, 340c
State of T.N.
87d-e, 133b-c, 204b-c
Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay
133e
Triloki Nath Khosa
225d-e, 311f-g
88c-d, 93d, 97c-d, 101d-e,
102b, 109a, 109c, 111b,
111d-e, 112a-b, 113a, 113e
-f, 114b, 116c-d, 116d,
116f, 117c-d, 117c-d, 117f-
g, 126g-h, 130a, 130e, 130e
-f, 138a-b, 139g-h, 144a,
147g, 174e, 176a-b, 176c-
d, 177d, 182b, 182d-e,
183a, 183b, 188b, 192b,
192c, 245b, 246a-b, 246c,
246f, 247a, 247e, 247f-g,
248a, 248b-c, 248d, 248f-g,
249a, 250a-b, 250d-e, 250e
-f, 251f, 253e-f, 255e, 258e,
260e-f, 261d-e, 270d-e,
270e-f, 270f, 270f-g, 270e,
282b-c, 282c-d, 284e,
287g, 287g-h, 288a, 288b,
291b, 302d, 304e, 308b,
322b-c, 322d, 323d, 323e-f,
333a, 334a-b
Parimoo V. State of J&K
145g, 146a, 214e-f, 225g
(1972), Wisconsin V. Yoder
208f
of India
88f
275a
140f-g
110. (1969) 1 QB 616 : (1968) 3 WLR 1273 (CA), Corocraft Ltd.
V. Pan American Airways Inc.
176a-b
111. (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC 507, C.A. Rajendran V.
Union of India
273g
112. (1968) 1 SCR 407 : AIR 1968 SC 349, State of Mysore V.
P. Narasinga Rao
206b-c
113. (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643, Golak Nath V. State 109c, 109d-e, 112e, 246a-b,
of Punjab (held, partly overruled)
246a-b
114. (1965) 1 SCR 933 : AIR 1965 SC 845, Sajjan Singh V. State
of Rajasthan
109b-c, 109c, 245a
Kerala V. Jacob Mathew
226f-g
116. (1964) 6 SCR 368 : AIR 1964 SC 1823, R. Chitralekha 93f, 99a, 145d-e, 145e-f, 232a-
State of Mysore
b
117. (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179, T. Devadasan V. 81a-b, 167e-f, 167f-g, 173g,
Union of India
216d, 216e, 217d, 279a,
279c-d, 280a-b
(1963), Douglas V. People of State of California
228e-f, 229b
119. (1963) 2 SCR 353 : AIR 1963 SC 222, Lachhman Dass V.
State of Punjab
313b
120. 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649, M.R. Balaji v18-b, 83g, 84a, 86a, 93f, 95b-
State of Mysore
C, 144d-e, 144e-f, 146b,
166c-d, 167f, 168a, 169g,
170a-b, 214d-e, 215f-g,
216d, 216f-g, 219b, 219b-c,
225g, 227a, 238d, 273g,
278f, 278g, 318c
121. AIR 1962 SC 36, Southern Railway V. Rangachari
327a
122. (1960) 3 SCR 250 : AIR 1960 SC 845, Berubari Union (1),
In re
270e
123. (1960) 2 SCR 311 : AIR 1960 SC 384, All India Station
Masters' & Asstt. Station Masters' Assn. V. Central Railway
206g
124. (1960) 1 SCR 426 : AIR 1959 SC 1318, V.V. Giri V. D. Suri
Dora
92a-b
125. 1959 SCR 279 : AIR 1958 SC 538, Ram Krishna Dalmia V.
S.R. Tendolkar
241b-c
126. 1958 SCR 1422 : AIR 1958 SC 468, M.P.V. Sundararamier
& Co. V. State of A.P.
241a
457 (1957), Morey V. Doud
202e-f
(1956), Griffin V. People of the State of Illinois
228c-d, 229b
(1954), Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka
209a-b
State of W.B. V. Sk. Serajuddin Batley
241a-b
Saurashtra
h, 267c, 267d-e
Ali Sarkar
325b
India
109b
85f-g, 85g, 86a, 95b-c, 97e,
136b-c, 197e, 198g, 199d-
e, 216c-d, 219b, 278e-f,
345e-f
264c-d
Champakam Dorairajan V. State of Madras
198b
137. (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA), Associated Provincial Picture
Houses V. Wednesbury Corpn.
285f
(1944), Toyosaburo Korematsu V. United States
338a
(1941), United States V. Classic
240b-c
Provinces & Berar Sales of Motor Spirit & Lubricants
Taxation Act, 1938, (XIV of 1938), In re
239g
141. 1936 AC 578 (PC), James V. Commonwealth of Australia
239f-g
(1905), Lochner V. People of the State of New York
115b-c
(1904), Missouri, Kansas & Texas Railway Co. of Texas V.
May
263b, 263c-d
165 US 275 (1897), Robertson V. Baldwin
240d-e
(1897), Gulf, Colorado & Santa Fe Railway Co. V. Ellis
311c, 325b
:
161 US 591 (1896), Brown V. Walker
240d-e
(1890), Home Insurance Co. of New York V. State of New
York
202a-b
148. 24 L Ed 616 : 96 US 97 (1877), Davidson V. New Orleans
240d-e
149. 7 L Ed 939 : 29 US 514 (1830), Providence Bank V.
Alpheus Billings
114e
150. 4 L Ed 579 : 4 Wheat 316 : 17 US 316 (1819), McCulloch V.
Maryland
239e
The Judgments of the Court were delivered by
DINESH MAHESHWARI, J. (Bela M. Trivedi, J. and J.B. Pardiwala, J. concurring;
U.U. Lalit, C.J. and S. Ravindra Bhat, J. dissenting)-
INDEX
SI.
Contents
Page Nos.
Nos.
1.
Preliminary and Brief Outline
77
2.
The Referral and the Questions Formulated
78
3.
Rival submissions
80
3.1.
In challenge to the amendment in question
80
3.2.
In part challenge to the amendment in question
93
3.3.
In support of the amendment in question
94
4.
Points for determination
99
5.
Relevant constitutional provisions
99
6.
Doctrine of Basic Structure and Constitutional Amendments
107
7.
Expanding Doctrine of "Equality"
131
8.
Affirmative Action by "Reservation" : Exception to the
134
General Rule of Equality
9.
Economic Disabilities and Affirmative Action
138
10.
Whether Economic Criteria as Sole Basis for Affirmative
143
Action Violates Basic Structure
11.
EWS Reservation Not Availing to Certain Classes : Whether
160
Violates Basic Structure
12.
Breach of Fifty Per Cent Ceiling of Reservations and Basic
165
Structure
13.
Other Factors and General Summation
174
14.
Conclusions
177
15.
Acknowledgments
178
Preliminary and Brief Outline
1. In this batch of transferred cases, transfer petitions, writ petitions and the
petition for special leave to appeal, the challenge is to the Constitution (One
Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 (hereinafter also referred to as "the
amendment in question" or "the 103rd Constitution Amendment" or simply "the
103rd Amendment"), which came into effect on 14-1-2019,
whereby Parliament has amended Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India by
adding two new clauses viz. clause (6) to Article 15 with Explanation and clause (6)
to Article 16; and thereby, the State has been empowered, inter alia, to provide for a
maximum of ten per cent reservation for "the economically weaker sections" ("EWS"
for short) of citizens other than "the Scheduled Castes" ("SCs" for short), "the
Scheduled Tribes" ("STs" for short) and the non-creamy layer of "the Other
Backward Classes" ("OBCs" for short). At the outset, it needs to be stated that the
amendment in question does not mandate but enables reservation for EWS and
prescribes a ceiling limit of ten per cent.
2. In a very brief outline of the forthcoming discussion, it could be noticed that
the challenge to the amendment in question is premised essentially on threefold
grounds : first, that making of special provisions including reservation in education
and employment on the basis of economic criteria is entirely impermissible and
offends the basic structure of the Constitution; second, that in any case, exclusion of
socially and educationally backward classes ("SEBC" for short) i.e. SCs, STs and non
-creamy layer OBCs from the benefit of these special provisions for EWS is
inexplicably discriminatory and destroys the basic structure of the Constitution; and
third, that providing for ten per cent additional reservation directly breaches the fifty
per cent ceiling of reservations already settled by the decisions of this Court and
hence, results in unacceptable abrogation of the Equality Code which, again,
destroys the basic structure of the Constitution.
3. Per contra, it is maintained on behalf of the sides opposing this challenge that
the amendment in question, empowering the State to make special provisions for
the economically weaker sections of citizens, is squarely within the four corners of
the Constitution of India; rather making of such provisions is necessary to achieve
the preambular goal of "JUSTICE, social, economic and political" in real sense of
terms. It is also asserted that there is no discrimination in relation to the classes
that are excluded from EWS for the simple reason that the existing special
provisions of affirmative action in their relation continue to remain in operation. As
regards the breach of fifty per cent ceiling of reservations, the contention is that the
said ceiling is not inflexible or inviolable and in the context of the object sought to
be achieved, ten per cent has been provided as the maximum by way of the
enabling provision.
4. With the foregoing outline, we may usefully take note of the reference made to
the Constitution Bench for determination of the substantial questions of
interpretation of the Constitution, as are involved in these matters and the questions
formulated while commencing the hearing.
The Referral and the Questions Formulated
5. By an order dated 5-8-20201, a three-Judge Bench of this Court took note of
the issues arising in these matters and referred the same for determination by a
"20.
By virtue of the impugned Amendments, the very Constitution
is
amended by inserting new clauses in Articles 15 and 16 thereof, which
empower the State to make reservations by way of affirmative action to the extent of
10% to economically weaker sections. It is the case of the petitioners, that the very
amendments run contrary to the constitutional scheme, and no segment of available
seats/posts can be reserved, only on the basis of economic criterion.
21. As such, we are of the view that such questions do constitute substantial
questions of law to be considered by a Bench of five Judges.
22. It is clear from the language of Article 145(3) of the Constitution and Order
XXXVIII Rule 1(1) of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013, the matters which involve
substantial questions of law as to interpretation of constitutional provisions they
are required to be heard by a Bench of five Judges. Whether the impugned
Amendment Act violates basic structure of the Constitution, by applying the tests
of "width" and "identity" with reference to equality provisions of the Constitution,
is a matter which constitutes substantial question of law within the meaning of
the provisions as referred above. Further, on the plea of ceiling of 50% for
affirmative action, it is the case of the respondent Union of India that though
ordinarily 50% is the rule but same will not prevent to amend the Constitution
itself in view of the existing special circumstances to uplift the members of the
society belonging to economically weaker sections. Even such questions also
constitute as substantial questions of law to be examined by a Bench of five
Judges "
6. Pursuant to the order1 aforesaid, this batch of matters has been referred to this
Constitution Bench for determination of the issues arising from the challenge to the
103rd Amendment. On 8-9-2022, after perusing the issues suggested by the
learned counsel for the respective parties, this Court noted , amongst others, the
issues suggested by the learned Attorney General for India as follows : (Janhit
"1. (1) Whether the 103rd Constitution Amendment can be said to breach
the basic structure of the Constitution by permitting the State to make special
provisions, including reservation, based on economic criteria?
(2) Whether the 103rd Constitution Amendment can be said to breach the
basic structure of the Constitution by permitting the State to make special
provisions in relation to admission to private unaided institutions?
(3) Whether the 103rd Constitution Amendment can be said to breach the
basic structure of the Constitution in excluding the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs from
the scope of EWS reservation?
(4) Whether the cap of 50% referred to in earlier decisions of the Supreme
Court can be considered to be a part of the basic structure of the Constitution? If
so, can the 103rd Constitution Amendment be said to breach the basic structure
of the Constitution?"
7. Having taken note of the relevant facets of the matter, this Court found that
the first three issues suggested by the learned Attorney General were the main
issues arising in the matter while the other issues were essentially in the nature of
supplementing and substantiating the propositions emerging from the said three
issues. Accordingly, this Court proceeded with the hearing with respect to the first
three issues aforesaid, while leaving it open to the learned counsel appearing for the
respective parties to advance their submissions touching upon other facets in aid of
the said three issues.
8. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners, the respondents, and
the interveners at substantial length and have also permitted them to submit
written notes on their respective submissions. The principal and material
submissions advanced in these matters could be usefully summarised, while
avoiding unnecessary repetition of the same line of arguments.
Rival submissions
In challenge to the amendment in question
9. Prof. (Dr) G. Mohan Gopal led the arguments on the side of the petitioners
challenging the amendment in question and also wrapped up the submissions in
rejoinder.
9.1. The learned counsel has, while extensively relying on the Constituent
Assembly Debates, Preamble, and Article 38 of the Constitution which enjoins the
State to secure and protect "a social order in which justice, social, economic and
political shall inform the institutions of the national life", stressed that it was to
ensure this social justice and the ethos of the Constitution that special provisions
were envisioned under Article 15(4) and reservations in employment were provided
under Article 16(4). He argued that it was due to certain primordial practices that a
section of population was marginalised and was deprived of material resources and
educational opportunities. The people in the lowest strand of social hierarchy were
ostracised and stigmatised from public life and were deprived of basic liberties and
equality. It was to address these historical inequalities that, as a vehicle of positive
discrimination, the socially oppressed sections were provided reservations and
special provisions so as to give them a voice in administration, access to resources
such as education and public employment. Therefore, the idea of ensuring social
equality and justice was a congenital feature of the Constitution shaping its basic
structure.
9.2. The learned counsel has argued that this basic structure has been violated by
the amendment in question which seeks to empower the privileged sections of
society, who are neither socially and educationally backward nor inadequately
represented. He also submitted that the amendment in question has introduced
those sections of people as economically weaker who were never subjected to any
discrimination, whether historically or otherwise; and were not backward, socially
and educationally. The learned counsel quoted Dr B.R. Ambedkar, Mr V.I.
Muniswamy Pillai and Mr Sardar Nagappa, from the Constituent Assembly Debates,
to support his contention that reservation should not be used by the forward class as
a self-perpetuating mechanism depriving the disadvantaged. The equation of the
victims of social
discrimination with those responsible for their victimisation, for the purpose of
conferring benefits, was a contortion of the Constitution and no less than playing a
fraud on it. He relied on the decisions of this Court in T. Devadasan V. Union of
India  , State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas 4 (hereinafter also referred to as "N.M.
Thomas") and Indra Sawhney V. Union of India (hereinafter also
referred
to
as
"Indra Sawhney") to submit that this Court has discerned reservations and special
provisions as an effective affirmative action to mitigate inequalities and ensure social
justice and equality of opportunity. The learned counsel has further relied on the
decision of this Court in M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore6 (hereinafter also referred to
as "M.R. Balaji"), which held that latent or covert transgression of the Constitution
by abusing an ostensible power granted by it will amount to "fraud on the
Constitution".
9.3. The learned counsel has further submitted that the non obstante clause in
Articles 15(6) and 16(6), while granting reservation to already privileged and
adequately represented class of citizens, has vetoed the prerequisite of being
socially and educationally backward or inadequately represented, which was the
kernel to philosophy of reservation. The Constitution puts forth social "and"
educational backwardness and not social "or" educational backwardness as a
criterion to determine positive discrimination in favour of a class. This foundation of
social justice for historically marginalised and disadvantaged people is completely
obliterated by the amendment in question, which removes that criterion. He argued
that backward class included those classes from the forward class that were socially
and educationally backward, hence making them eligible for benefits of reservation.
He exemplified this by stating that there were numerous communities, traditionally
belonging to the so-called "forward" class, in several States and several of those are
not professing any religion, but are recognised as OBC on the ground that they are
socially and educationally backward.
9.4. On the point of exclusion of SCs, STs and OBCs, the learned counsel has
argued that the concept of Fraternity, as envisaged in the Constitution, informs
Articles 15 and 17, giving shape to equality while prohibiting discrimination and
discriminatory practices prevalent in our society. Inclusion of forward class and
exclusion of disadvantaged class from the protection and benefit of reservation
violate the basic structure of the Constitution. The learned counsel has relied on the
decision of this Court in Prathvi Raj Chauhan V. Union of India  to highlight the place
and role of Fraternity in the scheme of polity and society. Further he has stated that
such exclusion of SCs, STs and OBCs was primarily based on caste because it is
indeed undisputed that a large chunk of population so excluded are also
economically backward along with being socially and educationally backward. Hence,
he would submit that the basic principle of equality forming the basic structure of
the Constitution stands
abrogated by excluding those who are socially and educationally backward and also
are part of systemic poverty/labour under abject poverty.
9.5. The learned counsel has yet further argued that the purpose of positive
discrimination was to put an end to monopoly of certain classes and create an
inclusive society so as to ensure equality of opportunity to the marginalised sections.
However, the amendment in question creates a perpetual monopoly by providing
reservation to that section of population whose identification is imprecise and is
based on their individual traits more so, when these classes have been enjoying and
are still enjoying control over resources and public employment.
9.6. Lastly, the learned counsel would submit that the amendment in question is
not based on economic condition, which is multidimensional, but on financial
incapacity which is transient in nature, rewarding poor financial behaviours and is,
therefore, not a reliable criterion for giving reservation. There are two wings of
reservation - social and educational backwardness, which cover the people who are
economically weaker but not those who are financially incapable. Economic weakness
goes hand-in-hand with social and educational backwardness. EWS is individual-
centric in contrast to Article 38(2) of the Constitution, which talks about inter-group
inequalities. Thus, the learned counsel has submitted that the 103rd Amendment
deserves to be set aside, being violative of the principle of equality, which is the
basic structure of the Constitution.
10. The learned Senior Counsel, Ms Meenakshi Arora, elucidating on the twin
objectives of Equality Code enshrined under Articles 14 to 17 of the Constitution as
to the formal equality and substantive equality, has submitted that these provisions
are to ensure that those sections of society who have been kept out of any
meaningful opportunity, participation in public life and decision-making, on the
grounds enumerated under Article 15(1), be uplifted through positive discrimination,
giving flesh and blood to the Equality Code, and essentially enabling the substantive
equality. Emphasising on the efficiency in services as under Article 335, she would
submit that the positive discrimination has to be read along with other guardrails
provided by the Constitution, ensuring identification of the protected group by
constitutionally sanctioned bodies. The absence of these guardrails and safeguards
in the newly created class of EWS through the amendment in question strikes at the
core of the Equality Code, violating the basic structure of the Constitution.
10.1. Stressing further on the argument of social and educational backwardness
and inadequacy in representation being the bedrock for grant of reservations, the
learned counsel has submitted that the communities, whom the amendment in
question aims to protect, are duly represented in all walks of life and hence, even
from the angle of adequacy in representation, they are not eligible to avail benefit of
reservation under Articles 15 and 16. She has placed reliance on the decisions of this
Court in M.R. Balaji and Indra Sawhney to submit that it is social "and" educational
backwardness and not social "or" educational backwardness that is to be considered
by the legislature to grant
the benefit of reservation. Furthermore, she has submitted that backwardness is sine
qua non and the lynchpin for special provision or reservation; and as stated by Dr
B.R. Ambedkar, backwardness was designed as a qualifying phrase to ensure that
the "exception does not eat the rule".
10.2. Moving on and while relying on the decisions of this Court in Indra
Sawhney5, N.M. Thomas4, M.R. Balaji6 and B.K. Pavitra V. Union of India8, the
learned counsel has submitted that the purpose of reservation was to enable the
backward classes to have a level playing field with the forward class so that they can
participate in public life with them on an equal basis. Also, this Court has held that
no one criterion such as caste could be the sole basis for grant of reservation. In the
amendment in question, the economic criteria is the sole basis for grant of
reservation without considering the concept of representation; and this prescription
is not only against the judicial pronouncements but also against the preambular
vision of casteless society, hitting the basic structure of the Constitution.
10.3. The learned counsel has further contended that for classes that are socially
and educationally backward, there are constitutionally devised commissions and
guardrails to ensure that the benefits are extended only to the deserving sections,
who are actually socially and educationally backward but the amendment in question
is bereft of any such guardrails or safeguards. The amendment is limited to those
classes that are neither identifiable nor have any constitutionally devised mechanism
for their identification.
10.4. The learned counsel would further submit that economic status is transient
in nature and would keep on changing unlike the status of backwardness, which is
based on age-old caste practices and oppressions that are immutable. The newly
protected class under the amendment in question lacks historic and continuing lack
of adequate representation caused by structural or institutional barriers, so as to be
eligible for positive discrimination. Further, the reservation is intended to be
operative only until there is inadequacy in representation of those classes and not in
perpetuity. However, the present amendment prescribes essentially no end to
reservation as there would always be people poorer than others. Since the need for
reservation has been delinked from inadequacy of representation and the need to
show backwardness, there is no natural guardrail or end point to reservations
connected with poverty. This constitutes a clear violation of the Equality Code and of
the basic structure of the Constitution.
10.5. In the alternative, the learned counsel has argued that even if this Court
were to accept poverty and income as valid criteria for the grant of reservation then
too, the amendment to the extent of "other than the class mentioned in clauses (4)
[and (5)]" should be severed from Articles 15(6) and 16(6) so as to include the poor
of all classes without any exclusion or discrimination.
11. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Sanjay Parikh, has relied extensively on the
Constituent Assembly Debates to contend that the Assembly was of the clear opinion
that the word "backward" should precede "class of people". Therefore, despite being
aware of the rampant poverty in the country, the focus of reservations was
predominantly on the social stigma attached to the group. Reservation in public
employment was given because the Framers wanted the backward classes to share
State power and for that matter, they had to be provided equal opportunity. The
Assembly intended to extend the benefits of affirmative action to only those socially
and educationally backward groups who had been excluded from mainstream
national life due to historic injustice, stigma and discrimination and thus, bringing in
any other criteria, excluding the communities who have suffered such
stigmatisation, would be a blatant violation of not only the Equality Code but also
the very principles of democracy (sharing of power being necessary to sustain
democracy), both of which form part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
11.1. The learned counsel would submit that the criteria for "backwardness" was
always "social" in nature and "economic" backwardness was never accepted as the
sole criterion. Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Indra Sawhney5 he
has contended that by the majority of 8 : 1, it was held that economic criteria
cannot be the sole basis to grant reservation under Article 16. Drawing attention to
the theory of "Substantive Equality" propounded by Prof. Sandra Fredman, the
learned counsel has submitted that reservation solely on economic criteria would
violate the principles of substantive equality ingrained in the Constitution, which was
directed against identity-based historic marginalisation.
11.2. The learned counsel has further placed reliance on Indra Sawhney3 to draw
distinction between backward class and weaker sections discussed under Articles 16
(4) and 46, respectively. It has been argued that the latter has no limitations and
thus, Article 46 cannot be the basis for providing reservation. He has also urged that
exceeding fifty per cent limit would violate the twin tests of width and identity, as
propounded by this Court in M. Nagaraj V. Union of India9 (hereinafter also referred
to as "M. Nagaraj") and result in disturbance of equality; and that fifty per cent limit
cannot be breached under any circumstance except if a law is protected under the
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, which the amendment in question is not. He
supported his argument citing Indra Sawhney5 and Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil V. State
of
Maharashtra 0 (hereinafter also referred to as "Jaishri Patil"), wherein it was held
that reservation under Article 16(4) should not exceed fifty per cent.
12. Traversing through the history of reservation policy since the year 1872 and
the decision of this Court in State of Madras V. Champakam Dorairajan (hereinafter
also referred to as "Champakam"), Prof. Ravivarma Kumar, learned Senior Counsel,
has submitted that the ratio of decision of
this Court in Champakam 11, that classification on the basis of religion, race, caste,
language or any of them was against the ethos of the Constitution, has been
followed unanimously and consistently by this Court in M.R. Balaji6 and Ashoka
Kumar Thakur V. Union of India2 (hereinafter also referred to as "Ashoka Kumar
Thakur"). However, the 103rd Amendment reinstates the communal Government
Order set aside in Champakam 1.
12.1. Elucidating further on formal and substantive equality, the learned counsel
has submitted that despite ensuring equal opportunity to all, it was still felt
necessary to prohibit discrimination specifically on the grounds of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth so as to halt all inequality and create a more egalitarian
society, protecting the interests of every individual through Articles 15, 16, 17, 23,
24 and 35. In order to highlight the intensity of caste-based discrimination in India,
he exemplified the prejudices and discriminations faced by Dr B.R. Ambedkar and
M.K. Gandhi and submitted that unless caste is destroyed in the country, equality
cannot be attained in true sense of the term.
12.2. The learned counsel has further contended that the term "socially and
educationally" backward has been employed in Article 15(4) and the expressions
employed are not "socially or educationally" or "socially or economically". The
intention behind this was to protect those classes of population who have been
historically disadvantaged by birth and not by loss of wealth or by accident. Further,
the substantive equality enshrined through Articles 15 and 16 not only makes the
provisions to bridge the gap but it also provides the means by which this gap can be
bridged. Likewise, under Article 340, the first Backward Classes Commission laid
down 22 parameters for the identification of a backward class. The amendment in
question does not have any such machinery employed within its ambit for the
identification of population who would fall under the EWS category. Relying upon the
census report, he has submitted that the population who would fall under the EWS
would be around five per cent, and providing ten per cent of reservation for such a
small population, more so to the forward class, is manifestly arbitrary and fraud on
the Constitution. Further, this positive discrimination is taking away the rights from
rest of the population.
12.3. The learned counsel has further argued that as per the grounds of
discrimination in Article 15, the Constitution has provided a bridge for all the
grounds but there, economic deprivation is not mentioned, which clarifies that it was
not considered as a basis for discrimination. Applying the principle of ejusdem
generis to Article 46, he contended that the measures contemplated in the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the amendment in question are in favour of
SCs and STs and those weaker sections who are similarly circumstanced to SCs and
STs; and definitely is not meant for those castes and sections which are at the other
end of the pendulum in the society.
12.4. Relying on the decision of this Court in Indra Sawhney5, the learned
counsel has posited that economic criteria cannot be the sole basis to provide
reservation. He would further submit that a class should be homogeneous, have a
common origin, and have the numerical strength. The EWS created by the
amendment in question does not fulfil any of the criteria and hence, cannot be called
a class for any State action, particularly the affirmative action. He further
emphasised on this argument by intensively reading the opinion of Sahai, J. in Indra
Sawhney5.
12.5. The learned counsel has further submitted that the amendment in question
fails on all the anvils of Equality Code because, if poverty is the rationale behind it
and it aims at providing jobs for the poor by way of reservation then, the
amendment fails to address as to how the poverty of the forward class is different
from that of the SCs, STs and OBCs. Hence, the amendment in question fails the
twin test of rationality and nexus, and violates the basic structure of the
Constitution.
13. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Salman Khurshid, has submitted that in
India, reservation formed a special part of affirmative action. It is within the larger
affirmative action circle that reservation finds its place. Drawing analogy with
countries like USA, Israel and Germany, the learned counsel has submitted that
indeed affirmative action can be an answer, but it is not the only answer. There are,
therefore, many ways of addressing the issue of economic disadvantage other than
reservation, as has been done by these countries. He would further submit that the
limit for such reservation cannot exceed fifty per cent except in cases where
compelling reasons arise. Arguing on the Equality Code, the learned counsel has
relied on the classification laid down by this Court in E.P. Royappa V. State of T.N. 13
to submit that the present amendment neither has any reasonable classification nor
such classification has any nexus with the object to be achieved, hence is violative of
Article 14. Entire list of the reserved categories of citizens is caste-based and the
amendment did not include any metric or indicator, ignoring the marginalisation
criteria entirely while granting reservation. He has also quoted the works of John
Rawls to submit that each person has the same indefeasible right over every claim.
14. "One law for lion and OX is oppression", Mr P. Wilson, learned Senior Counsel,
quoting William Blake, has contested the amendment in question on four grounds.
First, granting reservation to upper caste is violation of the basic structure of the
Constitution as the basis of reservation must be rooted in identified past
discrimination which impeded access to public administration and education
opportunities.
14.1. Relying on the decision of this Court in Indra Sawhney and the judgment
of the Gujarat High Court in Dayaram Khemkaran Verma V. State of Gujarat14
wherein similar reservations on the basis of economic criteria were quashed by this
Court and the High Court respectively, he has submitted that
economic criteria cannot be the sole basis for providing reservation, and the
reservation cannot exceed fifty per cent limit.
14.2. Second, he submitted that reservation in the favour of forward class
violates the basic structure of the Constitution and is, therefore, unconstitutional.
14.3. Third, classification of EWS is neither reasonable nor valid. The reason for
providing reservation to SC, ST and OBC communities was historical and perpetual
discrimination and stigmatisation. It was the structural barrier that kept them from
the mainstream. Reservation cannot be used as a poverty alleviation scheme. Hence,
such classification violates the Equality Code under Article 14.
14.4. Fourth, the amendment in question fails the width test laid down by this
Court in M. Nagaraj9 as there are no limitations or indicators that have been devised
to identify the people falling under the EWS. Whereas, for each category, be it SC,
ST or OBC, the Constitution is overseeing the reservation by virtue of Articles 366
(24), 366(25), 338, 340, 341, etc. Hence, the amendment in question fails the
guided power test.
15. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr K.S. Chauhan, while placing reliance on the
Constituent Assembly Debates and the decision of this Court in Kesavananda Bharati
V.
State of Kerala5 (hereinafter also referred to as "Kesavananda"), has argued that
the 103rd Amendment violates the basic structure of the Constitution as it changes
the identity of the Constitution. He would again submit that providing reservation
solely on economic criteria is against the decision of this Court in Indra Sawhney5
and also against the facet of democracy, as democracy ought to be representative.
The learned counsel would argue that economic criteria is transient in nature
whereas the inclusion of backward classes under Article 16(4) was on the ground of
historical exclusion. In our society, discrimination finds its root in caste, religion,
race, etc. and not in economic condition of a person. The classification under Article
14 has to have reasonable nexus and intelligible differentia which the amendment in
question, because of all the aforesaid reasons, fails to achieve. He has also
submitted that indeed forward class must have faced some discrimination, but the
intensity of discrimination is not enough to justify reservation. To support his
submission, he has relied on the judgment of this Court in Madhav Rao Jivaji Rao
Scindia V. Union of India6 wherein it was held that constitutional philosophy is the
obligation of the executive; if a particular class is eligible for identification in a
category and it is not identified as such, the constitutional scheme will be destroyed;
and if under the constitutional scheme, an obligation is given to a wing and if that
wing is not discharging the function, it is a fraud on the Constitution.
The surest way legal research!
16. The learned counsel, Mr Yadav Narender Singh, while referring to Sinho
Commission Report, has submitted that the Report, on the basis of which the
amendment was enacted, itself stated that economic criteria would not result in
homogeneous class. The learned counsel has argued that in the absence of
quantifiable data, one could not create a class for which protective measures are to
be taken. The said Report concluded that if poverty is kept as a baseline for
reservation, then it should have in its ambit all, irrespective of their class, more so
because the poor of SCs, STs and OBCs are worse off than those of the general
category. He has further argued that the condition precedent for a protective clause
is existence of discrimination. Hence, protective action for a class that is neither a
homogeneous class nor is discriminated against, is violative of the basic structure of
the Constitution. The learned counsel has relied upon the decision of this Court in
Indra Sawhney5, to submit that economic criteria cannot be the sole basis for
classification. He has further argued, in the alternative, that even if reservation on
grounds of economic criteria is to be given, EWS ought to include those who are
living below the poverty line (BPL).
17. The learned counsel, Mr Shadan Farasat, while adding on to the submissions
already advanced by the preceding counsel for the petitioners, posited that the
originalist understanding of reservation is that it can solely be granted as an anti-
discriminatory measure and not as an anti-deprivation measure. Hence, the
amendment in question cannot sustain itself, as it addresses the deprivation faced
by an individual and not discrimination.
17.1. The learned counsel would further argue that even if it is assumed that
reservation can be granted as an anti-deprivation measure, still the amendment
violates the Equality Code as it excludes the SCs, STs and OBCs, who are poorer
than the poor of forward class, without any intelligible differentia and its nexus with
the object sought to be achieved. Opposing the justification that these classes are
already protected by way of Articles 15(4) and 16(4), he has submitted that the
purpose of Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is to protect a "group" and to counter the
historical wrong/oppression done to them. Whereas, the amendment in question
deals with situational deprivation, mainly economic criteria, and is intended to
protect an individual. Purposes and entities of both the protections being different,
inclusion of SCs, STs and OBCs in one cannot mean their exclusion from the other.
17.2. The learned counsel has re-emphasised on the submissions that
statistically, the backward class poor are worse off than forward class poor and their
poverty is deeper, more intense and likely to be stickier and persistent. He has relied
on the Sinho Commission Report, NITI Aayog Multi-dimensional Poverty Index,
along with other reports; and has argued that the question before the Sinho
Commission was whether there could be reservation for general category people not
covered in any other category. The Report itself stated that the backward class poor
are poorer than the upper-class poor. He would underscore the point that poverty is
deeply linked to the caste of an individual and the perception surrounding that
status.
17.3. The learned counsel has further submitted that grant of reservation as a
measure of affirmative action is a way for reparation and does not lead to economic
upliftment. The object of economic upliftment of deprived sections of the society can
be achieved through other measures of poverty alleviation but reservation is not the
answer. While contending that Articles 15(1) and 16(1) are part of the basic
structure of the Constitution and that it is only in furtherance of substantive equality
that formal equality can be breached, he has submitted that exclusion on the basis
of caste straightaway breaches formal equality. Further, exclusion of those who are
arguably more impacted by this criterion violates substantive equality too, hitting
the Equality Code, and resultantly violating the basic structure of the Constitution.
17.4. In another line of arguments, the learned counsel has put forth the
proposition that the words "other than" in Articles 15(6) and 16(6) should be read
as "in addition to", thereby including SCs, STs and OBCs within them and furthering
the basic structure. He has placed reliance on the decision of this Court in State
(NCT of Delhi) V. Union of India to submit that if two interpretations are possible-
one which destroys the basic structure and the other which enhances it-then
purposive approach enhancing the basic structure of the Constitution is to be taken
and not the literal approach. He has concluded the submissions while quoting from
the judgment of this Court in K.C. Vasanth Kumar V. State of Karnataka
18
(hereinafter also referred to as "Vasanth Kumar") that lower the caste, the poorer
are its members.
18. The learned counsel, Ms Diya Kapoor, while stressing upon the Equality Code
and it being part of the basic structure, has argued on two facets. First, as to
whether the inclusion of new class of reservation solely on the basis of economic
criteria was constitutionally permissible; and second, as to whether the exclusion of
SCs, STs and OBCs from this newly created class, was constitutionally permissible.
She mapped the historical background of reservations for backward classes since
1917 until the Constituent Assembly Debates, where Dr B.R. Ambedkar and Mr K.M.
Munshi supported the use of the term "backward" so as to grant special benefits to
the classes qualifying that criterion and to neutralise the oppression faced by them.
She would submit that such classification was based on long continuing historical
oppression faced by these classes. Thus, to ensure their representation, reservations
were provided as a means to foster the equality and fraternity of the country, with
various checks and safeguards.
18.1. The learned counsel has further argued that reservation is for participation
and representation and cannot be used for poverty alleviation. Reservation in public
employment is to reverse discrimination and to equalise representation. Providing
government jobs cannot pave a way for economic upliftment whereas, other ways of
providing subsidies, etc. is a kind of affirmative action to eliminate poverty. Indeed,
poverty alleviation is a goal
for the State to strive for as per directive principles of State policy ("DPSP" for short)
but, reservation is not a way to alleviate poverty, as is evident from the statistics
that despite decades of reservation in favour of SCs, STs and OBCs, they are still
poor. Relying on the decision of this Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. V. Union of India9
(hereinafter also referred to as "Minerva Mills"), she would submit that alleviation of
poverty has to be done without trampling on fundamental rights. Welfare steps can
be taken under DPSP but it cannot be done under Article 15 unless there has been
discrimination on the grounds mentioned in Article 15(1), as otherwise, the
character of Article 15 is changed and results in abrogating the fundamental rights.
As iterated by this Court in Indra Sawhney5, Article 16(4) has to be in consonance
with and in furtherance to Article 16(1). Similarly, Article 16(6) also has to be in
furtherance of equality of opportunity under Article 16(1). So, if Article 16(6) is
violative of Article 16(1), it cannot sustain itself in the scheme of the Constitution.
18.2. Further relying upon a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Indra
Sawhney (2) V. Union of India0 the learned counsel has submitted that by
providing reservation to forward class, the identity of backward class is erased and
therefore, such reservation is illegal, hitting at the roots of the Constitution.
Moreover, if the forward class becomes backward, it can come under OBC so as to
benefit from reservation. She would reason that the 103rd Constitution Amendment
is discriminatory to SCs and STs as the people falling in EWS are approximately five
per cent and for these five per cent of people ten per cent of reservation is provided.
The learned counsel would further submit that the amendment in question is
arbitrary too, for there is no mechanism/procedure laid down for it, as under Article
340, for identification of genuine EWS.
19. The learned counsel, Dr M.P. Raju, has based his submission on the ground
that the amendment in question is a caste-based reservation that excludes the
historically oppressed groups (SC/ST/OBC) from its coverage and is thus,
destructive to the aim of "casteless society", which is the preambular vision forming
the basic structure of the Constitution. The learned counsel has submitted that this
amendment has created two levels of classification - first, between the classes
already covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) (socially and educationally backward
classes) and those who were not (forward class/non-reserved), which has resulted in
caste-based classification; second, within the forward class between those who were
economically weaker and those who were not. Such classification, in his opinion, not
only defeats the goal of casteless society, as envisaged by the Constituent
Assembly, but also attempts to create vertical reservation inside a vertical
reservation, which is not permitted under the Constitution.
19.1. The learned counsel has further submitted that, as held by this Court in
Indra Sawhney5, if castelessness is an ideal of the Constitution, and if this ideal goes
into the basic identity of the Constitution, then the
constitutional amendment, even if passes the test of equality, violates the basic
structure. He has also urged that the condition of "adequate representation" that
controlled Article 16(4) is intentionally excluded from Articles 15(6) and 16(6).
Reservation, once starts, has to end. It cannot be in perpetuity. He has further
argued that the amendment in question is violative of the Constitution inasmuch as
grant of reservation to already sufficiently represented classes while excluding those
who were inadequately represented (SC/ST/OBC) offends not only the Equality Code
but also the principle of fraternity, as recognised in the Preamble to the Constitution.
He has supported his contentions while relying upon the decisions of this Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation V. State of Karnataka1 and V.V. Giri V. D. Suri Dora22
20. The learned counsel, Mr Kaleeswaram Raj, has based his submissions on
modern jurisprudence citing academic scholarship23 to submit that two things are to
be considered while dealing with discrimination law. First, the immutability and
second, it should constitute fundamental choice. Relativity of poverty is antithetical
to immutability. He has further submitted that the 103rd Amendment in the context
of exclusion, made the forward communities as protected group and the backward
class as cognate group, which is impermissible. The amendment in question strips
off the right of backward class candidates to contest the seats kept in open category,
to which they are entitled to. The learned counsel has argued that this amendment
fails the preference test by giving preferential treatment to forward class and taking
it away from backward class who are inadequately represented. He has further
submitted that the "living tree" approach should be applied to interpret the
Constitution as per the changing circumstances of the society.
21. The learned counsel has also argued that fundamental rights are
individualistic in nature; and while relying on the decision of this Court in K.S.
Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J.) V. Union of India4 he would submit that the individual is
the focal point because it is only in the realisation of individual rights, that the
collective well-being of the group can be determined and hence, it remains baseless
to say that collective rights have been provided to the SC/ST/OBC as a group.
22. The learned counsel, Mr Pratik Bombarde, has submitted that the amendment
in question changes the identity of fundamental rights while omitting to take into
account the crucial factor that social backwardness was a "cause" of economic
backwardness and not its "consequence". While relying on the decision in Saurav
Yadav V. State of U.P. 25 which held that open category is open to all and horizontal
and vertical reservations are methods of ensuring representation in public places, he
has argued that the right to equality of the persons belonging to SC, ST and OBC
communities is impacted by reducing
their seats in open category. He would reiterate that rule of ejusdem generis shall
apply while reading Article 46. Lastly, he has submitted that confining each social
category to its extent of reservation would result in communal reservation, which, in
turn, would result in breach of the Equality Code and thereby, damage the basic
structure of the Constitution.
23. The learned counsel, Mr Akash Kakade referred to the phraseology of the
provisions under consideration and submitted that while Articles 15(4) and 15(5)
refer to socially and educationally backward classes, Article 16(4) is directed towards
backwardness and inadequate representation. According to him, the impugned
provisions of Articles 15(6) and 16(6) have left aside the key elements of "social
backwardness" and "inadequate representation" while providing for EWS reservation.
These provisions, therefore, are rather antithetical to the spirit of the existing
provisions. The learned counsel has again urged that Article 46 should be read under
the rule of ejusdem generis and by excluding SC, ST and OBC communities, the said
rule is violated. According to the learned counsel, keeping SC, ST and OBC
communities outside of its scope and bringing in economically weaker sections
within it was never the idea of Article 46. He has also submitted that no
constitutionally recognised commission has been set up for determination of the
financial incapacity/capacity of a candidate, as in the case of OBCs.
24. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Shekhar Naphade, has argued that there was
no dimension of equality, other than what was rooted in Articles 14 to 16 of the
Constitution. Relying on passages of the judgments of A.N. Ray, C.J. and P.
Jaganmohan Reddy, J. in Kesavananda5, which indicated that new dimensions of
equality could be discerned having regard to new challenges, he has submitted that
those observations were not endorsed by other Judges. As a result, the amendment
cannot sustain itself on the ground that it gives shape to another facet or dimension
of equality. The learned counsel has further contended that economic criteria cannot
be the sole criteria for the basis of classification, and if it is to be taken as a sole
criterion, Indra Sawhney5 has to be revisited, which cannot be done by this Bench of
5 Judges.
25. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Jayant Muthuraj, in addition to the arguments
already advanced, would submit that ten per cent reservation in open category in
favour of forward class reduces the availability of seats in open category for other
classes and communities, in particular the persons belonging to the creamy layer
category in SEBCs/OBCs. This, according to him, would damage the basic structure
of the Constitution.
26. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Ravi K. Deshpande, and the learned counsel,
Mr Sachin Patil, Mr Shashank Ratnoo, Mr Varun Thakur, Mr P.A. Noor Muhammad and
Mr A. Selvin Raja have also made their submissions as interveners. All of their
submissions, which are akin to the submissions already noticed above, need not be
elaborated. However, in sum and substance, their additional submissions had been
that the amendment in question, which
states "not more than ten per cent of the total seats in each category" has to be
interpreted as providing ten per cent reservation for EWS in each category. One of
the interveners provided the statistics as to the percentage of people working in
each category to submit that the exclusion of SCs, STs and OBCs is invalid as they
are still inadequately represented in State services. Further they submitted that the
current strength of the Bench is not competent to overrule Indra Sawhney5 wherein
it was explicitly held that reservation cannot be based solely on economic criteria.
Yet further, discussing the power of Parliament under Article 368, it was posited that
Parliament has the power to amend the Constitution by way of "addition, variation or
repeal" and not by breaking down the basic structure of the Constitution.
In part challenge to the amendment in question
27. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan has taken a stance
different than other petitioners, and has contended that the amendment in question
is violative of basic structure of the Constitution only to the extent of the words "in
addition to the existing reservation and" which need to be severed and that the rest
of the part, which provides classification on the economic criteria for extension of
special provisions for the advancement of economically weaker sections excluding
classes already covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4), was permissible.
28. The learned counsel has, otherwise, supported the amendment in question on
two grounds:
28.1. First, that the insertion of the Economically Weaker Sections is perfectly
valid as a class for the extension of special provisions for their advancement,
admissions and for reservations in posts. He has submitted that the classification on
the basis of economic criteria has been recognised in plethora of measures
introduced by the State from providing housing, admission in schools or hospitals, to
several statutes for their upliftment. Further, this Court in M.R. Balaji6, R.
Chitralekha V. State of Mysore26 and Vasanth Kumar18 has accepted poverty as an
indicator of backwardness, while considering reservation. It has been argued that
the present constitutional amendment has removed the basis of Indra Sawhney5
(bar on using economic criteria as a sole determinative of backwardness); and in
fact, such an amendment would further the goal of economic justice, thus
strengthening the basic structure of the Constitution. The learned counsel has
supported his submission with reference to the decision in Waman Rao V. Union of
India7 (hereinafter also referred to as "Waman Rao").
28.2. Second, at divergence from other submissions regarding exclusion of SC,
ST and OBC communities, he has argued that such an exclusion is permissible as
the exclusion is not of "castes" but of "classes" who are already receiving the benefit
of special provisions. Further, the SCs, STs and OBCs receive political reservations as
well without having any ceiling limits as such whereas, EWS reservation is capped at
ten per cent and is not extended to political reservation, thereby providing a balance
with sufficient guardrails and safeguards. Therefore, this amendment was long due,
stepping away from caste-based reservation to provide reservation for that class of
persons who had hitherto been overlooked.
29. Advancing his submission that the amendment in question, to the extent of
"in addition to existing reservation", is violative of the basic structure of the
Constitution, the learned counsel has given threefold reasoning. First, the expression
"in addition to" cements reservation, perpetuating the existing reservations within
the Constitution as a permanent feature which violates basic structure of the
Constitution as laid down in various decisions including those in Champakam 1, M.R.
Balaji6, Indra Sawhney5, Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. State of Bihar28 and Subhash
Chandra V. Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board29 Secondly, the amendment
in question inserts enabling provision "in addition to", making EWS reservation
reliant on those of SCs, STs and/or OBCs, which effectively converts enabling
provisions in Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) into enabled provisions, inconsistent
with the ethos and guiding principles of the Constitution. Lastly, on the extent of
reservation, he would submit that the amendment providing reservation "in addition
to existing reservation" breaches the fifty per cent ceiling limit, which is now not
only a part of constitutional interpretation of reservation provisions but is also a part
of basic structure of the Constitution. He has further emphasised that in more than
54 judgments of this Court in over 60 years, it has been repeatedly stated that fifty
per cent ceiling limit must be maintained when reservations are activated while
interpreting Articles 15 and 16. This, as per his contention, lends enough strength
for fifty per cent ceiling limit to be a basic feature of the Constitution. In support of
his submission on the extent of reservations, the learned counsel has relied upon the
decisions in Bhim Singhji V. Union of India 0 (hereinafter also referred to as "Bhim
Singhji"), M. Nagaraj and Jaishri Patil10.
In support of the amendment in question
30. The learned Attorney General for India, Mr K.K. Venugopal, has posited that
the 103rd Amendment does not violate the basic structure of the Constitution,
rather fosters it. Second, the exclusion of those classes already covered under
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) from the proposed reservation did not
breach the Equality Code. Third, the fifty per cent limit is not a sacrosanct rule.
Lastly, the benefit to EWS with respect to admission in private aided or unaided
educational institutions does not violate Article 14, as has been settled by this Court.
30.1. While quoting from Bhim Singhji30, the learned Attorney General has
submitted that a mere violation of Article 14 does not violate the basic structure of
the Constitution unless "the violation is shocking, unconscionable or unscrupulous
travesty of the quintessence of equal justice". Relying on M. Nagaraj2, he has
submitted that a constitutional amendment can be struck down only when it
changes the identity of the Constitution. In support of his submissions, he has also
relied on the decisions of this Court in Raghunathrao Ganpatrao V. Union of India  1
(hereinafter also referred to as "Raghunathrao"), Ashoka Kumar Thakur12 and
Minerva Mills19.
30.2. The learned Attorney General has placed reliance on the decision of this
Court in M. Nagaraj-, as to dynamic interpretation of the Constitution to strengthen
its preambular vision; and has submitted that Articles 38 and 46 along with the
Preamble to the Constitution enjoin a duty on the State to eliminate social, economic
and political inequalities and to promote justice. He has further argued that this
Court has, over the years, repeatedly recognised that it was desirable to use poverty
as the only basis for affirmative action and that it is poverty or economic deprivation
that results in social and educational backwardness. He has relied on the decisions of
this Court in Vasanth Kumar18 and Ashoka Kumar Thakur12 to support his
contention. He has further submitted that the creation of new class fosters the vision
of "Economic Justice", as set out in the Preamble, hence strengthening the basic
structure of the Constitution.
30.3. The learned Attorney General has further contended that the exclusion of
already covered classes does not violate the Equality Code as the EWS among the
SC, ST and OBC communities are already enjoying the benefit of affirmative action
in their favour by way of reservations in educational institutions and public
employment, seats in legislature, etc. to attain an equal status - socially and
educationally. However, the EWS among the classes not covered under any of
provisions preceding Articles 15(6) and 16(6) do not have any special provision
made in their favour except for reservation by way of the present amendment.
Further, this ten per cent carved out for EWS is in addition to the existing
reservation in favour of SEBCs; meaning thereby that it does not in any way affect
the reservation up to fifty per cent for the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs.
30.4. As to the extent of reservation, the learned Attorney General has submitted
that the fifty per cent cap as laid down in Indra Sawhney5 is for the classes covered
under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4). Therefore, extending the benefit of ten per
cent to these classes would exceed the reservation made for them beyond fifty per
cent and that would be violative of Indra Sawhney5, He has also contended that this
fifty per cent rule could be breached in extraordinary situation, as held by Indra
Sawhney5 and is, therefore, not an inviolable rule or part of the basic structure of
the Constitution.
30.5. On the question of private unaided educational institutions, the learned
Attorney General has relied on the decision in Society for Unaided Private Schools of
Rajasthan V. Union of India - which upheld twenty-five per cent reservation in favour
of EWS under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009,
which was further affirmed by the five-Judge Bench in Pramati Educational &
Cultural Trust V. Union of India 33 (hereinafter also referred to as "Pramati Trust").
31. The learned Solicitor General of India, Mr Tushar Mehta, has submitted that to
set aside a constitutional amendment, very high judicial threshold is needed. He
would submit that a constitutional amendment may even touch upon the basic
structure but unless it is shown that it fundamentally alters the basic structure or
basic features of the Constitution, it cannot be struck down under judicial review. In
support of his contentions, the learned Solicitor General has placed reliance on the
said decisions in Raghunathrao1, Bhim Singhji30 and Kesavananda5 as also on the
decision in Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj Narain34 (hereinafter also referred to as
"Indira Nehru Gandhi"). He has further argued that the amendment in question,
instead of hitting or disturbing the basic structure, rather strengthens the
preambular vision of the Constitution i.e. of providing economic justice to its people
along with social and political justice.
31.1. The learned Solicitor General has further argued that the exclusion of
classes already covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) does not violate the Equality
Code; and that from the time of the decision in Champakam 1 to the recent decision
in Jaishri Patil10, the understanding and concept of equality and reservation have
changed and evolved with time, and the reservation itself has been treated as a part
and parcel of the Equality Code that furthers substantive equality. The Constitution
has recognised different zones of affirmative action, whereby it extends reservation
and special provisions as to the needs of each
section of the society. For instance, all SEBCs do not have any reservation in
Parliament, however, SCs and STs have been given a secured representation in
Parliament. The learned Solicitor General has also submitted that except for the open
category, the SCs, STs and OBCs are not permitted to migrate to the other vertical
reservations; and similarly, the Constitution has created another vertical zone for
EWS category, which exists outside the fold of pre-existing reservations. Further, he
would submit that ten per cent reservation in favour of EWS would result in
miniscule delimitation of the available seats in favour of SC, ST and OBC
communities (SC : reduces from 65% to 55%; ST : reduces from 57.5% to 47.5%;
and OBC : reduces from 77% to 67%).
31.2. On the question of fifty per cent ceiling limit, the learned Solicitor General
has again submitted that this percentage could be exceeded in exceptional
circumstances for, being neither a fundamental tenet of the Constitution nor a part
of its basic structure. He lastly contended that the validity of a constitutional
amendment cannot be tested on possible apprehensions or absence of guardrails.
31.3. Mr Kanu Agrawal, learned counsel, has supplemented the submissions of
the learned Solicitor General that the amendment in question has guardrails inbuilt
in it by having the upper limit of reservation fixed at ten per cent unlike Articles 15
(4), 15(5) and 16(4). He further submitted that exclusion of other classes is
inherent in the concept of reservation and therefore, the exclusion of SC, ST and
OBC communities already covered under preceding provisions is not violative of the
Equality Code. Thus, the exclusion clause "other than" is an "opportunity cost" which
does not violate the basic structure of the Constitution. Further, he has submitted
that Pramati Trust33 is squarely applicable to Article 15(6) as well as to making of
special provisions in relation to admission to the private unaided institutions.
32. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Mahesh Jethmalani, has submitted that the
amendment in question takes into account the changing conditions of the society as
iterated in M. Nagaraj and hence, purposive interpretation of the Constitution has to
be resorted to. He has further submitted that, as held in Jaishri Patil10 there must
be harmony between fundamental rights and DPSP, which the amendment seeks to
strike. Further, the learned counsel would submit that the challenge in Indra
Sawhney was to an office memorandum and the view of the Court that economic
criteria cannot be the sole basis ran contrary to its own view of excluding creamy
layer from OBCs on economic basis. Further, Indra Sawhney5 tested the office
memorandum on the tenets of Article 16 alone. Here, the amendment in question,
being a constitutional amendment, has to be tested on the threshold of violation of
basic structure to an extent that it changes the identity of the Constitution.
33. The learned Senior Counsel, Mr Niranjan Reddy, has submitted that neither
the entitlement to reservation nor exclusion therefrom is part of the basic structure
of the Constitution; and that reservations are enabling provisions, temporary in
nature and do not hold within them the feature of permanence, so as to form part of
the basic structure of the Constitution. Indra Sawhney5, staged 30 years ago, dealt
with "schematic interpretation" of Articles 16(4) and 15(4). He further emphasised
on the balance to be maintained between the competing claims that keeps on
changing with the needs of the society. He based his argument principally on the
premise that economic criteria by itself can be a determinative factor for
backwardness. He has supported his contention by quoting Indra Sawhney5, which
mentioned R. Chitralekha where occupation-cum-means test was employed so as
to determine social backwardness. On the issue of exclusion of SCs, STs and OBCs,
he has submitted that there is already an affirmative action in the form of
reservation and special provisions operating in their favour. Their "opportunity
quotient" including the reserved and open category exceeds fifty per cent. Hence,
the ten per cent in favour of EWS, in no way violates the Equality Code. According to
the learned counsel, in fact, exclusion of SCs, STs and OBCs perfectly fits the
constitutional scheme so as to avoid double benefit to them; and thus, exclusion is a
part of reasonable classification.
34. The learned Senior Counsel, Ms Vibha Dutta Makhija, has submitted that the
"living tree" approach has to be applied while interpreting the Constitution so as to
further a more inclusive and progressive society. The learned counsel has argued
that right of the EWS category arises from Article 21 of the Constitution, which
provides for the right of dignity; and poverty affects dignity. She has also
emphasised on various international obligations, namely, Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, which the Constitution caters under Articles 46, 51(c) and 253, so as to
submit that it is the duty of the State to eradicate poverty in order to ensure
economic justice; and in that context too, the amendment in question becomes an
empowering measure for those who are in systemic poverty. She has further referred
to the works of economist Mr Amartya Sen, to elucidate upon the concept and effect
of poverty.
35. The learned counsel has further argued that the Constitution does not impede
Parliament to protect a new section of people in order to further the preambular
vision of economic justice, different from the traditional approach of caste-based
affirmative action. The learned counsel has further exemplified, by referring to U.P.
Constables, teachers and Shiksha Mitra recruitments, that OBCs are already in good
position now, earning seats in meritorious category as well as in reserved category
and it is the EWS who are suffering and being deprived of the seats. She lastly
contended that the basis of classification in the amendment in question is
"intersecting disadvantages" if not "generational disadvantages"; and there is no bar
or violation of basic structure of the Constitution in addressing these intersecting
disadvantages.
36. The learned counsel, Mr V.K. Biju, on the basis of various reports and
statistical data, has argued that reservation on the basis of economic criteria is the
need of the hour and the stepping stone to achieve economic and social justice,
moving away from caste-based reservations, as also vocalised by Dr B.R. Ambedkar
in the Constituent Assembly Debates. He has further argued that even in Indra
Sawhney5, the Court took a conscious note that there may be a group or class of
people, who can qualify for benefits of reservation irrespective of caste.
Points for determination
37. Three major issues to be answered in these matters by this Bench have been
noticed at the outset. In order to answer those issues and in view of the variety of
submissions urged as also the subject-matter, the following principal points arise for
determination:
37.1. (a) As to whether reservation is an instrument for inclusion of socially and
educationally backward classes to the mainstream of the society and, therefore,
reservation structured singularly on economic criteria violates the basic structure of
the Constitution of India?
37.2. (b) As to whether the exclusion of classes covered under Articles 15(4), 15
(5) and 16(4) from getting benefit of reservation as economically weaker sections
violates the Equality Code and thereby, the basic structure doctrine?
37.3. (c) As to whether reservation for economically weaker sections of citizens
up to ten per cent in addition to the existing reservations results in violation of basic
structure on account of breaching the ceiling limit of fifty per cent?
38. All these points are essentially structured on three important components,
namely : (i) the general rule of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution;
(ii) the reservations enabled in Articles 15 and 16 as exception to the general rule of
equality; and (iii) the doctrine of basic structure that defines and limits the power of
Parliament to amend the Constitution.
Relevant constitutional provisions
39. Any process of determination of the points aforesaid would invariably require
an insight of the constitutional provisions. The relevant provisions could be usefully
reproduced as follows:
40. The Preamble to the Constitution of India, in its present form, reads as under:
"WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
The surest way t legal research!"
SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its
citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of
the Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION."
41. The underlying attribute of all the points and questions arising in these
matters is as to whether the 103rd Amendment violates the basic structure of the
Constitution. The discussion, therefore, revolves around the power of Parliament to
amend the Constitution and for this purpose, we need to have a close look at the
provisions contained in Article 368 of the Constitution. Article 368, as originally
adopted, read as under:
"368. Procedure for amendment of the Constitution.- amendment of
this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose
in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a
majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than
two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented
to the President for his assent and upon such assent being given to the Bill, the
Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in-
(a) Article 54, Article 55, Article 73, Article 162 or Article 241, or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or
(e) the provisions of this article,
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the legislature of not less than one-half of the
States specified in Parts A and B of the First Schedule by resolution to that effect passed by those
legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented to the President for
assent."
42. Article 368 has undergone several amendments, some of which had been the
subject-matter of debates in this Court, including the cases of Kesavananda- and
Minerva Mills19. Leaving aside other details, we may reproduce the relevant
provisions now contained in Article 368 as under:
"368. Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure
therefor.-(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may in
exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal
The surest way t legal research!
any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in
this article.
(2) An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the
introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when
the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that House
and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present
and voting, it shall be presented to the President who shall give his assent to the Bill
and thereupon the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of
the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in-
(a) Article 54, Article 55, Article 73, Article 162, Article 241 or Article 279-A,
or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or
(e) the provisions of this article,
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the legislature of not less than one-half of the
States by resolution to that effect passed by those legislatures before the Bill making provision for
such amendment is presented to the President for assent.
(3) Nothing in Article 13 shall apply to any amendment made under this
article. "35
43. After the amendments approved in Kesavananda5 Article 368 starts with a
non obstante clause and further to that, clause (3) thereof re-emphasises that
nothing in Article 13 would apply to any amendment made under Article 368. In this
context, a look at Article 13 of the Constitution is apposite, which otherwise declares
void every law which is inconsistent with or is in derogation of the fundamental
rights but, the inserted clause (4) keeps its operation away from the amendment
made under Article 368. Article 13 reads as under:
"13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.
-(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution, insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights
conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to
the extent of the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) "law" includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation,
notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law;
(b) "laws in force" includes laws passed or made by a legislature or other
competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this
Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that any such law or
any part thereof may not be then in operation either at all or in particular
areas.
(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this Constitution
made under Article 368."
44. By way of the amendment in question, clause (6) and Explanation have been
added to Article 15 and clause (6) has been added to Article 16 of the Constitution
of India. These two Articles, 15 and 16, being the subject of the amendment in
question and forming the core of controversy before us, need a closer look. For the
purpose, it is relevant to indicate at this stage itself that these Articles have
undergone several changes from time to time. For the purpose of the present
discussion, worthwhile it would be to take note of these Articles as originally adopted
and as now existing after various amendments, including the 103rd Constitution
Amendment* 36
45. Articles 15 and 16, in their original form were as under:
"15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex or place of birth.-(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth
or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with
regard to-
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public
entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the
general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provision for women and children.
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.-(1) There
shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment
or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place
of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in
respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an
office under any State specified in the First Schedule or any local or other
authority within its territory, any requirement as to residence within that State
prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the
services under the State."
46. These Articles 15 and 16, as now existing after various amendments,
including the amendment in question, read as under:
"15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex or place of birth.-(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth
or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with
regard to-
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public
entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the
general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State
from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 shall
prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes insofar as such special provisions relate to their
admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions,
whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational
institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30.
(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 or clause
(2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making-
(a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5);
and
(b) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5)
insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational
institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided
by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in
clause (1) of Article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in addition to
the existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of the total
seats in each category.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this article and Article 16, "economically
weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State from time to time
on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage.
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.-(1) There
shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment
or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place
of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in
respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an
office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or
Union Territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union
Territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the
services under the State.
(4-A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class
or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not
adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4-B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any
unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in
accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4-
A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years
and such class of vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of
the year in which they are being filled up for determining the ceiling of fifty per
cent reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides
that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be
a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.
(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to
the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of the posts in
each category."
47. Articles 14, 17 and 18, forming the integral part of the Equality Code along
with the aforementioned Articles 15 and 16, could also be taken note of as under:
"14. Equality before law.-The State shall not deny to any person equality
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
*
*
*
17. Abolition of Untouchability.-"Untouchability" is abolished and its
practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out of
"Untouchability" shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
18. Abolition of titles.- - (1) No title, not being a military or academic
distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any office of
profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the President any
title from any foreign State.
(4) No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State shall, without
the consent of the President, accept any present, emolument, or office of any kind
from or under any foreign State."
48. Various provisions in Part IV of the Constitution of India laying down directive
principles of State policy also require a close look, including Article 46, which has
been referred to in the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the purpose of the
amendment in question. Articles 38, 39 and 46 of the Constitution of India read as
under:
"38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
people.-(1) The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice,
social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in income,
and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not
only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people residing in different
areas or engaged in different vocations.
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.-The State
shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing-
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate
means of livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the
concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the
tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by
economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth
are protected against exploitation and against moral and material
abandonment.
*
*
*
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.-The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation."
Doctrine of Basic Structure and Constitutional Amendments
49. It is hardly a matter of debate that the challenge herein is not to any
executive order or even to an ordinary legislation. The challenge is to a constitutional
amendment. There has not been any question as regards fulfilment of all other
requirements of Article 368 of the Constitution of India while making the
amendment in question and insertion of the relevant clauses to Articles 15 and 16.
The challenge is founded on, and in fact could only be founded on, the premise that
the amendment in question violates the basic structure of the Constitution in the
manner that it destroys its identity. According to the principal part of challenge, the
Equality Code, an essential feature of the Constitution, gets abrogated because of
reservation structured only on economic criteria and because of exclusion of classes
covered under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) from its benefit. Therefore, the entire
challenge is essentially required to be examined on the anvil of the doctrine of basic
structure.
50. In the aforesaid view of the matter, before entering into the concepts relating
to the equality as also the reservation, it shall be apt and apposite to take into
account all the vital elements of the doctrine of basic structure, as developed and
hitherto applied to the constitutional amendments; and the discernible principles
which are to be applied to the amendment in question.
51. The power to amend the Constitution availing under Article 368 has been a
significant area of the development of the Constitutional law in our country. This
power, recognised as a constituent power, is subject to various safeguards which are
intrinsic to Article 368, including the procedural safeguards. The political process
from time to time that resulted in various constitutional amendments, some of them
radical in nature, gave rise to several debates in this Court as regards the width and
amplitude as also the limitations of this amending power of Parliament. Thus, Article
368 and the power of Parliament had been the subject-matter of various decisions,
some of which
being of far-reaching consequences. Before embarking upon a survey of the relevant
decisions and the principles discernible therefrom, particularly after the locus
classicus of Kesavananda5 and the later expositions (which had their genesis in the
nature of amendment and which were relatable to the given set of facts and
circumstances), it would be profitable to put a glance at a few background aspects.
52. The doctrine of basic structure was not as such discussed in the Constituent
Assembly while formulating the enabling provisions for amending the Constitution.
Then, at the initial stages of the Constitutional law development, the proposition of
challenging an amendment to the Constitution, as mooted in Shankari Prasad Singh
Deo V. Union of India 7 as also in Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan38 38 did not meet
with approval of this Court. However, first reference to the idea of "basic feature"
was made by Mudholkar, J. in Sajjan Singh 38, 39 . Then, the idea that certain parts of
the Constitution were unamendable was accepted by the eleven-Judge Bench in
Golak Nath V. State of Punjab40 However, in Kesavananda5, the thirteen-Judge
Bench of this Court, while partially overruling Golak Nath4 by a majority of 7-6, held
that though any part of the Constitution could be amended by Parliament, its basic
structure could not be damaged.
53. A precursor to the developments aforesaid could be traced to the year 1965
when a German jurist, Prof. Dietrich Conrad (1932-2001), gave a lecture on "Implied
Limitations of the Amending Power" at the Banaras Hindu University wherein he,
inter alia, asked: "Could the amending power be used to abolish the Constitution,
and reintroduce, let's say, the rule of a
Moghul emperor or the Crown of England?"41 Later, he wrote an article titled
"Limitations of Amendment Procedures and the Constituent Power" published in the
Indian Year Book of International Affairs wherein he described the limits on the
amending power as follows:
"The functional limitations implied in the grant of amending power to
Parliament may then be summarized thus : No amendment may abrogate the
Constitution. No amendment may effect changes which amount to a practical
abrogation or total revision of the Constitution. Even partial alterations are beyond
the scope of amendment if their repercussions on the organic context of the whole
are so deep and far-reaching that the fundamental identity of the Constitution is
"42
no longer apparent
54. Thus, even the origin of the submissions before this Court leading to the
expositions on the doctrine of basic structure could be traced to the thought-process
stimulated by the thinkers like Prof. Conrad. However, as shall be unfolding
hereafter, there had been voices of concern about the exact nature and implication
of this doctrine. For example, concern was expressed in State of Karnataka V. Union
"120.
In Kesavananda Bharati case1 this Court had not worked out the
implications of the basic structure doctrine in all its applications. It could,
therefore, be said, with utmost respect, that it was perhaps left there in an
amorphous state which could give rise to possible misunderstandings as to
whether it is not too vaguely stated or too loosely and variously formulated
without attempting a basic uniformity of its meaning or implications."
55. However, when the enquiry itself is into the effect of amendment of the
supreme and organic document, which is fundamental to everything related to the
country, the amorphous state of the doctrine of basic structure, obviously, leaves
every option open for purposive approach, in tune with the dynamics of change while
ensuring that the fundamental ethos remain unscathed
56. It shall now be appropriate to delve a bit deeper into some of the significant
and important cases in which the doctrine of basic structure was employed/applied
in the context of a constitutional amendment45.
57. In Kesavananda5, this Court outlined the basic structure doctrine of the
Constitution. In fact, in Kesavananda5 this Court, by a 7-6 majority, went several
steps ahead in asserting its power of judicial review so as to scrutinise any
amendment to see if it violated the basic structure of the Constitution; and asserted
its right to strike down amendments to the Constitution that were in violation of the
fundamental architecture of the Constitution. Factually, the case was a challenge to
the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 which interfered with the petitioner's rights to
manage property under Article 26. Furthermore, the Twenty-fourth, Twenty-fifth and
Twenty-ninth constitutional amendments were also challenged. By the Twenty-
fourth Amendment, Articles 13 and 368 were amended to exclude constitutional
amendments from the definition of law under Article 13; the Twenty-fifth
Amendment excluded judicial review by providing that the law giving effect to
principles specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of Article 39 could not be questioned
by the Court; and the Twenty-ninth Amendment put certain land reform enactments
in the Ninth Schedule. The present discussion need not be overexpanded with
reference to the variety of opinions expressed therein.
58. For the present purpose, a few relevant opinions could be extracted as
follows:
209, 284, 395 & 469)
"209. In other words, the expression "Amendment of this Constitution" does
not include a revision of the whole Constitution. If this is true-I say that the
concession was rightly made-then which is that meaning of the word
"Amendment" that is most appropriate and fits in with the whole scheme of the
Constitution. In my view that meaning would be appropriate which would enable
the country to achieve a social and economic revolution without destroying the
democratic structure of the Constitution and the basic inalienable rights
guaranteed in Part III and without going outside the contours delineated in the
Preamble.
*
*
*
284. In view of the above reasons, a necessary implication arises that there are
implied limitations on the power of Parliament that the expression "amendment of
this Constitution" has consequently a limited meaning in our Constitution and not
the meaning suggested by the respondents.
*
*
*
395. It was said that if Parliament cannot increase its power of amendment
clause (d) of Section 3 of the 24th Amendment which makes Article 13
inapplicable to an amendment of the Constitution would be bad. I see no force in
this contention. Article 13(2) as existing previous to the 24th Amendment as
interpreted by the majority in Golak Nath case40 prevented legislatures from
taking away or abridging the rights conferred by Article 13. In other words, any
law which abridged a fundamental right even to a small extent was liable to be
struck down Article 368 can amend every article of the Constitution as long as the
result is within the limits already laid down by me. The amendment of Article 13
(2) does not go beyond the limits laid down because Parliament cannot even after
the amendment abrogate or authorise abrogation or the taking away of
fundamental rights. After the amendment now a law which has the effect of
merely abridging a right while remaining within the limits laid down would not be
liable to be struck down.
*
*
*
469. I have held that Article 368 does not enable Parliament to abrogate or
take away fundamental rights. If this is so, it does not enable Parliament to do
this by any means, including the device of Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule.
The device of Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule is bad insofar as it protects
statutes even if they take away fundamental rights. Therefore, it is necessary to
declare that the Twenty-ninth Amendment is ineffective to protect the impugned
Acts if they take away fundamental rights."
(emphasis supplied)
paras 546 & 583)
"546. The meaning of the words "amendment of this Constitution" as used in
Article 368 must be such which accords with the true intention of the Constitution
-makers as ascertainable from the historical background, the Preamble, the entire
scheme of the Constitution, its structure and framework and the intrinsic evidence
in various articles including Article 368. It is neither possible to give it a narrow
meaning nor can such a wide meaning be given which can enable the amending
body to change substantially or entirely the structure and identity of the
Constitution. Even the concession of the learned Attorney General and the
Advocate General of Maharashtra that the whole Constitution cannot be abrogated
or repealed and a new one substituted supports the conclusion that the widest
possible meaning cannot be given to it.
*
*
*
583. The entire discussion from the point of view of the meaning of the
expression "amendment" as employed in Article 368 and the limitations which
arise by implications leads to the result that the amending power under Article
368 is neither narrow nor unlimited. On the footing on which we have proceeded
the validity of the 24th Amendment can be
sustained if Article 368, as it originally stood and after the amendment, is read in
the way we have read it. The insertion of Articles 13(4) and 368(3) and the other
amendments made will not affect the result, namely, that the power in Article 368 is
wide enough to permit amendment of each and every article of the Constitution by
way of addition, variation or repeal so long as its basic elements are not abrogated
or denuded of their identity."
(emphasis supplied)
666)
"666. On a careful consideration of the various aspects of the case, we are
convinced that Parliament has no power to abrogate or emasculate the basic
elements or fundamental features of the Constitution such as the sovereignty of
India, the democratic character of our polity, the unity of the country, the
essential features of the individual freedoms secured to the citizens. Nor has
Parliament the power to revoke the mandate to build a Welfare State and
egalitarian society. These limitations are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
Despite these limitations, however, there can be no question that the amending
power is a wide power and it reaches every article and every part of the
Constitution. That power can be used to reshape the Constitution to fulfil the
obligation imposed on the State. It can also be used to reshape the Constitution
within the limits mentioned earlier, to make it an effective instrument for social
good. We are unable to agree with the contention that in order to build a Welfare
State, it is necessary to destroy some of the human freedoms. That, at any rate is
not the perspective of our Constitution. Our Constitution envisages that the State
should without delay make available to all the citizens of this country the real
benefits of those freedoms in a democratic way.
Every encroachment on
freedoms sets a pattern for further encroachments. Our constitutional plan is to
eradicate poverty without destruction of individual freedoms."
(emphasis supplied)
1535)
"1416. Argument has then been advanced that if power be held to be vested in
Parliament under Article 368 to take away or abridge fundamental rights, the
power would be, or in any case could be, so used as would result in repeal of all
provisions containing fundamental rights. India, it is urged, in such an event
would be reduced to a police State wherein all cherished values like freedom and
liberty would be non-existent. This argument, in my opinion, is essentially an
argument of fear and distrust in the majority of representatives of the people. It
is also based upon the belief that the power under Article 368 by two-thirds of the
members present and voting in each House of Parliament would be abused or
used extravagantly. I find it difficult to deny to Parliament the power to amend
the Constitution so as to take away or abridge fundamental
right by complying with the procedure of Article 368 because of any such supposed
fear or possibility of the abuse of power. I may in this context refer to the
observations of Marshall, C.J., regarding the possibility of the abuse of power of
legislation and of taxation in Providence Bank V. Alpheus Billings46 : (L Ed p. 939)
This vital power may be abused; but the Constitution of the United States
was not intended to furnish the corrective for every abuse of power which may
be committed by the State Governments. The interest, wisdom, and justice of
the representative body, and its relations with its constituents furnish the only
security where there is no express contract, against unjust and excessive
taxation, as well as against unwise legislation generally.'
*
*
*
1535. In exercising the power of judicial review, the Courts cannot be oblivious
of the practical needs of the Government. The door has to be left open for trial
and error. Constitutional law like other mortal contrivances has to take some
chances. Opportunity must be allowed for vindicating reasonable belief by
experience. Judicial review is not intended to create what is sometimes called
Judicial Oligarchy, the Aristocracy of the Robe, Covert Legislation, or Judge-made
law. The proper forum to fight for the wise use of the legislative authority is that
of public opinion and legislative assemblies. Such contest cannot be transferred to
the judicial arena. That all constitutional interpretations have political
consequences should not obliterate the fact that the decision has to be arrived at
in the calm and dispassionate atmosphere of the court room, that Judges in order
to give legitimacy to their decision have to keep aloof from the din and
controversy of politics and that the fluctuating fortunes of rival political parties
can have for them only academic interest. Their primary duty is to uphold the
Constitution and the laws without fear or favour and in doing so, they cannot
allow any political ideology or economic theory, which may have caught their
fancy, to colour the decision. The sobering reflection has always to be there that
the Constitution is meant not merely for people of their way of thinking but for
The surest wayt to legal research!"
people of fundamentally differing views. As observed4 by Holmes, J. while
47
dealing with the Fourteenth Amendment to the US Constitution : (Lochner case4
`48.
The Fourteenth Amendment does not enact Mr Herbert Spencer's
Social Statics.
Some of these laws embody convictions or prejudices which
Judges are likely to share. Some may not. But a Constitution is not intended to
embody a particular economic theory, whether of paternalism and the organic
relation of the citizen to the State or of laissez faire. It is made for people of
fundamentally differing views, and the accident of our finding certain opinions
natural and familiar, or novel, and even shocking, ought not to conclude our
judgment upon the question whether statutes embodying them conflict with the
Constitution of the United States.''
"
(emphasis supplied)
59. In Indira Nehru Gandhi4, using the doctrine of basic structure, the Thirty-
ninth Constitutional Amendment Act was struck down whereby the election of the
President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha
were put beyond the judicial scrutiny. Such an amendment was held to be
destroying the basic feature of the Constitution.
60. In Minerva Mills19 again, using the doctrine of basic structure, clauses (4)
and (5) of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 were struck down
with the following, amongst other, observations : Per Chandrachud, C.J. : (Minerva
"56. The significance of the perception that Parts III and IV together constitute
the core of commitment to social revolution and they, together, are the
conscience of the Constitution is to be traced to a deep understanding of the
scheme of the Indian Constitution. Granville Austin's observation brings out the
true position that Parts III and IV are like two wheels of a chariot, one no less
important than the other. You snap one and the other will lose its efficacy. They
are like a twin formula for achieving the social revolution, which is the ideal which
the visionary founders of the Constitution set before themselves. In other words,
the Indian Constitution is founded on the bedrock of the balance between Parts III
and IV. To give absolute primacy to one over the other is to disturb the harmony
of the Constitution. This harmony and balance between fundamental rights and
directive principles is an essential feature of the basic structure of the
Constitution.
57.
The goals set out in Part IV have, therefore, to be achieved without the
abrogation of the means provided for by Part III. It is in this sense that Parts III
and IV together constitute the core of our Constitution and combine to form its
conscience. Anything that destroys the balance between the two parts will ipso
facto destroy an essential element of the basic structure of our Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
61. In Waman Rao27 it was held that the First Constitution Amendment Act, that
introduced Articles 31-A and 31-B, as well as the Twenty-fifth Amendment Act that
introduced Article 31-C were constitutional, and did not damage any basic or
essential features or the basic structure of the Constitution. Herein, this Court
examined the validity of Article 31-A and Article 31-B of the Constitution of India
with respect to the doctrine of basic structure introduced in Kesavananda15 and
observed that all the decisions made prior to the introduction of the doctrine shall
remain valid. The impact of this decision
had been that all the Acts and Regulations that were included under the Ninth
Schedule to the Constitution prior to the Kesavananda5 decision were to remain
valid while further amendments to the Schedule could be challenged on the grounds
of violation of the doctrine of basic structure.
62. The relevant observations in this case read as under : Per Chandrachud, C.J. :
"14.
We would like to add that every case in which the protection of a
fundamental right is withdrawn will not necessarily result in damaging or
destroying the basic structure of the Constitution. The question as to whether the
basic structure is damaged or destroyed in any given case would depend upon
which particular Article of Part III is in issue and whether what is withdrawn is
quintessential to the basic structure of the Constitution.
*
*
*
29. The First Amendment is aimed at removing social and economic disparities
in the agricultural sector. It may happen that while existing inequalities are being
removed, new inequalities may arise marginally and incidentally. Such marginal
and incidental inequalities cannot damage or destroy the basic structure of the
Constitution. It is impossible for any Government, howsoever expertly advised,
socially oriented and prudently managed, to remove every economic disparity
without causing some hardship or injustice to a class of persons who also are
entitled to equal treatment under the law. Thus, the adoption of "family unit" as
the unit of application for the revised ceilings may cause incidental hardship to
minor children and to unmarried daughters. That cannot, in our opinion, furnish
an argument for assailing the impugned laws on the ground that they violate the
guarantee of equality. It seems to us ironical indeed that the laws providing for
agricultural ceilings should be stigmatised as destroying the guarantee of equality
when their true object and intendment is to remove inequalities in the matter of
agricultural holdings.
*
*
*
49. We propose to draw a line, treating the decision in Kesavananda Bharati15
as the landmark. Several Acts were put in the Ninth Schedule prior to that
decision on the supposition that the power of Parliament to amend the
Constitution was wide and untrammelled. The theory that Parliament cannot
exercise its amending power so as to damage or destroy the basic structure of the
The surest way't legal research!"
Constitution, was propounded and accepted for the first time in Kesavananda
Bharati This is one reason for upholding the laws incorporated into the Ninth
Schedule before 24-4-1973, on which date the judgment in Kesavananda
Bharati15 was rendered. A large number of properties must have changed hands
and several new titles must have come into existence on the faith and belief that
the laws included in the Ninth Schedule were not open to challenge on the ground
that they were
violative of Articles 14, 19 and 31. We will not be justified in upsetting settled
claims and titles and in introducing chaos and confusion into the lawful affairs of a
fairly orderly society.
*
*
51. Thus, insofar as the validity of Article 31-B read with the Ninth Schedule is
concerned, we hold that all Acts and Regulations included in the Ninth Schedule
prior to 24-4-1973 will receive the full protection of Article 31-B. Those laws and
regulations will not be open to challenge on the ground that they are inconsistent
with or take away or abridge any of the rights conferred by any of the provisions
of Part III of the Constitution. Acts and Regulations, which are or will be included
in the Ninth Schedule on or after 24-4-1973 will not receive the protection of
Article 31-B for the plain reason that in the face of the judgment in Kesavananda
Bharati15 there was no justification for making additions to the Ninth Schedule
with a view to conferring a blanket protection on the laws included therein. The
various constitutional amendments, by which additions were made to the Ninth
Schedule on or after 24-4-1973, will be valid only if they do not damage or
destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.
*
*
*
54. Apart from this, if we are right in upholding the validity of Article 31-A on
its own merits, it must follow logically that the unamended Article 31-C is also
valid.
Whatever we have said in respect of the defined category of laws
envisaged by Article 31-A must hold good, perhaps with greater force, in respect
of laws passed for the purpose of giving effect to clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39.
It is impossible to conceive that any law passed for such a purpose can at all
violate Article 14 or Article 19. Article 31 is now out of harm's way. In fact, far
from damaging the basic structure of the Constitution, laws passed truly and
bona fide for giving effect to directive principles contained in clauses (b) and (c)
of Article 39 will fortify that structure. We do hope that Parliament will utilise to
the maximum its potential to pass laws, genuinely and truly related to the
principles contained in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39. The challenge made to
the validity of the first part of the unamended Article 31-C therefore fails."
(emphasis supplied)
In P. Sambamurthy V. State of A.P. 48 (hereinafter also referred to as "P.
Sambamurthy") this Court examined Article 371-D inserted by the Constitution
(Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973 and struck down its clause (5) with proviso,
as being violative of the basic structure since it conferred power on the State
Government to modify or annul the final order of the Administrative Tribunal, which
was against the concept of justice and principle of rule of law.
64. In Kihoto Hollohan V. Zachillhu49 the constitutional validity of the Tenth
Schedule to the Constitution introduced by the Constitution (Fifty-
second Amendment) Act, 1985, was assailed. Though, the majority opinion did not
find the entire amendment unconstitutional but the Court declared invalid Para 7 of
the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, which excluded judicial review of any matter
connected with the disqualification of a Member of a House in terms of the provisions
contained in that Schedule, essentially for want of ratification in accordance with the
proviso to clause (2) of Article 368.
65. In Raghunathrao1 the validity of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 1971 which removed privy purses was brought into question, inter
alia, on the ground that it violated the basic structure and essential features of the
Constitution of India and was, therefore, outside the scope and ambit of the powers
of Parliament to amend the Constitution. This Court denied interference while
"96. Permanent retention of the privy purse and the privileges of rights would
be incompatible with the sovereign and republican form of Government. Such a
retention will also be incompatible with the egalitarian form of our Constitution.
That is the opinion of Parliament which acted to repeal the aforesaid provisions in
exercise of its constituent power. The repudiation of the right to privy purse
privileges, dignities, etc. by the deletion of Articles 291 and 362, insertion of
Article 363-A and amendment of clause (22) of Article 366 by which the
recognition of the Rulers and payment of privy purse are withdrawn cannot be
said to have offended Article 14 or 19(g) [sic 19(1)(f)] and we do not find any
logic in such a submission. No principle of justice, either economic, political or
social is violated by the Twenty-sixth Amendment. Political justice relates to the
principle of rights of the people i.e. right to universal suffrage, right to democratic
form of Government and right to participation in political affairs. Economic justice
is enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution. Social justice is enshrined in Article
38. Both are in the directive principles of the Constitution. None of these rights
are abridged or modified by this Amendment. We feel that this contention need
not detain us any more and, therefore, we shall pass on to the next point in
debate.
*
*
*
107. On a deep consideration of the entire scheme and content of the
Constitution, we do not see any force in the above submissions. In the present
case, there is no question of change of identity on account of the Twenty-sixth
Amendment. The removal of Articles 291 and 362 has not made any change in
the personality of the Constitution either in its scheme or in its basic features, or
in its basic form or in its character. The question of identity will arise only when
there is a change in the form, character and content of the Constitution. In fact,
in the present case, the identity of the Constitution even on the tests proposed by
the counsel of the writ petitioners and interveners, remains the same and
unchanged."
(emphasis supplied)
66. A seven-Judge Bench of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar V. Union of India50
(hereinafter also referred to as "L. Chandra Kumar") had the occasion to examine the
nature and extent of jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226/227; and it
was held that power of judicial review under Articles 226/227 and Article 32 of the
Constitution is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution, constituting its
basic structure. The Constitution Bench held invalid the provisions of clause 2(d) of
Article 323-A and clause 3(d) of Article 323-B, inserted by the Constitution (Forty-
second Amendment) Act, which excluded the jurisdiction of the High Court while
"99. In view of the reasoning adopted by us, we hold that clause 2)(d) of
Article 323-A and clause (3)(d) of Article 323-B, to the extent they exclude the
jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 and
32 of the Constitution, are unconstitutional. Section 28 of the Act and the
"exclusion of jurisdiction" clauses in all other legislations enacted under the aegis
of Articles 323-A and 323-B would, to the same extent, be unconstitutional. The
jurisdiction conferred upon the High Courts under Articles 226/227 and upon the
Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is a part of the inviolable basic
structure of our Constitution. While this jurisdiction cannot be ousted, other
courts and Tribunals may perform a supplemental role in discharging the powers
conferred by Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
67. In M. Nagaraj9, the Constitution Bench validated the Constitution (Seventy-
seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 which inserted Article 16(4-A); the Constitution
(Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000 which inserted Article 16(4-B); the Constitution
(Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000 which inserted a proviso to Article 335; and
the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001 which added "consequential
seniority" for SC/STs under Article 16(4-B). The said amendments were introduced
essentially to nullify the effect of the decision in Indra Sawhney5 wherein a nine-
Judge Bench had ruled that reservation in appointments did not apply to
promotions. Article 16(4-A) enables the State to make any law regarding reservation
in promotion for SC/STs. Article 16(4-B) provides that reserved promotion posts for
SC/STs that remain unfilled, can be carried-forward to the subsequent year. Article
16(4-B) also ensures that the ceiling on the reservation quota for these carried-
forward posts does not apply to subsequent years. Article 335 mandates that
reservations have to be balanced with the "maintenance of efficiency". The
amendment to Article 335 clarified that the Article will not apply to the State
relaxing evaluation standards "in matters of promotion".
104, 108-09, 121 & 124)
"104. Applying the above tests to the present case, there is no violation of the
basic structure by any of the impugned Amendments, including the Constitution
(Eighty-second) Amendment Act, 2000. The constitutional limitation under Article
335 is relaxed and not obliterated. As stated above, be it reservation or
evaluation, excessiveness in either would result in violation of the constitutional
mandate. This exercise, however, will depend on the facts of each case. In our
view, the field of exercise of the amending power is retained by the impugned
Amendments, as the impugned Amendments have introduced merely enabling
provisions because, as stated above, merit, efficiency, backwardness and
inadequacy cannot be identified and measured in vacuum. Moreover, Article 16(4-
A) and Article 16(4-B) fall in the pattern of Article 16(4) and as long as the
parameters mentioned in those articles are complied with by the States, the
provision of reservation cannot be faulted. Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B) are
classifications within the principle of equality under Article 16(4).
*
*
*
108. Applying the above tests to the proviso to Article 335 inserted by the
Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000 we find that the said proviso
has a nexus with Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B). Efficiency in administration is held
to be a constitutional limitation on the discretion vested in the State to provide
for reservation in public employment. Under the proviso to Article 335, it is stated
that nothing in Article 335 shall prevent the State to relax qualifying marks or
standards of evaluation for reservation in promotion. This proviso is also confined
only to members of SCs and STs. This proviso is also conferring discretionary
power on the State to relax qualifying marks or standards of evaluation.
Therefore, the question before us is-whether the State could be empowered to
relax qualifying marks or standards for reservation in matters of promotion. In our
view, even after insertion of this proviso, the limitation of overall efficiency in
Article 335 is not obliterated. Reason is that "efficiency" is a variable factor. It is
for the State concerned to decide in a given case, whether the overall efficiency of
the system is affected by such relaxation. If the relaxation is so excessive that it
ceases to be qualifying marks then certainly in a given case, as in the past, the
State is free not to relax such standards. In other cases, the State may evolve a
mechanism under which efficiency, equity and justice, all three variables, could
be accommodated. Moreover, Article 335 is to be read with Article 46 which
provides that the State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social
injustice. Therefore, where the State finds compelling interests of backwardness
and inadequacy, it may relax the qualifying marks for SCs/
STs. These compelling interests however have to be identified by weighty and
comparable data.
109. In conclusion, we reiterate that the object behind the impugned
constitutional amendments is to confer discretion on the State to make
reservations for SCs/STs in promotions subject to the circumstances and the
constitutional limitations indicated above.
*
*
*
Conclusion
121. The impugned constitutional amendments by which Articles 16(4-A) and
16(4-B) have been inserted flow from Article 16(4). They do not alter the
structure of Article 16(4). They retain the controlling factors or the compelling
reasons, namely, backwardness and inadequacy of representation which enables
the States to provide for reservation keeping in mind the overall efficiency of the
State administration under Article 335. These impugned Amendments are
confined only to SCs and STs. They do not obliterate any of the constitutional
requirements, namely, ceiling limit of 50% (quantitative limitation), the concept
of creamy layer (qualitative exclusion), the sub-classification between OBCs on
one hand and SCs and STs on the other hand as held in Indra Sawhney5, the
concept of post-based roster with inbuilt concept of replacement as held in R.K.
Sabharwal51.
*
*
*
124. Subject to the above, we uphold the constitutional validity of the
Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995; the Constitution (Eighty-
first Amendment) Act, 2000; the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act,
2000 and the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001."
(emphasis supplied)
69. In Ashoka Kumar Thakur12, the provisions of the Constitution (Ninety-third
Amendment) Act, 2005 were under challenge, which inserted clause (5) to Article 15
of the Constitution. This Court rejected the contention of violation of the basic
122)
"118. Equality is a multicoloured concept incapable of a single definition as is
also the fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g). The principle of equality is a
delicate, vulnerable and supremely precious concept for our society. It is true that
it has embraced a critical and essential component of constitutional identity. The
larger principles of equality as stated in Articles 14, 15 and 16 may be understood
as an element of the "basic structure" of the Constitution and may not be subject
to amendment, although, these provisions, intended to configure
these rights in a particular way, may be changed within the constraints of the
The surest way t legal research!"
broader principle. The variability of changing conditions may necessitate the
modifications in the structure and design of these rights, but the transient
characters of formal arrangements must reflect the larger purpose and principles
that are the continuous and unalterable thread of constitutional identity. It is not the
introduction of significant and far-reaching change that is objectionable, rather it is
the content of this change insofar as it implicates the question of constitutional
identity.
*
*
*
120. If any constitutional amendment is made which moderately abridges or
alters the equality principle or the principles under Article 19(1)(g), it cannot be
said that it violates the basic structure of the Constitution. If such a principle is
(sic not) accepted, our Constitution would not be able to adapt itself to the
changing conditions of a dynamic human society. Therefore, the plea raised by
the petitioners' counsel that the present Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment)
Act, 2005 alters the basic structure of the Constitution is of no force. Moreover,
the interpretation of the Constitution shall not be in a narrow pedantic way. The
observations made by the Constitution Bench in Nagaraj case9 at pp. 240-41 are
`19. The Constitution is not an ephemeral legal document embodying a set of
legal rules for the passing hour. It sets out principles for an expanding future and
is intended to endure for ages to come and consequently to be adapted to the
various crises of human affairs. Therefore, a purposive rather than a strict literal
approach to the interpretation should be adopted. A constitutional provision must
be construed not in a narrow and constricted sense but in a wide and liberal
manner so as to anticipate and take account of changing conditions and purposes
so that a constitutional provision does not get fossilised but remains flexible
enough to meet the newly emerging problems and challenges."
*
*
*
122. Therefore, we hold that the Ninety-third Amendment to the Constitution
does not violate the "basic structure" of the Constitution so far as it relates to
aided educational institutions. Question whether reservation could be made for
SCs, STs or SEBCs in private unaided educational institutions on the basis of the
Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment); or whether reservation could be given in
such institutions; or whether any such legislation would be violative of Article 19
(1)(g) or Article 14 of the Constitution; or whether the Constitution (Ninety-third
Amendment) which enables the State Legislatures or Parliament to make such
legislation are all questions to be decided in a properly
constituted lis between the affected parties and others who support such
legislation."
(emphasis supplied)
70. In K. Krishna Murthy V. Union of India 52, the Constitution (Seventy-third
Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act,
1992 which had inserted Part IX and Part IX-A to the Constitution thereby
contemplating the powers, composition and functions of Local Self-Government
institutions i.e. the Panchayats (for rural areas) and Municipalities (for urban areas)
were in challenge. This Court rejected the challenge while holding that there was no
"82. In view of the above, our conclusions are:
(i) The nature and purpose of reservations in the context of local self-
government is considerably different from that of higher education and public
employment. In this sense, Article 243-D and Article 243-T form a distinct and
independent constitutional basis for affirmative action and the principles that
have been evolved in relation to the reservation policies enabled by Articles 15
(4) and 16(4) cannot be readily applied in the context of local self-
government. Even when made, they need not be for a period corresponding to
the period of reservation for the purposes of Articles 15(4) and 16(4), but can
be much shorter.
(ii) Article 243-D(6) and Article 243-T(6) are constitutionally valid since
they are in the nature of provisions which merely enable the State Legislatures
to reserve seats and chairperson posts in favour of backward classes. Concerns
about disproportionate reservations should be raised by way of specific
challenges against the State legislations.
(iii) We are not in a position to examine the claims about overbreadth in the
quantum of reservations provided for OBCs under the impugned State
legislations since there is no contemporaneous empirical data. The onus is on
the executive to conduct a rigorous investigation into the patterns of
backwardness that act as barriers to political participation which are indeed
quite different from the patterns of disadvantages in the matter of access to
education and employment. As we have considered and decided only the
constitutional validity of Articles 243-D(6) and 243-T(6), it will be open to the
petitioners or any aggrieved party to challenge any State legislation enacted in
pursuance of the said constitutional provisions before the High Court. We are of
the view that the identification of "backward classes" under Article 243-D(6)
and Article 243-T(6) should be distinct from the identification of SEBCs for the
purpose of
Article 15(4) and that of backward classes for the purpose of Article 16(4).
(iv) The upper ceiling of 50% vertical reservations in favour of
SCs/STs/OBCs should not be breached in the context of local self-government.
Exceptions can only be made in order to safeguard the interests of the
Scheduled Tribes in the matter of their representation in panchayats located in
the Scheduled Areas.
(v) The reservation of chairperson posts in the manner contemplated by
Articles 243-D(4) and 243-T(4) is constitutionally valid. These chairperson
posts cannot be equated with solitary posts in the context of public
employment."
(emphasis supplied)
71. In Pramati Trust33 the validity of clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution
inserted by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005 was again in
question in reference to the private unaided educational institutions (the aspect
which was not under consideration in Ashoka Kumar Thakur12) as also the validity of
Article 21-A of the Constitution inserted by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2002 with effect from 1-4-2010. This Court denied that there was
any basic structure violation while observing, inter alia, as under : (Pramati Trust
"38. We accordingly hold that none of the rights under Articles 14, 19(1)(g)
and 21 of the Constitution have been abrogated by clause (5) of Article 15 of the
Constitution and the view taken by Bhandari, J. in Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union
of
India2 that the imposition of reservation on unaided institutions by the Ninety-
third Amendment has abrogated Article 19(1)(g), a basic feature of the
Constitution is not correct. Instead, we hold that the Constitution (Ninety-third
Amendment) Act, 2005 inserting clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution is
valid.
*
*
*
51. In our considered opinion, therefore, by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth
Amendment) Act, a new power was made available to the State under Article 21-
A of the Constitution to make a law determining the manner in which it will
provide free and compulsory education to the children of the age of six to fourteen
years as this goal contemplated in the directive principles in Article 45 before this
constitutional amendment could not be achieved for fifty years. This additional
power vested by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002 in the
State is independent and different from the power of the State under clause (6) of
Article 19 of the Constitution and has affected the voluntariness of the right under
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. By exercising this additional power, the State
can by law impose admissions on private unaided schools and so long as the law
made by the State in exercise of this power under Article 21-A of the Constitution
is for the purpose of providing free and compulsory education to the children of
the age of 6 to 14 years and so long as such law
forces admission of children of poorer, weaker and backward sections of the society
to a small percentage of the seats in private educational institutions to achieve the
constitutional goals of equality of opportunity and social justice set out in the
Preamble of the Constitution, such a law would not be destructive of the right of the
private unaided educational institutions under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
*
*
*
56. In the result, we hold that the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act,
2005 inserting clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution and the Constitution
(Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002 inserting Article 21-A of the Constitution do
not alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution and are
constitutionally valid. We also hold that the 2009 Act is not ultra vires Article 19
(1)(g) of the Constitution. We, however, hold that the 2009 Act insofar as it
applies to minority schools, aided or unaided, covered under clause (1) of Article
30 of the Constitution is ultra vires the Constitution. Accordingly, Writ Petition (C)
No. 1081 of 2013 filed on behalf of Muslim Minority Schools Managers' Association
is allowed and Writ Petitions (C) Nos. 416 of 2012, 152 of 2013, 60, 95, 106,
128, 144-45, 160 and 136 of 2014 filed on behalf of non-minority private unaided
educational institutions are dismissed. All IAs stand disposed of. The parties,
however, shall bear their own costs."
(emphasis supplied)
72. In Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union of India53 (hereinafter
53
also referred to as "the NJAC Judgment"), the questions were pertaining to the
constitutional validity of the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 and
that of the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2014. This Court held
that the amendment violated the basic structure inasmuch as by altering the
process of appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court and the High Court, the
amendment was striking at the very basis of the independence of the judiciary, an
essential feature of the Constitution. A few passages from the majority opinions read
as under:
422, para 308)
"308. Articles 124-A(1)(a) and (b) do not provide for an adequate
representation in the matter to the judicial component to ensure primacy of the
judiciary in the matter of selection and appointment of Judges to the higher
judiciary, and therefore, the same are liable to be set aside and struck down as
being violative of the "basic structure" of the Constitution of India. Thus viewed,
we are satisfied that the "basic structure" of the Constitution would be clearly
violated if the process of selection of Judges to the higher judiciary was to be
conducted in the manner contemplated through NJAC. The impugned
constitutional amendment being ultra vires the "basic structure" of the
Constitution is liable to be set aside."
(emphasis supplied)
668-69, para 928)
"928. The 99th Constitution Amendment Act and the NJAC Act not only reduce
the Chief Justice of India to a number in NJAC but also convert the mandatory
consultation between the President and the Chief Justice of India to a dumb
charade with NJAC acting as an intermediary. On earlier occasions, Parliament
enhanced its power through constitutional amendments, which were struck down,
inter alia, in Indira Nehru Gandhi34 and Minerva Mills19. The 99th Constitution
Amendment Act unconstitutionally minimises the role of the Chief Justice of India
and the judiciary to a vanishing point in the appointment of Judges. It also
considerably downsizes the role of the President. This effaces the basic structure
of the independence of the judiciary by sufficiently altering the process of
appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court and the High Court, or at least
alters it unconstitutionally thereby striking at the very basis of the independence
of the judiciary."
(emphasis supplied)
73. In his powerful dissent in the abovereferred NJAC Judgment5 53 Chelameswar,
J. surveyed a vast variety of case law relating to the doctrine/theory of basic
structure and thereafter, summed up the relevant propositions, inter alia, as
1196)
"1196. An analysis of the judgments of the abovementioned cases
commencing from Kesavananda case 15 yields the following propositions:
1196.1. Article 368 enables Parliament to amend any provision of the
Constitution.
1196.2. The power under Article 368 however does not enable Parliament to
destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.
1196.3. None of the cases referred to above specified or declared what is the
basic structure of the Constitution.
1196.4. The expressions "basic structure" and "basic features" convey different
ideas though some of the learned Judges used those expressions interchangeably.
1196.5. The basic structure of the Constitution is the sum total of the basic
features of the Constitution.
1196.6. Some of the basic features identified so far by this Court are
democracy, secularism, equality of status, independence of judiciary, judicial
review and some of the fundamental rights.
1196.7. The abrogation of any one of the basic features results normally in the
destruction of the basic structure of the Constitution subject to some exceptions.
1196.8. As to when the abrogation of a particular basic feature can be said to
destroy the basic structure of the Constitution depends upon the nature of the
basic feature sought to be amended and the context of the amendment. There is
no universally applicable test vis--vis all the basic features."
(emphasis supplied)
74. Lastly, in the decision in Jaishri Patil10 to which one of us (S. Ravindra Bhat,
J.) was a party, this Court considered the validity of the Constitution (One Hundred
and Second Amendment) Act, 2018 which, inter alia, inserted Articles 366(26-C)
and 342-A. As a result of this amendment, the President alone, to the exclusion of
all other authorities, is empowered to identify socially and educationally backward
classes and include them in a list to be published under Article 342-A(1), which
shall be deemed to include SEBCs in relation to each State and Union Territory for
the purposes of the Constitution. The said amendment was challenged, inter alia, on
the ground that the same was not ratified by at least half of the States and that it
was striking at the federal structure of the Constitution. While rejecting the
challenge, this Court held that there was no breach of the basic structure of the
Constitution.
75. Some of the relevant questions formulated in that case and the opinions
para 7)
"7.
7.4. (4) Whether the Constitution (One Hundred and Second)
Amendment deprives the State Legislature of its power to enact a legislation
determining the socially and economically backward classes and conferring the
benefits on the said community under its enabling power?
7.5. (5) Whether, States' power to legislate in relation to "any backward class"
under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is anyway abridged by Article 342-A read with
Article 366(26-C) of the Constitution of India?
7.6. (6) Whether Article 342-A of the Constitution abrogates States' power to
legislate or classify in respect of "any backward class of citizens" and thereby
affects the federal policy/structure of the Constitution of India?"
"182. This Court is also of the opinion that the change brought about by the
102nd Amendment, especially Article 342-A is only with respect to the process of
identification of SEBCs and their list. Necessarily, the power to frame policies and
legislation with regard to all other matters i.e. the welfare schemes for SEBCs,
setting up of institutions, grants,
scholarships, extent of reservations and special provisions under Articles 15(4), 15
(5) and 16(4) are entirely with the State Government in relation to its institutions
and its public services (including services under agencies and corporations and
companies controlled by the State Government). In other words, the extent of
reservations, the kind of benefits, the quantum of scholarships, the number of
schools which are to be specially provided under Article 15(4) or any other beneficial
or welfare scheme which is conceivable under Article 15(4) can all be achieved by
the State through its legislative and executive powers. This power would include
making suggestions and collecting data - if necessary, through statutory
commissions, for making recommendations towards inclusion or exclusion of castes
and communities to the President on the aid and advice of the Union Council of
Ministers under Article 342-A. This will accord with the spirit of the Constitution
under Article 338-B and the principle of cooperative federalism which guides the
interpretation of this Constitution.
*
*
*
193. By these parameters, the alteration of the content of the State legislative
power in an oblique and peripheral manner would not constitute a violation of the
concept of federalism. It is only if the amendment takes away the verv essence of
federalism or effectively divests the federal content of the Constitution, and
denudes the States of their effective power to legislate or frame executive policies
(co-extensive with legislative power) that the amendment would take away an
essential feature or violate the basic structure of the Constitution. Applying such a
benchmark, this Court is of the opinion that the power of identification of SEBCs
hitherto exercised by the States and now shifted to the domain of the President
(and for its modification, to Parliament) by virtue of Article 342-A does not in any
manner violate the essential features or basic structure of the Constitution. The
102nd Amendment is also not contrary to or violative of proviso to Article 368(2)
of the Constitution of India. As a result, it is held that the writ petition is without
merit; it is dismissed.
*
*
*
194.5. Re Point (5) : Whether, States' power to legislate in relation to "any
backward class" under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is anyway abridged by Article 342
-A read with Article 366(26-C) of the Constitution of India? On these two
interrelated points of reference, my conclusions are as follows:
*
*
*
194.5.5. The States' power to make reservations, in favour of particular
communities or castes, the quantum of reservations, the nature of benefits and
the kind of reservations, and all other matters falling within the ambit of Articles
15 and 16 - except with respect to identification of SEBCs, remains undisturbed.
194.6. Re Point (6) : Article 342-A of the Constitution by denuding the States
power to legislate or classify in respect of "any backward class of citizens" does
not affect or damage the federal polity and does not violate the basic structure of
the Constitution of India."
(emphasis in original and supplied)
"686. We do not find any merit in the challenge to the Constitution 102nd
Amendment. The Constitution 102nd Amendment does not violate any basic
feature of the Constitution. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner
is that Article 368 has not been followed since the Constitution 102nd
Amendment was not ratified by the necessary majority of the State. Parliament
never intended to take the rights of the State regarding identification of backward
classes, the Constitution 102nd Amendment was not covered by the proviso to
Article 368 clause (2), hence, the same did not require any ratification. The
argument of procedural violation in passing the 102nd Constitutional Amendment
cannot also be accepted. We uphold the Constitution 102nd Amendment
interpreted in the manner as above."
(emphasis supplied)
76. A comprehension of the foregoing makes one aspect more than clear. It is
that there is no, and there cannot be any, cut-and-dried formula or a theorem which
could supply a ready-made answer to the question as to whether a particular
amendment to the Constitution violates or affects the basic structure. The nature of
amendment and the feature(s) of the Constitution sought to be touched, altered,
modulated, or changed by the amendment would be the material factors for an
appropriate determination of the question. As observed hereinbefore, amorphous
state of the doctrine of basic structure is rather pertinent in this quest, so as to keep
in tune with the organic nature of the Constitution.
77. However, the observations foregoing are not to suggest as if the doctrine of
basic structure is so open-ended that it would be readily applied to every
constitutional amendment. Quite to the opposite, as exemplified by the decisions
abovereferred, this Court has applied the same only against such hostile
constitutional amendments which were found to be striking at the very identity of
the Constitution, like direct abrogation of the features of judicial review
, Minerva Mills19 and P. Sambamurthy 54 free and fair elections
(Indira Nehru Gandhi4); plenary jurisdiction of constitutional courts (L. Chandra
Kumar50); and independence of judiciary (NJAC Judgment53. Most of the other
attempts to question the constitutional amendments have met with disapproval of
this Court even when there had been departure from the existing constitutional
provisions and scheme.
78. The reason for minimal interference by this Court in the constitutional
amendments is not far to seek. In our constitutional set-up of parliamentary
democracy, even when the power of judicial review is an essential feature and
thereby an immutable part of the basic structure of the Constitution, the power to
amend the Constitution, vested in Parliament in terms of Article 368, is equally an
inherent part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Both these powers, of
amending the Constitution (by Parliament) and of judicial review (by the
constitutional court) are subject to their own limitations. The interplay of amending
powers of Parliament and judicial review by the constitutional court over such
exercise of amending powers may appear a little bit complex but ultimately leads
towards strengthening the constitutional value of separation of powers. This synergy
of separation is the strength of our Constitution.
79. A few material aspects related with this interlacing of the amending powers of
Parliament and operation of the doctrine of basic structure could be usefully
condensed as follows:
79.1. The power to amend the Constitution essentially vests with Parliament and
when a high threshold and other procedural safeguards are provided in Article 368,
it would not be correct to assume that every amendment to the Constitution could
be challenged by theoretical reference to the basic structure doctrine.
79.2. As exposited in Kesavananda5, the amending power can even be used by
Parliament to reshape the Constitution in order to fulfil the obligation imposed on
the State, subject, of course, to the defined limits of not damaging the basic
structure of the Constitution.
79.3. Again, as put in Kesavananda  judicial review of the constitutional
amendment is a matter of great circumspection for the judiciary where the Courts
cannot be oblivious of the practical needs of the Government and door has to be left
open even for "trial and error", subject, again, to the limitations of not damaging the
identity of the Constitution.
79.4. The expressions "basic features" and "basic structure" convey different
meanings, even though many times they have been used interchangeably. It could
reasonably be said that the basic structure of the Constitution is the sum total of its
essential features.
79.5. As to when abrogation of any particular essential feature would lead to
damaging the basic structure of the Constitution would depend upon the nature of
that feature as also the nature of amendment.
79.6. As regards Part III of the Constitution, every case of amendment of the
fundamental rights may not necessarily result in damaging or destroying the basic
structure. The issue would always be as to whether what is sought to be withdrawn
or altered is an inviolable part of the basic structure.
79.7. Mere violation of the rule of equality does not violate the basic structure of
the Constitution unless the violation is shocking, unconscionable or unscrupulous
travesty of the quintessence of equal justice, as exposited in Bhim Singhji30.
79.8. If any constitutional amendment moderately abridges or alters the equality
principles, it cannot be said to be a violation of the basic structure.
80. While keeping in view the principles foregoing, we may embark upon the
points arising for determination in this matter so as to answer the root question as
to whether the amendment in question violates the basic structure of the
Constitution?
81. As noticed, the principal part of challenge to the 103rd Amendment is
premised on the ground that insertion of clause (6) to Article 15 as also the parallel
insertion of clause (6) to Article 16 abrogates the Equality Code, an essential feature
of the Constitution of India; and thereby destroys the basic structure of the
Constitution. In order to determine as to whether the amendment in question
destroys or violates the basic structure, we need to examine the doctrine of equality
as enshrined in our Constitution; the concept of reservation by affirmative action as
an exception to the general rule of equality; the economic disability and affirmative
action to deal with the same; the implications of economic criteria as the sole basis
for affirmative action; the implications of the exclusion of socially and educationally
backward classes from the affirmative action for economically weaker sections; and
the implication of the quantum of additional ten per cent reservation for EWS. These
aspects may now be examined in this very order as infra.
Expanding Doctrine of "Equality"
82. It would be apt to begin this discussion with the following words of H.M.
Seervai, a jurist of great repute, as regards fundamentals of the concepts of Liberty
and Equality:
"Liberty and equality are words of passion and power. They were the
watchwords of the French Revolution; they inspired the unforgettable words of
Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address; and the US Congress gave them practical
effect in the 13th Amendment, which abolished slavery, and in the 14th
Amendment, which provided that "the State shall not deny to any person within
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws". Conscious of this history, our
Founding Fathers not only put Liberty and Equality in the Preamble to our
Constitution but gave them practical effect in Article 17 which abolished
"Untouchability", and in Article 14 which provides that "the State shall not deny
to any person equality before the law and the equal protection of the laws in the
territory of India 56
83. Articles 14 to 18 of the Constitution are to ensure the right to equality. The
makers of our Constitution noticed the widespread social and economic inequalities
in the society that obtained ever since a long past, often sanctioned by public
policies, religion and other social norms and practices. Therefore, they enacted
elaborate provisions for eradication of inequalities and for establishing an egalitarian
society. The first expression "equality before the law" of Article 14 is taken from the
all-time wisdom as also from English Common Law, implying absence of any special
privilege in any individual57: and the other expression "the equal protection of the
laws", referable to the 14th Amendment to the US Constitution, is a constitutional
pledge of protection or guarantee of equal laws. Both these expressions occur in
Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.
84. In a nutshell, the principle of equality can be stated thus : equals must be
treated equally while unequals need to be treated differently, inasmuch as for the
application of this principle in real life, we have to differentiate between those who
being equal, are grouped together, and those who being different, are left out from
the group. This is expressed as reasonable classification. Now, a classification to be
valid must necessarily satisfy two tests : first, the distinguishing rationale should be
based on a just objective and secondly, the choice of differentiating one set of
persons from another should have a reasonable nexus to the object sought to be
achieved. However, a valid classification does not require mathematical niceties and
perfect equality; nor does it require identity of treatment. If there is similarity or
uniformity within
a group, the law will not be condemned as discriminatory, even though due to some
fortuitous circumstances arising out of a particular situation, some included in the
class get an advantage over others left out, so long as they are not singled out for
special treatment. In spite of certain indefiniteness in the expression "equality",
when the same is sought to be applied to a particular case or class of cases in the
complex conditions of a modern society, there is no denying the fact that the general
principle of "equality" forms the basis of a Democratic Government.
59
85. Since the early 1970s, equality in Article 14 being a dynamic concept, has
acquired new dimensions. In E.P. Royappa3, a new approach to this doctrine was
"85.
Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it
cannot be "cribbed, cabined and confined" within traditional and doctrinaire
limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In
fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law
in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to
political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14,
"
(emphasis supplied)
86. In Maganlal Chhaganlal (P) Ltd. V. Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay60, it
"33.
Article 14 enunciates a vital principle which lies at the core of our
republicanism and shines like a beacon light pointing towards the goal of classless
egalitarian socio-economic order which we promised to build for ourselves when
we made a tryst with destiny on that fateful day when we adopted our
Constitution. If we have to choose between fanatical devotion to this great
principle of equality and feeble allegiance to it, we would unhesitatingly prefer to
err on the side of the former as against the latter."
87. Indian constitutional jurisprudence has consistently held the guarantee of
equality to be substantive and not a mere formalistic requirement. Equality is at the
nucleus of the unified goals of social and economic justice. In Minerva Mills19 it was
"111. the equality clause in the Constitution does not speak of mere formal
equality before the law but embodies the concept of real and substantive equality
which strikes at inequalities arising on account of vast social and economic
differentials and is consequently an essential ingredient of social and economic
justice. The dynamic principle of
egalitarianism fertilises the concept of social and economic justice; it is one of its
essential elements and there can be no real social and economic justice where there
is a breach of the egalitarian principle."
(emphasis supplied)
88. Thus, equality is a feature fundamental to our Constitution but, in true sense
of terms, equality envisaged by our Constitution as a component of social, economic
and political justice is real and substantive equality, which is to organically and
dynamically operate against all forms of inequalities. This process of striking at
inequalities, by its very nature, calls for reasonable classifications so that equals are
treated equally while unequals are treated differently and as per their requirements.
Affirmative Action by "Reservation" : Exception to the General Rule of
Equality
89. In the multifaceted social structure, ensuring substantive and real equality,
perforce, calls for consistent efforts to remove inequalities, wherever existing and in
whatever form existing. Hence, the State is tasked with affirmative action. And, one
duly recognised form of affirmative action is by way of compensatory discrimination,
which has the preliminary goal of curbing discrimination and the ultimate goal of its
eradication so as to reach the destination of real and substantive equality. This has
led to what is known as reservation and quota system in the State activities.
90. Reservation and quota system was introduced in Malta much before it was
mentioned in India61. Reservation in India was introduced in the last decades of the
19th century at a time when the Indian sub-continent was broadly divided,
according to two main forms of governance, into British India and about 600 Princely
States. Some of the progressive States had modernised the society through the
promotion of education and industry. For example, the Princely States of Mysore,
Baroda and Kolhapur took considerable interest in the awakening and advancement
of deprived sections of society. Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj, the Ruler of Princely
State of Kolhapur, is said to have been influenced by the thoughts of egalitarian
thinker Jyotirao Phule and is said to have introduced affirmative action in 1902,
reserving a part of administrative posts for "depressed classes".
62
91. Leaving the historical perspective at that, for the purpose of questions at
hand, we may, however, move on to the provisions in the Constitution of India and
take note of their operation with reference to the relevant decisions. The "doctrine of
equality", as collectively enshrined in Articles 14 to 18,
happens to be the principal basis for the creation of a reasonable classification
whereunder "affirmative action", be it legislative or executive, is authorised to be
undertaken. The constitutional courts too, precedent by precedent, have
constructively contributed to the evolution of what we may term as "reservation
jurisprudence".
92. The Constitution of India has about two dozen articles providing for
compensatory or special treatment for disadvantaged citizens or for protecting them
against discrimination. Part III specifies the fundamental rights that are
constitutionally guaranteed. Article 12 defines the "State" against whom these
fundamental rights can be enforced. Article 13 declares void all laws offending
fundamental rights. Article 14, apparently considered to be one of the most
important of the fundamental rights, guarantees the right to equality and equal
protection of the laws. Article 15 confers on the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs the right to
seek reservation in admission to educational institutions. It also provides for the
advancement of these classes. Similarly, Article 16 provides for reservation in the
matter of public employment for Backward Classes. Both Articles 15 and 16, being
citizenship-specific unlike Article 14, prohibit discrimination broadly i.e. only on the
grounds of, religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. Part XVI of the Constitution,
making "Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes", provides for reservation of
seats in legislatures for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and so on.
93. Although several articles are relevant as expressing the spirit of the
Constitution, three of them are predominantly germane i.e. Article 14 as embodying
the generic principle of equality (as genus) and Articles 15 and 16, enacting the
facets of general equality (as species), vide N.M. Thomas4.
94. It is evident that the normal process of development benefits only that
section of society which already possesses land, education, and social
status/respect. For those who have none of these, or are deprived of any of these,
there was the task of making sure that they, who had been unable to enjoy these
rights due to myriad reasons, were given special facilities, privileges and
encouragement so that they could participate as equals in the mainstream of socio-
economic system, taking them to the path of Liberty and Justice and thereby
promoting Fraternity among all the citizens, assuring the dignity of the individual.
Given these objectives, the Indian constitutional structure, unlike the US
Constitution, specifically provides for "compensatory discrimination", vide Vasanth
Kumar18. and, in that context, reservation is the basic gateway to tread the path of
all-around development.
95. Thus, Article 15 enacts the principle of equality before law to specific
situations. While it prohibits certain classifications, it expressly requires making of
certain classifications which would impliedly be within the broad reach of Article 14.
Clause (4) was added to Article 15 by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act,
1951, w.e.f. 18-6-1951 to nullify the effects of the decision
in Champakam Article 16, which enacts another facet of equality, prohibits
discrimination in the matters relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State on almost the same grounds as in Article 15. Clauses (4) and (4-A)
of Article 16 carve out another exception to the rule of equality and enable the State
to make provisions for reservations of appointment in favour of any backward class
of citizens. Such provisions include reservations or quotas that can be made in the
exercise of executive powers and even without any legislative support, vide Indra
Sawhney5. The twin objectives of Articles 15 and 16 are to provide adequate
protection to the disadvantaged and, through special measures, to raise their
capabilities so that they would, on their own, compete with the rest.
96. The reference to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Articles 15
and 16 takes us to Articles 341 and 342, which authorise the President to issue a
notified order in respect of each of the States/Union Territories specifying the castes,
races or tribes which are to be regarded as Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Articles 338 and 338-A, respectively, provide for the establishment of National
Commission for Scheduled Castes and National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.
Similarly, Article 338-B provides for the establishment of National Commission for
Backward Classes. These constitutional bodies, inter alia, have the duty to
participate in and advice on the socio-economic development of the communities
concerned. Article 342-A introduced by the 102nd Constitutional Amendment w.e.f.
15-8-2018 authorises the President in consultation with the Governor of the State
concerned to notify socially and educationally backward classes (discussed and
upheld in Jaishri Patil10).
97. Reverting to Articles 15 and 16, it could at once be noticed that the
provisions concerning reservation were crafted carefully to be just "enabling
provisions". They were worded to confer no more than a discretionary power on the
State. They did not cast a duty on the State to the effect that it must set apart such
and such proportion of seats in educational institutions or of posts in government
services by way of reservation The provisions were written so as to obviate a
challenge to the steps that the State may take to raise the downtrodden. However,
they were, as such, not to confer a right on anyone.
98. As regards reservation as one of the measures of affirmative action, the
extent thereof has been a major area of debates and has led to various expositions,
as shall be noticed in the later segments of this judgment. For the present purpose,
of comprehending the ethos and contours of this affirmative action, the following are
the pertinent observations of this Court in M. Nagaraj
"102.
Clauses (1) and (4) of Article 16 are restatements of the principle of
equality under Article 14. Clause (4) of Article 16 refers to affirmative action by
way of reservation. Clause (4) of Article 16, however, states that the appropriate
Government is free to provide for reservation in cases where it is satisfied on the
basis of quantifiable data that Backward Class is inadequately represented in the
services. Therefore, in every case where the State decides to provide for
reservation there must exist two circumstances, namely, "backwardness" and
"inadequacy of representation". As stated above, equity, justice and efficiency are
variable factors. These factors are context-specific. There is no fixed yardstick to
identify and measure these three factors, it will depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case. These are the limitations on the mode of the exercise
of power by the State. If the State concerned fails to identify and measure
backwardness, inadequacy and overall administrative efficiency then in that event
the provision for reservation would be invalid. Equality has two facets - "formal
equality" and "proportional equality". Proportional equality is equality "in fact"
whereas formal equality is equality "in law". Formal equality exists in the rule of
law. In the case of proportional equality the State is expected to take affirmative
steps in favour of disadvantaged sections of the society within the framework of
liberal democracy. Egalitarian equality is proportional equality.
*
*
*
104.
As stated above, be it reservation or evaluation, excessiveness in either
would result in violation of the constitutional mandate. This exercise, however,
will depend on the facts of each case."
The surest way't to legal research!"
&
(emphasis supplied)
99. Thus, it could reasonably be summarised that for the socio-economic
structure which the law in our democracy seeks to build up, the requirements of real
and substantive equality call for affirmative actions; and reservation is recognised as
one such affirmative action, which is permissible under the Constitution; and its
operation is defined by a large number of decisions of this Court, running up to the
detailed expositions in Jaishri Patil10.
100. However, it need be noticed that reservation, one of the permissible
affirmative actions enabled by the Constitution of India, is nevertheless an exception
to the general rule of equality and hence, cannot be regarded as such an essential
feature of the Constitution that cannot be modulated; or whose modulation for a
valid reason, including benefit of any section other than the sections who are already
availing its benefit, may damage the basic structure.
Economic Disabilities and Affirmative Action
101. After having traversed through the two fundamental aspects, Equality and
Reservation, we may focus on the central point of consideration in these matters i.e.
the economic disabilities and affirmative action in that regard.
102. The social revolution was put at the top of the national agenda by the
Constituent Assembly when it adopted Objectives Resolution. In Kesavananda5, it
"646.
By the Objectives Resolution adopted on 22-1-1947, the Constituent
Assembly solemnly pledged itself to draw up for India's future governance a
Constitution wherein 'shall be guaranteed and secured to all the people of India
justice, social, economic and political, equality of status, of opportunity and
before the law; freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship, vocation,
association and action subject to law and public morality and wherein adequate
safeguard would be provided for minorities, backward and tribal areas and
depressed and other backward classes'. The close association between political
freedom and social justice has become a common concept since the French
Revolution. Since the end of the First World War, it was increasingly recognised
that peace in the world can be established only if it is based on social justice. The
most modern Constitutions contain declaration of social and economic principles,
which emphasise, among other things, the duty of the State to strive for social
security and to provide work, education and proper condition of employment for
its citizens. In evolving the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles, our
Founding Fathers, in addition to the experience gathered by them from the events
that took place in other parts of the world, also drew largely on their experience in
the past. The Directive Principles and the Fundamental Rights mainly proceed on
the basis of Human Rights. Representative democracies will have no meaning
without economic and social justice to the common man. This is a universal
experience. Freedom from foreign rule can be looked upon only as an opportunity
to bring about economic and social advancement. After all freedom is nothing else
but a chance to be better. It is this liberty to do better that is the theme of the
Directive Principles of State policy in Part IV of the Constitution."
103. The Chief Architect of the Constitution Dr B.R. Ambedkar, on 19-11-1948,
had stressed in the Constituent Assembly that the Constitution was committed to
the principle of "economic democracy" as a compliment to political democracy. His
words are worth quoting : (CAD Vol. VII, pp. 494-95)
"Sir, that is the reason why the language of the articles in Part IV is left in the
manner in which this Drafting Committee thought it best to leave it.
It is,
therefore, no use saying that the directive principles have no value. In my
judgment, the directive principles have a great value, for they lay down that our
ideal is economic democracy. Because we did not want
merely a parliamentary form of Government to be instituted through the various
mechanisms provided in the Constitution. Without any direction as to what our
economic ideal, as to what our social order ought to be, we deliberately included the
Directive Principles in our Constitution. I think, if the friends who are agitated over
this question bear in mind what I have said just now that our object in framing this
Constitution is really twofold : (i) to lay down the form of political democracy, and
(ii) to lay down that our ideal is economic democracy and also to prescribe that
every Government whatever, it is in power, shall strive to bring about economic
democracy, much of the misunderstanding under which most members are
labouring will disappear."
104. H.M. Seervai writes:
"4.13 (a) The words "justice, liberty, equality and fraternity" are words of
passion and power - the last three were the watchwords of the French
Revolution. If they are to retain their power to move men's hearts and to stir
them to action, the words must be used absolutely - as they are used in the
Preamble. But do they throw any light on the provisions of the Constitution? The
only one of the four objectives which is directly incorporated in any article is
"Justice, social, economic and political", for Article 38 provides:
"The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and
protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social,
economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national
life." (italics supplied)
And Article 39 amplifies the concept of justice by providing that the State shall in particular (that
is, especially) direct its policy towards securing the objectives set out of clauses (a) to (f) of that
Article. "66
105. The Preamble to our Constitution sets the ideals and goals which the makers
of the Constitution intended to achieve. Therefore, it is also regarded as "a key to
open the mind of the makers" of the Constitution which may show the general
purposes for which several provisions in the Constitution are enacted. In
Kesavananda5 the Preamble is held to be a part of the Constitution. Further, in
State of U.P. V. Dina Nath Shukla66, the Preamble is held to be a part of the
Constitution and its basic structure. The Preamble indicates the intent of the makers
of the Constitution "to secure to all its citizens : JUSTICE, social, economic and
political " In V.N. Shukla's Constitution of India, the significance of the expressions
occurring in the Preamble and their sequence has been highlighted in the following
words:
"
the Constitution makers sought to secure to citizens of India justice -
social, economic and political; liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith, and
worship; equality of status and of opportunity, and to promote among the people
of India, fraternity, assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and
integrity of the nation. Although the expressions "justice", "liberty", "equality",
"fraternity" and "dignity of the individual" do not have fixed contents and may not
be easy to define, they are not without content or as mere platitudes. They are
given content by the enacting provisions of the Constitution, particularly by Part
III, the Fundamental Rights; Part IV, the Directive Principles of State policy; Part
IV-A, the Fundamental Duties; and Part XVI, Special Provisions Relating to
Certain Classes. Special attention has been drawn to the sequence of these values
in the Preamble which establishes primacy of justice over freedom and equality
and this is what the Constitution does by making special provisions for the weaker
and excluded sections of the society, women, children and minorities."
106. The word "economic" is employed more than thirty times in the
Constitution. The relevant provisions in which it prominently occurs are : the
Preamble and Article 38 (economic justice); Article 39-A (legal aid with neutrality of
economic disability); Article 46 (promotion of economic interests of weaker
sections), Articles 243-G and 243-W (economic development to be undertaken by
local bodies).
107. Our jurisprudence supports making of a provision for tackling the
disadvantages arising because of adverse economic conditions. In fact, Article 38 of
the Constitution, inter alia, provides for securing economic justice and for striving to
minimise the inequalities in income amongst individuals and groups of people. In
Jolly George Varghese V. Bank of Cochin688, adopting of coercive recovery
proceedings in execution of decree, which were impinging upon liberty of a
judgment-debtor, was not countenanced by this Court; and in that context, a
decision5 69 of the Kerala High Court relying upon the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1948 was referred to. Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1948, on which the said decision is based, providing for social security reads
as under:
"22. Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is
entitled to realisation, through national effort and international cooperation and in
accordance with the organization and resources of each State, of the economic,
social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of
The surest way legal research!"
his personality."
108. As noticed hereinbefore, in Minerva Mills19 this Court distinctly pointed out
that the equality clause in the Constitution does not speak of mere formal equality
but embodies the concept of real and substantive equality,
which strikes at inequalities arising on account of vast social and economic
differentials; and that the dynamic principle of egalitarianism furthers the concept of
social and economic justice.
109. A few other observations of this Court, though made in different contexts
but having a bearing on the question of economic justice as a part of overall socio-
economic justice, could also be usefully indicated.
110. In Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. V. Nawab Khan Gulab Khan this Court
"25.
It is to be remembered that the Preamble is the arch of the Constitution
which accords to every citizen of India socio-economic and political justice,
liberty, equality of opportunity and of status, fraternity, dignity of person in an
integrated Bharat. The fundamental rights and the directive principles and the
Preamble being trinity of the Constitution, the right to residence and to settle in
any part of the country is assured to every citizen. In a secular socialist
democratic republic of Bharat hierarchical caste structure, antagonism towards
diverse religious belief and faith and dialectical difference would be smoothened
and the people would be integrated with dignity of person only when social and
economic democracy is established under the rule of law. The difference due to
cast, sect or religion pose grave threat to affinity, equality and fraternity. Social
democracy means a way of life with dignity of person as a normal social
intercourse with liberty, equality and fraternity. The economic democracy implicits
in itself that the inequalities in income and inequalities in opportunities and
status should be minimised and as far as possible marginalised."
111. In People's Union for Democratic Rights V. Union of this Court
"2.
Large numbers of men, women and children who constitute the bulk of
our population are today living a sub-human existence in conditions of abject
poverty; utter grinding poverty has broken their back and sapped their moral
fibre. The only solution for making civil and political rights meaningful to these
large sections of society would be to remake the material conditions and
restructure the social and economic order so that they may be able to realise the
economic, social and cultural rights. There is indeed close relationship between
civil and political rights on the one hand and economic, social and cultural rights
on the other and this relationship is so obvious that the International Human
Rights Conference in Teheran called by the General Assembly in 1968 declared in
a final proclamation:
'Since human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible, the full
realisation of civil and political rights without the enjoyment of economic, social
and cultural rights is impossible."
Of course, the task of restructuring the social and economic order so that the social and
economic rights become a meaningful reality for the poor and lowly sections of the community is
one which legitimately belongs to the legislature and the executive, The State or public authority.
should be. interested in ensuring basic human rights, constitutional as well as legal, to those
"
who are in a socially and economically disadvantaged position,
112. Thus, in almost all references to real and substantive equality, the concept
of economic justice has acquired equal focus alongside the principles of social
justice.
113. In giving effect to the rule of equality enshrined in Article 14, the Courts
have also been guided by the jurisprudence evolved by the US Supreme Court in the
light of the amendments made to their Constitution, which were founded on
economic considerations. 72 This is to highlight that the economic backwardness of
citizens can also be the sole ground for providing reservation by affirmative action.
Any civilised jurisdiction differentiates between haves and have-nots, in several
walks of life and more particularly, for the purpose of differential treatment by way
of affirmative action.
114. Poverty, the disadvantageous condition due to want of financial resources, is
a phenomenon which is complex in origin as well as in its manifestation. The 2001
explanation of poverty by the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights says:
"Persons living in poverty are confronted by the most severe obstacles-
physical, economic, cultural and social-to accessing their rights and
entitlements. Consequently, they experience many interrelated and mutually
reinforcing deprivations-including dangerous work conditions, unsafe housing,
lack of nutritious food, unequal access to justice, lack of political power and
limited access to healthcare-that prevents them from realising their rights and
perpetuate their poverty. Persons experiencing extreme poverty live in a vicious
cycle of powerlessness, stigmatisation, discrimination, exclusion and material
deprivation, which all mutually reinforce one another."73
115. The above-quoted expositions and explanations would comprehensively
inform anyone that if an egalitarian socio-economic order is
the goal so as to make the social and economic rights a meaningful reality, which
indeed is the goal of our Constitution, the deprivations arising from economic
disadvantages, including those of discrimination and exclusion, need to be
addressed to by the State; and for that matter, every affirmative action has the
sanction of our Constitution, as noticeable from the frame of the Preamble as also
the text and texture of the provisions contained in Part III and Part IV.
Whether Economic Criteria as Sole Basis for Affirmative Action Violates Basic
Structure
116. The principal ground of assailing the amendment in question in this batch of
matters is that even when the State could take all the relevant measures to deal
with poverty and disadvantages arising therefrom, so far as the affirmative action of
reservation is concerned, the same is envisaged by the Constitution only for socially
and educationally backward class of citizens; and economic disadvantage alone had
never been in contemplation for this action of reservation. We may examine the
sustainability of this line of arguments.
117. The expression "economically weaker sections of citizens" is not a matter of
mere semantics but is an expression of hard realities. Poverty is not merely a state
of stagnation but is a point of regression. Of course, mass poverty cannot be
eliminated within a short period and it is a question of progress along a time path.
The United Nations General Assembly, by its Resolution dated 25-9-2015, set forth
seventeen Sustainable Development Goals and the first of them is to "End poverty in
all its forms everywhere". The 2030 agenda for Sustainable Development by one
hundred and ninety-three countries of the United Nations General Assembly,
including India, brought institutionalised focus in measuring and addressing poverty
in all its forms, as expounded under the aforesaid Goal 1. The impact of this was also
reflected in the work of World Bank which is the custodian of the International
Poverty Line Statistics74. In this backdrop, the insertion of enabling provisions,
within the framework of the Constitution of India, to remedy the evil effects of
poverty by way of reservation, is primarily to be regarded as a part of the frontal
efforts to eradicate poverty "in all its forms everywhere". The only question is as to
whether providing for economic criteria as the sole basis for reservation is a violation
of the basic structure of the Constitution.
118. In Kesavananda5, building a Welfare State is held to be one of the main
objectives of the Constitution. In the Welfare State, public power becomes an
instrumentality for the achievement of purposes beyond the minimum objectives of
domestic order and national defence. It is not enough that the society be secured
against internal disorder and/or external aggression; a society can be thus secured
and well-ordered but, could be lacking in real and substantive justice for all. Equally,
providing for affirmative action in relation to one particular segment or class may
operate constructively in the direction of meeting with and removing the inequalities
faced by that segment or class but,
if another segment of society suffers from inequalities because of one particular
dominating factor like that of poverty, the question arises as to whether the said
segment could be denied of the State support by way of affirmative action of
reservation only because of the fact that that segment is otherwise not suffering
from other disadvantages. The answer could only be in the negative for, in the
State's efforts of ensuring all-inclusive socio-economic justice, there cannot be
competition of claims for affirmative action based on disadvantages in the manner
The surest way't to legal research!"
that one disadvantaged section would seek denial of affirmative action for another
disadvantaged section.
119. With the foregoing preliminary comments, reference could be made to the
pertinent and instructive expositions of this Court in a few of the relevant cases cited
by the respective parties in support of their respective contentions as regards the
economic criteria being the sole basis for affirmative action, on its permissibility or
impermissibility.
120. In M.R. Balaji6 an order dated 31-7-1962 by the State of Mysore, reserving
a total of sixty-eight per cent seats in engineering and medical colleges and other
technical institutions for various backward classes was challenged, being violative of
Article 15(4) of the Constitution. In the given context, it was observed by this Court
as under : Per P.B. Gajendragadkar, J. : (M.R. Balaji case6, AIR pp. 661 & 664, paras
30 & 36)
"30. That takes us to the question about the extent of the special provision
which it would be competent to the State to make under Article 15(4). Article 15
(4) authorises the State to make any special provision for the advancement of the
Backward Classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The learned Advocate General contends that this Article must be read in the light
of Article 46, and he argues that Article 15(4) has deliberately and wisely placed
no limitation on the State in respect of the extent of special provision that it
should make. Article 46 which contains a directive principle, provides that the
State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of
the weaker sections of the people, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation. There can be no doubt that the object of making a special provision
for the advancement of the castes or communities, there specified, is to carry out
the directive principle enshrined in Article 46. It is obvious that unless the
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people are
promoted quickly and liberally, the ideal of establishing social and economic
equality will not be attained, and so, there can be no doubt that Article 15(4)
authorises the State to take adequate steps to achieve the object which it has in
view. No one can dispute the proposition that political freedom and even
fundamental rights can have very little meaning or significance for the Backward
Classes and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes unless the backwardness
and inequality from which they suffer are immediately redressed.
*
*
*
36.
In our country where social and economic conditions differ from State to
State, it would be idle to expect absolute uniformity of approach; but in taking
executive action to implement the policy of Article 15(4), it is necessary for the
States to remember that the policy which is intended to be implemented is the
policy which has been declared by Article 46 and the Preamble of the
Constitution. It is for the attainment of social and economic justice that Article 15
(4) authorises the making of special provisions for the advancement of the
communities there contemplated even if such provisions may be inconsistent with
the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 15 or 29(2). The context,
therefore, requires that the executive action taken by the State must be based on
an objective approach, free from all extraneous pressures. The said action is
intended to do social and economic justice and must be taken in a manner that
justice is and should be done."
(emphasis supplied)
121. Similarly, in R. Chitralekha this Court upheld an order of the Government
that defined "backwardness" without any reference to caste, using other criteria such
as occupation, income and other economic factors. The Court ruled that while caste
may be relevant to determine backwardness, the mere exclusion of caste does not
impair the classification if it satisfies other tests. The relevant observations of this
Court read as under : Per K. Subba Rao, J. : (R. Chitralekha case26 , AIR p. 1833,
para 16)
"16. The Constitution of India promises justice, social, economic and political;
and equality of status and of opportunity, among others. Under Article 46, one of
the Articles in Part IV headed "Directive Principles of State policy", the State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation."
(emphasis supplied)
122. Furthermore, in Janki Prasad Parimoo V. State of J&K75 the teachers in the
Secondary High School of the State, who comprised a large portion of Kashmiri
Pandits, found that in spite of their seniority, promotions to the gazetted posts in the
service were being made on communal basis and not in accordance with the Jammu
and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeals) Rules, 1969. In this
matter, this Court held that mere poverty cannot be a consideration for the test of
backwardness for the purpose of enabling reservations by observing as follows : Per
"24. It is not merely the educational backwardness or the social backwardness
which makes a class of citizens backward; the class identified as a class as above
must be both educationally and socially backward. In India social and educational
backwardness is further
associated with economic backwardness and it is observed in Balaji case6 referred to
above that backwardness, socially and educationally, is ultimately and primarily due
to poverty. But if poverty is the exclusive test, a very large proportion of the
population in India would have to be regarded as socially and educationally
backward, and if reservations are made only on the ground of economic
considerations, an untenable situation may arise even in sectors which are
recognised as socially and educationally advanced there are large pockets of povertv.
In this country except for a small percentage of the population the people are
generally poor - some being more poor, others less poor. Therefore, when a social
investigator tries to identify socially and educationally backward classes, he may do
it with confidence that they are bound to be poor. His chief concern is, therefore, to
determine whether the class or group is socially and educationally backward. Though
the two words 'socially' and "educationally" are used cumulatively for the purpose of
describing the backward class, one may find that if a class as a whole is
educationally advanced it is generally also socially advanced because of the
reformative effect of education on that class. The words "advanced" and "backward"
are only relative terms - there being several layers or strata of classes, hovering
between "advanced" and "backward", and the difficult task is which class can be
recognised out of these several layers as being socially and educationally backward."
(emphasis supplied)
123. In N.M. Thomas4 provisions of the Kerala State and Subordinate Services
Rules, 1958 were in question, where Rule 13-A required every employee, to be
promoted in subordinate services, to clear a test within two years of promotion, but
it gave SC/ST candidates an extension of two more years. Later, Rule 13-AA was
added that enabled the State Government to grant more time to SC/ST candidates
to pass the test for promotional posts apart from the initial four years. The main
issue was as to whether the said Rule 13-AA was offending Articles 16(1) and 16(2)
of the Constitution. In this regard, the following observations of this Court become
relevant with emphasis on economic criteria:
"44. Our Constitution aims at equality of status and opportunity for all citizens
including those who are socially, economically and educationally backward. The
claims of members of backward classes require adequate representation in
legislative and executive bodies. If members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes, who
are said by this Court to be backward classes, can maintain minimum necessary
requirement of administrative efficiency, not only representation but also
preference may be given to them to enforce equality and to eliminate inequality.
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) bring out the position of backward classes to merit
equality. Special provisions are made for the advancement of backward classes
and reservations of
appointments and posts for them to secure adequate representation. These
provisions will bring out the content of equality guaranteed by Articles 14, 15(1) and
16(1). The basic concept of equality is equality of opportunity for appointment.
Preferential treatment for members of backward classes with due regard to
administrative efficiency alone can mean equality of opportunity for all citizens.
Equality under Article 16 could not have a different content from equality under
Article 14. Equality of opportunity for unequals can only mean aggravation of
inequality. Equality of opportunity admits discrimination with reason and prohibits
discrimination without reason. Discrimination with reasons means rational
classification for differential treatment having nexus to the constitutionally
permissible object. Preferential representation for the backward classes in services
with due regard to administrative efficiency is permissible object and backward
classes are a rational classification recognised by our Constitution. Therefore,
differential treatment in standards of selection are within the concept of equality."
(emphasis supplied)
& 67 and 78)
"64. It would follow that if we want to give equality of opportunity for
employment to the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, we
will have to take note of their social, educational and economic environment. Not
only is the directive principle embodied in Article 46 binding on the law-maker as
ordinarily understood but it should equally inform and illuminate the approach of
the Court when it makes a decision as the Court also is "State" within the
meaning of Article 12 and makes law even though "interstitially from the molar to
the molecular". I have explained at some length the reason why Court is "State"
under Article 12 in my judgment in Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala13
*
*
*
67. Today, the political theory which acknowledges the obligation of
Government under Part IV of the Constitution to provide jobs, medical care, old
age pension, etc. extends to human rights and imposes an affirmative obligation
to promote equality and liberty. The force of the idea of a State with obligation to
help the weaker sections of its members seems to have increasing influence in
constitutional law. The idea finds expression in a number of cases in America
involving social discrimination and also in the decisions requiring the State to
offset the effects of poverty by providing counsel, transcript of appeal, expert
witnesses, etc. Today, the sense that Government has affirmative responsibility
for elimination of inequalities, social, economic or otherwise, is one of the
dominant forces in constitutional law. While special concessions for the
underprivileged have been easily permitted, they have not traditionally been
required. Decisions
in the areas of criminal procedure, voting rights and education in America suggest
that the traditional approach may not be completely adequate. In these areas, the
inquiry whether equality has been achieved no longer ends with numerical equality;
rather the equality clause has been held to require resort to a standard of
proportional equality which requires the State, in framing legislation, to take into
account the private inequalities of wealth, of education and other circumstances 6.
*
*
*
78. I agree that Article 16(4) is capable of being interpreted as an exception to
Article 16(1) if the equality of opportunity visualised in Article 16(1) is a sterile
one, geared to the concept of numerical equality which takes no account of the
social, economic, educational background of the members of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. If equality of opportunity guaranteed under Article 16(1)
means effective material equality, then Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article
16(1). It is only an emphatic way of putting the extent to which equality of
opportunity could be carried viz. even up to the point of making reservation."
(emphasis supplied)
"93. When citizens are already employed in a particular grade, as government
servants, considerations relating to the sources from which they are drawn lose
much of their importance. As public servants of that grade they could, quite
reasonably and logically, be said to belong to one class, at least for purposes of
promotion in public service for which there ought to be a real "equality of
opportunity", if we are to avoid heart burning or a sense of injustice or frustration
in this class. Neither as members of this single class nor for purposes of the
equality of opportunity which is to be afforded to this class does the fact that
some of them are also members of an economically and socially backward class
continue to be material, or, strictly speaking, even relevant. Their entry, into the
same relevant class as others must be deemed to indicate that they no longer
suffer from the handicaps of a backward class. For purposes of government
service the source from which they are drawn should cease to matter. As
government servants they would, strictly speaking, form only one class for
purposes of promotion.
94.
The specified and express mode of realisation of these objects contained
in Article 16(4), must exclude the possibility of other methods which could be
implied and read into Article 16(1) for securing them in this field, one could think
of so many other legally permissible and possibly better, or, at least more direct,
methods of removing socio-economic inequalities by appropriate legislative action
in other fields left open and unoccupied for purposes of discrimination in favour of
the backward.
95.
Article 16(4) was designed to reconcile the conflicting pulls of Article 16
(1), representing the dynamics of justice, conceived of as equality in conditions
under which candidates actually compete for posts in government service, and of
Articles 46 and 335, embodying the duties of the State to promote the interests
of the economically, educationally, and socially backward so as to release them
from the clutches of social injustice. These encroachments on the field of Article
16(1) can only be permitted to the extent they are warranted by Article 16(4). To
read broader concepts of social justice and equality into Article 16(1) itself may
stultify this provision itself and make Article 16(4) otiose."
(emphasis supplied)
120 & 126)
"120. The domination of a class generates, after a long night of sleep or stupor
of the dominated, an angry awakening and protestant resistance and this conflict
between thesis i.e. the status quo, and antithesis i.e. the hunger for happy
equality, propels new forces of synthesis i.e. an equitable constitutional order or
just society. Our Founding Fathers, possessed of spiritual insight and influenced
by the materialist interpretation of history, forestalled such social pressures and
pre-empted such economic upsurges and gave us a trinity of commitments -
justice : social, economic and political. The "equality articles" are part of this
scheme. My proposition is, given two alternative understandings of the relevant
sub-articles [Articles 16(1) and (2)], the Court must so interpret the language as
to remove that ugly "inferiority" complex which has done genetic damage to
Indian polity and thereby suppress the malady and advance the remedy,
informed by sociology and social anthropology. My touchstone is that functional
democracy postulates participation by all sections of the people and fair
representation in administration is an index of such participation.
*
*
*
126.
The Directive Principles of State policy, fundamental in the governance
of the country, enjoin on the State the promotion
*with special care* the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and protect them from social injustice.
To neglect this obligation is to play truant with Article 46. Undoubtedly, economic interests of a
group - as also social justice to it - are tied up with its place in the services under the State.
Our history, unlike that of some other countries, has found a zealous pursuit of government jobs
as a mark of share in State power and economic position. Moreover, the biggest - and
expanding, with considerable State undertakings, -
employer is Government, Central and State, so much so appointments in the public
services matter increasingly in the prosperity of backward segments. The Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes have earned special mention in Article 46 and other
"weaker sections", in this context, means not every "backward class" but those
dismally depressed categories comparable economically and educationally to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. To widen the vent is to vitiate the equal
treatment which belongs to all citizens, many of whom are below the poverty line.
Realism reveals that politically powerful **castes** may try to break into equality,
using the masterkey of backwardness but, leaving aside Article 16(4), the ramparts
of Articles 16(1) and (2) will resist such oblique infiltration."
(emphasis supplied)
"166. Article 46 of the Constitution runs thus:
`46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.-The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation.'
Properly analysed this article contains a mandate on the State to take special care
for the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and
as illustrations of the persons who constitute the weaker sections the provision
expressly mentions the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes."
(emphasis supplied)
124. In Shantistar Builders V. Narayan Khimalal Totame77 , the Government of
Maharashtra exempted certain excess land from the provisions of the Urban Land
(Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 for the purpose of constructing dwelling houses
under a scheme for the weaker sections of the society on the conditions specified in
the order. In the given context, this Court observed as follows : Per Ranganath
"12. Members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have ordinarily
been accepted as belonging to the weaker sections. Attempt to bring in the test
of economic means has often been tried but no guideline has been evolved.
Undoubtedly, apart from the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes, there would be millions of other citizens who would also belong to the
weaker sections. The Constitution-makers intended all citizens of India belonging
to the weaker sections to be benefited when Article 46 was incorporated in the
Constitution. Parliament in adopting the same language in Section 21 of the Act
also intended people
of all weaker sections to have the advantage. It is, therefore, appropriate that the
Central Government should come forward with an appropriate guideline to indicate
who would be included within weaker sections of the society."
(emphasis supplied)
125. In Indra Sawhney5, the following observations were made in regard to the
myriad features of backwardness including the economic backwardness:
paras 44 & 116-17)
"44. The word "backward" is very wide bringing within its fold the social
backwardness, educational backwardness, economic backwardness, political
backwardness and even physical backwardness.
*
*
*
116. The composition and terms of reference of the Second Backward Classes
Commission show that the Commission was appointed to investigate the
conditions of socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of
India but not the socially, economically and educationally backward classes. The
earlier OM issued on 13-8-1990 reads that with a view to providing certain
weightage to socially and educationally backward classes in the services of the
Union and their Public Undertakings, as recommended by the Commission, the
orders are issued in the terms mentioned therein. The said OM also explains that
'the SEBC would comprise in the first phase the castes and communities which
The surest way't to legal research!"
are common to both the lists, in the report of the Commission and the State
Governments' list'. In addition it is said that a list of such castes/communities is
being issued separately. The subsequent amended OM dated 25-9-1991 states
that in order to enable the "poorer sections" of the SEBCs to receive the benefits
of reservation on a preferential basis and to provide reservation for other
economically backward sections of the people not covered by any of the existing
schemes of reservation, the Government have decided to amend the earlier
Memorandum. Thus this amended OM firstly speaks of the "poorer sections" of the
SEBCs and secondly about the economically backward sections of the people not
covered by any of the existing schemes of reservation. However, both the OMs
while referring to the SEBCs, do not include the "economic backwardness" of that
class along with "social and educational backwardness". By the amended OM, the
Government while providing reservation for the backward sections of the people
not covered by the existing schemes of reservation meant for SEBCs, classifies
that section of the people as "economically backward", that is to say that those
backward sections of the people are to be identified only by their economic
backwardness and not by the test of social and educational backwardness,
evidently for the reason that they are all socially and educationally well advanced.
117. Coming to Article 16(4) the words "backward class" are used with a wider
connotation and without any qualification or explanation.
Therefore, it must be construed in the wider perspective. Though the OMs speak of
social and educational backwardness of a class, the primary consideration in
identifying a class and in ascertaining the inadequate representation of that class in
the services under the State under Article 16(4) is the social backwardness which
results in educational backwardness, both of which culminate in economic
backwardness. The degree of importance to be attached to social backwardness is
much more than the importance to be given to the educational backwardness and
the economic backwardness, because in identifying and classifying a section of
people as a backward class within the meaning of Article 16(4) for the reservation of
appointments or posts, the "social backwardness" plays a predominant role."
(emphasis supplied)
492)
"482. Economic backwardness is the bane of the majority of the people in this
country. There are poor sections in all the castes and communities. Poverty runs
across all barriers. The nature and degree of economic backwardness and its
causes and effects, however, vary from section to section of the populace. Even
the poor among the higher castes are socially as superior to the lower castes as
the rich among the higher castes. Their economic backwardness is not on account
of social backwardness. The educational backwardness of some individuals among
them may be on account of their poverty in which case economic props alone may
enable them to gain an equal capacity to compete with others. On the other hand,
those who are socially backward such as the lower castes or occupational groups,
are also educationally backward on account of their social backwardness, their
economic backwardness being the consequence of both their social and
educational backwardness. Their educational backwardness is not on account of
their economic backwardness alone. It is mainly on account of their social
backwardness. Hence mere economic aid will not enable them to compete with
others and particularly with those who are socially advanced. Their social
backwardness is the cause and not the consequence either of their economic or
educational backwardness. It is necessary to bear this vital distinction in mind to
understand the true import of the expression "backward class of citizens" in
Article 16(4). If it is mere educational backwardness or mere economic
backwardness that was intended to be specially catered to, there was no need to
make a provision for reservation in employment in the services under the State.
That could be taken care of under Articles 15(4), 38 and 46. The provision for
reservation in appointments under Article 16(4) is not aimed at economic
upliftment or alleviation of poverty. Article 16(4) is specifically designed to give a
due share in the State power to those who have remained out of it mainly on
account of their social and, therefore, educational and economic backwardness.
The backwardness that is contemplated by Article
16(4) is the backwardness which is both the cause and the consequence of non-
representation in the administration of the country. All other kinds of backwardness
are irrelevant for the purpose of the said article. Further, the backwardness has to be
a backwardness of the whole class and not of some individuals belonging to the
class, which individuals may be economically or educationally backward, but the
class to which they belong may be socially forward and adequately or even more
than adequately represented in the services. Since the reservation under Article 16
(4) is not for the individuals but to a class which must be both backward and
inadequately represented in the services, such individuals would not be beneficiaries
of reservation under Article 16(4). It is further difficult to come across a "class" (not
individuals) which is socially and educationally advanced but is economically
backward or which is not adequately represented in the services of the State on
account of its economic backwardness. Hence, mere economic or mere educational
backwardness which is not the result of social backwardness, cannot be a criterion of
backwardness for Article 16(4).
*
*
*
492. While discussing Question I, it has been pointed out that so far as
"backward classes" are concerned, clause (4) of Article 16 is exhaustive of
reservations meant for them. It has further been pointed out under Question II
that the only "backward class" for which reservations are provided under the said
clause is the socially backward class whose educational and economic
backwardness is on account of the social backwardness. A class which is not
socially and educationally backward though economically or even educationally
backward is not a backward class for the purposes of the said clause. What follows
from these two conclusions is that reservations in posts cannot be made in favour
of any other class under the said clause. Further, the purpose of keeping
reservations even in favour of the socially and educationally backward classes
under clause (4), is not to alleviate poverty but to give it an adequate share in
power."
(emphasis supplied)
paras 799 & 843)
"799. It follows from the discussion under Question 3 that a backward class
cannot be determined Fonly and exclusively with reference to economic criterion.
It may be a consideration or basis along with and in addition to social
backwardness, but it can never be the sole criterion. This is the view uniformly
taken by this Court and we respectfully agree with the same.
*
*
*
843. While dealing with Question 3(d), we held that exclusion of "creamy
layer" must be on the basis of social advancement (such advancement as renders
them misfits in the backward classes) and not on the basis of mere economic
criteria. At the same time, we held that income or the extent of property held by
a person can be taken as a **measure** of social advancement and on that basis
"creamy layer" of a given caste/community/occupational group can be excluded
to arrive at a true backward class. Under Question 5, we held that it is not
impermissible for the State to categorise backward classes into backward and
more backward on the basis of their relative social backwardness. We had also
given the illustration of two occupational groups viz. goldsmiths and vaddes
(traditional stone-cutters in Andhra Pradesh); both are included within "other
backward classes". If these two groups are lumped together and a common
reservation is made, the goldsmiths would walk away with all the vacancies
leaving none for vaddes. From the said point of view, it was observed, such
classification among the designated backwards classes may indeed serve to help
the more backward among them to get their due. But the question now is
whether clause (i) of the Office Memorandum dated 25-9-1991 is sustainable in
law. The said clause provides for preference in favour of "poorer sections" of the
backward classes over other members of the backward classes. On first
impression, it may appear that backward classes are classified into two subgroups
on the basis of economic criteria alone and a preference provided in favour of the
poorer sections of the backward classes. In our considered opinion, however, such
an interpretation would not be consistent with context in which the said
expression is used and the spirit underlying the clause nor would it further the
objective it seeks to achieve. The object of the clause is to provide a preference in
favour of more backward among the "socially and educationally backward
classes". In other words, the expression "poorer sections" was meant to refer to
those who are socially and economically more backward. The use of the word
"poorer", in the context, is meant only as a measure of social backwardness. (Of
course, the Government is yet to notify which classes among the designated
backward classes are more socially backward i.e. "poorer sections"). Understood
in this sense, the said classification is not and cannot be termed as invalid either
constitutionally speaking or in law. The next question that arises is : what is the
meaning and context of the expression "preference"? Having regard to the fact
the backward classes are sought to be divided into two sub-categories viz.
backward and more backward, the expression "preference" must be read down to
mean an equitable apportionment of the vacancies reserved (for backward
classes) among them. The object evidently could not have been to deprive the
"backward" altogether from benefit of reservation, which could be the result if
word "preference" is read literally - if the "more backward" take away all the
available vacancies/posts reserved for OBCs, none would remain for "backward"
among the OBCs. It is for this reason that we are
inclined to read down the expression to mean an equitable apportionment. This, in
our opinion, is the proper and reasonable way of understanding the expression
"preference" in the context in which it occurs. By giving the above interpretation, we
would be effectuating the underlying purpose and the true intention behind the
clause."
(emphasis supplied)
126. The relevant observations in M. Nagaraj9 would read as under:
"120. At this stage, one aspect needs to be mentioned. Social justice is
concerned with the distribution of benefits and burdens. The basis of distribution
is the area of conflict between rights, needs and means. These three criteria can
be put under two concepts of equality, namely, "formal equality" and
"proportional equality". Formal equality means that law treats everyone equal.
Concept of egalitarian equality is the concept of proportional equality and it
expects the States to take affirmative action in favour of disadvantaged sections
of society within the framework of democratic polity. In Indra Sawhney5 all the
Judges except Pandian, J. held that the "means test" should be adopted to
exclude the creamy layer from the protected group earmarked for reservation. In
Indra Sawhney5 this Court has, therefore, accepted caste as a determinant of
backwardness and yet it has struck a balance with the principle of secularism
which is the basic feature of the Constitution by bringing in the concept of creamy
layer. Views have often been expressed in this Court that caste should not be the
determinant of backwardness and that the economic criteria alone should be the
determinant of backwardness. As stated above, we are bound by the decision in
Indra Sawhney5. The question as to the "determinant" of backwardness cannot be
gone into by us in view of the binding decision. In addition to the above
requirements this Court in Indra Sawhney5 has evolved numerical benchmarks
like ceiling limit of 50% based on post-specific roster coupled with the concept of
replacement to provide immunity against the charge of discrimination."
(emphasis supplied)
127. On a contextual reading, it could reasonably be culled out that the
observations, wherever occurring in the decisions of this Court, to the effect that
reservation cannot be availed only on economic criteria, were to convey the principle
that to avail the benefit of this affirmative action under Articles 15(4) and/or 15(5)
and/or 16(4), as the case may be, the class concerned ought to be carrying some
other disadvantage too and not the economic disadvantage alone. The said decisions
cannot be read to mean that if any class or section other than those covered by
Articles 15(4) and/or 15(5) and/or 16(4) is suffering from disadvantage only due to
economic conditions, the State can never take affirmative action qua that class or
section.
128. In view of the principles discernible from the decisions aforesaid as also the
background aspects, including the avowed objective of socio-economic justice in the
Constitution, the observations of this Court in the past decisions that reservations
cannot be claimed only on the economic criteria, apply only to class or classes
covered by or seeking coverage under Articles 15(4) and/or 15(5) and/or 16(4); and
else, this Court has not put a blanket ban on providing reservation for other sections
who are disadvantaged due to economic conditions.
129. On behalf of the petitioners, much emphasis has been laid on the
phraseology of Article 46 of the Constitution of India; and it has been suggested
that the measures contemplated therein are supposed to be taken in favour of
SCs/STs and such other weaker sections who are "similarly circumstanced to
SCs/STs". The submission has been that this provision cannot be invoked for
reservation in favour of any economically weaker section that is not carrying other
attributes which could place it on a par with, or akin to, SCs/STs. This line of
arguments is premised on the passages occurring in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons for introduction of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth
Amendment) Bill, 2019 in Parliament which led to the Constitution (One Hundred
and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 but, is based on too narrow and unacceptably
restricted reading of the text of Article 46 while totally missing on its texture; and
suffers from at least three major shortcomings.
130. The first and the apparent shortcoming is that this line of arguments not
only goes off at a tangent but also misses out the important principle of "Distributive
Justice", which is a bedrock of the provisions like Article 46 as also Articles 38 and
39 of the Constitution of India. The principle of distributive justice has been
explained and put into effect by this Court in Lingappa Pochanna Appelwar V. State
"16. Legislators, Judges and administrators are now familiar with the concept
of distributive justice. Our Constitution permits and even directs the State to
administer what may be termed "distributive justice". The concept of distributive
justice in the sphere of law-making connotes, inter alia, the removal of economic
inequalities and rectifying the injustice resulting from dealings or transactions
The surest way legal research!"
between unequals in society. Law should be used as an instrument of distributive
justice to achieve a fair division of wealth among the members of society based
upon the principle: "From each according to his capacity, to each according to his
needs." Distributive justice comprehends more than achieving lessening of
inequalities by differential taxation, giving debt relief or distribution of property
owned by one to many who have none by imposing ceiling on holdings, both
agricultural and urban, or by direct regulation of contractual transactions by
forbidding certain transactions and, perhaps, by requiring others. It also means
that those who have been deprived of their properties by unconscionable bargains
should be restored their property. All such laws
may take the form of forced redistribution of wealth as a means of achieving a fair
division of material resources among the members of society or there may be
legislative control of unfair agreements."
(emphasis supplied)
130.1. Of course, the aforesaid decision in Lingappa73 was rendered in the
context of the Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act, 1974,
which provides for annulment of transfer of agricultural land from tribals to non-
tribals and restoration of possession to tribals but, the principle stated therein, being
related to scheme of the Constitution, makes it clear that the mandate of the
Constitution to the State is to administer distributive justice; and in the law-making
process, the concept of distributive justice connotes, inter alia, the removal of
economic inequalities. There could be different methods of distributive justice; and it
comprehends more than merely achieving the lessening of inequalities by tax or
debt relief measures or by regulation of contractual transactions or redistribution of
wealth, etc. This discussion need not be expanded on all other means of distributive
justice but, it is more than evident that the philosophy of distributive justice is of
wide amplitude which, inter alia, reaches to the requirements of removing economic
inequalities; and then, it is not confined to one class or a few classes of the
disadvantaged citizens. In other words, the wide spectrum of distributive justice
mandates promotion of educational and economic interests of all the weaker
sections, in minimising the inequalities in income as also providing adequate means
of livelihood to the citizens. In this commitment, leaving one class of citizens to
struggle because of inequalities in income and want of adequate means of livelihood
may not serve the ultimate goal of securing all-inclusive socio-economic justice.
130.2. In fact, the argument that the State may adopt any poverty alleviation
measure but cannot provide reservation for EWS by way of affirmative action
proceeds on the assumption that the affirmative action of reservation in our
constitutional scheme is itself reserved only for SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs in view of the
existing text of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution. Such an
assumption is neither valid nor compatible with our constitutional scheme. This line
of argument is wanting on the fundamental constitutional objectives, with the
promise of securing "JUSTICE, social, economic and political" for "all" the citizens; and
to promote FRATERNITY among them "all". Thus viewed, the challenge to the
amendment in question fails on the principle of distributive justice.
131. Secondly, this argument concerning Article 46 crumbles down on the basic
rules of interpretation of the text of a constitutional provision.
131.1. It remains trite that a Constitution, unlike other enactments, is intended
to be an enduring instrument. The great generalities of the Constitution have a
content and a significance that vary from age to age. The Constitution is
recognised as a living organic thing to be required to meet the
current needs and requirements. Ergo, the provisions of the Constitution cannot be
put in a straitjacket. This Court in Assn. of Unified Tele Services Providers V. Union of
India with reference to a previous decision in People's Union for Civil Liberties
(PUCL) V. Union of India81 has pithily explained the principles in the following terms
(of course, in the context of Article 149) : (Assn. of Unified Tele Services Providers
"43. The Constitution, as it is often said "is a living organic thing and must be
applied to meet the current needs and requirements". The Constitution, therefore,
is not bound to be understood or accepted to the original understanding of the
constitutional economics. Parliamentary Debates, referred to by service providers
may not be the sole criteria to be adopted by a court while examining the
meaning and content of Article 149, since its content and significance has to vary
from age to age. Fundamental rights enunciated in the Constitution itself, as held
by this Court in People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) V. Union of India 81 have
no fixed content, most of them are empty vessels into which each generation has
to pour its content in the light of its experience."
(emphasis supplied)
131.2. Therefore, it cannot be said that the eclectic expression "other weaker
sections" is not to be given widest possible meaning or that this expression refers
only to those weaker sections who are similarly circumstanced to SCs and STs.
131.3. Though, the text and the order of the expressions used in the body of
Article 46 have been repeatedly recounted on behalf of the petitioners to emphasise
on the arguments based on ejusdem generis principle of interpretation but, as
aforesaid, that principle does not fit in the interpretation of an organic thing like the
Constitution. This apart, when traversing through the principles of interpretation, it
could also be noticed that in case of any doubt, the heading or sub-heading of a
provision could also be referred to as an internal aid in construing the provision,
82
while not cutting down the wide application of clear words used in the provision.
What is interesting to notice is that in the heading of Article 46, the chronology of
the description of target groups for promotion of educational and economic interests
is stated in reverse order than the contents of the provision. The heading signifies
"Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other weaker sections" whereas the contents of the main provision are
framed with the sentence "interest of the weaker sections of the people, and, in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes". A simple reading of
the heading together with the contents would make it clear that the broader
expression "other weaker sections" in Article 46 is disjointed from the particular
weaker sections (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribe); and is not confined to
only those sections who are similarly circumstanced to SCs and STs.
132. Apart from the aforesaid two major shortcomings in the argument
suggesting restricted operation of the measures contemplated by Article 46, the
other shortcoming rather knocks the bottom out of this argument when the same is
examined in the context of a constitutional amendment. The fundamental flaw in
this argument is that even if the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the
amendment in question refers to Article 46, such a reference is only to one part of
DPSP to indicate the constitutional objective which is sought to be addressed to, or
fulfilled. However, the amendment in question could be correlated with any other
provision of the Constitution, including the Preamble as well as Articles 38 and 39.
Moreover, it is not the requirement of our constitutional scheme that an amendment
to the Constitution has to be based on some existing provision in DPSP. In fact, an
amendment to the Constitution (of course, within the bounds of basic structure)
could be made even without any corresponding provision in DPSP.
133. In the aforesaid view of matter, there appears no reason to analyse another
unacceptable line of arguments adopted by the petitioners that the amendment in
question provides for compensatory discrimination in favour of the so-called forward
class/caste. Suffice it to observe that the amendment in question is essentially
related to the requirements of those economically weaker sections who have hitherto
not been given the benefit of such an affirmative action (particularly of reservation),
which was accorded to the other class/classes of citizens, namely, the
SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs. Viewing this affirmative action of EWS reservation from the
standpoint of backward class versus forward class is not in accord with the very
permissibility of compensatory discrimination towards the goal of real and
substantive justice for all.
134. There has been another ground of challenge that if at all reservation on
economic criteria is to be given, keeping the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs out of this
affirmative action is directly at conflict with the constitutional scheme and hits the
Equality Code. This line of arguments shall be dealt with in the next segment.
Enough to say for the present purpose that the challenge to the amendment in
question on the ground that though the State could take all the relevant measures
to deal with poverty and the disadvantages arising therefrom but, the affirmative
action of reservation is envisaged by the Constitution only for socially and
educationally backward class of citizens; and economic disadvantage alone had
never been in contemplation for this action of reservation, is required to be rejected.
In any case, any legitimate effort of the State towards all-inclusive socio-economic
justice, by way of affirmative action of reservation in support of economically weaker
sections of citizens, who had otherwise not been given the benefit of this affirmative
action, cannot be lightly interfered with by the Court.
EWS Reservation Not Availing to Certain Classes : Whether Violates Basic
Structure
135. The discussion aforesaid takes us to the next major area of discord in these
matters where the aggrieved petitioners state that the exclusion of
SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs from the benefit of EWS reservation violates the basic
framework of the Constitution. While entering into this point for determination,
worthwhile it would be to recapture the salient features of the provisions introduced
by the 103rd Amendment.
136. As noticed, the amendment in question introduces clause (6) to both the
Articles i.e. 15 and 16. Clause (6) of Article 15 starts with a non obstante
preposition, making it operative notwithstanding anything otherwise contained in
other clauses of Article 15 or Article 19(1)(g) or Article 29(2). Sub-clause (a) of
clause (6) of Article 15 enables the State to make any special provision for the
advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens and sub-clause (b)
thereof provides for making a maximum of ten per cent reservation in the matter of
admission to educational institutions, public or private, barring minority educational
institutions. Similarly, clause (6) of Article 16 also starts with a non obstante
preposition, making it operative notwithstanding anything otherwise contained in
other clauses of that Article and enables the State to make any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker sections
of citizens to a maximum of ten per cent. As per the Explanation to clause (6) of
Article 15, "economically weaker sections" for the purpose of both these Articles 15
and 16 shall be such as to be notified by the State from time to time on the basis of
family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage. However, when both
these clauses exclude from their ambit those classes who are already covered under
Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4), that is to say, the benefits under these amended
provisions do not avail to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Other
Backward Classes (Non-creamy layer), the ground of challenge is that keeping the
socially and educationally backward classes out of Articles 15(6) and 16(6) is
directly at conflict with the constitutional scheme and is of inexplicably hostile
discrimination. Rather, according to the petitioners, the classes covered by Articles
15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) are comprising of the poorest of the poor and hence, keeping
them out of the benefit of EWS reservation is an exercise conceptionally at conflict
with the constitutional norms and principles.
137. At the first blush, the arguments made in this regard appear to be having
some substance because it cannot be denied that the classes covered by Articles 15
(4), 15(5) and 16(4) would also be comprising of poor persons within. However, a
little pause and a closer look makes it clear that the grievance of the petitioners
because of this exclusion remains entirely untenable and the challenge to the
amendment in question remains wholly unsustainable. As noticed infra, there is a
definite logic in this exclusion; rather, this exclusion is inevitable for the true
operation and effect of the scheme of EWS reservation.
138. It is true that in identifying the classes of persons for the purpose of Articles
15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution i.e. Other Backward Classes (Non-creamy
layer), Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the social and educational
backwardness predominantly figures but then, it needs no great deal of research to
demonstrate that the poverty too is thickly associated with these factors.
139. In fact, poverty was recognised as the primary source of social and
769, para 80)
"80. Class poverty, not individual poverty, is therefore the primary test. Other
ancillary tests are the way of life, the standard of living, the place in the social
hierarchy, the habits and customs, etc. etc. Despite individual exceptions, it may
be possible and easy to identify social backwardness with reference to caste, with
reference to residence, with reference to occupation or some other dominant
feature. Notwithstanding our antipathy to caste and sub-regionalism, these are
facts of life which cannot be wished away. If they reflect poverty which is the
primary source of social and educational backwardness, they must be recognised
for what they are along with other less primary sources. There is and there can be
nothing wrong in recognising poverty wherever it is reflected as an identifiable
group phenomena whether you see it as a caste group, a sub-regional group, or
occupational group or some other class. Once the relevant factors are taken into
consideration, how and where to draw the line is a question for each State to
consider since the economic and social conditions differ from area to area. Once
the relevant conditions are taken into consideration and the backwardness of a
class of people is determined, it will not be for the Court to interfere in the
matter. But, lest there be any misunderstanding, judicial review will not stand
excluded."
(emphasis supplied)
140. Though, the principal factor in the observations aforesaid is class poverty
which is indicated to be different than individual poverty but, it cannot be denied
that poverty is a material factor taken into consideration along with caste, residence,
occupation or other dominant feature while recognising any particular class/caste's
entitlement to the affirmative action by way of reservation enabled in terms of
Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4). In that scenario, if Parliament has considered it
proper not to extend those classes covered by the existing clauses of Articles 15(4),
15(5) and 16(4) another benefit in terms of affirmative action of reservation carved
out for other economically weaker sections, there is no reason to question this
judgment of Parliament. Obviously, for the reason that those classes are already
provided with affirmative action in terms of reservation, in the wisdom of Parliament,
there was no need to extend them or any of their constituents yet another benefit in
the affirmative action of reservation carved out for other economically weaker
sections.
141. Moreover, the benefit of reservation avails to the excluded classes/castes
under the existing clauses of Articles 15 and 16; and by the amendment in question,
the quota earmarked for them is not depleted in any manner.
142. The amendment in question makes a reasonable classification between
"economically weaker sections" and other weaker sections, who are already
mentioned in Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution and are entitled to
avail the benefits of reservation thereunder. The moment there is a vertical
reservation, exclusion is the vital requisite to provide benefit to the target group. In
fact, the affirmative action of reservation for a particular target group, to achieve its
desired results, has to be carved out by exclusion of others. The same principle has
been applied for the affirmative action of reservation qua the groups of SEBCs,
OBCs, SCs, and STs. Each of them takes reservation in their vertical column in
exclusion of others. But for this exclusion, the purported affirmative action for a
particular class or group would be congenitally deformative and shall fail at its
inception. Therefore, the claim of any particular class or section against its exclusion
from the affirmative action of reservation in favour of EWS has to be rejected.
143. In fact, it follows as a necessary corollary to the discussion in the preceding
segments of this judgment that looking to the purpose and the objective of the
present affirmative action, that is, reservation for the benefit of economically weaker
sections, the other classes, who are already availing the benefit of affirmative action
of reservation by virtue of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4), are required to be kept
out of the benefits of EWS reservation in Articles 15(6) and 16(6). It could easily be
seen that but for this exclusion, the entire balance of the general principles of
equality and compensatory discrimination would be disturbed, with extra or
excessive advantage being given to the classes already availing the benefit under
Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4). In other words, sans such exclusion, reservation by
way of the amendment in question would only lead to an incongruous and
constitutionally invalid situation.
144. Putting it in other words, the classes who are already the recipient of, and
beneficiary of, compensatory discrimination by virtue of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16
(4), cannot justifiably raise the grievance that in another set of compensatory
discrimination for another class, they have been excluded. It gets, perforce,
reiterated that the compensatory discrimination, by its very nature, would be
structured as exclusionary in order to achieve its objectives. Rather, if the classes for
whom affirmative action is already in place are not excluded, the present exercise
itself would be of unjustified discrimination.
145. Even a slightly different angle of approach would also lead to the same
result. The case sought to be made out on behalf of the class or classes already
availing the benefit of Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) is that their exclusion from
EWS reservation is of inexplicable discrimination. What this argument misses out is
that in relation to the principles of formal equality, both the reservations, whether
under the pre-existing provisions or under the newly inserted provisions, are of
compensatory discrimination which is permissible
for being an affirmative action; and is to be contradistinguished from direct
discrimination, which is not permissible.
146. According to the petitioners, it is a case of their direct discrimination when
they have been excluded from EWS reservation. The problem with this argument is
that EWS reservation itself is another form of compensatory discrimination, which is
meant for serving the cause of such weaker sections who have hitherto not been
given any State support by way of reservation. SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs are having the
existing compensatory discrimination in their favour wherein the presently supported
EWS are also excluded along with all other excluded classes/persons. As a necessary
corollary, when EWS is to be given support by way of compensatory discrimination,
that could only be given by exclusion of others, and more particularly by exclusion of
those who are availing the benefit of the existing compensatory discrimination in
exclusion of all others. Put in simple words, the exclusion of SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs
from EWS reservation is the compensatory discrimination of the same species as is
the exclusion of general EWS from SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs reservation. As said above,
compensatory discrimination, wherever applied, is exclusionary in character and
could acquire its worth and substance only by way of exclusion of others. Such
differentiation cannot be said to be legally impermissible; rather it is inevitable.
When that be so, clamour against exclusion in the present matters could only be
rejected as baseless.
147. The fact that exclusion is innate in compensatory discrimination could
further be exemplified by the fact that in Indra Sawhney5, this Court excluded the
creamy layer of OBCs from the benefit of reservation. In the complex set-up of
formal equality on one hand (which debars discrimination altogether) and real and
substantive equality on the other (which permits compensatory discrimination so as
to upset the disadvantages), exclusion is as indispensable as the compensatory
discrimination itself is.
148. In fact, "creamy layer" principle itself was applied to make a true compact of
socially and educationally backward class. Two features strikingly come to fore with
creamy layer principle. One is that to make a real compact of socially and
educationally backward class, economic factors play an equally important role; and
then, the exclusionary principle applies therein too. These two features, when
applied to the present case, make it clear that the use of economic criteria is not
contra-indicated for the exercise of reservation, rather it is imperative; and second,
to make the exercise of compensatory discrimination meaningful so as to achieve its
desired result, exclusion of every other class/person from the target group is
inevitable. Thus viewed, the amendment in question remains unexceptionable in the
accepted principles of constitutional law presently in operation.
149. Yet further, in Indra Sawhney5, in the context of the question as to whether
Article 16(4) is exhaustive of the concept of reservation in favour of backward
694, para 743)
"743.
In our opinion, therefore, where the State finds it necessary - for the
purpose of giving full effect to the provision of reservation to provide certain
exemptions, concessions or preferences to members of backward classes, it can
extend the same under clause (4) itself. In other words, all supplemental and
ancillary provisions to ensure full availment of provisions for reservation can be
provided as part of concept of reservation itself. Similarly, in a given situation, the
State may think that in the case of a particular backward class it is not necessary
to provide reservation of appointments/posts and that it would be sufficient if a
certain preference or a concession is provided in their favour. This can be done
under clause (4) itself. In this sense, clause (4) of Article 16 is exhaustive of the
special provisions that can be made in favour of "the backward class of citizens".
Backward Classes having been classified by the Constitution itself as a class
deserving special treatment and the Constitution having itself specified the nature
of special treatment, it should be presumed that no further classification or
special treatment is permissible in their favour apart from or outside of clause (4)
of Article 16."
(emphasis supplied)
The above observations make it absolutely clear that so far as the classes availing
the benefit of compensatory discrimination in the form of reservation under Article
16(4) are concerned, no further classification or special treatment is to be given to
them. A fortiori, they cannot make a claim to intrude into other compensatory
discrimination in favour of another deserving group.
150. Having said so, even if it be assumed for the sake of argument that the
amendment in question alters the existing equality principles, it is not of abrogation
or annulment of the existing rights but could only be treated to be of moderate
abridgment thereof for a valid purpose. Thus viewed, it cannot be said that the
amendment in question leads to such a violation of the rule of equality which is
shocking or is unscrupulous travesty of quintessence of equal justice.
151. Viewed from any angle, the amendment in question cannot be declared
invalid as being violative of the basic structure of the Constitution of India.
152. Though the discussion and the observations foregoing are sufficient to
conclude this segment but, before moving on to the other point, it could be usefully
observed that in the ultimate analysis, the questions as to how all the requirements
of socio-economic justice are to be balanced in our constitutional scheme and, for
that purpose, whether any constitutional amendment is to be made or not, are
essentially in the domain of Parliament. Any constitutional amendment cannot be
disturbed by the Court only for its second guess as to the desirability of a particular
provision or by way of synthesis of advantages or disadvantages flowing from an
amendment. In this context and in the context
of the amendment in question, a reference to the following words of P.B.
Gajendragadkar, the former Chief Justice of India, shall be apposite:
"Modern liberalism draws its inspiration from a progressive and comprehensive
ethical philosophy. Its main postulate is that individual life should show
preference for social obligation. The root and basic motive of this ethical approach
is the passion for the relief of human suffering and misery. In the pursuit of this
ideal, liberalism does not hesitate to embark upon newer and newer socio-
economic experiments. These experiments represent in a sense an adventurous
voyage of discovery in unknown ethical regions, prepared to take the risks but
determined to win the ultimate prize of socio-economic justice."83
153. Even if the provisions in question are said to be of experiment, Parliament is
entitled to do any such experiment towards the avowed objective of socio-economic
justice. Such an action (or say, experiment) of Parliament by way of constitutional
amendment can be challenged only on the doctrine of basic structure and not
otherwise.
154. Thus, the exclusion of other groups and classes from the ten per cent
reservation earmarked for EWS does not make them constitutionally aggrieved
parties to invoke the general doctrine of equality for assailing the amendment in
question. In other words, their grievance cannot be said to be a legal grievance so as
to be agitated before the Court.
155. One of the submissions that the words "other than" in Articles 15(6) and 16
(6) of the Constitution of India should be read as "in addition to", so as to include
SCs/STs/OBCs within EWS has also been noted only for rejection for the simple
reason that the suggested construction is plainly against the direct meaning of the
exclusionary expression "other than" as employed in, and for the purpose of, the
said Articles 15(6) and 16(6). If there is any doubt yet, the official Hindi translation
of the amendment in question, as published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, Section 1-A dated 17-7-2019 would remove any misconception where the
exclusionary Hindi expression "AH" (bhinn) has been employed in relation to the
expression "other than". No further comment appears requisite in this regard.
Breach of Fifty Per Cent Ceiling of Reservations and Basic Structure
156. A long deal of arguments by the learned counsel challenging the
amendment in question had also been against the prescription of ten per cent
reservation for EWS on the ground that it exceeds the ceiling limit of fifty per cent
laid down by this Court in the consistent series of cases. Apart that this argument is
not precisely in conformity with the law declared by this Court, it runs counter to the
other argument that this EWS reservation is invalid because of exclusions. If at all
the cap of fifty per cent is the final and inviolable rule, the classes already standing
in the enabled bracket of fifty per cent cannot
justifiably claim their share in the extra ten per cent, which is meant for a separate
class and section i.e. economically weaker section.
157. Moreover, the argument regarding the cap of fifty per cent is based on all
those decisions by this Court which were rendered with reference to the reservations
existing before the advent of the amendment in question. The fifty per cent ceiling
proposition would obviously be applied only to those reservations which were in
place before the amendment in question. No decision of this Court could be read to
mean that even if Parliament finds the necessity of another affirmative action by the
State in the form of reservation for a section or class in need, it could never be
provided. As noticed hereinbelow, the decisions of this Court are rather to the
contrary and provide that flexibility within which Parliament has acted for putting in
place the amendment in question.
158. In the above backdrop, the relevant decisions of this Court in regard to this
fifty per cent ceiling limit could be referred but, while reiterating that these decisions
are applicable essentially to the class/classes who are to avail the benefits envisaged
by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution of India.
159. In M.R. Balaji6, the Constitution Bench of this Court, while considering
whether sixty per cent reservation in engineering and medical colleges and other
technical institutions was appropriate, observed as under : (AIR pp. 662-63, paras
31 & 34)
"31.
It is because the interests of the society at large would be served by
promoting the advancement of the weaker elements in the society that Article 15
(4) authorises special provision to be made. But if a provision which is in the
nature of an exception completely excludes the rest of the society, that clearly is
outside the scope of Article 15(4).
*
*
*
34.
Speaking generally and in a broad way, a special provision should be less
than 50%; how much less than 50% would depend upon the relevant prevailing
circumstances in each case."
160. In T. Devadasan, constitutionality of carry-forward rule was challenged on
the ground that it violated fifty per cent limit. The majority relied upon M.R. Balaji6
and observed that the ratio of the said decision pertaining to Article 15(4) equally
applied to the case at hand pertaining to Article 16(4); and held that reservation of
more than half of the vacancies was invalid. The Court struck down the carry-forward
rule by holding that Article 16(4) was a proviso to Article 16(1), in the following
words : (T. Devadasan case, AIR p. 187, paras 14 & 16)
"14.
In the case before us 45 vacancies have actually been filled out of which
29 have gone to members of the Scheduled Castes and Tribes on
the basis of reservation permitted by the carry-forward rule. This comes to 64.4% of
reservation. Such being the result of the operation of the carry-forward rule we
must, on the basis of the decision in Balaji case6 hold that the rule is bad.
*
*
*
16. Further, this Court has already held that clause (4) of Article 16 is by way
of a proviso or an exception to clause (1). A proviso or an exception cannot be so
interpreted as to nullify or destroy the main provision. To hold that unlimited
reservation of appointments could be made under clause (4) would in effect
efface the guarantee contained in clause (1) or at best make it illusory."
161. As noticed, N.M. Thomas4 arose in the context of constitutionality of the
rules contained in the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958, by which
the State Government was empowered to grant exemption to SC/ST candidates from
passing qualifying test for departmental exam. In that case, two learned Judges
opined about the rule of ceiling limit thus:
"191.
As to what would be a suitable reservation within permissible limits
will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case and no hard-and-fast
rule can be laid down, nor can this matter be reduced to a mathematical formula
so as to be adhered to in all cases. Decided cases of this Court have no doubt laid
down that the percentage of reservation should not exceed 50%. As I read the
authorities, this is, however, a rule of caution and does not exhaust all categories.
Suppose for instance a State has a large number of backward classes of citizens
which constitute 80% of the population and the Government, in order to give
them proper representation, reserves 80% of the jobs for them, can it be said
that the percentage of reservation is bad and violates the permissible limits of
clause (4) of Article 16?"
"143.
I agree with my learned Brother Fazal Ali, J. in the view that the
arithmetical limit of 50% in any one year set by some earlier rulings cannot
perhaps be pressed too far. Overall representation in a department does not
depend on recruitment in a particular year, but the total strength of a cadre. I
agree with his construction of Article 16(4) and his view about the "carry forward"
rule."
(emphasis supplied)
161.3. The other learned Judges did not specifically deal with the fifty per cent
rule but the majority Judges agreed that Article 16(4) was not an exception to
Article 16(1).
162. In Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) V. Union of India84
several concessions and exemptions granted by the Railway Board in favour of
SCs/STs came to be challenged. Therein, the opinions as regards percentage of
reservation came to be expressed as under:
162.1. Chinnappa Reddy, J. : (Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh case84 84
"135.
There is no fixed ceiling to reservation or preferential treatment in
favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes though generally
reservation may not be far in excess of fifty per cent. There is no rigidity about
the fifty per cent rule which is only a convenient guideline laid down by Judges.
Every case must be decided with reference to the present practical results yielded
by the application of the particular rule of preferential treatment and not with
reference to hypothetical results which the application of the rule may yield in the
future. Judged in the light of this discussion I am unable to find anything illegal
or unconstitutional in anyone of the impugned orders and circulars."
(emphasis supplied)
p. 296, para 88)
"88.
All that we need say is that the Railway Board shall take care to issue
instructions to see that in no year shall SC & ST candidates be actually appointed
to substantially more than 50% of the promotional posts. Some excess will not
affect as mathematical precision is difficult in human affairs, but substantial
excess will void the selection. Subject to this rider or condition that the "carry
forward" rule -shall not result in any given year, in the selection or
appointments of SC & ST candidates considerably in excess of 50%, we uphold
Annexure 'I'."
(emphasis supplied)
162.3. Thus, in effect, while Chinnappa Reddy, J. held that there can be no
ceiling limit on reservation, Krishna Iyer, J. held that reservation in substantial
excess of fifty per cent cannot be sustained.
1 In Vasanth Kumar18, two learned Judges stated slightly different conclusions
as regards this ceiling limit of fifty per cent and the effect of the decision in N.M.
Thomas4 as follows:
57-58)
"57.
The percentage of reservations is not a matter upon which a court may
pronounce with no material at hand. For a court to say that reservations should
not exceed 40%, 50% or 60%, would be arbitrary and the Constitution does not
permit us to be arbitrary. Though in Balaji
case6, the Court thought that generally and in a broad way a special provision should
be less than 50%, and how much less than 50% would depend upon the relevant
prevailing circumstances in each case, the Court confessed: 'In this matter again, we
are reluctant to say definitely what would be a proper provision to make.' All that the
Court would finally say was that in the circumstances of the case before them, a
reservation of 68% was inconsistent with Article 15(4) of the Constitution. We are
not prepared to read Balaji as arbitrarily laying down 50% as the outer limit of
reservation.
58. We must repeat here, what we have said earlier, that there is no scientific
statistical data or evidence of expert administrators who have made any study of
the problem to support the opinion that reservation in excess of 50% may impair
efficiency. It is a rule of thumb and rules of the thumb are not for Judges to lay
down to solve complicated sociological and administrative problems. Sometimes,
it is obliquely suggested that excessive reservation is indulged in as a mere vote-
catching device. Perhaps so, perhaps not. One can only say "out of evil cometh
good" and quicker the redemption of the oppressed classes, so much the better
for the nation. Our observations are not intended to show the door to genuine
efficiency. Efficiency must be a guiding factor but not a smokescreen. All that a
court may legitimately say is that reservation may not be excessive. It may not
be so excessive as to be oppressive; it may not be so high as to lead to a
necessary presumption of unfair exclusion of everyone else."
(emphasis supplied)
18
"149. After carefully going through all the seven opinions in the above case, it
is difficult to hold that the settled view of this Court that the reservation under
Article 15(4) or Article 16(4) could not be more than 50% has been unsettled by
a majority on the Bench which decided this case. I do not propose to pursue this
point further in this case because if reservation is made only in favour of those
backward castes or classes which are comparable to the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, it may not exceed 50% (including 18% reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and 15% reserved for "special group") in
view of the total population of such backward classes in the State of Karnataka."
(emphasis supplied)
164. In Indra Sawhney5, Jeevan Reddy, J., speaking for the majority, though
made it clear that reservation contemplated by Article 16(4) should not exceed fifty
per cent, yet left that small window open where some relaxation to the strict rule
may become imperative in view of the extraordinary situations inherent
in the great diversity of our country. As an example, it was pointed out that the
population inhabiting far-flung and remote areas might, on account of their being
out of the mainstream of national life and in view of the conditions peculiar to them,
need to be treated in a different way. However, a caveat was put that a special case
has to be made out and extreme caution has to be exercised in this regard. The
"809. From the above discussion, the irresistible conclusion that follows is that
the reservations contemplated in clause (4) of Article 16 should not exceed 50%.
810. While 50% shall be the rule, it is necessary not to put out of consideration
certain extraordinary situations inherent in the great diversity of this country and
the people. It might happen that in far-flung and remote areas the population
inhabiting those areas might, on account of their being out of the mainstream of
national life and in view of conditions peculiar to and characteristical to them,
need to be treated in a different way, some relaxation in this strict rule may
become imperative. In doing so, extreme caution is to be exercised and a special
case made out."
(emphasis supplied)
165. Pandian, J. also opined that no maximum percentage of reservation can be
"189. I fully share the above views of Fazal Ali, Krishna Iyer, Chinnappa Reddy,
JJ. holding that no maximum percentage of reservation can be justifiably fixed
under Articles 15(4) and/or 16(4) of the Constitution."
166. P.B. Sawant, J. also echoed that fifty per cent ordinary ceiling can be
breached but would be required to be seen in the facts and circumstances of every
"518. To summarise, the question may be answered thus. There is no legal
infirmity in keeping the reservations under clause (4) alone or under clause (4)
and clause (1) of Article 16 together, exceeding 50%. However, validity of the
extent of excess of reservations over 50% would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case including the field in which and the grade or level of
administration for which the reservation is kept. Although, further, legally and
theoretically the excess of reservations over 50% may be justified, it would
ordinarily be wise and nothing much would be lost, if the intentions of the
Framers of the Constitution and the observations of Dr Ambedkar, on the subject
in particular, are kept in mind. The reservations should further be kept category
and gradewise at appropriate percentages and for practical purposes the extent of
reservations should be calculated category and gradewise."
167. In M. Nagaraj2, while interpreting Articles 16(4-A) and (4-B) and while
considering the extent of reservation, the expression "ceiling limit" came to be
employed by this Court while underscoring the concept of "proportional equality".
Para 102 of the said decision, which had been reproduced hereinabove in the
discussion pertaining to reservation, could be usefully re-extracted along with other
"102.
Clauses (1) and (4) of Article 16 are restatements of the principle of
equality under Article 14. Clause (4) of Article 16 refers to affirmative action by
way of reservation. Clause (4) of Article 16, however, states that the appropriate
Government is free to provide for reservation in cases where it is satisfied on the
basis of quantifiable data that Backward Class is inadequately represented in the
services. Therefore, in every case where the State decides to provide for
reservation there must exist two circumstances, namely, "backwardness" and
"inadequacy of representation". As stated above, equity, justice and efficiency are
variable factors. These factors are context-specific. There is no fixed yardstick to
identify and measure these three factors, it will depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case. These are the limitations on the mode of the exercise
of power by the State. If the State concerned fails to identify and measure
backwardness, inadequacy and overall administrative efficiency then in that event
the provision for reservation would be invalid.
Equality has two facets - "formal
equality" and "proportional equality". Proportional equality is equality "in fact"
whereas formal equality is equality "in law". Formal equality exists in the rule of
law. In the case of proportional equality the State is expected to take affirmative
steps in favour of disadvantaged sections of the society within the framework of
liberal democracy. Egalitarian equality is proportional equality.
*
*
*
104
As stated above, be it reservation or evaluation, excessiveness in either
would result in violation of the constitutional mandate. This exercise, however,
will depend on the facts of each case.
*
*
*
Conclusion
121. The impugned constitutional amendments by which Articles 16(4-A) and
16(4-B) have been inserted flow from Article 16(4). They do not alter the
structure of Article 16(4). They retain the controlling factors or the compelling
reasons, namely, backwardness and inadequacy of representation which enables
the States to provide for reservation keeping in mind the overall efficiency of the
State administration under Article 335. These impugned Amendments are
confined only to SCs and STs. They do not obliterate any of the constitutional
requirements, namely,
ceiling limit of 50% (quantitative limitation), the concept of creamy layer
(qualitative exclusion), the sub-classification between OBCs on one hand and SCs
and STS on the other hand as held in Indra Sawhney5, the concept of post-based
roster with inbuilt concept of replacement as held in R.K. Sabharwal51.
122. We reiterate that the ceiling limit of 50%, the concept of creamy layer
and the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation
and overall administrative efficiency are all constitutional requirements without
which the structure of equality of opportunity in Article 16 would collapse."
(emphasis supplied)
168. In K. Krishna Murthy52, as noticed, this Court rejected the challenge to the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Constitution (Seventy-
fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 which had inserted Part IX and Part IX-A to the
Constitution thereby contemplating the powers, composition and functions of the
Panchayats (for rural areas) and Municipalities (for urban areas). In the present
context, the passage referring to the ceiling aspect of reservation in regard to local
"82.
(iv) The upper ceiling of 50% vertical reservations in favour of
SCs/STs/OBCs should not be breached in the context of local self-government.
Exceptions can only be made in order to safeguard the interests of the Scheduled
Tribes in the matter of their representation in panchayats located in the
Scheduled Areas."
169. In Jaishri Patil10 Bhat, J. after analysis of Indra Sawhney5 said as follows :
"10. A careful reading of the judgments in Indra Sawhney V. Union of India5,
clarifies that seven out of nine Judges concurred that there exists a quantitative
limit on reservation-spelt out at 50%. In the opinion of four Judges, therefore, as
per the judgment of B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J., this limit could be exceeded under
extraordinary circumstances and in conditions for which separate justification has
to be forthcoming by the State or the agency concerned. However, there is
unanimity in the conclusion by all seven Judges that an outer limit for reservation
should be 50%. Undoubtedly, the other two Judges, Ratnavel Pandian and P.B.
Sawant, JJ. indicated that there is no general rule of 50% limit on reservation. In
these circumstances, given the general common agreement about the existence
of an outer limit i.e. 50%, the petitioner's argument about the incoherence or
uncertainty about the existence of the rule or that there were contrary
observations with respect to absence of any ceiling limit in other judgments (the
dissenting judgments of K. Subba Rao, in T. Devadasan V. Union of
India  , the judgments of S.M. Fazal Ali and Krishna lyer, JJ. in State of Kerala V.
N.M. Thomas4 and the judgment of Chinnappa Reddy, J. in K.C. Vasanth Kumar V.
State of Karnataka8 is not an argument compelling a review or reconsideration of
Indra Sawhney5 rule."
(emphasis in original)
170. In the said decision, Bhushan, J. observed as under : (Jaishri Patil case10 10
"442. The above constitutional amendment makes it very clear that ceiling of
50% "has now received constitutional recognition". Ceiling of 50% is ceiling which
was approved by this Court in Indra Sawhney case thus, the constitutional
amendment in fact recognises the 50% ceiling which was approved in Indra
Sawhney case5 and on the basis of above constitutional amendment, no case has
been made out to revisit Indra Sawhney5."
171. Thus, having examined the permissible limits of affirmative action in light of
the possible harm of preferential treatment qua other innocent class of competitors
i.e. general merit candidates, this Court has expressed the desirability of fifty per
cent as the ceiling limit for reservation in education and public employment but, as
observed hereinbefore, all such observations are required to be read essentially in
the context of the reservation obtaining under Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) or
other areas of affirmative action like that in relation to local self-government (the
case of K. Krishna Murthy52) and cannot be overstretched to the reservation provided
for entirely different class, consisting of the economically weaker sections.
172. Moreover, as noticed, this ceiling limit, though held attached to the
constitutional requirements, has not been held to be inflexible and inviolable for all
times to come. Reasons for this are not far to seek. As mentioned hereinbefore,
reservation by affirmative action is not having trappings of any such essential
15
feature of the Constitution, collectively enumerated by Kesavananda and
successive decisions, that its modulation with reference to any particular compelling
The surest way't to legal research!"
reason or requirement could damage the basic structure of the Constitution.
173. In another view of the matter, the prescription of ceiling limit of fifty per
cent, being apparently for the benefit of general merit candidates, does not provide
any justified cause to the candidates standing in the bracket of already available
reservation to raise any grievance about extra ten per cent reservation for the
benefit of another section of society in need of affirmative action. In
any case, there is no question of violation of any such basic feature of the
Constitution that the entire structure of equality of opportunity in Article 16 would
collapse by this EWS reservation.
Other Factors and General Summation
174. There have been several suggestions during the course of arguments that
while the existing reservations are class-specific, the impugned reservation is person
-specific and even the eligibility factor, that is, of "economic weakness", is itself
uncertain, fortuitous and mutable. All these submissions have only been noted to be
rejected in the context of the limited permissible challenge to the amendment in
question on the doctrine of basic structure. None of these submissions make out a
case of violation of any such essential feature of the Constitution that leads to
destroying the basic structure.
175. It may, however, be observed that as per the Explanation to Article 15(6),
the reservations in relation to economically weaker sections would avail to such
sections/persons as may be notified by the State from time to time on the basis of
family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage. The question as to
whether any particular section or person falls in or is entitled to stand within the
class of "economically weaker sections of citizens" may be a question to be
determined with reference to the parameters laid down and indicators taken into
consideration by the State. Coupled with this, even the extent of reservation
provided therein may also be a question to be determined with reference to the
relevant analysis of the material data justifying a particular percentage. In other
words, the question as to whether any particular classification as economically
weaker section is based on relevant data and factors as also the extent of reservation
for that section could be the matters of consideration as and when arising but, for
these and akin grounds, the constitutional amendment, moderately expanding the
enabling power of the State, cannot be questioned.
176. The fact that "representation" alone is not the purpose of enabling
provisions of Article 16 could be directly seen from clause (4-B) of Article 16,
inserted later and upheld by this Court ensuring that ceiling on reservation quota to
carried forward posts does not apply to subsequent years. Interestingly, clause (5)
of Article 16, protecting the operation of any law in relation to any incumbent of an
office in connection with the affairs of any religious or denominational institution as
regards eligibility, operates in an entirely different field but finds mention in Article
16 for being an exception to the general rule of equality of opportunity. Viewed as a
whole, it is difficult to say that permissible deviation from the rule of equality in the
matters of employment is having the objective of representation alone.
177. Moreover, even if it be assumed that the existing provisions concerning
reservation are correlated with "representation", such a correlation would only
remain confined to the classes availing benefit under Article 16(4); and it cannot be
said that for any other deserving section or class reservation could be provided only
for the purpose of representation. As repeatedly noticed, the real and substantive
equality takes myriad shapes, depending on
the requirements. Therefore, questioning clause (6) of Article 16 only on the ground
of it being not representation-oriented, does not appear to be a sustainable
argument vis--vis the doctrine of basic structure.
178. A few other pertinent features of consideration herein may also be usefully
indicated.
179. As noticed, our country is and has been a participant in various international
conventions having a co-relation with the questions pertaining to economic
disabilities. Kesavananda5 has referred to a decision rendered by Lord Denning in
Corocraft Ltd. V. Pan American Airways Inc. 85 that, " it is the duty of these
courts
to construe our legislation so as to be in conformity with international law and not in
conflict with it." In R.D. Upadhyay V. State of A.P. a three-Judge Bench affirmed
the earlier decisions upholding the enforceability of International Conventions when
they elucidate and effectuate the fundamental rights and that such conventions may
also be read as part of domestic law as long as there is no inconsistency between
them. Thus understood, it hardly needs elaboration that the laws (including
constitutional amendments) enacted, inter alia, for giving effect to International
Conventions, have to be broadly construed and cannot be struck down for askance.
180. Apart from the principles relating to judicial restraint and circumspection in
the matters of challenge to constitutional amendment, as stated by Khanna, J. in
Kesavananda5 (reproduced hereinbefore), what Justice Cardozo of the US Supreme
Court said about the judicial process in the matters of challenge to constitutionality
is also instructive:
"... The restraining power of the judiciary does not manifest its chief worth in
the few cases in which the legislature has gone beyond the lines that mark the
limits of discretion. Rather shall we find its chief worth in making vocal and
audible the ideals that might otherwise be silenced, in giving them continuity of
life and of expression, in guiding and directing choice within the limits where
choice ranges. This function should preserve to the courts the power that now
belongs to them, if only the power is exercised with insight into social values, and
with suppleness of adaptation to changing social needs."8
181. It would also be worthwhile to quote the words of famous American jurist
Thomas M. Cooley thus:
"The rule of law upon this subject appears to be, that, except where the
Constitution has imposed limits upon the legislative power, it must be considered
as practically absolute, whether it operate according to natural justice or not in
any particular case. The courts are not the guardians of the
rights of the people of the State, unless those rights are secured by some
constitutional provision which comes within the judicial cognizance. The remedy for
unwise or oppressive legislation, within constitutional bounds, is by an appeal to the
justice and patriotism of the representatives of the people. If this fail, the people in
their sovereign capacity can correct the evil; but courts cannot assume their rights.
The judiciary can only arrest the execution of a statute when it conflicts with the
Constitution. It cannot run a race of opinions upon points of right, reason, and
expediency with the law-making power. Any legislative act which does not encroach
upon the powers apportioned to the other departments of the Government, being
prima facie valid, must be enforced, unless restrictions upon the legislative power
,88
can be pointed out in the Constitution, and the case shown to come within them.
182. The abovementioned norms of circumspection had been the guiding factors
in examining the challenge to the amendment in question, with this Court being
conscious that Parliament, whilst enacting amendments to the Constitution,
exercises constituent power, as distinguished from ordinary legislative power. Same
as that Parliament is not at liberty to destroy the basic structure of the Constitution,
the constitutional court is also not at liberty to declare constitutional amendments
void because of their perceived injustice or impolicy or where they appear to the
Court to be violating fundamental principles of governance, unless such principles
are placed beyond legislative encroachment by the Constitution itself. As noticed
from Kesavananda 5, the power to amend the Constitution can be used to reshape
the Constitution to fulfil the obligation imposed on the State. Starting from the
insertion of clause (4) to Article 15 by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act,
1951; moving on to the insertion of clause (4-A) to Article 16 by the Constitution
(Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 to the insertion of clause (4-B) to Article
16 by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000 and further amendment
of the said clause (4-A) by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001;
yet further with the insertion of clause (5) to Article 15 by the Constitution (Ninety-
third Amendment) Act, 2005; and lately with insertion of Articles 366(26-C) and
342-A by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018,
Parliament has indeed brought about certain modulations, within the framework of
the Constitution of India, to cater to the requirements of the citizenry with real and
substantive justice in view. In the same vein, if Parliament has considered it fit to
make provisions in furtherance of the objectives of socio-economic justice by the
amendment in question for economically weaker sections, the amendment cannot be
condemned as being violative of any of the basic features of the Constitution and
thereby damaging the basic structure.
183. In the ultimate analysis, it is beyond doubt that using the doctrine of basic
structure as a sword against the amendment in question and thereby to stultify
State's effort to do economic justice as ordained by the Preamble and DPSP and,
inter alia, enshrined in Articles 38, 39 and 46, cannot be countenanced. This is
essentially for the reason that the provisions contained in Articles 15 and 16 of the
Constitution of India, providing for reservation by way of affirmative action, being of
exception to the general rule of equality, cannot be treated as a basic feature.
Moreover, even if reservation is one of the features of the Constitution, it being in
the nature of enabling provision only, cannot be regarded as an essential feature of
that nature whose modulation for the sake of other valid affirmative action would
damage the basic structure of the Constitution. Therefore, the doctrine of basic
structure cannot be invoked for laying a challenge to the 103rd Amendment. In this
view of the matter, the other contentions and submissions need not be dilated
herein.
Conclusions
184. For what has been discussed and held hereinabove, the points formulated in
paras 37 and 38 are answered as follows:
184.1. Reservation is an instrument of affirmative action by the State so as to
ensure all-inclusive march towards the goals of an egalitarian society while
counteracting inequalities; it is an instrument not only for inclusion of socially and
educationally backward classes to the mainstream of society but, also for inclusion of
any class or section so disadvantaged as to be answering the description of a weaker
section. In this background, reservation structured singularly on economic criteria
does not violate any essential feature of the Constitution of India and does not cause
any damage to the basic structure of the Constitution of India.
184.2. Exclusion of the classes covered by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) from
getting the benefit of reservation as economically weaker sections, being in the
nature of balancing the requirements of non-discrimination and compensatory
discrimination, does not violate Equality Code and does not in any manner cause
damage to the basic structure of the Constitution of India.
184.3. Reservation for economically weaker sections of citizens up to ten per cent
in addition to the existing reservations does not result in violation of any essential
feature of the Constitution of India and does not cause any damage to the basic
structure of the Constitution of India on account of breach of the ceiling limit of fifty
per cent because, that ceiling limit itself is not inflexible and in any case, applies
only to the reservations envisaged by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) of the
Constitution of India.
185. Not much of the contentions have been urged in relation to the impact of
the amendment in question on admissions to private unaided institutions. However,
it could at once be clarified that what has been observed hereinabove in relation to
the principal part of challenge to the amendment in question,
read with the decision of this Court in Pramati Trust33 the answer to the issue
framed in that regard would also be against the challenge.
186. Accordingly, and in view of the above, the answers to the issues formulated
in these matters are as follows:
186.1. The 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic
structure of the Constitution by permitting the State to make special provisions,
including reservation, based on economic criteria.
186.2. The 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic
structure of the Constitution by permitting the State to make special provisions in
relation to admission to private unaided institutions.
186.3. The 103rd Constitution Amendment cannot be said to breach the basic
structure of the Constitution in excluding the SEBCs/OBCs/SCs/STs from the scope
of EWS reservation.
187. Consequently, the transferred cases, transfer petitions, writ petitions and
the petition for special leave to appeal forming the part of this batch of matters are
dismissed.
Acknowledgments
188. While closing on this reference, sincere thanks and compliments deserve to
be placed on record for the learned counsel for the respective parties, their
associates, and their researchers as also all the constructive contributors, whose
erudite and scholarly presentation of respective viewpoints has rendered invaluable
assistance to this Court in shaping the formulations herein.
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. (concurring)- I have had the benefit of perusing the opinion
of my learned Brother Dinesh Maheshwari, J. and I am in respectful agreement with
him. However, having regard to the importance of the constitutional issues involved,
I deem it appropriate to pen down my few views, in addition to his opinion.
190. For the sake of brevity, the divergent and irreconcilable submissions made
by the learned counsel for the parties and the propositions of law laid down by this
Court from time to time on the issues involved, are not repeated, the same having
already been narrated in the opinion of my learned Brother.
191. Since the advent of the Constitution, there is a constant churning process
going on to keep alive the spirit of its Preamble and to achieve the goal of
establishing a welfare State, adhering to the inherent elements of the constitutional
morality and constitutional legality. As a result thereof about 105 amendments have
been made so far, in the Constitution. We have been called upon to examine the
constitutional validity of the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act,
2019.
192. For ready reference, the impugned 103rd Amendment along with the
Statement of Objects and Reasons is reproduced:
"MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, 12-1-2019/Pausha 22, 1940 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on 12-1-
2019, and is hereby published for general information-
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND THIRD AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019
[12-1-2019]
An Act further to amend the Constitution of India
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows-
1. Short title and commencement.-(1) - This Act may be called the
Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Amendment of Article 15.- Article 15 of the Constitution, after clause
(5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:
'(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 or clause
(2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making-
(a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5);
and
(b) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5)
insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational
institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided
by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in
clause (1) of Article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in addition to
the existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of the total
seats in each category.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this article and Article 16, "economically
weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State from time to time
on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage."
3. Amendment of Article 16.-In Article 16 of the Constitution, after clause
(5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:
'(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned
in clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of
ten per cent of the posts in each category."
Dr G. Narayana Raju,
Secretary to the Government of India."
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
At present, the economically weaker sections of citizens have largely remained
excluded from attending the higher educational institutions and public
employment on account of their financial incapacity to compete with the persons
who are economically more privileged. The benefits of existing reservations under
clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15 and clause (4) of Article 16 are generally
unavailable to them unless they meet the specific criteria of social and
educational backwardness.
2. The directive principles of State policy contained in Article 46 of the
Constitution enjoin that the State shall promote with special care the educational
and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from
social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
3. Vide the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, clause (5) was
inserted in Article 15 of the Constitution which enables the State to make special
provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes
of citizens, or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to
their admission in higher educational institutions. Similarly, clause (4) of Article
16 of the Constitution enables the State to make special provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens
which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services
under the State.
4. However, economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the
benefit of reservation. With a view to fulfil the mandate of Article 46, and to
ensure that economically weaker sections of citizens to get a fair chance of
receiving higher education and participation in employment in the services of the
State, it has been decided to amend the Constitution of India.
5. Accordingly, the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Amendment)
Bill, 2019 provides for reservation for the economically weaker sections of society
in higher educational institutions, including private institutions whether aided or
unaided by the State other than the minority educational institutions referred to
in Article 30 of the Constitution and also provides for reservation for them in posts
in initial appointment in services under the State.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
New Delhi;
7-1-2019. Thaawarchand Gehlot."
193. The legal and constitutional history of India depicted through the erudite,
scholarly and authoritative opinions pronounced by this Court in the past, has always
been very educative and interesting. The wide spectrum and
perspectives of the contours of the Constitution of India laid down therein, have
actually worked at the fulcrum and have guided us as a laser beam in the
interpretation of the constitutional provisions. The sole fountainhead of the
constituent power conferred upon Parliament to amend the provisions of the
Constitution is Article 368 thereof. It is very well-established proposition of law that
it is the Constitution and not the constituent power which is supreme. The
Constitution which reflects the hopes and aspirations of the people, also provides for
the framework of the different organs of the State viz. the Executive, the Legislature
and the Judiciary. The Judiciary is entrusted with the responsibility of upholding the
supremacy of the Constitution. That does not mean that such power of judicial
review makes the judiciary supreme. The Constitution itself has created a system of
checks and balances by which the powers are so distributed that none of the three
organs it sets up, can become so predominant as to disable the others from
exercising and discharging powers and functions entrusted to them. 15 Yet the power
of judicial review is provided expressly in our Constitution by means of Articles 226
and 32, which is one of the features upon which hinges the system of checks and
balances. This power is of paramount importance in a federal Constitution like ours
and is the heart and core of the democracy.
194. It is axiomatic that Parliament has been conferred upon the constituent
power to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of the
Constitution under Article 368 of the Constitution, and the same is required to be
exercised in accordance with the procedure laid down in the said Article. The
Constitution is said to be a living document or a work in progress only because of
the plenary power to amend is conferred upon Parliament under the said provision.
Of course, as laid down in plethora of judgments, the said power is subject to the
constraints of the basic structure theory.
195. Deriving inspiration from the Preamble and the whole scheme of the
Constitution, the majority in Kesavananda Bharati case held that every provision of
the Constitution can be amended so long as the basic foundation and structure of
the Constitution remains the same. Some of the basic features of the constitutional
structure carved out by the Court in the said judgment were, the supremacy of the
Constitution, Republican and democratic form of Government, separation of powers,
judicial review, sovereignty and the integrity of the nation, Federal Character of
Government, etc. A multitude of features have been acknowledged as the basic
features in various subsequent judicial pronouncements. Accordingly, any
amendment made by Parliament is open to the judicial review and is liable to be
interfered with by the Court on the ground that it affects one or the other basic
feature of the Constitution.
196. In Kihoto Hollohan V. Zachillhu49 the Court explaining the limitations
imposed on the constituent power observed that the limitations imposed are
substantive limitations and procedural limitations. Substantive limitations are
those which restrict the field of exercise of the amending power and exclude some
areas from its ambit. Therefore, violation of the basic structure of the Constitution
would be a substantive limitation restricting the field of exercise of the amending
power under Article 368 of the Constitution. Procedural limitations are those which
impose restrictions with regard to the mode of exercise of the amending power. Both
these limitations touch and affect the constituent power itself, the disregard of which
invalidates its exercise.
197. In Kesavananda Bharati case15 it has been observed that while examining
the width of the constituent power, it is essential to see its limits, the maximum and
the minimum; the entire ambit and the magnitude of it. It has been further
observed that Parliament could under Article 368 amend Article 13 and also the
fundamental rights; and that the power of amendment under Article 368 is wide,
but it is not wide enough to totally abrogate any of the fundamental rights or other
essential elements of the basic structure of the Constitution and destroy its
identity 15
198. In the light of aforestated legal position, let us examine whether the
impugned Amendment has disregarded any of the limitations-substantive or
procedural. The gravamen of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
petitioners is that the Equality clause as interpreted in a catena of decisions is the
most important and indispensable feature of the Constitution, and the destruction
thereof will amount to changing the basic structure of the Constitution. The bone of
contention raised by them is that the exclusionary clauses contained in Articles 15
(6) and 16(6) keeping out the backward classes and SCs/STs from having the
benefits of the economic reservation, are discriminatory in nature and violate the
equality code and in turn the basic structure of the Constitution.
199. At the outset, very relevant and apt observations made by Krishna Iyer, J. in
Bhim Singhji V. Union of India  0 , with regard to the breach of equality code, deserve
"20.
every breach of equality cannot spell disaster as a lethal violation of
basic structure. Peripheral inequality is inevitable when large-scale equalisation
processes are put into action. If all the Judges of the Supreme Court in solemn
session sit and deliberate for half a year to produce a legislation for reducing
glaring economic inequality their genius will let them down if the essay is to avoid
even peripheral inequalities. Every large cause claims some martyr, as
sociologists will know. Therefore, what is a betrayal of the basic feature is not a
mere violation of Article 14 but a shocking, unconscionable or unscrupulous
travesty of the quintessence of equal justice. If a legislation does go that far, it
shakes the democratic foundation and must suffer the death penalty."
(emphasis supplied)
200. In an another interesting opinion by Mathew, J. in Indira Nehru Gandhi V.
"334. Equality is a multi-coloured concept incapable of a single definition. It is
a notion of many shades and connotations. The Preamble of the Constitution
guarantees equality of status and of opportunity. They are nebulous concepts.
And I am not sure whether they can provide a solid foundation to rear a basic
structure. I think the types of equality which our democratic republic guarantees
are all subsumed under specific articles of the Constitution like Articles 14, 15,
16, 17, 25, etc. and there is no other principle of equality which is an essential
feature of our democratic polity."
201. The seven-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas4,
stated that Article 16(1) is only part of comprehensive scheme to ensure equality in
all spheres and is an instance of larger concept of equality of law. Article 16(4)
cannot be viewed as an exception to Article 16(1), but only as something which
logically emanates from Article 16(1).
202. In Waman Rao V. Union of India7 it was observed that every case in which
the protection of a fundamental right is withdrawn will not necessarily result in
damaging or destroying the basic structure of the Constitution. The question as to
whether the basic structure is damaged or destroyed in any given case would
depend upon which particular article of Part III is in issue and whether what is
withdrawn is quintessential to the basic structure of the Constitution.
203. M. Nagaraj V. Union of India classifies equality into two parts - "Formal
equality" and "Proportional equality". Proportional equality is equality "in fact",
whereas formal equality is equality "in law". Formal equality exists in the rule of law.
In case of proportional equality, the State is expected to take affirmative steps in
favour of disadvantaged sections of the society within the framework of liberal
democracy. Egalitarian equality is proportional equality. The Constitution Bench in
the said case was called upon to examine the constitutional validity of Articles 16(4-
A) and 16(4-B) as well as the 77th, 82nd and 85th Amendments of the Constitution.
While unanimously upholding the validity of the said Amendments, it was observed
"118. The constitutional principle of equality is inherent in the rule of law.
However, its reach is limited because its primary concern is not with the content
of the law but with its enforcement and application. The rule of law is satisfied
when laws are applied or enforced equally, that is, even-handedly, free of bias
and without irrational distinction. The concept of equality allows differential
treatment but it prevents distinctions that are not properly justified. Justification
needs each case to be decided on case-to-case basis."
(emphasis supplied)
675, paras 53-54)
"53. The equal protection of the laws is a pledge of the protection of equal
laws. But laws may classify. And the very idea of classification is that of
inequality. In tackling this paradox, the Court has neither abandoned the demand
for equality nor denied the legislative right to classify. It has taken a middle
course. It has resolved the contradictory demands of legislative specialisation and
constitutional generality by a doctrine of reasonable classification.
54. A reasonable classification is one which includes all who are similarly
situated and none who are not. The question then is : what does the phrase
"similarly situated" mean? The answer to the question is that we must look
beyond the classification to the purpose of the law. A reasonable classification is
one which includes all persons who are similarly situated with respect to the
purpose of the law. The purpose of a law may be either the elimination of a public
mischief or the achievement of some positive public good."
(emphasis supplied)
205. What is discernible from the above-cited decisions is that the concept of
equality allows differential treatment but it prevents distinctions that are not
properly justified. Equality is violated if it rests on unreasonable classification. A
reasonable classification is permissible, which includes all who are similarly situated,
and none who are not. Discrimination is the essence of classification. Those who are
similarly circumscribed are entitled to an equal treatment. Classification has to be
founded on substantial differences which distinguish persons grouped together from
those left out of the groups, and such differential attributes must bear a just and
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
206. The Preamble, Part [II-Fundamental Rights and Part IV-Directive
Principles of State policy-the Trinity are the conscience of the Constitution. The
Preamble visualises to remove economic inequalities and to secure to all citizens of
India, Justice - Social, Economic and Political, which is the sum total of the
aspirations incorporated in Part IV. Economic empowerment to the weaker sections
of the society is the fundamental requirement for ensuring equality of status and to
promote fraternity assuring dignity as visualised by the Framers of our Constitution.
And therefore any positive discrimination in favour of the weak or disadvantaged
class of people by means of a valid classification has been treated as an affirmative
action on the part of the State. The Preamble to the Constitution and the directive
principles of State policy give a positive mandate to the State and the State is
obliged to remove inequalities and backwardness from the society.
207. As observed in Ashoka Kumar Thakur12, while considering the
constitutionality of social justice legislation, it is worthwhile to note the objectives
which have been incorporated by the Constitution makers in the Preamble to the
Constitution and how they are sought to be secured by enacting fundamental rights
in Part III and directive principles of State policy in Part IV of the Constitution. The
fundamental rights represent the civil and political rights and the directive principles
embody social and economic rights. Together they are intended to carry out the
objectives set out in the Preamble to the Constitution. Article 46 enjoins upon the
State to promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the
weaker sections of the people and to protect them from social injustice and all forms
of exploitation. The theory of reasonable classification is implicit and inherent in the
concept of equality. Equality of opportunity would also mean a fair opportunity not
only to one section or the other but to all sections by removing the handicaps if a
particular section of the society suffers from the same.
208. Krishna Iyer, J. in N.M. Thomas4 has beautifully explained what is "social
"119. Social engineering-which is law in action-must adopt new strategies to
liquidate encrusted group injustices or surrender society to traumatic tensions.
Equilibrium, in human terms, emerges from release of the handicapped and the
primitive from persistent social disadvantage, by determined, creative and canny
legal manoeuvres of the State, not by hortative declaration of arid equality. 'To
discriminate positively in favour of the weak may sometimes be promotion of
genuine equality before the law' as Anthony Lester argued in his talk in the BBC
in 1970 in the series : What is wrong with the law91 "One law for the Lion and Ox
is oppression". Or, indeed, as was said of another age by Anatole France:
'The law in its majestic equality forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep
under bridges, to beg in the streets and to steal bread." 92"
209. As transpiring from the Statement of Objects and Reasons for introducing
the Bill to the impugned Amendment, Parliament has taken note that the
economically weaker sections of the citizens have largely remained excluded from
attaining the higher educational institutions and public employment on account of
their financial incapacity to compete with the persons who are economically more
privileged. The benefits of existing reservations under clauses (4) and (5) of Article
15 and clause (4) of Article 16 are generally unavailable to them unless they meet
with the specific criteria of social and educational backwardness. It has been further
stated that vide the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, clause (5)
was inserted in
Article 15 of the Constitution which enables the State to make special provision for
the advancement of any social and educational backwardness of citizens, or for the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to their admission in higher
educational institutions. Similarly, clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution
enables the State to make special provision for the reservation of appointments or
posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State, is
not adequately represented in the services under the State. However, economically
weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the benefit of reservation. Therefore,
with a view to fulfil the ideals lying behind Article 46, and to ensure that
economically weaker sections of citizens to get a fair chance of receiving higher
education and participation in employment in the services of the State, it was
decided to amend the Constitution of India.
210. As well settled, it must be presumed that the legislature understands and
appreciates the needs of its own people. Its laws are directed to the problems made
manifest by experience, and its discriminations are based on adequate norms.
Therefore, the constitutional amendment could not be struck down as discriminatory
if the state of facts are reasonably conceived to justify it. In the instant case, the
legislature being aware of the exclusion of economically weaker sections of citizens
from having the benefits of reservations provided to the SCs/STs and SEBCs citizens
in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15 and clause (4) of Article 16, has come out with
the impugned Amendment empowering the State to make special provision for the
advancement of the "economically weaker sections" of citizens other than the classes
mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15 and further to make special provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of the economically weaker
sections of the citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4) of Article 16.
211. The impugned Amendment enabling the State to make special provisions for
the "economically weaker sections" of the citizens other than the Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of
citizens, is required to be treated as an affirmative action on the part of Parliament
for the benefit and for the advancement of the economically weaker sections of the
citizens. Treating economically weaker sections of the citizens as a separate class
would be a reasonable classification, and could not be termed as an unreasonable or
unjustifiable classification, much less a betrayal of basic feature or violative of Article
14. As laid down by this Court, just as equals cannot be treated unequally, unequals
also cannot be treated equally. Treating unequals as equals would as well offend the
doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
212. The Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and the backward class for whom
the special provisions have already been provided in Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4)
form a separate category as distinguished from the general or unreserved category.
They cannot be treated on a par with the citizens belonging to the general or
unreserved category. The impugned Amendment creates a separate class of
"economically weaker sections of the citizens" from the general/unreserved class,
without affecting the special rights of reservations provided to the Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes and backward class of citizens covered under Articles 15
(4), 15(5) and 16(4). Therefore, their
exclusion from the newly created class for the benefit of the "economically weaker
sections of the citizens" in the impugned Amendment cannot be said to be
discriminatory or violative of the equality code. Such amendment could certainly be
not termed as shocking, unconscionable or unscrupulous travesty of the
quintessence of equal justice as sought to be submitted by the learned counsel for
the petitioners.
213. The sum and substance is that the limitations-substantive or procedural-
imposed on the exercise of constituent power of the State under Article 368 could
not be said by any stretch of imagination, to have been disregarded by Parliament.
Neither the procedural limitation i.e. the mode of exercise of the amending power
has been disregarded nor the substantive limitation i.e. the restricted field has been
disregarded, which otherwise would invalidate the impugned Amendment. What is
visualised in the Preamble and what is permissible both in Part III and Part IV of the
Constitution could not be said to be violative of the basic structure or basic feature
of the Constitution. In absence of any obliteration of any of the constitutional
provisions and in absence of any alteration or destruction in the existing structure of
equality code or in the basic structure of the Constitution, neither the width test nor
the identity test as propounded in Kesavananda could be said to have been
violated in the impugned Amendment. Accordingly, the challenge to the
constitutional validity of the 103rd Amendment fails, and the validity thereof is
upheld.
214. Before parting, let me say something on the time span of the reservation
policy.
The surest way legal research!"
215. It is said that no document can be perfect and no ideals can be fully
achieved. But does that mean we should have no ideals? No vision? Sardar Patel had
said93 : (CAD Vol. VIII, p. 272)
But in the long run, it would be in the interest of all to forget that there is
anything like majority or minority in this country; that in India there is only one
community...
216. Can we not move towards an ideal envisaged by the framers of our
Constitution to have an egalitarian, casteless and classless society? Though difficult,
it is an achievable ideal. Our Constitution which is a living and organic document
continuously shapes the lives of citizens in particular and societies in general.
217. At this juncture, some of the very apt observations made by the
Constitution Bench in K.C. Vasanth Kumar18 are worth noting:
30-31)
"30. Let me conclude. If economic criterion for compensatory discrimination or
affirmative action is accepted, it would strike at the root
cause of social and educational backwardness, and simultaneously take a vital step
in the direction of destruction of caste structure which in turn would advance the
secular character of the Nation. This approach seeks to translate into reality the twin
constitutional goals : one, to strike at the perpetuation of the caste stratification of
the Indian Society so as to arrest regressive movement and to take a firm step
towards establishing a casteless society; and two, to progressively eliminate poverty
by giving an opportunity to the disadvantaged sections of the society to raise their
position and be part of the mainstream of life which means eradication of poverty.
31. Let me make abundantly clear that this approach does not deal with
reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Thousands of
years of discrimination and exploitation cannot be wiped out in one generation.
But even here economic criterion is worth applying by refusing preferred
treatment to those amongst them who have already benefited by it and improved
their position. And finally reservation must have a time span otherwise
concessions tend to become vested interests."
(emphasis supplied)
11, para 150)
"150. At this stage it should be made clear that if on a fresh determination
some castes or communities have to go out of the list of backward classes
prepared for Article 15(4) and Article 16(4), the Government may still pursue the
policy of amelioration of weaker sections of the population amongst them in
accordance with the directive principle contained in Article 46 of the
Constitution."
218. In the said judgment, Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. as he then was, had proposed
"2. I would state my opinion in the shape of the following propositions:
(1) The reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
must continue as at present, there is, without the application of a means test,
for a further period not exceeding fifteen years. Another fifteen years will make
it fifty years after the advent of the Constitution, a period reasonably long for
the upper crust of the oppressed classes to overcome the baneful effects of
social oppression, isolation and humiliation.
(2) The means test, that is to say, the test of economic backwardness ought
to be made applicable even to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
after the period mentioned in (1) above. It is essential that the privileged
section of the underprivileged society should not be permitted to monopolise
preferential benefits for an indefinite period of time.
(3) Insofar as the other backward classes are concerned, two tests should
be conjunctively applied for identifying them for the purpose of reservations in
employment and education : One, that they should be comparable to the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the matter of their backwardness;
and two, that they should satisfy the means test such as a State Government
may lay down in the context of prevailing economic conditions.
(4) The policy of reservations in employment, education and legislative
institutions should be reviewed every five years or so. That will at once afford
an opportunity : (i) to the State to rectify distortions arising out of particular
facets of the reservation policy, and (ii) to the people, both backward and non-
backward, to ventilate their views in a public debate on the practical impact of
the policy of reservations."
(emphasis supplied)
219. The concern for continuing the reservation as an affirmative action only for a
limited period was also expressed by this Court in Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union of
"666. Caste has divided this country for ages. It has hampered its growth. To
have a casteless society will be realisation of a noble dream. To start with, the
effect of reservation may appear to perpetuate caste. The immediate effect of
caste-based reservation has been rather unfortunate. In the pre-reservation era
people wanted to get rid of the backward tag-either social or economical. But
post reservation, there is a tendency even among those who are considered as
"forward", to seek the "backward" tag, in the hope of enjoying the benefits of
reservations. When more and more people aspire for "backwardness" instead of
"forwardness" the country itself stagnates. Be that as it may. Reservation as an
affirmative action is required only for a limited period to bring forward the socially
and educationally backward classes by giving them a gentle supportive push. But
if there is no review after a reasonable period and if reservation is continued, the
country will become a caste divided society permanentlv. Instead of developing a
united society with diversity, we will end up as a fractured society forever
suspicious of each other. While affirmative discrimination is a road to equality,
care should be taken that the road does not become a rut in which the vehicle of
progress gets entrenched and stuck. Any provision for reservation is a temporary
crutch. Such crutch by unnecessary prolonged use, should not become
a
permanent liability. It is significant that the Constitution does not specifically
prescribe a casteless society nor tries to abolish caste. But by barring
discrimination in the name of caste and by providing for affirmative action
Constitution seeks to remove the difference in status on the basis of caste. When
the differences in status among castes are removed, all castes will become equal.
That will be a beginning for a casteless egalitarian society."
(emphasis supplied)
220. What was envisioned by the framers of the Constitution, what was proposed
by the Constitution Bench in 1985 and what was sought to be achieved on the
completion of fifty years of the advent of the Constitution i.e. that the policy of
reservation must have a time span, has still not been achieved even till this day i.e.
till the completion of seventy-five years of our Independence. It cannot be gainsaid
that the age-old caste system in India was responsible for the origination of the
reservation system in the country. It was introduced to correct the historical
injustice faced by the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes, and to provide them a level playing field to
compete with the persons belonging to the forward classes. However, at the end of
seventy-five years of our Independence, we need to revisit the system of reservation
in the larger interest of the society as a whole, as a step forward towards
transformative constitutionalism.
221. Be it noted that as per Article 334 of the Constitution, the provisions of the
Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the SCs and the STs in the House
of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States would cease to have
effect on the expiration of a period of eighty years from the commencement of the
Constitution. The representation of Anglo-Indian community in the House of
Parliament and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination, has
already ceased by virtue of the 104th Amendment w.e.f. 25-1-2020. Therefore,
similar time-limit if prescribed, for the special provisions in respect of the
reservations and representations provided in Article 15 and Article 16 of the
Constitution, it could be a way forward leading to an egalitarian, casteless and
classless society.
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. (concurring)- I have had the benefit of carefully considering
the lucid and erudite judgment delivered by my learned Brother Ravindra Bhat, J.
taking the view that Sections 2 and 3, respectively, of the Constitution (One
Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 which inserted clause (6) in Article 15
and clause (6) in Article 16, respectively, are unconstitutional and void on the
ground that they destroyed and are violative of the basic structure of the
Constitution.
223. My esteemed Brother Bhat, J. has taken the view that the State's compelling
interest to fulfil the objective set out in the directive principles, through special
provisions on the basis of economic criteria, is legitimate; that reservation or special
provisions have so far been provided in favour of historically disadvantaged
communities cannot be the basis of contending that the other disadvantaged groups
who have not been able to progress due to the ill-effects of abject poverty should
remain so and the special provisions should not be made by way of affirmative
action or even reservation on their behalf. My learned esteemed Brother Bhat, J. has
concluded that therefore the special provisions based on objective economic criteria,
is per se not violative of the basic structure. However, my esteemed Brother Bhat, J.
thought fit to declare clause (6) of Article 15 as unconstitutional essentially on the
ground that the exclusion clause therein and the classification could be termed as
arbitrary resulting in hostile discrimination of the poorest sections of the society who
are socially and educationally backward and/or subjected to caste discrimination.
224. Insofar as clause (6) of Article 16 is concerned, my esteemed Brother Bhat,
J. struck it down on two counts - first, the same is violative of the equality code
particularly the principle of non-discrimination and non-exclusion which forms an
inextricable part of the basic structure of the Constitution and, secondly, although
the "economic criteria" per se is permissible in relation to access of public goods
(under Article 15), yet the same is not true for Article 16 as the goal of which is
empowerment through representation of the community.
225. On the other hand, my esteemed Brother Dinesh Maheshwari, J., in his
separate judgment, has taken the view that clause (6) in Article 15 and clause (6) in
Article 16 do not violate the basic structure of the Constitution in any manner and
are valid.
226. Having gone through both the sets of judgments, I regret my inability to
agree with my esteemed Brother Bhat, J. that clause (6) in Article 15 and clause (6)
in Article 16 are unconstitutional and void. Whereas, I agree with the final decision
taken by my esteemed Brother Dinesh Maheshwari, J. that the impugned
Amendment is valid, I would like to assign my own reasons as I have looked into the
entire issue from a slightly different angle.
"25. The judgment of this Court in Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala5,
which introduced the concept of basic structure in our constitutional jurisprudence
is the spontaneous response of an activist Court after working with our
Constitution for about 25 years. This Court felt that in the absence of such a
stance by the constitutional court there are clear tendencies that the tumultuous
tides of democratic majoritarianism of our country may engulf the constitutional
values of our nascent democracy. The judgment in Kesavananda Bharati is
15
possibly an 'auxiliary precaution against a possible tidal wave in the vast ocean of
Indian democracy'.
26. But we must have a clear perception of what the basic structure is. It is
hazardous to define what is the basic structure of the Constitution as what is
basic does not remain static for all time to come."
228. The idea of equality is the heart and soul of the Indian Constitution. India
achieved Independence on 15-8-1947 after a long political struggle in which a
number of patriots laid down their lives and countless suffered to secure self-
government and to throw off the foreign yoke. But self-government was not an end
in itself. It was a means to an end. They struggled and suffered not merely to be
ruled by their chosen representatives in the place of foreign rulers, but to achieve
the basic human rights and freedom and to secure social, economic and political
justice so as to build up a welfare State from which
poverty, ignorance and disease may be banished and to lay the foundation of a
strong and independent country which may command respect in the world.
229. A Constituent Assembly was formed to draw up a Constitution which was
ultimately adopted on 26-1-1950. The aspirations of the people are reflected in the
Preamble to the Constitution which reads thus:
"WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of
the Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION."
230. The Preamble of our Constitution promises equality, which is explained in
detail in Articles 14 and 15, respectively, as enshrined in Part III of the Constitution.
Equality, as contemplated under our constitutional system, is "among equal and
similarly situated". Equality in general cannot be universally applied and is subject
to the condition and restriction as spelt out in the Constitution itself. The Preamble
to the Constitution referred to above does not grant any power but it gives the
direction and purpose to the Constitution. It outlines the objective of the whole
Constitution. The Preamble contains the fundamentals of the Constitution. It serves
several important purposes, as for example:
230.1. It contains the enacting clause which brings the Constitution into force.
230.2. It declares the great rights and freedoms which the People of India
intended to secure to all its citizens.
230.3. It declares the basic type of Government and polity which is sought to be
established in the country.
230.4. It throws light on the source of the Constitution viz. the People of India.
231. Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, deal with the various facets of the right
to equality. Article 14 provides for equality before law and prohibits the State from
denying to any person, equality before law or equal protection of laws. Article 15
provides for prohibition of discrimination against any citizen on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or any of them, but permits special
provisions being made for women and children or for the advancement of any
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. Article 16 guarantees equality of opportunity in matters of
public employment to the citizens of India.
232. These three Articles form part of the same constitutional code of guarantees
and, in the sense, supplement to each other. Article 14 on the one hand, and
Articles 15 and 16, respectively, on the other, have frequently been described as
being the genesis and the species, respectively.
233. I propose to look into the constitutional validity of the Constitution (103rd
Amendment) Act, 2019 in the first instance, as if there is nothing like Articles 15(6)
and 16(6), respectively, in the Constitution. It would be profitable to look into the
various relevant provisions (Articles) of the Constitution of India:
"14. Equality before law.-The State shall not deny to any person equality
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex
or place of birth.-(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on ground only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth
or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with
regard to-
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public
entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of
general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State
from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 shall
prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes insofar as such special provisions relate to their
admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions,
whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational
institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30.
(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 or clause
(2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making,
(a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5);
and
(b) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5)
insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational
institutions including private educational institutions, whether
aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions
referred to in clause (1) of Article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in
addition to the existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of
the total seats in each category.
Explanation.-F the purposes of this article and Article 16, "economically
weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State from time to time
on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage.
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.-(1) There
shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment
or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place
of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in
respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an
office under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or
Union Territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union
Territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the
services under the State.
(4-A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class
or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not
adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4-B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any
unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in
accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4-
A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years
and such class of vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of
the year in which they are being filled up for determining the ceiling of fifty per
cent reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides
that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be
a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.
(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to
the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of the posts in
each category.
*
*
*
21-A. Right to education.-The State shall provide free and compulsory
education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the
State may, by law, determine.
*
*
*
25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and
propagation of religion.-(1) Subject to public order, morality and health and
to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of
conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or
prevent the State from making any law-
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular
activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu
religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Explanation I.-The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be
included in the profession of the Sikh religion.
Explanation II.-In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus shall
be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or
Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be
construed accordingly.
26. Freedom to manage religious affairs.-Subject - to public order, morality
and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the
right-
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable
purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
*
*
*
29. Protection of interests of minorities.- (1) Any section of the citizens
The surest way t legal research!"
residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language,
script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions.- All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall
have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
(1-A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any
property of an educational institution established and administered by a minority,
referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed
by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as
would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate
against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the
management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.
*
*
*
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.-The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation."
234. The Constitution of India was framed by the Constituent Assembly after long
-drawn debates. Many of the Members of the Constituent Assembly themselves were
actively and directly involved in the struggle for freedom. They, therefore, brought in
framing the Constitution their experience of movement for liberation from the
Colonial Rule. The Constitution was framed at a time when the memories of violation
of human and fundamental rights at the hands of colonial rulers were fresh. So was
fresh in the mind of the people the Nazi excesses during the time of the Second
World War. Declaration of separate chapter of fundamental rights with special focus
on equality and personal liberties was thus inevitable. The framers of the
Constitution, thus, dedicated a whole chapter (Part III) for fundamental rights.
While doing so, important provisions were made in Part IV pertaining to the directive
principles of State policy, making detailed provisions laying down a road-map for
bringing about a peaceful social revolution through constitutional means and for the
Governments to bear in mind those principles while framing future governmental
policies.
235. Article 37 contained in Part IV provides that the provisions contained in that
Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but it makes it clear that the principles
laid down therein are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country
and it shall be the duty of the State to apply those principles in making laws.
Interplay of fundamental rights and directive principles of State policy has occupied
the minds of this Court on several occasions.
236. Article 15, as originally framed, did not contain clauses (4) and (5). Clause
(4) in fact was introduced through the First Constitution Amendment in the year
1951. This was necessitated due to a judicial pronouncement of the Supreme Court
in State of Madras V. Champakam Dorairajan.
237. In Article 15, there are two words of very wide import - (1) "discrimination"
and (2) "only". The expression "discriminate against", according to Oxford Dictionary
means, "to make an adverse distinction with regard to; to distinguish favourably
from others". The true purport of the word "discrimination" has been very well
explained by this Court in a Constitution
p. 226, para 9)
"9. All legislative differentiation is not necessarily discriminatory. In fact, the
word "discrimination" does not occur in Article 14. The expression "discriminate
against" is used in Article 15(1) and Article 16(2), and it means, according to
Oxford Dictionary, "to make an adverse distinction with regard to; to distinguish
unfavourably from others". Discrimination thus involves an element of
unfavourable bias and it is in that sense that the expression has to be understood
in
this context. If such bias is disclosed and is based on any of the grounds
mentioned in Articles 15 and 16, it may well be that the statute will, without
more, incur condemnation as violating a specific constitutional prohibition unless
it is saved by one or other of the provisos to those articles. But the position under
Article 14 is different."
238. The principle has been consistently followed in subsequent decisions.
Reference may be made, in this respect, to Ashutosh Gupta V. State of Rajasthan96.
239. A very important decision on the significance of the word "only" [as used in
Article 29(2) also relating to fundamental rights] is that of the Full Bench in
Champakam Dorairajan V. State of Madras97. In that case the Madras Government,
finding that there were not sufficient vacancies for admission of students to Medical
College, issued a circular making, what it considered, an equitable division of the
vacancies available among the various classes of citizens of the State. Out of every
14 seats, 6 were to be filled by non-Brahmin Hindus, 2 to backward Hindu
communities, 2 to Brahmins, 2 to Harijans, 1 to Anglo-Indians and Indian Christians
and 1 to Muslims. The circular was challenged by various persons on the ground that
it decided admission to persons only on the ground of religion or caste. It was
sought to support the circular on the ground that the denial was not only on the
ground of religion or caste, but as a matter of public policy based upon the
provisions of Article 46 together with the paucity of the vacancies. It was held that
much significance could not be attached to the word "only" because even reading
the Article without that word, the result would be the same. It was further held that
the circular was bad because it infringed the clear and unambiguous terms of Article
15(1) since it discriminated against citizens only on the ground of religion, race,
"15.. "Discriminate against" means "make an adverse distinction with regard
to"; "distinguish unfavourably from others" (Oxford Dictionary). What the article
says is that no person of a particular religion or caste shall be treated
unfavourably when compared with persons of other religions and castes merely on
the ground that they belong to a particular religion or caste. Now what does the
Communal G.O. purport to
do? It says that a limited number of seats only are allotted to persons of a particular
caste, namely, Brahmins. The qualifications which would enable a candidate to
secure one of those seats would necessarily be higher than the qualifications which
would enable a person of another caste or religion, say, Harijan or Muslim to secure
admission."
It was, therefore, held that the Communal G.O. was void.
240. This decision was upheld by the Supreme Court on appeal in State of Madras
"19. It is argued that the petitioners are not denied admission only because
they are Brahmins but for a variety of reasons e.g. (a) they are Brahmins, (b)
Brahmins have an allotment of only two seats out of 14, and (c) the two seats
have already been filled up by more meritorious Brahmin candidates. This may be
true so far as these two seats reserved for the Brahmins are concerned but this
line of argument can have no force when we come to consider the seats reserved
for candidates of other communities, for, so far as those seats are concerned, the
petitioners are denied admission into any of them not on any ground other than
the sole ground of their being Brahmins and not being members of the
community for whom those reservations have been made.
20. The classification in the Communal G.O. proceeds on the basis of religion,
race and caste. In our view, the classification made in the Communal G.O. is
opposed to the Constitution and constitutes a clear violation of the fundamental
rights guaranteed to the citizen under Article 29(2)."
241. In view of the aforesaid, Parliament intervened and introduced clause (4) to
Article 15 which provided that if any action was taken by the State to make special
provisions for the advancement of the communities specified therein, that could not
be challenged on the ground that it contravened Article 15(1). In other words, a
specific exception was made to the provisions of Article 15(1) in regard to the
backward communities mentioned in Article 15(4). This amendment also shows how
a progressive democratic legislature does not hesitate even to amend the
Constitution with a view to harmonise the fundamental rights of the individual
citizen with the claims of social good.
242. Thus, the decisions of this Court in Champakam Dorairajan and Kathi
Raning Rawat95 establish the proposition that, while classification is permissible, it
cannot be based on any of the factors mentioned in Articles 15 and 16, respectively.
So far as this proposition of law is concerned, it still holds good even after the
pronouncement of this Court in Indra Sawhney V. Union of India5.
243. Article 16 of the Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity in matters
of public employment to all the citizens. Article 16(1) provides that there shall be
equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or
appointment to any office under the State. Clause (2) of Article 16 further amplifies
this equality of opportunity in public employment, by providing that no citizen shall,
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any
of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any employment or
office under the State. Clause (4) of Article 16 reads thus:
"16. (4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward
class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented
in the services under the State."
244. Article 21 pertains to protection of life and personal liberty and provides that
no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to the
procedure established by law. This important guarantee, though seemingly plain,
has been interpreted by this Court as to include variety of rights which would form
part of right to life and personal liberty, without enjoyment of which the rights, like
the right to life and personal liberty would be meaningless and nugatory. Right to
education has been recognised as one of the facets of Article 21 long before it was
codified as one of the fundamental rights separately guaranteed under Article 21-A
of the Constitution.
245. The Constitution of India was amended by the Eighty-sixth Amendment Act,
2002, to include the right to education as a fundamental right under Article 21-A
providing that "the State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children
of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law,
determine".
246. Article 29 guarantees protection of interests of minorities and reads as
under:
"29. Protection of interests of minorities.-(1) Any section of the citizens
residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language,
script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them."
247. Article 30 pertains to the right of minorities to establish and administer
educational institutions. Clause (1) thereof provides that all minorities, whether
based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice.
248. Article 46 contained in Part IV provides that the State shall promote with
special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the
people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and
shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
249. The Constitution of India places immense importance on the fundamental
rights for which a separate chapter was dedicated while framing the Constitution
itself. The fact that Article 32 guaranteeing the right to move the Supreme Court for
appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of rights conferred in Part III itself is
contained in the fundamental rights and thus made a fundamental right, is a strong
indication that such rights were considered sacrosanct. However, it has always been
recognised while framing the Constitution as well as while interpreting the same that
no right of a citizen can be absolute and every right would have reasonable
restriction. Article 19, for example, while guaranteeing various individual freedoms
to citizens contains various clauses limiting enjoyment of such rights under specified
conditions. Likewise, though Article 14 in plain terms provides that the State shall
not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws,
since the earliest days of interpretation of the Constitution, it has been recognised
that this does not imply that there shall be one law which must apply to every
person and that every law framed must correspondingly cover every person. In legal
terminology, it means though Article 14 prohibits class legislation, the same does
not prevent reasonable classification. It is, of course, true that for the classification
to be valid and to pass the test of reasonableness twin tests laid down by this Court,
time and again, must be fulfilled. Such tests are that the classification must be
founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are
grouped together from others left out of the group and that the differentia must
have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in
question.
250. Article 14 guarantees equality in very wide terms and is worded in negative
term preventing the State from denying any person equality before law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India. Article 15(1), on the other hand,
prevents the State from discriminating against any citizen on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. Clause (2) of the Article
further provides that no citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex,
place of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or
condition with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, use of wells, tanks,
bathing ghats, etc. of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or
dedicated to the use of general public. Article 16, in turn, pertains to equality of
opportunity in matters of public employment. Clause (1) of Article 16, as already
noted, guarantees equality of opportunity to all citizens in matters of employment
or
appointment to any office under the State. Clause (2) thereof, further amplifies that
no citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth,
residence or any of them, be ineligible for or discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
251. Thus, Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, are all different facets of concept
of equality. In different forms, such Articles guarantee equality of opportunity and
The surest way t legal research!
equal treatment to all the citizens while specifically mandating that the State shall
not discriminate against the citizens only on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex,
descent, place of birth or any of them. Like Article 14,
neither Article 15(1) nor Article 16(1) prohibits reasonable classification. In other
words, the clauses of Articles 15 and 16, respectively, guaranteeing non-
discrimination on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or
equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of public employment prohibit
hostile discrimination, but not reasonable classification. As in Article 14, as well in
Article 15(1), if it is demonstrated that special treatment is meted out to a class of
citizens, not only on the ground of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of
them, but due to some special reasons and circumstances, the enquiry would be,
does such a classification stand the test of reasonableness and in the process, it
would be the duty of the court to examine whether such classification fulfils the
abovenoted twin conditions, namely, it must be founded on an intelligible differentia
which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out
of the group and that the differentia must have a rational relation to the object
sought to be achieved by the statute in question. (See : Adam B. Chaki V. Union of
India98. 98 )
252. In Mohd. Shujat Ali V. Union of India99, a Constitution Bench of this Court in
the context of concept of equality flowing from Articles 14 and 16, respectively, of
the Constitution observed that Article 16 is an instance or incident of guarantee of
equality enshrined in Article 14. It gives effect to the doctrine of equality in the
spheres of public employment. The constitutional code of equality and equal
opportunity, however, does not mean that the same laws must be applicable to all
"23. Now we proceed to consider the challenge based on infraction of Articles
14 and 16 of the Constitution. Article 14 ensures to every person equality before
law and equal protection of the laws and Article 16 lays down that there shall be
equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or
appointment to any office under the State. Article 16 is only an instance or
incident of the guarantee of equality enshrined in Article 14 : it gives effect to the
doctrine of equality in the spheres of public employment. The concept of equal
opportunity to be found in Article 16 permeates the whole spectrum of an
individual's employment from appointment through promotion and termination to
the payment of gratuity and pension and gives expression to the ideal of equality
of opportunity which is one of the great socio-economic objectives set out in the
Preamble of the Constitution. The constitutional code of equality and equal
opportunity, however, does not mean that the same laws must be applicable to all
persons. It does not compel the State to run "all its laws in the channels of
general legislation". It recognises that having regard to differences and disparities
which exist among men and things, they cannot all be treated alike by the
application of the same laws. 'To recognise marked differences that exist in fact is
living law; to
&
disregard practical differences and concentrate on some abstract identities is lifeless
logic. 
,100 The legislature must necessarily, if it is to be effective at all in solving the
manifold problems which continually come before it, enact special legislation
directed towards specific ends and limited in its application to special classes of
persons or things. 'Indeed, the greater part of all legislation is special, either in the
,101
extent to which it operates, or the objects sought to be attained by it.
24. We thus arrive at the point at which the demand for equality confronts the
right to classify. For it is the classification which determines the range of persons
affected by the special burden or benefit of a law which does not apply to all
persons. This brings out a paradox. The equal protection of the laws is a "pledge
of the protection of equal laws". But laws may classify. And, as pointed out by
Justice Brewer, "the very idea of classification is that of inequality". The court has
tackled this paradox over the years and in doing so, it has neither abandoned the
demand for equality nor denied the legislative right to classify. It has adopted a
middle course of realistic reconciliation. It has resolved the contradictory
demands of legislative specialisation and constitutional generality by a doctrine of
reasonable classification. This doctrine recognises that the legislature may classify
for the purpose of legislation but requires that the classification must be
reasonable. It should ensure that persons or things similarly situated are all
similarly treated. The measure of reasonableness of a classification is the degree
102
of its success in treating similarly those similarly situated.
25. But the question is : what does this ambiguous and crucial phrase
"similarly situated" mean? Where are we to look for the test of similarity of
situation which determines the reasonableness of a classification? The inescapable
answer is that we must look beyond the classification to the purpose of the law. A
reasonable classification is one which includes all persons or things similarly
situated with respect to the purpose of the law. There should be no discrimination
between one person or thing and another, if as regards the subject-matter of the
legislation their position is substantially the same. This is sometimes
epigrammatically described by saying that what the constitutional code of
equality and equal opportunity requires is that among equals, the law should be
equal and that like should be treated alike. But the basic principle underlying the
doctrine is that the legislature should have the right to classify and imposed
special burdens upon or grant special benefits to persons or things grouped
together under the classification, so long as the classification is of persons or
things similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the legislation, so that all
persons or things similarly situated are treated alike by law. The test which has
been evolved for this purpose is - and this test has been consistently
applied by this Court in all decided cases since the commencement of the
Constitution - that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia
which distinguishes certain persons or things that are grouped together from others
and that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved
by the legislation."
(emphasis supplied)
253. While doing so, a note of caution was sounded in Mohd. Shujat Ali V. Union
of India999 that the fundamental guarantee is of equal protection of the laws and the
doctrine of classification is only a subsidiary rule evolved by the courts to give a
practical content to that guarantee by accommodating it with the practical needs of
the society and it should not be allowed to submerge and drown the precious
guarantee of equality.
254. In State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas4, Mathew, J. observed that Articles 16(1)
and 16(2), respectively, of the Constitution do not prohibit prescription of a
reasonable classification for appointment or for promotion. Any provision as to
qualification for employment or appointment to an office reasonably fixed and
applicable to all would be consistent with the doctrine of equality of opportunity
under Article 16(1). It was observed that classification is reasonable if it includes all
persons who are similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law.
255. In Indra Sawhney5, B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. in his majority opinion, observed
reasonable classification so does Article 16(1).
256. In a judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in E.P. Royappa V.
State of T.N. 13 , Bhagwati, J. in the context of co-relation between Article 14 and
"85. The last two grounds of challenge may be taken up together for
consideration. Though we have formulated the third ground of challenge as a
distinct and separate ground, it is really in substance and effect merely an aspect
of the second ground based on violation of Articles 14 and 16. Article 16
embodies the fundamental guarantee that there shall be equality of opportunity
for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State. Though enacted as a distinct and independent fundamental right
because of its great importance as a principle ensuring equality of opportunity in
public employment which is so vital to the building up of the new classless
egalitarian society envisaged in the Constitution, Article 16 is only an instance of
the application of the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14. In other words,
Article 14 is the genus while Article 16 is a species. Article 16 gives effect to the
doctrine of equality in all matters relating to public employment. The basic
principle which, therefore, informs both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and
inhibition against discrimination. Now, what is the content and reach of this great
equalising principle? It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose, J., "a way of
life", and it must not be subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach.
We cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all-embracing scope and
meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a
dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be "cribbed,
cabined and confined" within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic
point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness
are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to
the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit
in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is
therefore violative of Article 14, and if it affects any matter relating to public
employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 16 strike at
arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment. They
require that State action must be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike
to all similarly situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant
considerations because that would be denial of equality. Where the operative reason
for State action, as distinguished from motive inducing from the antechamber of the
mind, is not legitimate and relevant but is extraneous and outside the area of
permissible considerations, it would amount to mala fide exercise of power and that
is hit by Articles 14 and 16. Mala fide exercise of power and arbitrariness are
different lethal radiations emanating from the same vice : in fact the latter
comprehends the former. Both are inhibited by Articles 14 and 16."
257. Similar observations were made also in the context of co-relation between
Articles 14 and 16, respectively, in State of A.P. V. P.B. Vijayakumar103. It was
"6. This argument ignores Article 15(3). The interrelation between Articles 14,
15 and 16 has been considered in a number of cases by this Court. Article 15
deals with every kind of State action in relation to the citizens of this country.
Every sphere of activity of the State is controlled by Article 15(1). There is,
therefore, no reason to exclude from the ambit of Article 15(1) employment under
the State. At the same time Article 15(3) permits special provisions for women.
Both Articles 15(1) and 15(3) go together. In addition to Article 15(1) Article 16
(1), however, places certain additional prohibitions in respect of a specific area of
State activity viz. employment under the State. These are in addition to the
grounds of prohibition enumerated under Article 15(1) which are also included
under Article 16(2). There are, however, certain specific provisions in connection
with employment under the State under Article 16. Article 16(3) permits the
State to prescribe a requirement of residence within the State or Union Territory
by parliamentary legislation; while Article 16(4)
permits reservation of posts in favour of backward classes. Article 16(5) permits a
law which may require a person to profess a particular religion or may require him to
belong to a particular religious denomination, if he is the incumbent of an office in
connection with the affairs of the religious or denominational institution. Therefore,
the prohibition against discrimination on the grounds set out in Article 16(2) in
respect of any employment or office under the State is qualified by clauses (3), (4)
and (5) of Article 16. Therefore, in dealing with employment under the State, it has
to bear in mind both Articles 15 and 16 - the former being a more general provision
and the latter, a more specific provision. Since Article 16 does not touch upon any
special provision for women being made by the State, it cannot in any manner
derogate from the power conferred upon the State in this connection under Article
15(3). This power conferred by Article 15(3) is wide enough to cover the entire
range of State activity including employment under the State."
258. In State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas4, A.N. Ray, C.J. also advanced this theory,
observing that there is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who
complains of discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who are
alleged to have been favoured. Article 16(1) does not bar a reasonable classification.
"27. There is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who
complains of discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who are
alleged to have been favoured. Article 16(1) does not bar a reasonable
classification of employees or reasonable tests for their selection (State of Mysore
V. P. Narasinga Rao104).
28. This equality of opportunity need not be confused with absolute equality.
Article 16(1) does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection to
any employment or appointment to any office. In regard to employment, like
other terms and conditions associated with and incidental to it, the promotion to
a
selection post is also included in the matters relating to employment and even in
regard to such a promotion to a selection post all that Article 16(1) guarantees is
equality of opportunity to all citizens. Articles 16(1) and (2) give effect to equality
before law guaranteed by Article 14 and to the prohibition of discrimination
guaranteed by Article 15(1). Promotion to selection post is covered by Articles 16
(1) and (2).
*
*
*
30. Under Article 16(1) equality of opportunity of employment means equality
as between members of the same class of employees and not equality between
members of separate, independent class. The Roadside Station Masters and
Guards are recruited separately, trained separately and have separate avenues of
promotion. The Station Masters claimed
equality of opportunity for promotion vis--vis the guards on the ground that they
were entitled to equality of opportunity. It was said the concept of equality can have
no existence except with reference to matters which are common as between
individuals, between whom equality is predicated. The Roadside Station Masters and
Guards were recruited separately. Therefore, the two form distinct and separate
classes and there is no scope for predicating equality or inequality of opportunity in
matters of promotion. (See All India Station Masters' & Asstt. Station Masters' Assn.
V. Central Railway105.) The present case is not to create separate avenues of
promotion for these persons.
31. The rule of parity is the equal treatment of equals in equal circumstances.
The rule of differentiation is enacting laws differentiating between different
persons or things in different circumstances. The circumstances which govern one
set of persons or objects may not necessarily be the same as those governing
another set of persons or objects so that the question of unequal treatment does
not really arise between persons governed by different conditions and different
sets of circumstances. The principle of equality does not mean that every law
must have universal application for all persons who are not by nature, attainment
or circumstances in the same position and the varying needs of different classes
of persons require special treatment. The legislature understands and appreciates
the need of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made manifest
by experience and that its discriminations are based upon adequate grounds. The
rule of classification is not a natural and logical corollary of the rule of equality,
but the rule of differentiation is inherent in the concept of equality. Equality
means parity of treatment under parity of conditions. Equality does not connote
absolute equality. A classification in order to be constitutional must rest upon
distinctions that are substantial and not merely illusory. The test is whether it has
a reasonable basis free from artificiality and arbitrariness embracing all and
omitting none naturally falling into that category."
259. Education, by now, which is well recognised through judicial
pronouncements and outside, is perhaps the most fundamental requirement of
development. Without access to quality basic education, it would be impossible in
the modern world to expect any individual, race, class or community to make any
real advancement. While recognising the role of education to achieve development
and to provide equality of opportunity, the Courts have also recognised that the
State has an important role, in fact an obligation, to provide quality basic education
to all the citizens. Long before the Constitution was amended by introduction of
Article 21-A, providing for free and compulsory education to children between age of
6 and 14 years, this Court had been expanding this principle through purposive
interpretation and meaningful construction of guarantee to life and liberty enshrined
under Article 21 of the Constitution.
pp. 678-80, paras 9 & 12-14)
"9. The directive principles which are fundamental in the governance of the
country cannot be isolated from the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III.
These principles have to be read into the fundamental rights. Both are
supplementary to each other. The State is under a constitutional mandate to
create conditions in which the fundamental rights guaranteed to the individuals
under Part III could be enjoyed by all. Without making "right to education" under
Article 41 of the Constitution a reality the fundamental rights under Chapter III
shall remain beyond the reach of large majority which is illiterate.
*
*
*
12. "Right to life" is the compendious expression for all those rights which the
Courts must enforce because they are basic to the dignified enjoyment of life. It
extends to the full range of conduct which the individual is free to pursue. The
right to education flows directly from right to life. The right to life under Article 21
and the dignity of an individual cannot be assured unless it is accompanied by the
right to education. The State Government is under an obligation to make
endeavour to provide educational facilities at all levels to its citizens.
13. The fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution of
India including the right to freedom of speech and expression and other rights
under Article 19 cannot be appreciated and fully enjoyed unless a citizen is
educated and is conscious of his individualistic dignity.
14. The "right to education", therefore, is concomitant to the fundamental
rights enshrined under Part III of the Constitution. The State is under a
constitutional mandate to provide educational institutions at all levels for the
benefit of the citizens. The educational institutions must function to the best
advantage of the citizens. Opportunity to acquire education cannot be confined to
the richer section of the society. Increasing demand for medical education has led
to the opening of large number of medical colleges by private persons, groups
and trusts with the permission and recognition of State Governments. The
Karnataka State has permitted the opening of several new medical colleges under
various private bodies and organisations. These institutions are charging
capitation fee as a consideration for admission. Capitation fee is nothing but a
price for selling education. The concept of "teaching shops" is contrary to the
constitutional scheme and is wholly abhorrent to the Indian culture and heritage.
As far back as December 1980 the Indian Medical Association in its 56th All India
Medical Conference held at Cuttack on December 28-30, 1980 passed the following
resolutions:
'The 56th All India Medical Conference views with great concern the attitude
of State Governments particularly the State Government of Karnataka in
permitting the opening of new medical colleges under various bodies and
organisations in utter disregard to the recommendations of Medical Council of
India and urges upon the authorities and the Government of Karnataka not to
permit the opening of any new medical college, by private bodies.
It further condemns the policy of admission on the basis of capitation fees.
This commercialisation of medical education endangers the lowering of standards
of medical education and encourages bad practice.''
(emphasis supplied)
261. In Unni Krishnan V. State of A.P. 107 , the decision in Mohini Jain 106 came
up
for consideration before a larger Bench of this Court. While not approving the
judgment in toto, the above concept was further expanded and refined. It was
"168. In Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka08 Earl Warren, C.J., speaking
for the US Supreme Court emphasised the right to education in the following
13. Today, education is perhaps the most important function of State and
local governments.
It is required in the performance of our most basic
responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very foundation of
good citizenship. Today it is the principal instrument in awakening the child to
cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping
him to adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubtful that
any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the
opportunity of an education.'
para 11)
11.
Providing public schools ranks at the very apex of the function of a
State.'
The said fact has also been affirmed by eminent educationists of modern India like Dr
Radhakrishnan, J.P. Naik, Dr Kothari and others.
170. It is argued by some of the counsel for the petitioners that Article 21 is
negative in character and that it merely declares that no person shall
be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to the procedure
established by law. Since the State is not depriving the respondents' - students of
their right to education, Article 21 is not attracted, it is submitted. If and when the
State makes a law taking away the right to education, would Article 21 be attracted,
according to them. This argument, in our opinion, is really born of confusion; at any
rate, it is designed to confuse the issue. The first question is whether the right to life
guaranteed by Article 21 does take in the right to education or not. It is then that
the second question arises whether the State is taking away that right. The mere
fact that the State is not taking away the right as at present does not mean that
right to education is not included within the right to life. The content of the right is
not determined by perception of threat. The content of right to life is not to be
determined on the basis of existence or absence of threat of deprivation. The effect
of holding that right to education is implicit in the right to life is that the State
cannot deprive the citizen of his right to education except in accordance with the
procedure prescribed by law.
171. In the above state of law, it would not be correct to contend that Mohini
Jain106
was wrong insofar as it declared that "the right to education flows directly
from right to life". But the question is what is the content of this right? How much
and what level of education is necessary to make the life meaningful? Does it
mean that every citizen of this country can call upon the State to provide him
education of his choice? In other words, whether the citizens of this country can
demand that the State provide adequate number of medical colleges, engineering
colleges and other educational institutions to satisfy all their educational needs?
Mohini
Jain106 seems to say, yes. With respect, we cannot agree with such a
broad proposition. The right to education which is implicit in the right to life and
&
personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 must be construed in the light of the
directive principles in Part IV of the Constitution. So far as the right to education
is
concerned, there are several articles in Part IV which expressly speak of it.
Article 41 says that the 'State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education
and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and
disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want'. Article 45 says that 'the
State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the
commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all
children until they complete the age of fourteen years'. Article 46 commands that
'the State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests
of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all
forms of exploitation'. Education means knowledge - and "knowledge
itself is power". As rightly observed by John Adams, 'the preservation of means of
knowledge among the lowest ranks is of more importance to the public than all the
property of all the rich men in the country'. (Dissertation on Canon and Feudal Law,
1765) It is this concern which seems to underlie Article 46. It is the tyrants and bad
rulers who are afraid of spread of education and knowledge among the deprived
classes. Witness Hitler railing against universal education. He said: 'Universal
education is the most corroding and disintegrating poison that liberalism has ever
invented for its own destruction." (Rauschning, The Voice of Destruction : Hitler
speaks.) A true democracy is one where education is universal, where people
understand what is good for them and the nation and know how to govern
themselves. The three Articles 45, 46 and 41 are designed to achieve the said goal
among others. It is in the light of these Articles that the content and parameters of
the right to education have to be determined. Right to education, understood in the
context of Articles 45 and 41, means : (a) every child/citizen of this country has a
right to free education until he completes the age of fourteen years, and (b) after a
child/citizen completes 14 years, his right to education is circumscribed by the limits
of the economic capacity of the State and its development. We may deal with both
these limbs separately.
172. Right to free education for all children until they complete the age of
fourteen years (Article 45). It is noteworthy that among the several articles in
Part IV, only Article 45 speaks of a time-limit; no other article does. Has it no
significance? Is it a mere pious wish, even after 44 years of the Constitution? Can
the State flout the said direction even after 44 years on the ground that the
article merely calls upon it to "endeavour to provide" the same and on the further
ground that the said article is not enforceable by virtue of the declaration in
Article 37. Does not the passage of 44 years - more than four times the period
stipulated in Article 45 - convert the obligation created by the article into an
enforceable right? In this context, we feel constrained to say that allocation of
available funds to different sectors of education in India discloses an inversion of
priorities indicated by the Constitution. The Constitution contemplated a crash
programme being undertaken by the State to achieve the goal set out in Article
45. It is relevant to notice that Article 45 does not speak of the "limits of its
economic capacity and development" as does Article 41, which inter alia speaks of
right to education. What has actually happened is - more money is spent and
more attention is directed to higher education than to - and at the cost of -
primary education. (By primary education, we mean the education, which a
normal child receives by the time he completes 14 years of age.) Neglected more
so are the rural sectors, and the weaker sections of the society referred to in
Article 46. We clarify, we are not seeking to lay down the priorities for the
Government - we are only emphasising the constitutional policy as disclosed by
Articles 45, 46 and 41. Surely
the wisdom of these constitutional provisions is beyond question. This inversion of
priorities has been commented upon adversely by both the educationists and
economists.
173. Gunnar Myrdal, the noted economist and sociologist, a recognised
authority on South Asia, in his book Asian Drama (Abridged Edition - published
in 1972) makes these perceptive observations at p. 335:
'But there is another and more valid criticism to make. Although the declared
purpose was to give priority to the increase of elementary schooling in order to
raise the rate of literacy in the population, what has actually happened is that
secondary schooling has been rising much faster and tertiary schooling has
increased still more rapidly. There is a fairly general tendency for planned targets
of increased primary schooling not to be reached, whereas targets are over-
reached, sometimes substantially, as regards increases in secondary and,
particularly, tertiary schooling. This has all happened in spite of the fact that
secondary schooling seems to be three to five times more expensive than primary
schooling, and schooling at the tertiary level five to seven times more expensive
than at the secondary level.
What we see functioning here is the distortion of development from planned
targets under the influence of the pressure from parents and pupils in the upper
strata who everywhere are politically powerful. Even more remarkable is the fact
that this tendency to distortion from the point of view of the planning objectives
is more accentuated in the poorest countries, Pakistan, India, Burma and
Indonesia, which started out with far fewer children in primary schools and which
should therefore have the strongest reasons to carry out the programme of giving
primary schooling the highest priority. It is generally the poorest countries that
are spending least, even relatively, on primary education, and that are permitting
the largest distortions from the planned targets in favour of secondary and
tertiary education."
174. In his other book Challenge of World Poverty (published in 1970, Chapter
6 "Education") he discusses elaborately the reasons for and the consequences of
neglect of basic education in this country. He quotes J.P. Naik, (the renowned
educationist, whose Report of the Education Commission, 1966 is still considered
The surest way't legal research!"
to
be the most authoritative study of the education scene in India) as saying
"Educational development is benefitting the "haves" more than the "have nots".
This is a negation of social justice and "planning" proper" - and our Constitution
speaks repeatedly of social justice [Preamble and Article 38(1)]. As late as 1985,
the Ministry of Education had this to say in para 3.74 of its publication Challenge
of Education - A Policy Perspective. It is stated there:
'3.74. Considering the constitutional imperative regarding the
universalisation of elementary education it was to be expected that the share
of this sector would be protected from attribution (sic). Facts, however, point
in the opposite direction. From a share of 56% in the First Plan, it declined to
35% in the Second Plan, to 34% in the Third Plan, to 30% in the Fourth Plan.
It started going up again only in the Fifth Plan, when it was at the level of
32%, increasing in Sixth Plan to 36%, still 20% below the First Plan level. On
the other hand, between the First and the Sixth Five Year Plans, the share of
university education went up from 9% to 16%.'
175. Be that as it may, we must say that at least now the State should honour
the command of Article 45. It must be made a reality - at least now. Indeed, the
National Education Policy 1986 says that the promise of Article 45 will be
redeemed before the end of this century. Be that as it may, we hold that a child
(citizen) has a fundamental right to free education up to the age of 14 years."
(emphasis in original)
262. The decision of this Court in Unni Krishnan 107 was later on overruled in a
larger Bench decision in T.M.A. Pai Foundation V. State of Karnataka 21 but on a
different point.
2 In Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan V. Union of India
this
Court considered the validity of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009 insofar as it made the provisions therein applicable to unaided
non-minority schools. S.H. Kapadia, C.J., speaking for the majority, observed as
"27. At the outset, it may be stated, that fundamental rights have two
aspects-they act as fetters on plenary legislative powers and, secondly, they
provide conditions for fuller development of our people including their individual
dignity. Right to live in Article 21 covers access to education. But unaffordability
defeats that access. It defeats the State's endeavour to provide free and
compulsory education for all children of the specified age. To provide for free and
compulsory education in Article 45 is not the same thing as to provide free and
compulsory education. The word "for" in Article 45 is a preposition. The word
"education" was read into Article 21 by the judgments of this Court. However,
Article 21 merely declared "education" to fall within the contours of right to live.
28. To provide for right to access education, Article 21-A was enacted to give
effect to Article 45 of the Constitution. Under Article 21-A, right is given to the
The surest way t legal research!
State to provide by law "free and compulsory education". Article 21-A
contemplates making of a law by the State. Thus, Article 21-A contemplates right
to education flowing from the law to be made
which is the 2009 Act, which is child-centric and not institution-centric. Thus, as
stated, Article 21-A provides that the State shall provide free and compulsory
education to all children of the specified age in such manner as the State may, by
law, determine. The manner in which this obligation will be discharged by the State
has been left to the State to determine by law. The 2009 Act is thus enacted in
terms of Article 21-A. It has been enacted primarily to remove all barriers (including
financial barriers) which impede access to education."
(emphasis in original)
264. I am conscious of the fact that the economically weaker sections of the
citizens are not declared as socially and economically backward classes (SEBCs) for
the purpose of Article 15(4) of the Constitution. However, for the purpose of judging
the validity of the impugned Amendment, this, in my view, would not be of any
consequence. One should take notice of the fact that Article 16(4) of the
Constitution refers to backward class of citizens, which in the opinion of the State, is
not adequately represented in the services under the State. In such a case, it is
provided that nothing in that Article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of such backward
classes of the citizens. On the other hand, Article 15(4) refers to socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens along with the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes and provides that nothing in that Article or Article 29(2) shall
prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of such
classes. Article 16(4) pertains to backward class of citizens for the purpose of
making reservation in public employment. Article 15(4), on the other hand, refers to
socially and educationally backward classes for the purpose of making any special
provision by the State for the advancement of such classes. While affirmative action
implied in Article 16(4) is restricted to reservation in employment, Article 15(4) has
a wider canvass and reach by virtue of the pronounced purpose of making special
provision.
265. Such a distinction between the two provisions was noticed by this Court in
Indra Sawhney5 wherein Reddy, J. speaking for the majority, observed as under :
"(c) Whether the backwardness in Article 16(4) should be both social and educational?
786. The other aspect to be considered is whether the backwardness
contemplated in Article 16(4) is social backwardness or educational backwardness
or
whether it is both social *and* educational backwardness. Since the decision in
Balaji6 it has been assumed that the backward class of citizens contemplated by
Article 16(4) is the same as the socially and educationally backward classes,
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes mentioned in Article 15(4). Though
Article 15(4) came into existence later
&
in 1951 and Article 16(4) does not contain the qualifying words "socially and
educationally" preceding the words "backward class of citizens" the same meaning
came to be attached to them. Indeed, it was stated in Janki Prasad Parimoo75
`22. Article 15(4) speaks about "socially and educationally backward classes
of citizens" while Article 16(4) speaks only of "any backward class citizens".
However, it is now settled that the expression "backward class of citizens" in
Article 16(4) means the same thing as the expression "any socially and
educationally backward class of citizens" in Article 15(4). In order to qualify for
being called a "backward class citizen" he must be a member of a socially and
educationally backward class. It is social and educational backwardness of a
class which is material for the purposes of both Articles 15(4) and 16(4).
787. It is true that no decision earlier to it specifically said so, yet such an
impression gained currency and it is that impression which finds expression in the
above observation. In our respectful opinion, however, the said assumption has
no basis. Clause (4) of Article 16 does not contain the qualifying words "socially
and educationally" as does clause (4) of Article 15. It may be remembered that
Article 340 (which has remained unamended) does employ the expression
"socially and educationally backward classes" and yet that expression does not
find place in Article 16(4). The reason is obvious: "backward class of citizens" in
Article 16(4) takes in Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and all other backward
classes of citizens including the socially and educationally backward classes. Thus,
certain classes which may not qualify for Article 15(4) may qualify for Article 16
(4). They may not qualify for Article 15(4) but they may qualify as backward class
of citizens for the purposes of Article 16(4). It is equally relevant to notice that
Article 340 does not expressly refer to services or to reservations in services
under the State, though it may be that the Commission appointed thereunder
may recommend reservation in appointments/posts in the services of the State as
one of the steps for removing the difficulties under which SEBCs are labouring
and for improving their conditions. Thus, SEBCs referred to in Article 340 is only
one of the categories for whom Article 16(4) was enacted : Article 16(4) applies
to a much larger class than the one contemplated by Article 340. It would, thus,
be not correct to say that "backward class of citizens" in Article 16(4) are the
same as the socially and educationally backward classes in Article 15(4). Saying
so would mean and imply reading a limitation into a beneficial provision like
Article 16(4). Moreover, when speaking of reservation in appointments/posts in
the State services - which may mean, at any level whatsoever - insisting upon
educational backwardness may not be quite appropriate."
(emphasis supplied)
266. Despite such legal distinction drawn by this Court between the "backward
classes" referred to in Article 16(4) and "socially and educationally backward
classes" referred to in Article 15(4) of the Constitution, in the practice which has
developed over a period of time, such distinction has been virtually obliterated. It is
an undisputed position that the State has been categorising various classes and
communities as socially and educationally backward classes (SEBCs) often referred
to in popular term as the Other Backward Classes or OBCs. Such list is common for
both the benefits envisaged under Article 16(4) of the Constitution as well as Article
15(4). In other words, it is this very list of SEBCs which is utilised by the State
organs for the purpose of granting reservation in public employment in terms of
Article 16(4) of the Constitution. This very classification of the SEBC status also
qualifies the member of the community to reservation in education including
professional courses which would flow from the provisions made in Article 15(4) of
the Constitution.
267. Though previously Articles 15(4) and 16(4), respectively, were seen as
exception of the equality enshrined in Articles 15(1) and 16(1), respectively, this
understanding of the constitutional provisions underwent a major change in the
"78. I agree that Article 16(4) is capable of being interpreted as an exception
to Article 16(1) if the equality of opportunity visualised in Article 16(1) is a sterile
one, geared to the concept of numerical equality which takes no account of the
social, economic, educational background of the members of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. If equality of opportunity guaranteed under Article 16(1)
means effective material equality, then Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article
16(1). It is only an emphatic way of putting the extent to which equality of
opportunity could be carried viz. even up to the point of making reservation."
268. This change in the approach was noticed and amplified by this Court in the
-92, paras 741-42)
"741. In Balaji6 it was held - 'there is no doubt that Article 15(4) has to be
read as a proviso or an exception to Articles 15(1) and 29(2)'. It was observed
that Article 15(4) was inserted by the First Amendment in the light of the
decision in Champakam 1, with a view to remove the defect pointed out by this
Court, namely, the absence of a provision in Article 15 corresponding to clause
(4) of Article 16. Following Balaji6 it was held by another Constitution Bench (by
majority) in Devadasan3 'further this Court has already held that clause (4) of
Article 16 is by
way of a proviso or an exception to clause (1)' Subba Rao, J. however, opined in his
dissenting opinion that Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1) but that it is
only an emphatic way of stating the principle inherent in the main provision itself.
Be that as it may, since the decision in Devadasan, it was assumed by this Court
that Article 16(4) is an exception to Article 16(1). This view, however, received a
severe setback from the majority decision in State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas4.
Though the minority (H.R. Khanna and A.C. Gupta, JJ.) stuck to the view that Article
16(4) is an exception, the majority (Ray, C.J., Mathew, Krishna Iyer and Fazal Ali,
JJ.) held that Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1) but that it was merely
an emphatic way of stating a principle implicit in Article 16(1). (Beg, J. took a
slightly different view which it is not necessary to mention here.) The said four
learned Judges - whose views have been referred to in para 713 - held that Article
16(1) being a facet of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14 permits
reasonable classification just as Article 14 does. In our respectful opinion, the view
taken by the majority in Thomas4 is the correct one. We too believe that Article 16
(1) does permit reasonable classification for ensuring attainment of the equality of
opportunity assured by it. For assuring equality of opportunity, it may well be
necessary in certain situations to treat unequally situated persons unequally. Not
doing so, would perpetuate and accentuate inequality. Article 16(4) is an instance of
such classification, put in to place the matter beyond controversy. The "backward
class of citizens" are classified as a separate category deserving a special treatment
in the nature of reservation of appointments/posts in the services of the State.
Accordingly, we hold that clause (4) of Article 16 is not exception to clause (1) of
Article 16. It is an instance of classification implicit in and permitted by clause (1).
The speech of Dr Ambedkar during the debate on draft Article 10(3) [corresponding
to Article 16(4)] in the Constituent Assembly - referred to in para 693 - shows
that a substantial number of members of the Constituent Assembly insisted upon a
"provision (being) made for the entry of certain communities which have so far been
outside the administration", and that draft clause (3) was put in in recognition and
acceptance of the said demand. It is a provision which must be read along with and
in harmony with clause (1). Indeed, even without clause (4), it would have been
permissible for the State to have evolved such a classification and made a provision
for reservation of appointments/posts in their favour. Clause (4) merely puts the
matter beyond any doubt in specific terms.
742. Regarding the view expressed in Balaji6 and Devadasan, it must
be
remembered that at that time it was not yet recognised by this Court that Article
16(1) being a facet of Article 14 does implicitly permit classification. Once this
feature was recognised the theory of clause (4) being an exception to clause (1)
became untenable. It had to be accepted that clause (4) is an instance of
classification inherent in clause (1). Now, just as Article 16(1) is a facet or an
elaboration of the principle underlying
Article 14, clause (2) of Article 16 is also an elaboration of a facet of clause (1). If
clause (4) is an exception to clause (1) then it is equally an exception to clause (2).
Question then arises, in what respect is clause (4) an exception to clause (2), if
"class" does not mean "caste". Neither clause (1) nor clause (2) speak of class. Does
the contention mean that clause (1) does not permit classification and therefore
clause (4) is an exception to it. Thus, from any point of view, the contention of the
petitioners has no merit."
269. In that context, this Court answered the question whether Article 16(4) is
exhaustive of the very concept of reservation. It was held that though Article 16(4)
is exhaustive for reservation in favour of backward classes and no further special
treatment is permissible in their favour outside of Article 16(4), Article 16(4) itself is
not exhaustive of the concept of reservation. It was held that Article 16(1) itself, of
course, in very exceptional situations and not for all and sundry reasons permits
reservations. The contention that Article 16(1) permits preferential treatment and
not reservation was thus rejected.
270. According to the constitutional scheme, the right to education forms part of
the right to life under Article 21 and the right to education is incorporated separately
and in clear terms as an independent fundamental right in the form of Article 21-A.
That Article is couched in the language which is mandatory insofar as the State is
obliged to provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of 6 to 14
years. The matter of free and compulsory primary education has been perceived to
be so important even at the time of drafting of the Constitution that Articles 45 and
46, respectively, were incorporated in Part IV of the Constitution to lay the principles
fundamental in the governance of the country and they were made the duty of the
State to apply those principles in making laws by virtue of Article 37. Now that right
to education is not only declared as fundamental right of every child, but the State
has been obliged to provide free and compulsory education, no authority which is
the State within the definition contained in Article 12 could legitimately renege on
the constitutional covenant. The phrase "free and compulsory education" in Article
21-A clearly makes it obligatory on the State to not only provide necessary funds
and facilities for free, but also compulsory education. Thus, the State is under an
obligation to apply the provisions contained in Articles 45 and 46, respectively, to
provide childhood care and primary education and promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and protect
them from social injustice. (See : Adam B. Chaki98
Constitutional validity of clause (5) in Article 15
271. The constitutional validity of clause (5) in Article 15 of the Constitution
introduced by the Constitution (93rd Amendment) Act, 2005 was made the subject-
matter of challenge before this Court in Pramati Educational & Cultural Trust V. Union
of India 33.
272. The constitutional validity of clause (5) in Article 15 was essentially
challenged on the ground that the same is violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution, inasmuch as it compels the private educational institutions to give up a
share of the available seats to the candidates chosen by the State and such
appropriation of seats would not be a regulatory measure and not a reasonable
restriction on the right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution within the meaning
of Article 19(6) of the Constitution. It was further argued that clause (5) of Article
15 of the Constitution, as its very language indicates would not apply to the minority
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 of the Constitution. It
was argued that thus it violated Article 14 because the aided minority institutions
and unaided minority institutions cannot be treated alike. It was also argued that
clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution is discriminatory and violative of the
equality clause in Article 14 of the Constitution, which is a basic feature of the
Constitution.
273. On the other hand, while defending clause (5) of Article 15 of the
Constitution, it was argued on behalf of the Union of India that clause (5) of Article
15 of the Constitution is only an enabling provision empowering the State to make a
special provision, by law, for the advancement of socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including the private educational institutions. It was also argued that Article 15(5) is
consistent with the socialistic goals set out in the Preamble and the directive
principles in Part IV and to ensure the march and progress of the weaker sections
resulting in progress to socialistic democratic State establishing the egalitarian
ethos/egalitarian equality which is the mandate of the Constitution and has also
been recognised by this Court in M. Nagaraj V. Union of India9. It was argued that
this Court in M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore disagreed with the judgment in State of
Madras V. Champakam Dorairajan1 and upheld that Article 46 of the Constitution
charges the State with promoting with special care the educational and economic
interests of the weaker sections of the society. The underlying logic behind the
judgment in M.R. Balaji has logically flown from the mandate of Article 15(4),
Article 16(4), Article 38, Article 45 and Article 46, respectively, and that Article 15
(5) is only a continuation of that process. Much emphasis was laid on the fact that
when the elementary education has been made a fundamental right, in order to
make that objective more meaningful, it was also necessary for the State to ensure
that even in higher education, there must be affirmative equality by providing
chances or opportunities to the socially and educationally backward classes.
274. The Constitution Bench, in Pramati Educational & Cultural Trust33 after due
consideration of the rival contentions canvassed on either side and while upholding
256-57 & 259-61, paras 29-31, 34-35 & 37-38)
"29. We may now examine whether the Ninety-third Amendment satisfies the
width test. A plain reading of clause (5) of Article 15 would show that the power
of a State to make a law can only be exercised where it is necessary for
advancement of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and not for any other purpose. Thus, if a
law is made by the State only to appease a class of citizen which is not socially or
educationally backward or which is not a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe,
The surest way t legal research!"
such a law will be beyond the powers of the State under clause (5) of Article 15 of
the Constitution. A plain reading of clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution will
further show that such law has to be limited to making a special provision relating
to admission to private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided, by the
State. Hence, if the State makes a law which is not related to admission in
educational institutions and relates to some other aspects affecting the autonomy
and rights of private educational institutions as defined by this Court in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation1 , such a law would not be within the power of the State under clause
(5) of Article 15 of the Constitution. In other words, power in clause (5) of Article
15 of the Constitution is a guided power to be exercised for the limited purposes
stated in the clause and as and when a law is made by the State in purported
exercise of the power under clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution, the Court
will have to examine and find out whether it is for the purposes of advancement
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and whether the law is confined to admission of
such socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to private educational institutions, whether
aided or unaided, and if the Court finds that the power has not been exercised for
the purposes mentioned in clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution, the Court
will have to declare the law as ultra vires Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. In
our opinion, therefore, the width of the power vested on the State under clause
(5) of Article 15 of the Constitution by the constitutional amendment is not such
as to destroy the right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
30. We may now examine the contention of Mr Nariman that clause (5) of
Article 15 of the Constitution fails to make a distinction between aided and
unaided educational institutions and treats both aided and unaided alike in the
matter of making special provisions for admission of socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The distinction between a private aided educational institution and a private
unaided educational institution is that
private educational institutions receive aid from the State, whereas private unaided
educational institutions do not receive aid from the State. As and when a law is
made by the State under clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution, such a law
would have to be examined whether it has taken into account the fact that private
unaided educational institutions are not aided by the State and has made provisions
in the law to ensure that private unaided educational institutions are compensated
for the admissions made in such private unaided educational institutions from
amongst socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. In our view, therefore, a law made under clause
(5) of Article 15 of the Constitution by the State on the ground that it treats private
aided educational institutions and private unaided educational institutions alike is
not immune from a challenge under Article 14 of the Constitution. Clause (5) of
Article 15 of the Constitution only states that nothing in Article 15 or Article 19(1)
(g) will prevent the State to make a special provision, by law, for admission of
The surest way legal research!
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes to educational institutions including private educational
institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State. Clause (5) of Article 15 of the
Constitution does not say that such a law will not comply with the other
requirements of equality as provided in Article 14 of the Constitution. Hence, we do
not find any merit in the submission of Mr Nariman that clause (5) of Article 15 of
the Constitution that insofar as it treats unaided private educational institutions and
aided private educational institutions alike it is violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution.
31. We may now deal with the contention of Mr Divan that clause (5) of Article
15 of the Constitution is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution as it excludes
from its purview the minority institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 of
the Constitution and the contention of Mr Nariman that clause (5) of Article 15
excludes both unaided minority institutions and aided minority institutions alike
and is thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
*
*
34. Clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution enables the State to make a
special provision, by law, for the advancement of socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Such admissions of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes who may belong to communities
other than the minority community which has established the institution, may
affect the right of the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of
Article 30 of the Constitution. In other words, the minority character of the
minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 of the
Constitution, whether aided or unaided, may be affected by admissions of socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens or the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes and it is for this reason that minority institutions, aided or
unaided, are kept outside the enabling power of the State under clause (5) of
Article 15 with a view to protect the minority
institutions from a law made by the majority. As has been held by the Constitution
Bench of this Court in Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union of India2, the minority
educational institutions, by themselves, are a separate class and their rights are
protected under Article 30 of the Constitution, and, therefore, the exclusion of
minority educational institutions from Article 15(5) is not violative of Article 14 of
the Constitution.
35. We may now consider the contention of Mr Divan that clause (5) of Article
15 of the Constitution is violative of secularism insofar as it excludes religious
minority institutions referred to in Article 30(1) of the Constitution from the
purview of clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution. In M. Ismail Faruqui V.
37.
The Preamble of the Constitution read in particular with Articles 25 to
&
28 emphasises this aspect and indicates that the concept of secularism
embodied in the constitutional scheme [is] a creed adopted by the Indian
people "
Hence, secularism is no doubt a basic feature of the Constitution, but we fail to appreciate how
clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution which excludes religious minority institutions in clause
(1) of Article 30 of the Constitution is in any way violative of the concept of secularism. On the
other hand, this Court has held in T.M.A. Pai Foundation1 that the essence of secularism in India
is the recognition and preservation of the different types of people, with diverse languages and
different beliefs and Articles 29 and 30 seek to preserve such differences and at the same time
unite the people of India to form one strong nation (see para 161 of the majority judgment of
by excluding the minority institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 of the Constitution, the
secular character of India is maintained and not destroyed.
*
*
*
37. Educational institutions in India such as Kendriya Vidyalayas, Indian
Institute of Technology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences and Government
Medical Colleges admit students in seats reserved for backward classes of citizens
and for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and yet these government
institutions have produced excellent students who have grown up to be good
administrators, academicians, scientists, engineers, doctors and the like.
Moreover, the contention that excellence will be compromised by admission from
amongst the backward classes of citizens and the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in private educational institutions is contrary to the Preamble of
the Constitution which promises to secure to all citizens "fraternity assuring the
dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity
of the nation". The goals of fraternity, unity and integrity of the nation cannot be
achieved unless the backward classes of citizens and the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, who for historical factors, have not advanced are integrated into
the mainstream of the nation. We, therefore, find no merit in the submission of Mr
Nariman that clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution violates the right under
Article 21 of the Constitution.
38. We accordingly hold that none of the rights under Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and
21 of the Constitution have been abrogated by clause (5) of Article 15 of the
Constitution and the view taken by Bhandari, J. in Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union
of India2 that the imposition of reservation on unaided institutions by the Ninety-
third Amendment has abrogated Article 19(1)(g), a basic feature of the
Constitution is not correct. Instead, we hold that the Constitution (Ninety-third
Amendment) Act, 2005 inserting clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution is
valid."
(emphasis supplied)
275. Thus, if Article 15(5) of the Constitution has been found to be consistent
with the socialistic goals set out in the Preamble and the directive principles in Part
IV and to ensure the march and progress of the weaker sections resulting in
progress to Socialistic Democratic State establishing the egalitarian ethos/egalitarian
equality which is the mandate of the Constitution and has also been approved in M.
Nagaraj2 then clause (6) in Article 15 of the Constitution could also be said to be
consistent with the socialistic goals set out in the Preamble and the directive
principles in Part IV. Article 15(6), brought in by way of the Constitution (103rd
Amendment) Act, 2019, which provides for identical reservation for the economically
weaker sections of the citizens in private unaided educational institutions. The
Constitution Bench in Pramati Educational & Cultural Trust33 was not impressed with
the challenge to Article 15(5) on the ground of breach of basic structure so far as it
relates to the unaided private educational institutions.
276. Taking the aforesaid view of the matter, the Constitution Bench of this
Court, in Pramati Educational & Cultural Trust33 held that the Constitution (93rd
Amendment) Act, 2005 inserting clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution could
not be said to have altered the basic structure or framework of the Constitution and
is constitutionally valid.
277. In view of the aforesaid, Article 15(6), which is the subject-matter of
challenge and which provides for reservation for the "EWS other than the SC, ST and
OBC-NCL" in private unaided educational institutions, cannot be said to be altering
the basic structure. It is constitutionally valid. However, the question whether the
exclusion clause is violative of the equality code, particularly the principle of non-
discrimination and non-exclusion which forms inextricable part of the basic structure
of the Constitution, shall be answered by me a little later.
278. Let us remember the observations made by Mathew, J. in N.M. Thomas4, as
"73. There is no reason why this Court should not also require the State to
adopt a standard of proportional equality which takes account of the differing
conditions and circumstances of a class of citizens whenever those conditions and
circumstances stand in the way of their equal access to the enjoyment of basic
rights or claims."
(emphasis supplied)
279. It has been held by this Court in Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. V. Union of
, that with a view to establish an egalitarian social order, the trinity, the
Preamble, the Fundamental Rights in Part III and the Directive Principles of State
policy in Part IV of the Constitution delineated the social economic justice. The word
"justice" envisioned in the Preamble is used in a broad spectrum to harmonise the
individual right with the general welfare of the society. The Constitution is the
supreme law. The purpose of law is realisation of justice whose content and scope
vary depending on the prevailing social environment. Every social and economic
change causes change in the law. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, it is
not possible to change the legal basis of social and economic life of the community
without bringing about any corresponding change in the law. In Dalmia Cement
(Bharat)111 , this Court further observed that social justice is not a simple or single
idea of a society but is an essential part of complex social change to relieve the poor,
etc. from the handicaps, penury, to ward them off from distress and to make their
lives liveable for the greater good of the society at large. Therefore, social and
economic justice in the context of our Indian Constitution must, be understood in a
comprehensive sense to remove every inequality and to provide equal opportunity to
all citizens in social as well as economic activities and in every part of life. Economic
justice means abolition of those economic conditions which ultimately result in the
inequality of economic values between men leading towards backwardness.
280. In the case on hand, it was vociferously argued that the individuals
belonging to the economical weaker sections may not form a class and they may be
weaker as individual only. Secondly, their weakness may not be the result of the
past social and educational backwardness or discrimination. The basis of such
argument is the observation of Sawant, J. in Indra Sawhney5. All the learned counsel
while criticising the impugned Amendment kept reminding this Court time and again
that the Constitution has never recognised economic criteria as a mode of
reservation. Reservation in employment, etc. is only meant for the socially oppressed
class. Economically weaker sections of the citizens may be financially handicapped or
poor but still socially, they can be said to be much advanced and cannot be
compared with the socially oppressed class like the SCs/STs. Thus, the reservation
for the weaker sections of the citizens
has destroyed or rather abridged the basic structure of the Constitution. I shall deal
with this argument of abridgment of the basic structure a little later. But, I would
definitely like to say something as regards the economic criteria for the purpose of
reservation.
281. In this country with a population of around 1.41 billion, the economic
backwardness is not confined only to those who are covered by Article 15(4) or
Article 16(4) of the Constitution. In a country where only a small percentage of the
population is above the poverty line, to deny opportunities of higher education
(which secures employment) and employment is to deny to those who are qualified
and deserving what is or at least should be their due.
282. When the 42nd Constitutional Amendment was on the anvil, there was
suggestion of inclusion of "right to work" which carries with it the natural corollary of
assured employment as a fundamental right. This, understandably, could not be
done in a political system which is based on mixed economy. The natural effect of
reservation is to close the door of betterment or even employment to even a portion
of economically weak section of community. This all the more emphasises the urgent
necessity of eliminating or at least substantially reducing the causes which have
contributed to the creation of socially and educationally backward section of the
community, thus, creating a situation when the need of reservation would be no
more. Then alone the promise of equality for all would become a reality. And, it is to
be remembered that right of equality is the "Cornerstone of the Constitution" (per
Khanna, J.). Chandrachud, J. says: "it is a right which more than any other is a basic
postulate of our Constitution". Mathew, J. describes it as the "most fundamental
postulate of republicanism". [See : Padmraj Samarendra V. State of Bihar112, AIR
Pat at p. 267, Patna High Court, Special Bench.]
283. In the aforesaid context, it would further be useful again to extract the
observation of Iyer, J., in N.M. Thomas4 who concurring with A.N. Ray, C.J.
"149. no caste, however seemingly backward, or claiming to be derelict, can
be allowed to breach the dykes of equality of opportunity guaranteed to all
citizens. To them the answer is that, save in rare cases of "chill penury repressing
their noble rage", equality is equality - nothing less and nothing else. The heady
upper berth occupants from "backward" classes do double injury. They beguile
the broad community into believing that backwardness is being banished. They
rob the need-based bulk of the backward of the "office" advantages the nation, by
classification, reserves or proffers. The constitutional dharma, however, is not an
unending deification of "backwardness" and showering "classified" homage,
regardless of advancement registered, but progressive exercising of the social evil
and gradual withdrawal of artificial crutches. Here the Court has to be objective,
resisting mawkish politics."
284. Also, the note of caution sounded by this Court in State of J&K V. Triloki
"51.
let us not evolve, through imperceptible extensions, a theory of
classification which may subvert, perhaps submerge, the precious guarantee of
equality. The eminent spirit of an ideal society is equality and so we must not be
left to ask in wonderment : what after all is the operational residue of equality
and equal opportunity?"
285. In Ram Singh V. Union of India , this Court, while considering a challenge
to the notification published in the Gazette of India dated 4-3-2014 by which the Jat
Community came to be included in the Central List of Backward Classes for the
States of Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, NCT of Delhi,
Bharatpur and Dholpur Districts of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand,
"54. Past decisions of this Court in M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore 6 and Janki
Prasad Parimoo V. State of J&K75 had conflated the two expressions used in
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) and read them synonymously. It is in Indra Sawhney
case5 that this Court held that the terms "backward class" and "socially and
educationally backward classes" are not equivalent and further that in Article 16
(4) the backwardness contemplated is mainly social. The above interpretation of
backwardness in Indra Sawhney5 would be binding on numerically smaller
Benches. We may, therefore, understand a social class as an identifiable section
of society which may be internally homogeneous (based on caste or occupation)
or heterogeneous (based on disability or gender e.g. transgender). Backwardness
is a manifestation caused by the presence of several independent circumstances
which may be social, cultural, economic, educational or even political. Owing to
historical conditions, particularly in Hindu society, recognition of backwardness
has been associated with caste. Though caste may be a prominent and
distinguishing factor for easy determination of backwardness of a social group,
this Court has been routinely discouraging the identification of a group as
backward solely on the basis of caste. Article 16(4) as also Article 15(4) lay the
foundation for affirmative action by the State to reach out to the most deserving.
Social groups who would be most deserving must necessarily be a matter of
continuous evolution. New practices, methods and yardsticks have to be
continuously evolved moving away from caste centric definition of backwardness.
This alone can enable recognition of newly emerging groups in society which
would require palliative action. The recognition of the third gender as a socially
and educationally backward class of citizens entitled to affirmative action of the
State under the Constitution in National Legal Services Authority V. Union of India15
is too significant a development to be ignored. In fact it is a pathfinder, if not a path
-breaker. It is an important reminder to the State of the high degree of vigilance it
must exercise to discover emerging forms of backwardness. The State, therefore,
cannot blind itself to the existence of other forms and instances of backwardness. An
affirmative action policy that keeps in mind only historical injustice would certainly
result in under protection of the most deserving backward class of citizens, which is
constitutionally mandated. It is the identification of these new emerging groups that
must engage the attention of the State and the constitutional power and duty must
be concentrated to discover such groups rather than to enable groups of citizens to
recover "lost ground" in claiming preference and benefits on the basis of historical
prejudice."
(emphasis supplied)
286. In State of Kerala V. Jacob Mathew116, M.S. Menon, C.J. observed as
"8. In these regions of human life and values the clear-cut distinctions of cause
and effect merge into each other. Social backwardness contributes to educational
backwardness; educational backwardness perpetuates social backwardness; and
both are often no more than the inevitable corollaries of the extremes of poverty
and the deadening weight of custom and tradition."
(emphasis supplied)
287. In M.R. Balaji6, Gajendragadkar, J. said that : (AIR pp. 659 & 664, paras 23
& 36)
"23.
Social backwardness is on the ultimate analysis the result of poverty, to
a very large extent. The classes of citizens who are deplorably poor automatically
become socially backward.
*
*
*
36.
However, we may observe that if any State adopts such a measure, it
may afford relief to and assist the advancement of the Backward Classes in the
State, because backwardness, social and educational, is ultimately and primarily
due to poverty."
(emphasis supplied)
Economic criteria for the affirmative action under the Constitution
288. What is so principally, so fundamentally wrong in singling out an economic
criterion for reservation? Is it that they do not belong to a homogeneous group? Is it
cast in stone that they (beneficiaries of reservation) should belong to homogeneous
group? Why cannot economic criterion be a ground for the State's affirmative action?
289. The aforesaid are the few questions which were put by this Bench to the
learned counsel appearing for the respective petitioners. One common reply
to the aforesaid questions was that the reservation is only meant for the persons
falling within Article 15(4) and Article 16(4) of the Constitution and that there are
other affirmative actions which can address the problem of economy, but not
necessarily reservation.
290. Economic criteria can be a relevant factor for affirmative action under the
Constitution. In N.M. Thomas4, the constitutional validity of Rule 13-AA giving
further exemption of two years to the members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes
and Scheduled Castes in the service from passing the tests referred to in Rule 13 or
Rule 13-A, was questioned. The High Court struck down the rule. Allowing the State
& 230-31)
"67. Today, the political theory which acknowledges the obligation of
Government under Part IV of the Constitution to provide jobs, medical care, old
age pension, etc. extends to human rights and imposes an affirmative obligation
to promote equality and liberty. The force of the idea of a State with obligation to
help the weaker sections of its members seems to have increasing influence in
constitutional law. The idea finds expression in a number of cases in America
involving social discrimination and also in the decisions requiring the State to
offset the effects of poverty by providing counsel, transcript of appeal, expert
witnesses, etc. Today, the sense that Government has affirmative responsibility
for elimination of inequalities, social, economic or otherwise, is one of the
dominant forces in constitutional law. While special concessions for the
underprivileged have been easily permitted, they have not traditionally been
required. Decisions in the areas of criminal procedure, voting rights and education
in America suggest that the traditional approach may not be completely
adequate. In these areas, the inquiry whether equality has been achieved no
longer ends with numerical equality; rather the equality clause has been held to
require resort to a standard of proportional equality which requires the State, in
framing legislation, to take into account the private inequalities of wealth, of
education and other circumstances. 76
68. The idea of compensatory State action to make people who are really
unequal in their wealth, education or social environment, equal, in specified
areas, was developed by the Supreme Court of the United States. Rousseau has
said:
It is precisely because the force of circumstances tends to destroy equality that
117
force of legislation must always tend to maintain it.
69. In Griffin V. People of the State of Illinois1 118 an indigent defendant was
unable to take advantage of the one appeal of right granted by Illinois law
because he could not afford to buy the necessary transcript. Such
transcripts were made available to all defendants on payment of a similar fee; but in
practice only non-indigents were able to purchase the transcript and take the
appeal. The Court said that
there can be no equal justice where the kind of trial a man gets depends on
the amount of money he has
and held that the Illinois procedure violated the equal protection clause. The State did not have to
make appellate review available at all; but if it did, it could not do so in a way which operated to
deny access to review to defendants solely because of their indigency. A similar theory
underlies the requirement that counsel be provided for indigents on appeal. In Douglas V. People
of
State of California 119 the case involved the California procedure which guaranteed one appeal
of right for criminal defendants convicted at trial. In the case of indigents the appellate court
checked over the record to see whether it would be of advantage to the defendant or helpful to the
appellate court to have counsel appointed for the appeal. A negative answer meant that the
indigent had to appeal pro se if at all. The Court held that this procedure denied defendant the
equal protection of the laws. Even though the State was pursuing an otherwise legitimate objective
of providing counsel only for non-frivolous claims, it had created a situation in which the well-to-do
could always have a lawyer - even for frivolous appeals - whereas the indigent could not.
*
*
*
71. Though in one sense Justice Harlan is correct, when one comes to think of
the real effect of his view, one is inclined to think that the opinion failed to
recognise that there are several ways of looking at equality, and treating people
equally in one respect always results in unequal treatment in some other
respects. For Mr Justice Harlan, the only type of equality that mattered was
numerical equality in the terms upon which transcripts were offered to the
defendants. The majority, on the other hand, took a view which would bring about
equality in fact, requiring similar availability to all of criminal appeals in Griffin
case- 118 and counsel-attended criminal appeals in Douglas case9. To achieve this
result, the legislature had to resort to a proportional standard of equality. These
cases are remarkable in that they show that the kind of equality which is
considered important in the particular context and hence of the respect in which it
is necessary to treat people equally. 76
*
*
*
The surest way't to legal research!"
158. It is no doubt true that Article 16(1) provides for equality of opportunity
for all citizens in the services under the State. It is, however, well settled that the
doctrine contained in Article 16 is a hard and reeling reality, a concrete and
constructive concept and not a rigid rule or an empty formula. It is also equally
well-settled by several authorities of this Court
that Article 16 is merely an incident of Article 14, Article 14 being the genus is of
universal application whereas Article 16 is the species and seeks to obtain equality
of opportunity in the services under the State. The theory of reasonable classification
is implicit and inherent in the concept of equality for there can hardly be any country
where all the citizens would be equal in all respects. Equality of opportunity would
naturally mean a fair opportunity not only to one section or the other but to all
sections by removing the handicaps if a particular section of the society suffers from
the same. It has never been disputed in judicial pronouncements by this Court as
also of the various High Courts that Article 14 permits reasonable classification. But
what Article 14 or Article 16 forbid is hostile discrimination and not reasonable
classification. In other words, the idea of classification is implicit in the concept of
equality because equality means equality to all and not merely to the advanced and
educated sections of the society. It follows, therefore, that in order to provide
equality of opportunity to all citizens of our country, every class of citizens must
have a sense of equal participation in building up an legalitarian society, where there
is peace and plenty, where there is complete economic freedom and there is no
pestilence or poverty, no discrimination and oppression, where there is equal
opportunity to education, to work, to earn their livelihood so that the goal of social
justice is achieved.
*
*
*
230. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are castes and tribes specified by
the President under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution to be known as such
for the purposes of the Constitution. It is accepted that generally speaking these
castes and tribes are backward in educational and economic fields. It is claimed
that the expression "Scheduled Castes" does not refer to any caste of the Hindu
society but connotes a backward class of citizens. A look at Article 341 however
will show that the expression means a number of existing social castes listed in a
schedule; castes do not cease to be castes being put in a schedule though
backwardness has come to be associated with them. Article 46 requires the State
to promote the economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The special
reference to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes does not suggest
that the State should promote the economic interests of these castes and tribes
at the expense of other "weaker sections of the people". I do not find anything
reasonable in denying to some lower division clerks the same opportunity for
promotion as others have because they do not belong to a particular caste or
tribe. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes no doubt constitute a well-defined
class, but a classification valid for one purpose may not be so for another; in the
context of Article 16(1) the sub-class made by Rule 13-AA within the same class
of employees amounts to, in my opinion, discrimination only on grounds of race
and caste which is forbidden by clause (2) of Article 16.
231. All I have said above relates to the scope of Article 16(1) only, because
counsel for the appellant has built his case on this provision alone. Clause (4) of
Article 16 permits reservation of appointments on posts in favour of backward
classes of citizens notwithstanding Article 16(1); I agree with the views
expressed by Khanna, J. on Article 16(4) which comes in for consideration
incidentally in this case. The appalling poverty and backwardness of large sections
of the people must move the State machinery to do everything in its power to
better their condition but doling out unequal favours to members of the clerical
staff does not seem to be a step in that direction : tilting at the windmill taking it
to be a monster serves no useful purpose."
(emphasis supplied)
291. On the issue of economic criteria as an affirmative action under the
Constitution, there is no difference of opinion amongst us. My esteemed Brother
Bhat, J., in his dissenting judgment has beautifully observed that the economic
emancipation is a facet of economic justice which the Preamble as well as Articles 38
and 46, respectively, promise to all Indians. It is intrinsically linked with distributive
justice - ensuring a fair share of the material resources, and a share of the progress
of the society as a whole, to each individual. My esteemed Brother Bhat, J. has
rightly observed that the break from the past - which was rooted on elimination of
caste-based social discrimination, in affirmative action - to now include affirmative
action based on deprivation, through impugned Amendment, does not alter, destroy
or damage the basic structure of the Constitution. On the contrary, it adds a new
dimension to the constitutional project of uplifting the poorest segments of the
society.
292. The following is discernible from the aforesaid:
292.1. When substantive equality is the avowed constitutional mandate, the
292.2. The test for such reasonable classification is not necessarily, or much less
exclusively, the social backwardness test of Article 15(4) and Article 16(4),
respectively.
292.3. Article 16(4) [and Article 15(4)] provision is rooted as historical reasons of
exclusion from service. The provision was thus fulcrumed on the Constituent
Assembly's clear intent (expressed through Dr B.R. Ambedkar's speech) to redress
the specific wrong.
292.4. Indra Sawhney5 was limited to then existing Article 16 and construed the
meaning of "socially" backward classes for the purpose of Article 16(4).
292.5. Indra Sawhney5 was thus undertaking a "schematic interpretation" of
Article 16(4) [subsequently held equally applicable for Article 15(4)].
292.6. The special "schematic interpretation" based on the original intent
doctrine led to the amendment of the Constitution and introduction of Article
16(4-A) [77th Amendment], Article 16(4-B) [81st Amendment] and Article 15(5)
[91st Amendment] all of which have been upheld by this Court.
292.7. The recurring feature of such constitutional progression is Parliament's
freedom and liberty from the "original intent" doctrine. It is the same theme that
enables Parliament to constantly innovate and improvise to better attend to the
directive principles' mandate of Articles 38 and 46, respectively, or of the equality
code itself.
293. The march from the past is also discernible from the judicial approach. If
adequate representation in services of under-represented class was the sole purpose
of Article 16(4), any person from that class would be representative of that class.
When Indra Sawhney5 read the necessity of excluding Creamy Layer from the
"backward class" in Article 16(4) - it took note of the events 42 years post the
adoption of the Constitution. It is 30 years since the seminal judgment of Indra
Sawhney5. Time enough for Parliament to feel the necessity of attending to another
section of deprived classes.
294. Therefore, the 103rd Constitutional Amendment signifies Parliament's
intention to expand affirmative action to hitherto untouched groups-who suffer from
similar disadvantages as the OBCs competing for opportunities. If economic advance
can be accepted to negate certain social disadvantages for the OBCs [Creamy Layer
concept] the converse would be equally relevant. At least for considering the
competing disadvantages of Economically Weaker Sections. Economic capacity has
been upheld as a valid basis for classification by this Court in various other contexts.
It has also been implored to be considered as a relevant facet of the "Equality Code"
provisions. The 103rd Amendment offers a basis not frowned upon by Article 15(1)
or 16(2) for providing a population generic and caste/religion/community neutral
criteria. It also harmonises with the eventual constitutional goal of a casteless
society. Indra Sawhney5 holds that Chitralekha* 26 propounded occupation-cum-
means test can be a basis of social backwardness even for the purposes of Article 16
(4). Article 15(6)(b) Explanation defining "EWS" could be said to be fully compliant
with this norm.
The Constitution (103rd Amendment) Act, 2019
295. Let me now look into the Constitution (103rd Amendment) Act, 2019 which
came into effect on 14th of January, 2019 amending Articles 15 and 16,
respectively, of the Constitution by adding new clauses which empower the State to
provide a maximum of 10% reservation for the "weaker sections" (EWS) of citizens
other than the Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs) and Non-Creamy
Layer of the Other Backward Classes (OBCs-NCL).
296. The Constitution (124th Amendment) Bill, 2019 reads thus:
"THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-
fourth Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely-
'(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of Article 19 or clause
(2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making-
(a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5);
and
(b) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5)
insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational
institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided
by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in
clause (1) of Article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in addition to
the existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of the total
seats in each category.
Explanation.- the purposes of this article and Article 16, "economically
weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State from time to time
on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage."
3. In Article 16 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely-
'(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to
the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent of the posts in
each category.'"
297. The Statement of Objects and Reasons reads thus:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
At present, the economically weaker sections of citizens have largely remained
The surest way t legal research!"
excluded from attending the higher educational institutions and public
employment on account of their financial incapacity to compete with the persons
who are economically more privileged. The benefits of existing reservations under
clauses (4) and (5) of Article 15 and clause (4) of Article 16 are generally
unavailable to them unless they meet the specific criteria of social and
educational backwardness.
2. The directive principles of State policy contained in Article 46 of the
Constitution enjoin that the State shall promote with special care the educational
and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from
social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
3. Vide the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, clause (5) was
inserted in Article 15 of the Constitution which enables the State to make special
provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes
of citizens, or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to
their admission in higher educational institutions. Similarly, clause (4) of Article
16 of the Constitution enables the State to make special provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens
which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services
under the State.
4. However, economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the
benefit of reservation. With a view to fulfil the mandate of Article 46, and to
ensure that economically weaker sections of citizens to get a fair chance of
receiving higher education and participation in employment in the services of the
State, it has been decided to amend the Constitution of India.
5. Accordingly, the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Amendment)
Bill, 2019 provides for reservation for the economically weaker sections of society
in higher educational institutions, including private institutions whether aided or
unaided by the State other than the minority educational institutions referred to
in Article 30 of the Constitution and also provides for reservation for them in posts
in initial appointment in services under the State.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects."
298. Thus, from the Objects and Reasons as aforesaid it is evident that the entire
edifice of the impugned Amendment is to fulfil the mandate of Article 46 of the
Constitution. What was looked into by Parliament was the fact that the economically
weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the benefit of reservations. However,
with a view to fulfil the mandate of Article 46 and to ensure that economically
weaker sections of the citizens get a fair chance of being imparted higher education
and participation in employment in the services of the State, the Constitution (103rd
Amendment) Act was brought into force.
299. The reservation for the new category will be in addition to the existing
scheme of 15%, 7.50% and 27%, respectively, reservations for the SC, ST and OBC-
NCL, thus, bringing the total reservation to 59.50%. An "Explanation" appended to
Article 15 states that the EWS shall be such as may be notified by the State from
time to time based on the family income and other indicators of economic
disadvantage. In its Office Memorandum F. No. 20013/01/2018-BC-II dated 17-1-
2019, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India has
stipulated that only persons whose families have a gross annual income less than Rs
8 lakhs, or agricultural land less than 5 acres, or residential flat less than 1000 sq ft,
or residential plot less than 100 sq yd in the notified municipalities, or residential
plot less than 200 sq yd in the areas other than the notified municipalities, are to be
identified as EWS for the benefit of reservation.
300. What is exactly happening after the impugned Amendment? Or to put it in
other words, what is the effect of it?
300.1. The total reservation is now to the extent of 59.50%. The hue and cry is
that the same is in excess of the ceiling of 50% fixed by this Court in Indra
Sawhney5.
300.2. It excludes the Scheduled Castes (SCs), the Scheduled Tribes (STs) and
the Non-Creamy Layer of Other Backward Classes (OBCs-NCL). The hue and cry is
that the same has abridged the equality code. In other words, the exclusion is
violative of Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, of the Constitution.
300.3. Reservation of 10% of the vacancies among the open competition
candidates means exclusion of those above the demarcating line from those 10%
seats. In other words, the competition will now be within 40%. The hue and cry in
this regard is that it is not permissible to debar a citizen from being considered for
appointment to an office under the State solely on the basis of his income or
property-holding.
301. In the aforesaid context, by and large, all the learned counsel who argued
that the impugned judgment is unconstitutional strenuously urged before the
Constitution Bench to take the view that Article 46 of the Constitution could not
have been made the edifice for the impugned Amendment. It was vociferously
argued that Article 46 should be interpreted on the principle of ejusdem generis. To
put in other words, it was vociferously submitted that the words "weaker sections"
used in Article 46 should be read to mean only the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes.
302. Article 46 reads as under:
"46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.-The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation."
303. I found something very interesting to read in regard to Article 46 from the
decision of this Court in Shantistar Builders V. Narayan Khimalal Totame wherein a
528, paras 11-12)
"11.
"Weaker sections" have, however, not been defined either in the
Constitution or in the Act itself. An attempt was made in the Constituent
Assembly to provide a definition but was given up. Attempts have thereafter been
made from time to time to provide such definition but on account of controversies
which arise once the exercise is undertaken, there has been no success. A
suggestion for introducing economic criterion for explaining the term was made in
the approach to the Seventh Five Year Plan (1985-1990) brought out by the
Planning Commission and approved by the National Development Council and the
Union Government. A lot of controversy was raised in Parliament and the attempt
was dropped. In the absence of a definition perhaps a proper guideline could be
indicated but no serious attention has been devoted to this aspect.
12. Members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have ordinarily
been accepted as belonging to the weaker sections. Attempt to bring in the test
of economic means has often been tried but no guideline has been evolved.
Undoubtedly, apart from the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes, there would be millions of other citizens who would also belong to the
weaker sections. The Constitution-makers intended all citizens of India belonging
to the weaker sections to be benefited when Article 46 was incorporated in the
Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
304. I am of the view that the words "weaker sections" used in Article 46 cannot
be read to mean only the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes nor the same
can be interpreted on the principle of ejusdem generis, as argued. The expression
refers to all weaker sections and in particular the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes. Inasmuch as, if we confine the meaning of the expression "weaker
sections" only to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the likes, namely,
backward class, then it will expose the weaker sections of citizens, other than the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and backward class people to
exploitation without any protection from it. Sandro Galea, Dean and Robert A. Knox
Professor, Boston University School of Public Health has defined "Economic Justice"
as "a set of moral principles for building economic institutions, the ultimate goal of
which is to create an opportunity for each person to create a sufficient material
foundation upon which to have a dignified, productive, and creative life beyond
economics. Therefore, an economic justice argument focuses on the need to ensure
that everyone has access to the material resources that create opportunities, in order
to live a life unencumbered by pressing economic concerns." Social
welfare or welfare of the State is the onus of the State itself. Thus, Part IV has been
given the status and expression in the Constitution which lays down the
constitutional policy that the State must strive for, if the country is to develop as a
welfare State. The weaker section of the people is the lowliest class of people
(poorest of the poor), economically and educationally weak who have been given
constitutional protection. Their welfare is paramount as can be read from the
conjoint reading of Articles 21 and 46, respectively, of the Constitution.
305. Speaking of the constitutional position in this regard, this Court in N.M.
"126.
The Preamble to the Constitution silhouettes a "justice-oriented"
community. The directive principles of State policy, fundamental in the
governance of the country, enjoin on the State the promotion
with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections
of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, and protect them from social injustice.
To neglect this obligation is to play truant with Article 46. Undoubtedly, economic interests of a
group-as also social justice to it-are tied up with its place in the services under the State."
(emphasis supplied)
306. Article 21 encompasses the right to live with dignity. The right to live with
dignity is not an ordinary expression. It has serious meaning attached to it. In the
OnLine All para 13)
"13.
`24.
Our society is an amalgamation of various classes of people.
Some are wealthy. Some are not wealthy. Some lead life of penance with
pleasure. Some lead life of penance due to their fortune. Our Constitution
endorses welfare of all classes. ,121"
(emphasis supplied)
This is why Article 21 has been given wide connotation and expression by the courts,
particularly, by this Court to give effect to the constitutional policy of welfare State.
The decision of this Court in Unni Krishnan107 is an authority on this aspect where
the Court confirmed that right to education is implicit under Article 21 and
proceeded to identify the content and parameters of this right to be achieved by
Articles 41, 45, and 46, respectively, in relation to education. Understood in this
context, Article 46 gives not only solemn protection to the weaker sections of the
people on a par with the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes but speaks of
special care to be taken by the State of this section of people. Further, the
expression "educational and economic interests" in Article 46 concludes the whole
legal position in relation to Article 46 to
mean that the State must endeavour to do welfare especially of this section of
people. The endeavour of the State to give the weaker section of the people a life of
dignity is the link between Articles 46 and 21, respectively. The conjoint reading of
both the provisions puts constitutional obligation on the State to achieve the goal of
welfare of the weaker sections of the people by all means. Article 46 is not based on
social test but on the means test. It speaks of "educational and economic interests"
of "weaker sections". The expressions "weaker sections" and their "economic
interests" are correlative and denote the means status of the people who are to be
taken care of. Although, the phrase "economic interests" is not to be read alone but
in consonance with the expression "educational" used in Article 46; yet to confuse
Article 46 with the "social status" would be to put a strain and nullify otherwise the
pure object of Article 46. The distinction can be explained with the aid of Article 15
(4). Article 15(4) gives impetus to the social and educational "advancement" of
Backward Classes or the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It is an enabling
provision for the State to make special provisions for the socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
The emphasis here is on the upliftment of three constitutionally earmarked classes
i.e. Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes. However, Article 46
is wide in expression. The object of welfare under Article 46 is towards those
educationally and economically weak. In fact, this Court has laid down in M.R. Balaji
that : (AIR p. 664, para 36)
"36.
in taking executive action to implement the policy of Article 15(4), it is
necessary for the States to remember that the policy which is intended to be
implemented is the policy which has been declared by Article 46 and the
Preamble to the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
Reference in this context may also be made to Ashoka Kumar Thakur V. Union of
India2. [See : Atish Kumar V. Union of India 20, the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad, Lucknow Bench.]
307. Thus, it is evident from the aforesaid that there can be reservation for
certain weaker sections other than the SCs/STs and socially and educationally
backward classes. The impugned Amendment is meant for weaker sections of the
society who are economically weak and cannot afford to impart education to their
children or are unable to secure employment in the services of the State.
308. Thus, in view of my aforesaid discussion, I am not impressed with the
submission canvassed on behalf of the writ applicants that Article 46 of the
Constitution cannot be brought in aid to defend the constitutional validity of the
impugned Amendment.
Interpretation of the Constitution
309. There are certain important differences in the theory of interpretation of a
Constitution contrasted with the theory of interpretation of statutes. These
differences arise from the very nature and quality of a Constitution. It would be
pertinent over here to make a brief reference to these differences. Although the
validity of a statute can be assailed on the ground that it is ultra vires (beyond the
powers), yet the legislature which enacted it, the validity of the Constitution cannot
be assailed on any ground whatsoever.
310. The framing of the Constitution of a State is a capital political fact and not a
juridical act. No court or other authority in the State under the Constitution can,
therefore, determine the primordial question whether the Constitution has been
lawfully framed according to any standards. Even if a Constitution is framed under
violence, rebellion or coercion, it stands outside the whole area of law, jurisprudence
and justiciability. The basic principle of constitutional jurisprudence is that the
Constitution is the supreme law of the land, even supreme above the law and itself
governing all other laws. [Mukharji, The New Jurisprudence, p. 103.] But this
principle is not applicable to an amendment of the Constitution. The Constitution can
be amended only in accordance with the provisions thereof by the authority
empowered to do so in accordance with the procedure laid down therein. The validity
of a constitutional amendment can, therefore, be challenged on the ground that it is
ultra vires.
311. The interpretation of a Constitution involves more than a passing interest
concerning the actual litigants and being a pronouncement of the courts on the
Government and administration, has a more general and far-reaching consequence.
Marshall, C.J. of the American Supreme Court, therefore warned in McCulloch V.
Maryland1 "We must never forget that it is a Constitution we are expounding". The
policy of a particular State is more easily discernible and interpreted than the policy
of a Constitution, which is a charter for government and administration of a whole
nation and a country. It is that policy consideration which makes the statutory
interpretation different from the interpretation of the Constitution. [Mukharji, The
New Jurisprudence, p. 105.] More foresight in the nature of judicial statesmanship,
therefore, is required in interpreting a Constitution than in construing a statute. The
Constitution is not to be construed in any narrow pedantic sense [per Lord Wright in
James V. Commonwealth of Australia23 AC at p. 614] and a broad liberal spirit
should inspire those whose duty it is to interpret it, for a Constitution, which
provides for the government of a country, is a living and organic thing, which of all
instruments has the greatest claim to be construed ut res magis valeat quam pereat
(it is better for a thing to have effect than to be made void). [Per Gwyer, C.J. in
Central Provinces case24, FCR at p. 37.] But this does not mean that a court is free
to stretch or pervert the language of a Constitution in the interests
of any legal or constitutional theory, or even for the purpose of supplying omissions
or for the purpose of correcting supposed errors. [ibid]
312. If there is an apparent or real conflict between two provisions of the
Constitution, it is to be resolved by applying the principle of harmonious
construction. [Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, pp. 25-27 (Vol. I).] Since it is
impossible to make a clear-cut distinction between mutually exclusive legislative
powers, it is well settled that in case of conflict, Central law would prevail over State
law, for otherwise an absurd situation would arise if two inconsistent laws, each of
equal validity, could exist side by side within the same territory. [Salmond,
Jurisprudence, p. 32.]
313. Stone, J. of the American Supreme Court in United States V. Classic
expressed the important principle of constitutional interpretation in these terms :
"19.
in determining whether a provision of the Constitution applies to a new
subject-matter, it is of little significance that it is one with which the framers
were not familiar. For in setting up an enduring framework of government they
undertook to carry out for the indefinite future and in all the vicissitudes of the
changing affairs of men, those fundamental purposes which the instrument itself
discloses. Hence we read its words, not as we read legislative codes which are
subject to continuous revision with the changing course of events, but as the
revelation of the great purposes which were intended to be achieved by the
Constitution as a continuing instrument of government. Davidson V. New
Orleans126 Brown V. Walker127, US at p. 595, S Ct at p. 646; Robertson V.
Baldwin128 , US at pp. 281, 282, S Ct at pp. 328, 329. If we remember that "it is a
Constitution we are expounding", we cannot rightly prefer, of the possible
meanings of its words, that which will defeat rather than effectuate the
constitutional purpose."
314. This has been sometimes called as "flexible" or "progressive" interpretation
of
the Constitution which Dr Wynes refers to as the doctrine of "generic
interpretation".
315. The rules of the interpretation of the Constitution have to take into
consideration the problems of government, structure of a State, dynamism in
operation, caution about checks and balances, not ordinarily called for in the
interpretation of statutes. [Mukharji, The New Jurisprudence, p. 106.]
316. Although a Constitution is not to be fettered by the past history, yet it is
relevant for properly interpreting the Constitution. This Court accepted the logic that
the Indian Constitution was not written on a "blank slate" and because the
Government of India Act, 1935 provided the basic fabric for the
Indian Constitution, it was invoked to interpret the Constitution in the light of the
provisions of the Act. [M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. V. State of A.P. 129]
317. The principle of ejusdem generis, a rule of statutory interpretation, has been
applied to the Indian Constitution by this Court in State of W.B. V. Sk. Serajuddin
Batley130. The statutory rule of interpretation expressed "expression unius est exclusio
alterius" (the express mention of one person or thing is the exclusion of another) is
not strictly applicable to constitutional interpretation. [Mukharji, The New
Jurisprudence, p. 110.]
318. It is the fundamental principle of construction that there is always a
presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is
upon him who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the
Constitution vide Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R. Tendolkar31. [Reference : Law, Judges
and Justice by S.M.N. Raina, First Edn.]
para 124)
"124.
In the interpretation of a constitutional document, 'words are but the
framework of concepts and concepts may change more than words themselves'.
The significance of the change of the concepts themselves is vital and the
constitutional issues are not solved by a mere appeal to the meaning of the words
without an acceptance of the line of their growth. It is aptly said that 'the
intention of a Constitution is rather to outline principles than to engrave details'."
para 27)
"27. A constitutional document outlines only broad and general principles
meant to endure and be capable of flexible application to changing circumstances
- a distinction which differentiates a statute from a Charter under which all
statutes are made."
41, para 19)
"19. The Constitution is not an ephemeral legal document embodying a set of
legal rules for the passing hour. It sets out principles for an expanding future and
is intended to endure for ages to come and consequently to be adapted to the
various crises of human affairs. Therefore, a purposive rather than a strict literal
approach to the interpretation should be adopted. A constitutional provision must
be construed not in a narrow and constricted sense but in a wide and liberal
manner so as to anticipate and take account
of changing conditions and purposes so that a constitutional provision does not get
fossilised but remains flexible enough to meet the newly emerging problems and
challenges."
(emphasis supplied)
Doctrine of Basic Structure
"16.
'Amend as you may even the solemn document which the Founding
Fathers have committed to your care, for you know best the needs of your
generation. But, the Constitution is a precious heritage; therefore, you cannot
destroy its identity."
323. The Doctrine of Basic Structure includes general features of the broad
democracy, supremacy of the Constitution, rule of law, separation of powers, judicial
review, freedom and dignity of the individual, unity and integrity of the nation, free
and fair education, federalism and secularism. The Basic Structure Doctrine admits
to identify a philosophy upon which a Constitution is based. A Constitution stands on
certain fundamental principles which are its structural pillars and if those pillars are
demolished or damaged, the whole constitutional edifice may fall down. The
metaphor of a living Constitution is usually used in its interpretive meaning i.e. that
the language of the document should evolve through judicial decisions according to
the changing environment of society. A Constitution's amendment process provides
another mechanism for such evolution, as a "built-in provision for growth". Prima
facie, the view that a Constitution must develop over a period of time supports a
broad use of the amendment power. Nevertheless, even if we conceive of the
Constitution as a living tree, which must evolve with the nation's growth and
develop with its philosophical and cultural advancement, it has certain roots that
cannot be uprooted through the growth process. In other words, the metaphor of a
living tree captures the idea of certain constraints: "trees, after all, are rooted, in
ways that other living organisms are not". These roots are the basic principles of a
given Constitution. [Reference: "Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments : A
Study of the Nature and Limits of Constitutional Amendment Powers", Yaniv Roznai,
Thesis, February, 2014.]
324. In the words of Carl Friedrich, a German mathematician and physicist:
"A Constitution is a living system. But just as in a living, organic system, such
as the human body, various organs develop and decay, yet the basic structure or
pattern remains the same with each of the organs having its proper functions, so
also in a constitutional system the basic institutional pattern remains even though
the different component parts may undergo significant alterations. For it is the
characteristic of a system that it perishes when one of its essential component
parts is destroyed."
325. Therefore, it is not merely a matter of which principles are more
fundamental than the others. It is not an exercise of "ranging over the constitutional
scheme to pick out elements that might arguably be more fundamental in the
hierarchy of values", William Harris correctly claimed, adding that:"a constitutional
provision would be fundamental only in terms of some articulated political theory
that makes sense of the whole Constitution". The idea of a hierarchy of norms within
the foundational structuralism is to examine whether a constitutional principle or
institution is so basic to the constitutional order that changing it-and looking at the
whole Constitution-would be to change the entire constitutional identity.
326. Gary Jacobsohn, Professor of Constitutional and Comparative Law in the
Department of Government and Professor of Law at the University of Texas at Austin,
argues that constitutional identity is never a static thing, as it emerges from the
interplay of inevitably disharmonic elements. But changes to the constitutional
identity, "however significant, rarely culminate in a wholesale transformation of the
Constitution". This is because a nation usually aims to remain faithful to a "basic
structure", which comprises its constitutional identity. "It is changeable", Gary
writes, "but resistant to its own destruction".
327. Yaniv Roznai in his thesis referred to above, has referred to Water Murphy
who argues:
"Thus an "amendment" corrects or modifies the system without fundamentally
changing its nature : An "amendment" operates within the theoretical parameters
of the existing Constitution. A proposal to transform a central aspect of the
compact to create another kind of system - for example, to change a
constitutional democracy into an authoritarian State
- would not be an
amendment at all, but a re-creation of both the covenant and its people. That
deed would lie outside the authority of any set of governmental bodies, for all are
creatures of the people's agreement."
328. In other words, constitutional changes should not be tantamount to
constitutional metamorphosis. Conversely, one should not confuse constitutional
preservation with constitutional stagnation. As Joseph Raz writes:
"The law of the Constitution lies as much in the interpretive decisions of the
courts as in the original document that they interpret
But
it is the same
Constitution. It is still the Constitution adopted two hundred years ago, just as a
person who lives in an eighteenth-century house lives in a house built two
hundred years ago. His house had been repaired, added to, and changed many
times since. But it is still the same house and so is the Constitution. A person
may, of course, object to redecorating the house or to changing its windows,
saying that it would not be the same. In that sense it is true that an old
Constitution is not the same as a new Constitution, just as an old person is not
the same as the same person when young. Sameness in that sense is not the
sameness of identity It is the sameness of all the intrinsic properties of the
object. The point of my coda is to warn against
confusing change with loss of identity and against the spurious arguments it breeds.
Dispelling errors is all that a general theory of the Constitution can aspire to
achieve."
Standard of review
329. While considering the appropriate standards of review of the constitutional
amendments vis--vis unamendable principles, Yaniv Roznai has suggested three
different levels of standards:
1. Minimal Effect Standard
330. The first option is the Minimal Effect Standard. This is the most stringent
standard of the judicial review of amendments. According to this standard, any
violation or infringement of an unamendable principle is prohibited no matter how
severe the intensity of the infringement is, including amendments that have only a
minimal effect on the protected principles. On the one hand, one may claim that the
importance of the protected unamendable principles-as pillars of the Constitution-
necessitates the most stringent protection. If the aim of unamendability is to
provide for hermetic protection of a certain set of values or institutions, then any
violation of these principles ought to give rise to grounds for judicial intervention. On
the other hand, such a standard would not only bestow great power to the courts,
but also would place wide-perhaps too wide-restrictions on the ability to amend
the Constitution. The theory of unamendability should not be construed as a severe
barrier to change. It should be construed as a mechanism enabling constitutional
progress, permitting certain flexibility by allowing constitutional amendments, while
simultaneously shielding certain core features of the Constitution from amendment,
thereby preserving the constitutional identity.
2. Disproportionate Violation Standard
331. The intermediate standard of review is the Disproportionate Violation
Standard. It is an examination of the proportionality of the violation. The principle of
proportionality is nowadays becoming an almost universal doctrine in constitutional
adjudication. Proportionality generally requires that a violation of a constitutional
right has a "proper purpose"; that there is a rational connection between the
violation and that purpose; that the law is narrowly tailored to achieve that purpose;
and that the requirements of the proportionality stricto (balancing) test are met. A
disproportionate violation of a constitutional right would be considered
unconstitutional and thus void. This standard emphasises the balancing of
conflicting interests.
3. Fundamental Abandonment Standard
332. Fundamental Abandonment Standard is the lowest level of scrutiny.
According to this standard, only an extraordinary infringement of unamendable
principles, one that changes and "fundamentally abandons" them, would allow
judicial annulment of constitutional amendments. This seems to be the approach
taken by the German Constitutional Court.
333. One of the initial references to doctrine of basic features and its permanency
was in Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan38, observed (at AIR p. 864, para 57), that
the Constitution
"formulated a solemn and dignified Preamble which appears to be an epitome of the basic
features of the Constitution. Can it not be said that these are indicia of the intention of the
Constituent Assembly to give a permanency to the basic features of the Constitution?"
334. The doctrine actually came to be in the seminal case of Kesavananda
Bharati15, where the Supreme Court emphasising on the essence of the basic
structure held that "every provision of the Constitution can be amended provided in
the result the basic foundation and structure of the Constitution remains the same".
The concept of basic structure, as such gives coherence and durability to a
Constitution, for it has a certain intrinsic force in it.
335. Inspired by the Doctrine of Basic Structure enshrined in Articles 1 to 19 of
the German Constitution, 1949 ("the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of
Germany"), where these principles are based on the premise that democracy is not
only a parliamentary form of government but also is philosophy of life based on the
appreciation of the dignity, the value and the inalienable rights of each individual
human being; such as that of right to life and physical integrity; equality before law;
rights to personal honour and privacy; occupational freedom; inviolability of the
home; right to property and inheritance. The essence of basic rights could, under no
circumstance, be affected.
336. Article 20 of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany provides
that Germany is a Democratic and Social Federal State. State authority is derived
from the people through elections. All Germans have right to resist anyone seeking
to abolish the constitutional order, if no other remedy is available.
337. Article 79 of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany lays down
the procedure to amend the Basic Law by supplementing a particular provision or
expressly amending the same. However, amendments to the Basic Law affecting the
principles laid down in Articles 1 and 20 or affecting the division of federation i.e.
participation of Centre and State in the legislative process are inadmissible.
338. The provisions under the German Constitution deal with rights, which are
not mere values, rather, they are justiciable and capable of interpretation. Thus,
those values impose a positive duty on the State to ensure their attainment as far as
practicable. The State must facilitate the rights, liberties and freedoms of the
individuals.
339. In India, the Doctrine of Basic Structure is a judicial innovation, and it
continues to evolve via judicial pronouncements of this Court. The contours of the
expression have been looked into by the Court from time to time, and
several constitutional features have been identified as the basic structure of the
Constitution; but there is not an exhaustive definition or list of what constitutes the
"basic structure" of the Constitution - the Court decides from case to case if a
constitutional feature can be regarded as basic or not.
340. Kesavananda Bharati was heard by a Full Bench of this Court consisting of
13 Judges. A majority of Judges held that the view taken in Golak Nath V. State of
Punjab40 that the word "law" in Article 13 included a constitutional amendment,
could not be upheld. The said decision was, therefore, overruled. But the Court was
sharply split on the question whether the word "amendment" in Article 368 as it
stood before its amendment by the 24th Amendment included the power to alter the
basic feature or to repeal the Constitution itself.
341. Six Judges led by Sikri, C.J. were of the view that the Constitution could not
be amended so as to abrogate or emasculate the basic features of the Constitution
some of which were characterised by Sikri, C.J. as under : (Kesavananda Bharati
"292.
(1) Supremacy of the Constitution;
(2) Republican and Democratic forms of Government;
(3) Secular character of the Constitution;
(4) Separation of powers between the legislature, the executive and the
judiciary;
(5) Federal character of the Constitution."
(emphasis in original)
342. It was further held that fundamental rights could not be abrogated though
reasonable abridgment of fundamental rights could be affected in public interest.
According to this view, Parliament would be able to adjust fundamental rights in
order to secure what the directive principles directed to be accomplished while
maintaining the freedom and dignity of the citizens.
343. Khanna, J. took a more liberal view in regard to the power of amendment of
Parliament. He agreed with the abovementioned six Judges that the power of
amendment is not unlimited and made the following pertinent observations in para
"1426.
The word "amendment" postulates that the old Constitution survives
without loss of its identity despite the change and continues even though it has
been subjected to alternations.
The words "amendment of the Constitution"
with all their wide sweep and amplitude cannot have the effect of destroying or
abrogating the basic structure or framework of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
He was, however, of the view that subject to the retention of the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary and includes
within itself the power to amend the various articles of the
Constitution, including those relating to fundamental rights as well as those which
may be said to relate to essential features. He was also of the view that the right to
property does not pertain to basic structure or framework of the Constitution (vide
344. In short, the decision of the majority in Kesavananda Bharati case15 may be
stated as under:
344.1. Golak Nath case4 is overruled.
344.2. Article 368 does not enable Parliament to alter the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution.
344.3. The Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, is valid.
344.4. Sections 2(a) and 2(b) of the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act,
1971 is valid.
344.5. The first part of Section 3 of the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment)
Act, 1971, is valid. The second part, namely, "and no law containing a declaration
that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on
the ground that it does not give effect to such policy" is invalid.
344.6. The Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1971 is valid.
345. Other six Judges led by Ray, J. (as he then was) held that the power to
amend was wide and unlimited and included the power to add, alter or repeal any
provision of the Constitution. They, therefore, upheld all the Constitutional
Amendments.
346. Seven Judges against six thought that the basic structure of the
Constitution cannot be altered under the amending power although there was no
agreement among themselves about the meaning and content of the so-called basic
structure.
:
AIR p. 1565)
"475.
(c) The expression "amendment of this Constitution" does not enable
Parliament to abrogate or take away fundamental rights or to completely change
the fundamental features of the Constitution so as to destroy its identity. Within
these limits Parliament can amend every article."
348. Shelat and Grover, JJ., said on the scope of amending power under Article
10)
"608.
(2)(b) though the power to amend cannot be narrowly construed and
extends to all the articles it is not unlimited so as to include the power to
abrogate or change the identity of the Constitution or its basic features;"
349. Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ., expressed the same opinion. They said :
"744. (3) Though the power to amend the Constitution under Article 368 is a
very wide power, it does not yet include the power to destroy or emasculate the
basic elements or the fundamental features of the Constitution."
350. Reddy, J. was of the same opinion. Khanna, J. held that the amending
power of Parliament is very wide under Article 368, but he also imposed certain
limitations on the amending power in the name of basic structure of the
1860)
"1426.
it is permissible under the power of amendment to effect changes,
howsoever important, and to adapt the system to the requirements of changing
conditions, it is not permissible to touch the foundation or to alter the basic
institutional pattern. The words "amendment of the Constitution" with all their
wide sweep and amplitude cannot have the effect of destroying or abrogating the
basic structure or framework of the Constitution."
1903-04)
"1537.
(vii)
Subject to the retention of the basic structure or framework of
the Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary and includes within itself
the power to amend the various articles of the Constitution. The power of
amendment would also include within itself the power to add, alter or repeal the
various articles."
351. Thus, it is very clear that the sense in which Khanna, J., uses the expression
"basic structure or framework of the Constitution" is very different from the sense in
which six Judges led by Sikri, C.J., use the expression "essential features or basic
features" of the Constitution. Fundamental rights can be abrogated by the use of the
amending power according to Khanna, J., but not so according to six Judges led by
Sikri, C.J.
352. Ray, J. rejected the idea of any implied limitations on the amending power
and thought that the power to amend is wide and unlimited. He said that :
"1064.
There can be or is no distinction between essential and inessential
features of the Constitution to raise any impediment to amendment of alleged
essential features."
353. The aforesaid opinion was also shared by Palekar, Mathew, Beg, Dwivedi and
Chandrachud, JJ.
354. Thus, if Kesavananda Bharati1 is to be read closely and carefully, it says
that there are no limitations on the exercise of Article 368 (which is a constituent
power), yet it is subject to the "Basic Structure Doctrine". The origin of the "Doctrine
of Basic Features" lies in the fear of an apprehension of constitutional collapse, and
anxiety which is exceptional in the life of a Constitution. The "Basic Structure
Doctrine" was meant for special use in times when constitutional amendments
threatened the fundamental structure of the Constitution. The special stature
anticipates a careful use of the doctrine so as to ensure that its unique place is
preserved. Vital as the doctrine was, even more important was to exercise some
restraint and to ensure its meaningful use. The "Basic Structure Doctrine" has been
taken recourse to over and over again with little concern about its restrained use.
Professor Satya Prateek, former Assistant Professor, O.P. Jindal Global University, in
one of his essays titled "Today's Promise, Tomorrow's Constitution: "Basic Structure",
Constitutional Transformations and the Future of Political Progress in India" has very
rightly stated that the doctrine has been extensively used in affecting policy
decisions and its indifferent use is the root cause of the resentment that has brewed
against it. Over a period of time, it has been used less for constitutional gatekeeping
in times of crisis and more for decisively influencing the course which State policy
might take in future. The repeated use of the Doctrine of Basic Structure may impair
the doctrine itself and it is likely that the idea of constitutional essentialism might
not get the respect it deserves from the political institutions. Prof. Satya Prateek has
beautifully explained stating that the "Basic Structure Doctrine" is indeed special, it
is a powerful tool we have for constitutional preservation but its special character as
well as its authority is severely threatened in a culture of unresponsive use.
355. According to the widely accepted principles of constitutional interpretation,
the provisions of a Constitution should be construed in the widest possible manner.
Constitutional law is the basic law. It is meant for people of different opinions. It
should be workable by people of different ideologies and at different times. Since it
provides a framework for the organisation and working of a State in a society which
keeps on changing, it is couched in elastic terms and, therefore, it has to be
interpreted broadly. No generation has a right to bind the future generations by its
own beliefs and values. Each generation has to choose for itself the ways of life and
social organisation. Constitution should be so adaptable that each generation may be
able to make use of it to realise its aspirations and ideals. An amending clause is
specifically provided to adapt the Constitution according to the needs of the society
and the times. In view of this, no implied limitation can be imposed on the
amending power. To do so would be to defeat the very purpose of it. The
Constitution-makers had before them the Constitutions of the United States,
Australia, Canada, Ireland, South Africa and Germany which they were constantly
referring to while discussing and drafting the amending provisions. In all these
Constitutions the word "amendment" is used in the widest possible sense. Therefore,
our Constitution-makers may be
presumed to have used this word in the same broad sense in the absence of any
express limitations. [B.N. Rau, Table of Amending Process, Constitutional
Precedents, 1st Series (1947) cf. Hari Chand, Amending Process in the Indian
Constitution 96 (1972).]
356. Dwivedi, J., in Kesavananda Bharati said about the scope of amending
"1890. Article 368 is shaped by the philosophy that every generation should be
free to adapt the Constitution to the social, economic and political conditions of its
time. Most of the Constitution-makers were freedom-fighters. It is difficult to
believe that those who had fought for freedom to change the social and political
organisation of their time would deny the identical freedom to their descendants
to change the social, economic and political organisation of their times. The denial
of power to make radical changes in the Constitution to the future generation
would invite the danger of extraordinary constitutional changes of the
Constitution. 'The State without the means of some change is without means of
its conservation. Without such means it might even risk the loss of that part of
the Constitution which it wished the most religiously to preserve. ,134 "
357. The whole Constitution is basic law. It is not easy to distinguish which part
is more basic than the other as there is no objective test to distinguish. [Ray, J., in
1682 & 1684.] Since, there are no objective criteria to distinguish, there are bound
to be subjective preferences and choices in deciding what constitutes this so-called
basic structure. Even, if it were possible to distinguish essential features from non-
essential features, it is not possible to assert that the essential features are
at
pp.
874-75, AIR SC at p. 1947.] Judging from past history one may doubt if any feature
of law and society is unchangeable. What was considered fundamental by one
society at one time was abandoned later as an outmoded impediment.
358. Fundamental rights, no doubt, are very important and constitute the
bedrock of civilisation. But society keeps on changing with the changes in the socio-
economic conditions. The limits of these rights may need constant re-definition.
Even their essential content may undergo a radical transformation. To enable
necessary adjustments in the legal relationships and to bring them in harmony with
social realities, an amending power is provided in all Constitutions. The easier the
mode of amendment, the more flexible the Constitution is. In the absence of some
amending provision, a Constitution will fail to contain the social changes and is
bound to break down. It is
a necessary safety valve to allow radical changes through constitutional processes. If
the necessary changes cannot be brought through constitutional means, revolution
becomes a necessity. Thus, an unlimited amending power and a simple procedure of
amendment is an effective means to bring about social revolution through law. The
British Constitution offers a very good example of a flexible Constitution with an
easy procedure of simple majority vote to bring about any changes in law including
constitutional law. Perhaps, this aspect of constitutional law and strong democratic
traditions in Britain prompted even Marx to say that probably Britain is the only
country where revolution may be brought about through peaceful and democratic
means. [Friedrich Engels (ed.) Karl Marx, Capital, 1952. 50 Britannic Great Book
Series.] Thus, to have wide amending power and easy procedure of amendment is
not to undervalue fundamental rights, nor is it an invitation to abolish them but is a
means to preserve them through necessary adaptations in harmony with the
changed social realities. Stability of fundamental rights lies not in the absence of
legal power to remove them but in the social and political support for them.
[Reference: "Phantom of Basic Structure of the Constitution", Source : Journal of the
Indian Law Institute, April-June 1974, Vol. 16.]
359. Mr N. Palkhivala has summed up the effect of the majority judgment in his
book titled Our Constitution Defaced and Defiled in the following words:
"Parliament cannot, in the exercise of its amending power, alter the basic
structure or framework of the Constitution. For instance, it cannot abolish the
sovereignty of India or the free democratic character of the republic; nor can it
impair the integrity and unity of India or abolish the States. (The principle that
the basic structure or framework of the Constitution cannot be altered gives a
wider scope to the amending power than the principle that none of the essential
features of the Constitution can be damaged or destroyed.) The Court's
jurisdiction cannot be ousted as is sought to be done by Article 31-C. If the
Court's jurisdiction were housted, any of the States could pass laws which might
lead to the dismemberment of India."
(emphasis supplied)
360. Thus, Kesavananda Bharati15 struck a balance between the rights of the
individuals and the powers of the State to curtail those rights. It found a suitable via
media between the two rival philosophies-one favouring the complete sanctity of
fundamental rights while the other supporting the complete flexibility of the
Constitution. [Reference : Law, Judges and Justice - by S.M.N. Raina, J.].
361. In Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj Narain the Court, expanding the scope of
the basic structure, held that there were four unamendable features which formed
"664. (i) India is a sovereign democratic republic; (ii) Equality of status and
opportunity shall be secured to all its citizens; (iii) The
State shall have no religion of its own and all persons shall be equally entitled to
freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion
and that (iv) The nation shall be governed by a government of laws, not of men."
These, according to them, were "the pillars of our constitutional philosophy, the
pillars, therefore, of the basic structure of the Constitution".
362. The Court in Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj Narain34 also noted that the
principle of free and fair elections is an essential postulate of democracy, and which,
in turn, is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. That democracy was an
essential feature forming part of the basic structure. In this case, the Court struck
down clause (4) of Article 329-A which provided for special provision as to elections
to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker, on the ground that it
damaged the democratic structure of the Constitution. That the said clause (4) had
taken away the power of judicial review of the courts as it abolished the forum
without providing for another forum for going into the dispute relating to the validity
of election of the Prime Minister. It extinguished the right and the remedy to
challenge the validity of such an election. The complaints of improprieties,
malpractices and unfair means have to be dealt with as the principle of free and fair
elections in a democracy is a basic feature of the Constitution, and thus, clause (4)
was declared to be impermissible piece of constitutional amendment.
3 However, the Court in this case also observed that : (Indira Nehru Gandhi
"357.
The concept of a basic structure as brooding omnipresence in the sky
apart from the specific provisions of the Constitution, is too vague and indefinite
to provide a yardstick to determine the validity of an ordinary law."
364. In Minerva Mills19 discussing the standard to be applied to what qualifies as
"82.
the features or elements which constitute the basic structure or
framework of the Constitution or which, if damaged or destroyed, would rob the
Constitution of its identity so that it would cease to be the existing Constitution
but would become a different Constitution.
Therefore, in every case where the
question arises as to whether a particular feature of the Constitution is a part of
its basic structure, it would have to be determined on a consideration of various
factors such as the place of the particular feature in the scheme of the
Constitution, its object and purpose and the consequence of its denial on the
integrity of the Constitution as a fundamental instrument of country's
governance
(emphasis supplied)
Fundamental rights occupy a unique place in the lives of civilised societies and
have been variously described in our judgments as "transcendental", "inalienable"
and "primordial".
they constitute the ark of the Constitution".
*
*
*
To destroy the guarantees given by Part III in order purportedly to achieve
the goals of Part IV is plainly to subvert the Constitution by destroying its basic
structure.
365. In S.R. Bommai V. Union of India35 expanding the list of basic features,
this Court held that secularism was an essential feature of the Constitution and part
of its basic structure. In this case, this Court explained the concept of basic
structure of the Constitution, while dealing with the issue of exercise of the power by
the Central Government under Article 356 of the Constitution.
366. In M. Nagaraj2, the Constitution Bench of this Court dealing with the issue
"26.
axioms like secularism, democracy, reasonableness, social justice, etc.
are overarching principles which provide linking factor for principles of
fundamental rights like Articles 14, 19 and 21. These principles are beyond the
amending power of Parliament. They pervade all enacted laws and they stand at
the pinnacle of the hierarchy of constitutional values."
Such rights have to be respected and cannot be taken away.
367. The framers of the Constitution have built a wall around the fundamental
rights, which has to remain forever, limiting the ability of the majority to intrude
upon them. That wall is a part of basic structure. [See : I.R. Coelho V. State of
T.N.136; See also Kesavananda Bharati15.]
368. Thus,
"25. For a constitutional principle to qualify as an essential feature, it must be
established that the said principle is a part of the constitutional law binding on
the legislature. Only thereafter, the second step to be taken, namely, whether the
principle is so fundamental as to bind even the amending power of Parliament i.e.
369. When an issue is raised regarding the basic structure, the question does
arise as to whether the amendment alters the structure of the constitutional
provisions:
"103. The criterion for determining the validity of a law is the competence of
the law-making authority. The competence of the law-making authority would
depend on the ambit of the legislative power, and the limitations imposed thereon
p. 269, para 103]
370. The aforesaid structure is built on the basic foundation i.e. the dignity and
freedom of the individual. This is of supreme importance. This cannot be destroyed
by any form of amendment. Parliament cannot expand its power of amendment
under Article 368 so as to confer on itself the power to repeal, abrogate the
Constitution or damage, emasculate or destroy any of the fundamental rights or
essential elements of the basic structure of the Constitution or of destroying the
identity of the Constitution.
371. In I.R. Coelho6, a nine-Judge Bench of this Court laid down the concrete
138)
"124. Since power to amend the Constitution is not unlimited, if changes
brought about by amendments destroy the identity of the Constitution, such
amendments would be void.
*
*
*
138.
every improper enhancement of its own power by Parliament, be it
clause (4) of Article 329-A or clauses (4) and (5) of Article 368 or Section 4 of the
42nd Amendment have been held to be incompatible with the Doctrine of Basic
Structure as they introduced new elements which altered the identity of the
Constitution or deleted the existing elements from the Constitution by which the
very core of the Constitution is discarded."
(emphasis supplied)
372. Articles 14, 19 and 21, respectively, represent the fundamental values and
form the basis of rule of law, which is a basic feature of the Constitution. For
instance, Parliament, in exercise of its amending power under Article 368, can make
additions in the three legislative lists contained in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution, but it cannot abrogate all the lists as that would abrogate the federal
structure, which is one of the basic features of the Constitution.
373. To qualify to be a basic structure it must be a "terrestrial concept having its
habitat within the four corners of the Constitution". What constitutes basic structure
is not like "a twinkling star up above the Constitution". It does not consist of any
abstract ideals to be found outside the provisions of the Constitution. The Preamble
no doubt enumerates great concepts embodying the ideological aspirations of the
people but these concepts are particularised and their essential features delineated
in the various provisions of the Constitution.
It is these specific provisions in the body of the Constitution which determine the
type of democracy which the founders of that instrument established; the quality
and nature of justice, political, social and economic which they aimed to realise, the
content of liberty of thought and expression which they entrenched in that document
and the scope of equality of status and of opportunity which they enshrined in it.
These specific provisions enacted in the Constitution alone can determine the basic
structure of the Constitution. These specific provisions, either separately or in
combination, determine the content of the great concepts set out in the Preamble. It
is impossible to spin out any concrete concept of basic structure out of the gossamer
concepts set out in the Preamble. The specific provisions of the Constitution form the
yarn from which the basic structure has to be woven.
374. In Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union of India this Court
held that there are declared limitations on the amending power conferred on
Parliament which cannot be breached. Breach of a single provision of the
Constitution is sufficient to render the entire legislation ultra vires the Constitution.
The Court held that the basic structure of the Constitution includes supremacy of the
Constitution, the republican and democratic form of Government, the federal
character of distribution of powers, secularism, separation of powers between the
Legislatures, Executive and the Judiciary, and independence of the Judiciary.
375. In Kuldip Nayar V. Union of this Court, while dealing with the
para 452)
"452. Parliamentary democracy and multi-party system are an inherent part of
the basic structure of the Indian Constitution. It is the political parties that set up
candidates at an election who are predominantly elected as Members of the State
Legislatures."
Further, the Court, placing reliance on Kesavananda Bharati15 observed that :
"381. .6 a Parliamentary Democracy like ours functions on the basis of
the party system. The mechanics of operation of the party system as well as the
system of Cabinet Government are such that the people as a whole can have little
control in the matter of detailed
(emphasis in original)
376. In Kihoto Hollohan V. Zachillhu49 the Court felt that the existence of the
Tenth Schedule to the Constitution further strengthens the importance of the
political parties in our democratic set-up. Rejecting the argument that the political
party is not a democratic entirety, and that Whip issued under the Tenth Schedule is
unconstitutional, the Court reiterated that Parliament was empowered to provide
that the Members are expected to act in accordance
with the ideologies of their respective political parties and not against it. Thus,
"Basic" means the base of a thing on which it stands and on the failure of which it
falls. Hence, the essence of the "basic structure of the Constitution" lies in such of
its features, which if amended would amend the very identity of the Constitution
itself, ceasing its current existence. It, as noted above is, not a "vague concept" or
"abstract ideals found to be outside the provisions of the Constitution". Therefore,
the meaning/extent of "basic structure" needs to be construed in view of the specific
provision(s) under consideration, its object and purpose, and the consequences of its
denial on the integrity of the Constitution as a fundamental instrument of
governance of the country. [Reference : Paras 108 to 114, Paras 135 to 150 from -
Doctrine of Basic Structure : Contours by Dr Justice B.S. Chauhan, former Judge,
Supreme Court of India; dated 16-9-2018.]
377. In the case on hand, the entire debate on the constitutional validity of the
103rd Constitution Amendment has proceeded on the Doctrine of Basic Structure. If
there is one decision of this Court which explains the Doctrine of Basic Structure and
its reach and effects in the most lucid and simple manner, the same is Glanrock
Estate (P) Ltd. V. State of T.N. 138 In the said case, a Bench of three Judges
examined the constitutional validity of the Constitution (34th Amendment) Act,
1974 by which the Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into
Ryotwari) Act, 1969 stood inserted in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution as Item
80. It was argued on behalf of the petitioner therein that the inclusion of the
Janmam Act in the Ninth Schedule amounted to direct negation and abrogation of
judicial review. It was argued that the Constitution (34th Amendment) Act, 1974
destroyed the basic feature of the Constitution, namely, judicial review.
378. S.H. Kapadia, C.J., speaking for the Bench, in Glanrock Estate138 , has
explained certain concepts like the egalitarian equality, overarching principles and
reading of Article 21 with Article 14.
379. The learned Judge explained that in applying the above three principles, one
has to go by the degree of abrogation as well as the degree of elevation of an
ordinary principle of equality to the level of overarching principles. The learned
Judge reminded that the case was not one wherein the challenge was to any
ordinary law of the land. The Court said that the challenge was to the constitutional
amendment. In a rigid Constitution (Article 368) power to amend the Constitution is
a derivative power, which is an aspect of the constituent power.
380. In the case on hand also, the challenge is to the exercise of derivative power
of Parliament in the matter of the 103rd Constitution Amendment. Since the power
to amend the Constitution is a derivative power, the exercise of such power to
amend the Constitution is subject to two limitations, namely, the Doctrine of Basic
Structure and lack of legislative competence. The Doctrine of Basic Structure is
brought in as a window to keep the power of judicial review intact as abrogation of
such a power would result in violation of basic
structure. When we speak of discrimination or arbitrary classification, the same
constitutes violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. This Court laid stress to keep in
mind that the distinction between constitutional law and ordinary law in a rigid
Constitution like ours. The said distinction proceeds on the assumption that ordinary
law can be challenged on the touchstone of the Constitution. Therefore, when an
ordinary law seeks to make a classification without any rational basis and without
any nexus with the object sought to be achieved, such ordinary law could be
challenged on the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution. However, when it
comes to the validity of a constitutional amendment, one has to examine the validity
of such amendment by asking the question as to whether such an amendment
violates any overarching principle in the Constitution. What is overarching principle?
Concepts like secularism, democracy, separation of powers, power of judicial review
fall outside the scope of amendatory powers of Parliament under Article 368. If any
of these were to be deleted, it would require changes to be made not only in Part III
of the Constitution but also in Article 245 and the three Lists of the Constitution
resulting in the change of the very structure or framework of the Constitution. When
an impugned Act creates a classification without any rational basis and having no
nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the principle of equality before law is
violated undoubtedly. Such an Act can be declared to be violative of Article 14. Such
a violation does not require rewriting of the Constitution. This would be a case of
violation of ordinary principle of equality before law. Similarly, "egalitarian equality"
is a much wider concept. It is an overarching principle. The term "egalitarianism"
has distinct definition that all people should be treated as equal and have the same
political, economic, social and civil rights or have a social philosophy advocating the
removal of economic inequalities among the people, economic egalitarianism or the
decentralisation of power.
381. For the purpose of explaining "egalitarian equality" as an overarching
principle, this Court in Glanrock Estate138 gave an illustration of the acquisition of
"26.
This would be a case of violation of ordinary principle of equality before
law.
27. Similarly, "egalitarian equality" is a much wider concept. It is an
overarching principle. Take the case of acquisition of forests. Forests in India are
an important part of environment. They constitute national asset. In various
judgments of this Court delivered by the Forest Bench of this Court in T.N.
Godavarman Thirumulpad V. Union of India (Writ Petition No. 202 of 1995), it has
been held that "inter-generational equity" is part of Article 21 of the Constitution.
28. What is inter-generational equity? The present generation is answerable to
the next generation by giving to the next generation a good environment. We are
answerable to the next generation and if deforestation takes place rampantly then
inter-generational equity would stand violated.
29. The doctrine of sustainable development also forms part of Article 21 of the
Constitution. The "precautionary principle" and the "polluter pays principle" flow
from the core value in Article 21.
30. The important point to be noted is that in this case we are concerned with
vesting of forests in the State. When we talk about inter-generational equity and
sustainable development, we are elevating an ordinary principle of equality to the
level of overarching principle. Equality doctrine has various facets. It is in this
sense that in I.R. Coelho case this Court has read Article 21 with Article 14.
The above example indicates that when it comes to preservation of forests as well
as environment vis--vis development, one has to look at the constitutional
amendment not from the point of view of formal equality or equality enshrined in
Article 14 but on a much wider platform of an egalitarian equality which includes
the concept of "inclusive growth". It is in that sense that this Court has used the
expression Article 21 read with Article 14 in I.R. Coelho case. Therefore, it is
only that breach of the principle of equality which is of the character of destroying
the basic framework of the Constitution which will not be protected by Article 31-
B. If every breach of Article 14, however, egregious, is held to be unprotected by
Article 31-B, there would be no purpose in protection by Article 31-B.
31. The question can be looked at from yet another angle. Can Parliament
increase its amending power by amendment of Article 368 so as to confer on itself
the unlimited power of amendment and destroy and damage the fundamentals of
the Constitution? The answer is obvious. Article 368 does not vest such a power in
Parliament. It cannot lift all limitations/restrictions placed on the amending power
or free the amending power from all limitations. This is the effect of the decision
in Kesavananda Bharati15.
382. This Court, in the aforesaid context, said that the point to be noted,
therefore, is that when constitutional law is challenged, one has to apply the "effect
test" to find out the degree of abrogation. This is the "degree test" which has been
referred to earlier. If one finds that the constitutional amendment seeks to abrogate
core values/overarching principles like secularism, egalitarian equality, etc. and
which would warrant rewriting of the Constitution, then such constitutional law
would certainly violate the basic structure. In other words, such overarching
principles would fall outside the amendatory power under Article 368 in the sense
that the said power cannot be exercised even by Parliament to abrogate such
overarching principles. The Court proceeded to quote the observations made by
Mathew, J. in Indira Nehru Gandhi34 that equality is a feature of rule of law and not
vice-versa. The expression "rule of law" describes a society in which the Government
must act in accordance with
law. A society governed by law is the foundation of personal liberty. It is also the
foundation of economic development since investment will not take place in a
country where rights are not respected. The Court said that it is in that sense that
the expression "Rule of Law" constitutes an overarching principle embodied in Article
21, one aspect of which is equality.
383. As stated above, the amending power under Article 368 of the Constitution
is a derivative power. The Doctrine of Basic Structure provides a touchstone on
which the validity of the Constitutional Amendment Act could be judged. While
applying this doctrine, one need not go by the content of a "right" but by the test of
justifiability under which one has to see the scope and the object of the
Constitutional Amendment. The doctrine of classification under Article 14 has several
facets. Equality is a comparative concept. This Court proceeded to observe
37)
"37.
A person is treated unequally only if that person is treated worse than
others, and those others (the comparison group) must be those who are "similarly
situated" to the complainant."
(emphasis supplied)
384. The pivotal or seminal question that falls for my consideration is whether the
"similarly situated test" is attracted in the present case so as to say that the
egalitarian equality as an overarching principle is violated and has thereby rendered
clause (6) of Article 15 and clause (6) of Article 16 invalid as they exclude the SCs,
STs and OBCs.
385. In Glanrock Estate38, K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan, J., concurring with S.H.
Kapadia, C.J., thought fit to supplement the reasonings by his separate order.
"79. Right to equality before law, right to equality of opportunity in matters of
public employment, right to protection of life and personal liberty, right against
exploitation, right to freedom of religion, etc. are all fundamental rights
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution and a common thread running
through all the articles in Part III of the Constitution have a common identity
committed to an overarching principle which is the basic structure of the
Constitution. Rule of law is often said as closely interrelated principle and when
interpreted as a principle of law, it envisages separation of powers, judicial
review, restriction on the absolute and arbitrary powers, equality, liberty, etc.
Separation of powers is an integral part of rule of law which guarantees
independence of judiciary which is a fundamental principle viewed as a safeguard
against arbitrary exercise of powers, legislative and constitutional.
80. Doctrine of absolute or unqualified parliamentary sovereignty is antithesis
to rule of law. Doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty may, at times, make rule of
law and separation of powers subservient to the wish of the majority in
Parliament. Parliamentary supremacy cannot be held
unqualified so as to undo the basic structure. Basic structure doctrine is, in effect, a
constitutional limitation against parliamentary autocracy. Let us, however, be clear
that the principles of equality inherent in the rule of law do not averse to the
imposition of special burdens, grant special benefits and privileges to secure to all
citizens justice, social and economic, and for implementing the directive principles of
State policy for establishing an legalitarian society."
(emphasis supplied)
386. Thus, the word "amendment" postulates that the old Constitution survives
without loss of its identity despite the change and continues even though it has
been subjected to alteration. As a result of the amendment, the old Constitution
cannot be destroyed and done away with; it is retained though in the amended
form. What then is meant by the retention of the old Constitution? It means the
retention of the basic structure or framework of the Constitution. Although it is
permissible under the power of amendment to effect changes, howsoever important,
and to adapt the system to the requirements of changing conditions, yet it is not
permissible to touch the foundation or to alter the basic institutional pattern. The
words "amendment of the Constitution" with all their wide sweep and amplitude
cannot have the effect of destroying or abrogating the basic structure or framework
of the Constitution. It would not be competent under the garb of amendment, for
instance, to change the democratic government into dictatorship or hereditary
monarchy, nor would it be permissible to abolish the Lok Sabha and the Rajya
Sabha.
387. H.R. Khanna, J. in one of his lectures delivered at the Delhi Study Group in
New Delhi, stated something which is worth taking note of:
"Criticism has been levelled against the concept of basic structure that it
creates uncertainty in a vital matter like the power to amend the Constitution. It
is urged that unless that concept is put in precise cut and dry form, those
amending the Constitution would always remain uncertain whether the
constitutional amendment, even though passed by the requisite majority, would
be upheld by the courts. In this respect it may be stated that the majority
decision of this Court in Kesavananda Bharati case- contains sufficient indication
by giving illustrations as to what would constitute basic structure of the
Constitution. It is never desirable in constitutional matters to put either the
provisions or basic propositions in cut and dry form, nor is it proper in such
matters to try to be exhaustive for once you do that you forget a vital fact of life
that in human affairs there can arise a variety of situations and that it is beyond
any human ingenuity to pierce through the visage of time and to contrive for all
types of contingencies. It is for that reason that the provision of a Constitution are
couched in general terms because that fact gives the provisions flexibility, helps
them to grow and enables them to adapt themselves to new situations. Rigidity is
one thing which the provisions of a Constitution must shun for such rigidity can
result in the breakdown of the Constitution in situations
where what is needed is resilience and flexibility rather than brittleness and rigidity.
Absence of formal exactitude or want of fixity of meaning is not unusual or even
regrettable attribute of constitutional provision. Nor is it desirable in such matters to
freeze a concept at some fixed stage of thought or time. The US Constitution was
framed about 200 years ago. It was designed for a country which at that time was
primarily agricultural and consisted of a small number of States. The fact that the
said Constitution has stood the test of time and has proved effective for the most
industrialised country consisting of a very large number of States is primarily due to
the fact that the provisions of its Constitution are couched in general language. As
mentioned by a great master the generalities of US Constitution have helped it to
grow and adapt its provisions to the varying situations. Although one can never
prevent the challenge to any provision, however immaculately drafted, there can be
not much doubt about the validity of most of the provisions."
(emphasis supplied)
388. Thus, what is important from the aforesaid is that it is never desirable in
constitutional matters to put either the provisions or basic propositions in cut and
dry form nor is it proper in such matters to try to be exhaustive for once you do that
you forget a vital fact of life that in human affairs there can arise a variety of
situations and that it is beyond any human ingenuity to pierce through the visage of
time and to contrive for all types of contingencies. The amending power cannot be
construed in a narrow and pedantic manner. It cannot be said that no part of Part III
can be abridged. What is violative of the basic structure is the withdrawal of the
props on which the edifice stands, will alter the identity of the Constitution. [See :
Kesavananda Bharati15. ] Only if a right is so abridged that it tends to affect the basic
structure or essential content of the right and reduces the right only to a name, will
be abridgment or ceases to be an abridgment.
The surest way t legal research!"
389. If the economic criteria based on the economic indicator which distinguishes
between one individual and another is relevant for the purpose of classification and
grant of benefit of reservation under clause (6) of Article 15 as held by my esteemed
Brother Bhat, J. then merely because the SCs/STs/OBCs are excluded from the
same, by itself, will not make the classification arbitrary and the amendment
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution. This is where with all humility at
my command I beg to differ with my esteemed Brother Bhat, J. for whom I have
utmost and profound respect.
390. Article 14 has two clear facets which are invalid. One is overclassification
and the other is underclassification, which is otherwise, overinclusiveness or
underinclusiveness. The judicial review of overclassification should be undertaken
very strictly. In the cases of underclassification when the complaint is either by
those who are left out or those who are in i.e. that the statute has roped him in, but
a similarly situated person has been left out, it would be underinclusiveness. It is to
say that you ought to have brought him in to make the classification reasonable. It
is in such
cases that the courts have said that "who should be brought in" should be left to the
wisdom of the legislature because it is essentially a stage where there should be an
element of practicability. Therefore, the cases of under-inclusion can be reviewed in
a little liberal manner. The under-inclusion argument should not be very readily
accepted by the courts because the stage could be experimental. For instance, in the
case on hand, the argument in the context of the 103rd Constitution Amendment is
that SCs, STs and OBCs have been left out, the Court would say that it is
underinclusiveness. The legislature does not have to bring any and everybody to
make it reasonable. The case on hand is not one of active exclusion. The SCs, STs
and OBCs who have been left out at the first instance are telling the Court that they
ought to have been included. In such circumstances, the test would be very strict,
not that it would be impervious to review. Had they been included in clause (6) of
Article 15 and clause (6) of Article 16, respectively, at any point of time and
thereafter, excluded, it would be legitimate for them to argue that having treated
them as one, they cannot be excluded in an arbitrary manner.
391. This Court in State of Gujarat V. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. 89 has explained the
paras 54-56)
"54. A reasonable classification is one which includes all who are similarly
situated and none who are not. The question then is : what does the phrase
"similarly situated" mean? The answer to the question is that we must look
beyond the classification to the purpose of the law. A reasonable classification is
one which includes all persons who are similarly situated with respect to the
purpose of the law. The purpose of a law may be either the elimination of a public
mischief or the achievement of some positive public good.
55. A classification is under-inclusive when all who are included in the class are
tainted with the mischief but there are others also tainted whom the classification
does not include. In other words, a classification is bad as under-inclusive when a
State benefits or burdens persons in a manner that furthers a legitimate purpose
but does not confer the same benefit or place the same burden on others who are
similarly situated. A classification is over-inclusive when it includes not only those
who are similarly situated with respect to the purpose but others who are not so
situated as well. In other words, this type of classification imposes a burden upon
a wider range of individuals than are included in the class of those attended with
mischief at which the law aims. Herod ordering the death of all male children born
on a particular day because one of them would some day bring about his downfall
employed such a classification.
56. The first question, therefore, is, whether the exclusion of establishments
carrying on business or trade and employing less than 50 persons makes the
classification under-inclusive, when it is seen that all factories employing 10 or 20
persons, as the case may be, have been
included and that the purpose of the law is to get in unpaid accumulations for the
welfare of the labour. Since the classification does not include all who are similarly
situated with respect to the purpose of the law, the classification might appear, at
first blush, to be unreasonable. But the Court has recognised the very real difficulties
under which legislatures operate-difficulties arising out of both the nature of the
legislative process and of the society which legislation attempts perennially to re-
shape-and it has refused to strike down indiscriminately all legislation embodying
classificatory inequality here under consideration. Mr Holmes, J. in urging tolerance
of under-inclusive classifications, stated that such legislation should not be
disturbed by the Court unless it can clearly see that there is no fair reason for the
law which would not require with equal force its extension to those whom it leaves
untouched.
What, then, are the fair reasons for non-extension? What should a
court do when it is faced with a law making an under-inclusive classification in areas
relating to economic and tax matters? Should it, by its judgment, force the
legislature to choose between inaction or perfection?"
(emphasis supplied)
392. Ambica Mills89 justified overinclusiveness on the grounds of recognition of
degrees of harm, administrative convenience, and legislative experimentation.
Reference was made to Oliver Wendell Holmes, J.'s observation in Missouri, Kansas &
56)
"56.
legislation should not be disturbed by the Court unless it can clearly see
that there is no fair reason for the law which would not require with equal force its
extension to those whom it leaves untouched",
to state that the judiciary must exercise self-restraint in such cases.
393. The equality code in Article 14 of the Indian Constitution prescribes
substantive and not formal equality. It is now a settled position that classification
per se is not discriminatory and violative of Article 14. Article 14 only forbids class
&
legislation and not reasonable classification. A classification is reasonable, when the
following twin tests as laid down by S.R. Das, J., in State of W.B. V. Anwar Ali
Sarkar140 , are fulfilled:
393.1. The classification must be based on an intelligible differentia which
distinguishes persons or things that are grouped, from others left out of the group.
393.2. The differentia must have a rational relationship to the object sought to be
achieved by the statute.
394. Das, J. in Anwar Ali Sarkar140 held that there must be some yardstick to
differentiate the class included and the others excluded from the group. The
differentia used for the classification in the amendment is to promote or uplift the
economically weaker sections of citizens who are otherwise not covered
under Article 15(4) and Article 16(4) of the Constitution. This is keeping in mind the
directive principles of State policy as embodied under Article 46 of the Constitution.
Therefore, there is a yardstick used for constituting the class for the purpose of the
amendment. To put it in other words, the insertion of the economically weaker
sections is perfectly valid as a class for the extension of special provision for their
advancement for admission and for reservation in posts.
395. The broad egalitarian principle of social and economic justice for all is
implicit in every directive principle and, therefore, a law designed to promote a
directive principle, even if it comes into conflict with the formalistic and doctrinaire
of equality before the law, would most certainly advance the broader egalitarian
principles and desirable constitutional goal of social and economic justice for all.
141
[See : Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. V. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
396. Article 14 of the Constitution of India corresponds to the last portion of
Section 1 of the 14th Amendment of the American Constitution, except that our
Article 14 has also adopted the English doctrine of rule of law by the addition of the
words "equality before the law". However, the addition of these extra words does not
make any substantial difference in its practical application. The, meaning, scope and
effect of Article 14 of the Constitution of India have been discussed and laid down by
this Court in Charanjit Lal Chowdhury V. Union of India42
397. It could be said that this Court in S. Seshachalam V. Bar Council of T.N. 143
has taken the view that the reasonable classification to prevent double benefits
paras 28-29)
"28. The various welfare fund schemes are in actuality intended for the benefit
of those who are in the greatest need of them. The lawyers, straight after their
enrolment, who join the legal profession with high hopes and expectations and
dedicate their whole lives to the professions are the real deservers. Lawyers who
enrol themselves after their retirement from government services and continue to
receive pension and other terminal benefits, who basically join this field in search
of greener pastures in the evening of their lives cannot and should not be equated
with those who have devoted their whole lives to the profession. For these retired
persons, some amount of financial stability is ensured in view of the pension and
terminal benefits and making them eligible for lump sum welfare fund under the
Act would actually amount to double benefits. Therefore, in our considered view,
the classification of lawyers into these two categories is a reasonable classification
having a nexus with the object of the Act.
29. Furthermore, it is also to be noted that in view of their being placed
differently than the class of lawyers who chose this profession as the sole
means of their livelihood, it can reasonably be discerned that the retired persons
form a separate class. As noticed earlier, the object of the Act is to provide for the
constitution of a welfare fund for the benefit of advocates on cessation of practice. As
per Section 3(2)(d) any grant made by the Government to the welfare fund is one of
the sources of the Advocates" Welfare Fund. The retired employees are already in
receipt of pension from the Government or other employer and to make them get
another retiral benefit from the Advocates' Welfare Fund would amount to double
benefit and they are rightly excluded from the benefit of the lump sum amount of
the welfare fund."
(emphasis in original and supplied)
398. One of the arguments of Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior
Counsel who appeared for the petitioner in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 73 of 2019 that
has appealed to me is that the SC/ST/OBCs received political reservation as well as
under the Constitution and there are no ceiling limits to the extent of reservation
which each of the groups can receive. On the other hand, the EWS reservation is
kept at 10% and is not extended to the political reservation, thereby providing a
balance. Indisputably, the exclusion in Articles 15(6) and 16(6), respectively, from
the benefits of EWS measures is only of the "classes mentioned" in Articles 15(4),
15(5) and 16(4) of the Constitution. The contention that the exclusion of these
groups is discriminatory overlooks the fact that by exclusion of the creamy layer, the
lower economic strata of the SC/ST and OBCs are already represented in the classes
covered by Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4), respectively. The sketch below would
make it more clear:
EWS
CONCENTRIC CIRCLES
SEBC/OBC
SC/ST
Definition
Special Provisions
Definition
Definition
SC -366(24).
15(4).15(5).
15(6)(b)
366(26-C)
ST 366(25)
16(4-A).16(4-B).
Special
243-D(4).243-T(4)
Special Provision
Provisions
Explanation
330,332
15(4). 15(5). 16(4).
15(6).) 16(6)
Identification
Commission
SC-341,ST-342
SC-338,ST-338-A
Identification
Commission
342-A
338-B
KEY
Social & Educational
Backwardness
Political Backwardness
Economic Backmardness
Commission ?
399. Let me go back to Kathi Raning Rawat95 I have referred to Kathi Raning
Rawat95 in para 237 of my judgment. Let me reiterate the observations made in
Kathi Raning Rawat95 which I have incorporated in para 237. I quote once again :
"9. All legislative differentiation is not necessarily discriminatory. In fact, the
word "discrimination" does not occur in Article 14. The expression "discriminate
against" is used in Article 15(1) and Article 16(2), and it means, according to
Oxford Dictionary, "to make an adverse distinction with regard to; to distinguish
unfavourably from others". Discrimination thus involves an element of
unfavourable bias and it is in that sense that the expression has to be understood
in this context. If such bias is disclosed and is based on any of the grounds
mentioned in Articles 15 and 16, it may well be that the statute will, without
more, incur condemnation as violating a specific constitutional prohibition unless
it is saved by one or other of the provisos to those articles. But the position under
Article 14 is different."
400. Article 15, just like Article 16, is a facet of the right to equality. That right as
interpreted in the context of Article 14 is not the right to uniform or identical
treatment. It is a right to be treated equally among equals. Unequal treatment of
equals is as much violation of that right as equal treatment of unequals. Every
difference of treatment is not inconsistent with that right just as every identical
treatment is not consistent with it. For determining the consistency of such
treatment with the right to equality from time to time different tests such as
reasonable classification, suspect classification, or classification lying in between the
two, etc. have been devised and applied. But they have not always been able to
provide satisfactory explanation, particularly when it comes to affirmative action or
positive equality. An all-comprehensive and satisfactory test in this regard has been
provided by Ronald Dworkin, an American philosopher and scholar of the United
States Constitutional Law, in his distinction between the right to equal treatment
and the right to treatment as an equal. According to Ronald Dworkin, the latter is
the fundamental right, while the former is only a derivative right. The right to
treatment as an equal consists in equal respect and concern, while the right to equal
treatment consists in identical treatment. But identical treatment is neither possible
nor consistent with the right to equality. Therefore, what the right to equality
requires is equal concern. As long as that concern exists, the difference of treatment
is consistent with the right to equality. Not every difference of treatment is per se
inconsistent with the right to equality. Only that difference of treatment which is
based on lack of equal concern is inconsistent with that right. To illustrate, different
treatment on the basis of race, religion or caste is not, in itself, bad so long as equal
concern or respect is shown to every race, religion or caste. It becomes vulnerable
only when it is based on disrespect, contempt or prejudice to a race, religion or
caste. Article 15 prohibits only such and not every difference of treatment based on
religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. This
is very much obvious from the expression "discriminate against" in Article 15 of the
Constitution. The State is not prohibited from treating people differently on the basis
of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth; it is prohibited from discriminating
against them on these grounds. Discrimination results only when religion, race,
caste, sex or place of birth or any of them is made the basis of disrespect, contempt
or prejudice for difference in treatment. In other words, if difference in treatment on
any of these grounds is not based on any disrespect, contempt or prejudice, it is not
discriminatory and, therefore, not against Article 15(1). The same is true for Article
29(2).
401. Articles 15(1) and 29(2), respectively, while thus prohibiting discrimination
or prejudicial or contemptuous difference of treatment on the grounds mentioned in
those Articles, Article 15(4) sanctions "special provisions for the advancement of any
socially and educationally backward classes or for the Scheduled Castes and
the
Scheduled Tribes". Could it be said or argued that any provision for the
advancement of any socially and educationally backward class or for SCs and STs
can be termed or characterised as the one based on any prejudice, contempt or
insult to any forward class? If the answer is in the negative, then why any provision
for the advancement of any economically weaker section of the society excluding
SCs and STs should be termed or characterised as the one based on any prejudice,
contempt or insult to any backward class? The aforesaid would equally apply to
Article 16 of the Constitution. [Reference : Are Articles 15(4) and 16(4)
Fundamental Rights?94a by Prof. Mahendra P. Singh, Professor of Law, Delhi
University.]
para 9)
"9. All legislative differentiation is not necessarily discriminatory. In fact, the
word "discrimination" does not occur in Article 14. The expression "discriminate
against" is used in Article 15(1) and Article 16(2), and it means, according to
Oxford Dictionary, "to make an adverse distinction with regard to; to distinguish
unfavourably from others". Discrimination thus involves an element of
unfavourable bias and it is in that sense that the expression has to be understood
in this context. If such bias is disclosed and is based on any of the grounds
mentioned in Articles 15 and 16, it may well be that the statute will, without
more, incur condemnation as violating a specific constitutional prohibition unless
it is saved by one or other of the provisos to those articles. But the position under
Article 14 is different. Equal protection claims under that article are examined
with the presumption that the State action is reasonable and justified. This
presumption of constitutionality stems from the wide power of classification which
the legislature must, of necessity, possess in making laws operating differently as
regards different groups of persons in order to give effect to its policies."
403. Fazal Ali, J. in his concurring judgment in Kathi Raning Rawat95 explained
"20. I think that a distinction should be drawn between "discrimination without
reason" and "discrimination with reason". The whole doctrine of classification is
based on this distinction and on the well-known fact that the circumstances which
govern one set of persons or objects, may not necessarily be the same as those
governing another set of persons or objects, so that the question of unequal
treatment does not really arise as between persons governed by different
conditions and different sets of circumstances."
404. In State of M.P. V. Narmada Bachao Andolan144 this Court observed quoting
"73. Discrimination means an unjust, an unfair action in favour of one and
against another. It involves an element of intentional and purposeful
differentiation and further an element of unfavourable bias; an unfair
classification. Discrimination under Article 14 of the Constitution must be
conscious and not accidental discrimination that arises from oversight which the
State is ready to rectify. [Vide Kathi Raning Rawat V. State of Saurashtra95, and
Video Electronics (P) Ltd. V. State of Punjab145 ]"
405. Let me also refer to a speech of the President of the Supreme Court of the
United States on "Equality and Human Rights", Oxford Equality Lecture 2018, Lady
Hale dated 29-10-2018. The speech starts stating:
"Equality sounds a simple concept but the reality is very complicated. Is it
about where you start - with equal opportunities - or where you end up - with
equal outcomes - or something in between - like a level playing field?"
406. Let me now refer to some relevant parts of the speech:
"There must be other people in an 'analogous situation" or 'similarly situated'
who are treated more favourably than the complainant. In ordinary discrimination
cases, now under the Equality Act, 2010, the equivalent requirement, that the
circumstances of the comparator must be the same or not materially different
from those of the complainant, can generate a lot of argument. How different is
different? I usually give the illustration of Shamoon V. Chief Constable of the
Royal Ulster Constabulary146 the House of Lords held that the situation of a senior
female police officer was not the same as the situation of male officers who had
been treated more favourably, because there had been complaints against
her from subordinates and not against them. This begs the question of whether the
complaints themselves stemmed from discriminatory attitudes towards senior police
officers. A better illustration now might be Hewage V. Grampian Health Board
147
where an Asian female consultant in orthodontics complained of bullying and
harassment by her managers and the more favourable treatment given to White
male consultants who'd made similar complaints. The Health Board tried hard to
argue that their situations were different because of minor differences between them
- but we did not agree.
These arguments arise because under the Equality Act it is not generally a
defence to direct discrimination that the difference in treatment is justified. It is
tempting, therefore, where a court or tribunal thinks that there might have been a
justification to find that the cases are not the same. This is not a problem under
Article 14 where both direct and indirect discrimination can be justified if it is a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. So the approach to
comparability ought to be more relaxed, as indeed it is. As Lord Nicholls put it in
R (Carson) V. Secy. of State for Work & Pensions148 AC para 3 : (AC p. 179)
'3.
the essential question for the court is whether the alleged
discrimination, that is, the difference in treatment of which complaint is made,
can withstand scrutiny. Sometimes the answer to this question will be plain.
There may be such an obvious, relevant difference between the claimant and
those with whom he seeks to compare himself that their situations cannot be
regarded as analogous. Sometimes, where the position is not so clear, a
different approach is called for. Then the court's scrutiny may best be directed
at considering whether the differentiation has a legitimate aim and whether the
means chosen to achieve the aim is appropriate and not disproportionate in its
adverse impact."
Thus in most cases it comes down to justification. There is a link here with
status. Discrimination on some grounds is more difficult to justify than
discrimination on others. In R (RJM) V. Secy. of State for Work & Pensions149
Lord
Walker produced the illuminating idea that personal characteristics are 'more like
a series of concentric circles' (AC para 5). The inner circle is innate, largely
immutable, and closely connected with personality : gender, sexual orientation,
colour, race, disability. Next come nationality, language, religion and politics,
which may be innate or acquired, but are all-important to personality and reflect
important values protected by the European Convention. Outside those are
acquired characteristics, more concerned with what people do or with what
happens to them than with who they are, such as military status, residence, or
past employment. He put street homelessness into that category:` 'The more
peripheral or debateable any suggested personal characteristic is, the less likely it is
to come within the most sensitive area where discrimination is particularly difficult
to justify.' (AC para 5). So denying disability premium to street homeless was
justified. Strasbourg has also put immigration status into this category (Bah V.
United Kingdom 50.
But there is also a link with the subject-matter. Discrimination in some areas is
easier-much easier-to justify than in others. Generally speaking, we address
justification in four questions : is there a legitimate aim; is there a rational
connection between the means and the aim; could the aim be achieved by
measure which would intrude less upon the fundamental right in question; and
The surest wayt legal research!"
has a fair balance been struck between the end and the means? But the test to be
applied in striking that balance does differ according to the subject-matter.
This brings me to the most fraught area of all - welfare benefits. Welfare
benefits do more than try to ensure a level playing field on which all start equal
and then make of life what they can. Welfare benefits are trying to do something
to redress inequality of results : to lift people out of absolute poverty; to redress
some of the disadvantage suffered by children growing up in poverty; to make
reasonable adjustments to cater for disability. They are not of course trying to
achieve absolute equality - just to prevent the worst effects of gross socio-
economic inequalities."
(emphasis supplied)
407. Keeping in view the aforesaid, let me now refer to some of the observations
121 & 373)
"114. A survey of the conclusions reached by the learned Judges in
Kesavananda Bharati case clearly shows that the power of amendment was very
wide and even the fundamental rights could be amended or altered. It is also
important to note that the decision in Berubari Union (1), In re151 to the effect
that the Preamble to the Constitution was not part of the Constitution was
disapproved in Kesavananda Bharati case15 and it was held that it is a part of the
Constitution and the Preamble to the Constitution is of extreme importance and
the Constitution should be read and interpreted in the light of the grand and
noble visions envisaged in the Preamble. A close analysis of the opinions in
Kesavananda Bharati case15 shows that all the provisions of the Constitution,
including the fundamental rights, could be amended or altered and the only
limitation placed is that the basic structure of the Constitution shall not be
altered. The judgment in Kesavananda Bharati case 15 clearly indicates what is the
basic structure
of the Constitution. It is not any single idea or principle like equality or any other
constitutional principles that are subject to variation, but the principles of equality
cannot be completely taken away so as to leave the citizens in this country in a state
of lawlessness. But the facets of the principle of equality could always be altered
especially to carry out the directive principles of State policy envisaged in Part IV of
the Constitution.
115. The basic structure of the Constitution is to be taken as a larger principle
on which the Constitution itself is framed and some of the illustrations given as to
what constitutes the basic structure of the Constitution would show that they are
not confined to the alteration or modification of any of the fundamental rights
alone or any of the provisions of the Constitution. Of course, if any of the basic
rights enshrined in the Constitution are completely taken out, it may be argued
that it amounts to alteration of the basic structure of the Constitution. For
example, the federal character of the Constitution is considered to be the basic
structure of the Constitution. There are large number of provisions in the
Constitution dealing with the federal character of the Constitution. If any one of
the provisions is altered or modified, that does not amount to the alteration of the
basic structure of the Constitution. Various fundamental rights are given in the
Constitution dealing with various aspects of human life. The Constitution itself
sets out principles for an expanding future and is obligated to endure for future
ages to come and consequently it has to be adapted to the various changes that
may take place in human affairs.
116.
as regards constitutional amendments, if any challenge is made on the
basis of basic structure, it has to be examined based on the basic features of the
Constitution.
117. It may be noticed that the majority in Kesavananda Bharati case did not
hold that all facets of Article 14 or any of the fundamental rights would form part
of the basic structure of the Constitution.
118. Equality is a multicoloured concept incapable of a single definition as is
also the fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g). The principle of equality is a
delicate, vulnerable and supremely precious concept for our society. It is true that
it
has embraced a critical and essential component of constitutional identity. The
larger principles of equality as stated in Articles 14, 15 and 16 may be understood
as an element of the "basic structure" of the Constitution and may not be subject
to amendment, although, these provisions, intended to configure these rights in a
particular way, may be changed within the constraints of the broader principle.
The variability of changing conditions may necessitate the modifications in the
structure and design of these rights, but the transient characters of formal
arrangements must reflect the larger purpose and principles that are the
continuous and unalterable thread of constitutional identity. It is not the
introduction of significant and far-reaching change that is objectionable,
rather it is the content of this change insofar as it implicates the question of
constitutional identity.
119. The observations made by Mathew, J. in Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj
Narain34 are significant in this regard*:
`83.
"341.
To be a basic structure it must be a terrestrial concept
having its habitat within the four corners of the Constitution." (Indira Nehru
*
*
*
What constitutes basic structure is not like "a twinkling star up above the
Constitution". It does not consist of any abstract ideals to be found outside the
provisions of the Constitution. The Preamble no doubt enumerates great concepts
embodying the ideological aspirations of the people but these concepts are
particularised and their essential features delineated in the various provisions of
the Constitution. It is these specific provisions in the body of the Constitution
which determine the type of democracy which the founders of that instrument
established; the quality and nature of justice, political, social and economic which
they aimed to realise, the content of liberty of thought and expression which they
entrenched in that document and the scope of equality of status and of
opportunity which they enshrined in it. These specific provisions enacted in the
Constitution alone can determine the basic structure of the Constitution. These
specific provisions, either separately or in combination, determine the content of
the great concepts set out in the Preamble. It is impossible to spin out any
concrete concept of basic structure out of the gossamer concepts set out in the
Preamble. The specific provisions of the Constitution are the stuff from which the
*
*
*
121. It has been held in many decisions that when a constitutional provision is
interpreted, the cardinal rule is to look to the Preamble to the Constitution as the
guiding star and the directive principles of State policy as the "book of
interpretation". The Preamble embodies the hopes and aspirations of the people
and directive principles set out the proximate grounds in the governance of this
country.
*
*
*
373. Affirmative action is employed to eliminate substantive social and
economic inequality by providing opportunities to those who may not otherwise
gain admission or employment. Articles 14, 15 and 16
allow for affirmative action. To promote Article 14 egalitarian equality, the State may
classify citizens into groups, giving preferential treatment to one over another. When
it classifies, the State must keep those who are unequal out of the same batch to
achieve constitutional goal of egalitarian society."
(emphasis supplied)
408. I am of the view as Prof. Satya Prateek rightly puts that the enabling
provisions, varying enforcement mechanisms and the State opinion on
backwardness, reservation, adequate representation, etc. in any circumstances
cannot be recognised as the fundamental or basic structure of the Constitution. By
their very nature, they are bound to change, with time, location and circumstances.
On the other hand, the fundamental tenets or the core principles of the Constitution
are foundational - they are at the core of its existence. They are seminal to the
Constitution's functioning. The Constitution retains its existence on these
foundations as they preserve the Constitution in its essence. This is not to mark out
the possibilities of structural adjustments in the foundations with time. The
foundations may shift, fundamental values may assume a different meaning with
time but they would still remain to be integral to the constitutional core of
principles, the core on which the Constitution would be legitimately sustained.
[Reference : Virendra Kumar, "Basic Structure of the Indian Constitution : Doctrine
of Constitutionally Controlled Governance", 49 : 3, Journal of the Indian Law
Institute, 365, 385 (2007).]
409. Prof. Virendra Kumar believes that there is a difference between the
fundamental rights and the values that structure such fundamental rights. He views
the values to have an overarching influence and says that it is totally possible to
hold that violation of the fundamental rights in certain situations, may not infringe
the fundamental values in their backdrop. (Reference Essay by Satya Prateek.)
410. The ad hoc policies of the State directed towards achieving a larger,
fundamental standard of equality, cannot by itself become fundamental.
Fundamental would only be the principle and not the way these principles are
sought to be realised. Such mechanisms which facilitate "equality of opportunity in
public employment" as guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution are ad hoc
arrangements. They could be suitably modified with passage of time or even be done
away with for a more suitable, convenient and efficient reservation policy, largely
dependent on the State's own understanding of the best way to pursue the
constitutional ends.
411. This Court in Ajit Singh (2) V. State of Punjab152 (five-Judge Bench) after
quoting with approval the law laid down in its previous judgments in M.R. Balaji6
and C.A. Rajendran V. Union of India 53 ruled that there is no duty on the
Government to provide reservation. The Court held that both Articles 16(4) and 16(4
-A), respectively, do not confer any fundamental rights nor do they impose any
constitutional duties but are only in the nature of enabling provision vesting a
discretion in the State to consider providing reservation if the circumstances
mentioned in those articles so warranted.
412. Each one of these constitutional provisions that are categorised as rights
under Part III has intrinsic value content. Many of these rights are a part of the
mechanism geared towards realising a common constitutional principle. For
example, Articles 14, 15 and 16, respectively, of the Constitution are committed to
the common principle of equality. Reasonably then, if an amendment is to be struck
down under the "basic structure" formulation, the central principle of these
interrelated provisions should be at threat. A mere violation of one of these enabling
provisions would not be of much consequence under the Doctrine of Basic Structure
as long as such violation does not infringe upon the central thesis of equality.
Redress for marginal encroachment cannot be found under the "Basic Structure
Doctrine". In considering the effect of an amendment on the constitutional core, it is
important to keep in mind the widest ramifications of the amendment. It is
imperative to contemplate and consider every way in which the "basic structure" of
the Constitution might be threatened through the impugned Amendment. The
amendment would stand as constitutional only after a satisfactory understanding as
to its effect on the constitutional core is reached by the courts. To sustain itself, the
amendment should not violate such core in the widest interpretation given to it.
(Reference : Prof. Satya Prateek's essay.)
413. The new concept of economic criteria introduced by the impugned
Amendment for affirmative action may go a long way in eradicating caste-based
reservation. It may be perceived as a first step in the process of doing away with
caste-based reservation. In the words of Nani A. Palkhivala:
The basic structure of the Constitution envisages a cohesive, unified,
casteless society. By breathing new life into casteism the judgment (Mandal-Indra
Sawhney5) fractures the nation and disregards the basic structure of the
Constitution. The decision would revitalise casteism, cleave the nation into two -
forward and backward - and open up new vistas for internecine conflicts and
fissiparous forces, and make backwardness a vested interest. It will undo
whatever has been achieved since Independence towards creating a unified,
integrated nation. The majority judgment (Mandal) will revive casteism
which
the Constitution emphatically intended to end; and the pre-Independence
tragedy would be re-enacted with the roles reversed - the erstwhile
underprivileged would now become the privileged
"
414. Baba Saheb Ambedkar recognised fraternity as a necessary principle for the
survival of Indian democracy. He defined fraternity as the "common brotherhood of
all Indians". In his revolutionary, yet undelivered speech titled "Annihilation of
Caste", he described fraternity as the "essential attitude of respect and reverence
towards fellowmen".
415. Let me remind one and all of what this Court observed almost five decades
"29.
But all the same the Government should not proceed on the basis that
once a class is considered as a backward class it should continue to be backward
class for all times. Such an approach would defeat the very purpose of the
reservation because once a class reaches a stage of progress which some modern
writers call as take off stage then competition is necessary for their future
progress. The Government should always keep under review the question of
reservation of seats and only the classes which are really socially and
educationally backward should be allowed to have the benefit of reservation.
Reservation of seats should not be allowed to become a vested interest."
(emphasis supplied)
416. Thus, reservation is not an end but a means - a means to secure social and
economic justice. Reservation should not be allowed to become a vested interest.
Real solution, however, lies in eliminating the causes that have led to the social,
educational and economic backwardness of the weaker sections of the community.
This exercise of eliminating the causes started immediately after Independence i.e.
almost seven decades back and it still continues. The long-standing development
and the spread of education have resulted in tapering the gap between the classes
to a considerable extent. As larger percentages of backward class members attain
acceptable standards of education and employment, they should be removed from
the backward categories so that the attention can be paid toward those classes
which genuinely need help. In such circumstances, it is very much necessary to take
into review the method of identification and the ways of determination of backward
classes, and also, ascertain whether the criteria adopted or applied for the
classification of backward is relevant for today's conditions. The idea of Baba Saheb
Ambedkar was to bring social harmony by introducing reservation for only ten years.
However, it has continued past seven decades. Reservation should not continue for
an indefinite period of time so as to become a vested interest.
417. In the result, I hold that the impugned Amendment is valid and in no
manner alters the basic structure of the Constitution.
418. I am of the view that all the petitions challenging the impugned
Amendment should fail.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J. (for Lalit, C.J. and himself, dissenting) -
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SI.
Heading
Page
No.
Nos.
I.
Context and history of reservations
277
II.
Dealing with the basic structure
281
A.
Important cases on the doctrine
281
B.
Test for determining basic structure
284
III.
Re : Question 3 : Analysing the exclusionary clause "other than"
291
and whether it offends the basic structure
A.
Historical analysis of the Equality Code
292
(i)
Article 15
292
(ii)
Article 16
295
(iii)
Article 17
296
(iv)
Other provisions in the Constitution
300
B.
Content of Equality Code
300
C.
Equality Code is a part of the basic structure
302
D.
Impact/effect of the phrase "other than" in the impugned
309
Amendment
(i)
Test of reasonable classification
309
(ii)
Individual - as the beneficiary
314
(iii)
Violation of the basic structure
316
IV.
IV. Re : Question 1 : Permissibility of special provisions
317
(including reservation) based on economic criteria
A.
Judicial observations on economic criteria
317
B.
State's obligations under Directive Principles to fulfil
320
mandate of substantive equality
C.
Flexibility of constitutional amendments to enable
321
substantive equality
D.
Purpose that the amendment seeks to achieve through
323
introduction of economic criteria
E.
Conclusion on permissibility of economic criteria per se
325
V.
Consideration of Article 16(6)
325
VI.
Re : Question 2 : Special provisions based on economic criteria,
327
in relation to admission to private unaided institutions
VII.
Addressing other related challenges to, and justifications of the
330
impugned Amendment
A.
Possibility of reading down the exclusion
330
B.
Absence of "guardrails" to deny economic criteria per se
331
C.
Basic structure doctrine as a discernible concept
332
D.
Whether an enabling provision can violate the basic
333
structure
E.
Parallel with exclusion of creamy layer
337
F.
Other justifications for the classification
338
(i)
Reasonable classification to prevent double
338
benefits
(ii)
Scope of Article 46
339
(iii)
EWS as a "compensatory" measure
341
G.
The breach of the 50% cap - A note of caution
344
VIII.
Conclusion
344
A.
The principles of non-discrimination and fraternity in the
345
constitutional ethos
B.
Summary of findings on Questions 1 to 3
347
419. I regret my inability to concur with the views expressed by the majority
opinion on the validity of the 103rd Amendment on Question 3, since I feel-for
reasons set out elaborately in the following opinion-that this Court has for the first
time, in the seven decades of the Republic, sanctioned an avowedly exclusionary and
discriminatory principle. Our Constitution does not speak the language of exclusion.
In my considered opinion, the Amendment, by the language of exclusion,
undermines the fabric of social justice, and thereby, the basic structure.
420. At the outset, I must state that I am in agreement that the addition, or
insertion of the "economic criteria" for affirmative action in aid of the section of
population who face deprivation due to poverty, in furtherance of Article 46, does not
per se stray from the constitutional principles, so as to alter, violate, or destroy its
basic structure. As long as the State addresses deprivation resulting from
discriminatory social practices which have kept the largest number of our populace
in the margins, and continues its ameliorative policies and laws, the introduction of
such deprivation-based affirmative action, is consistent with constitutional goals.
The surest way't to legal research!"
What, however, needs further scrutiny, (which this opinion proposes to address
presently) is whether the manner of implementing - i.e. the implicit exclusion of
those covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) [Scheduled Castes ("SCs"), Scheduled
Tribes ("STs"), and Socially and Educationally Backward Classes ("SEBCs")],
cumulatively referred to as "backward classes"] violates, or damages the basic
structure or essential features of the Constitution.
421. Therefore, I will first address the point of my disagreement - Question 3
[Part III] followed by a discussion on Question 1 [Part IV]; I have also separately
considered economic criteria vis--vis Article 16, specifically [Part V]. I have given
my additional reasoning on Question 2 [Part VI]. Since all three questions framed by
this Court, entail an examination under the Doctrine of Basic Structure, I find it
necessary to lay out the contours of this doctrine, the standard of review for
identifying the essential feature or principle, and for application of the doctrine itself
[Part II].
I. Context and history of reservations
422. Given that it has been exhaustively recounted in the judgment of Dinesh
Maheshwari, J. - it is unnecessary for the purpose of this opinion to retrace the
history of how affirmative action and reservations in India have been worked out;
I
have briefly outlined what is relevant to my analysis.
423. Aside from the allusion to Maharaja Chhatrapati Shahuji's reservation of
50% (in 1902), the kind of affirmative action one sees today, can be traced to the
1931 Census which separately determined the "depressed classes". Premised on
this, the Government of India (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1936 155 enlisted a large
number of communities which faced the brunt of caste stigma and other socially evil
practices. Parallelly, in several Princely States disparate efforts were made to
ameliorate the lot of such communities and castes, that had been discriminated
against and marginalised for centuries. This history informs a large part of the
Constituent Assembly debates, during which, member after member, reiterated the
fledgling nation's determination not only to ensure equality before law, and equal
protection of the law, but travelling beyond that, to ensuring substantive equality of
opportunity and access to public places, goods, employment, etc.
424. One of the first cases that this Court decided was State of Madras V.
Champakam Dorairajan (hereinafter "Champakam Dorairajan"), where this Court
held to be unconstitutional, a communal reservation which fixed quotas for different
communities and castes - this led to insertion of Article 15(4) by the Constitution
(First Amendment) Act. The next important case was M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore6
(hereinafter "M.R. Balaji") where this Court held that reservations cannot be solely
based on caste, and rather would have to satisfy the test of social and educational
backwardness, as per the (then) text of the Constitution. It was held that the result
of poverty, to a large extent, was that the poor class of citizens automatically
became socially backward. They did not enjoy a status in society and were therefore,
forced to take a backward seat. Other decisions followed the law declared in M.R.
Balaji6.
425. In T. Devadasan V. Union of India 3 3 (hereinafter "T. Devadasan"), too, a rule
enabling carrying forward of SC vacancies which resulted in almost 2/3rd of the
vacancies being earmarked for SC candidates, was adversely commented upon and
held to be unconstitutional. The majority remarked importantly that the reason for
backwardness of SC/ST communities was due to "historical causes" and that the
"purpose of Article 16(4) is to ensure that such people, because of their
backwardness should not be unduly handicapped in the matter of securing
employment in the services of the State". Reservations is therefore "in favour of
backward classes who are not adequately represented in the services under the
State". The Court also said that a rule for reservation and posts for such backward
classes "cannot be said to have violated Article 14", as advanced classes cannot be
considered for appointment to such posts because "they may be equally or even
more meritorious than the members of the backward classes".
426. However, in an illuminating dissent, Subba Rao, J. highlighted the linkages
between Articles 14, 15 and 16, stressing on the fact that Article 16(4) was a facet
of Article 16(1) : (T. Devadasan case, AIR pp. 189-90, para 23)
"23. Article 14 lays down the general rule of equality. Article 16 is an instance
of the application of the general rule with special reference to opportunity of
appointments under the State. It says that there shall be equality of opportunity
for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State. If it stood alone, all the backward communities would go to the
wall in a society of uneven basic social structure; the said rule of equality would
remain only a utopian conception unless a practical content was given to it. Its
strict enforcement brings about the very situation it seeks to avoid. To make my
point clear, take the illustration of a horse race. Two horses are set down to run a
race-one is a first class race horse and the other an ordinary one. Both are made
to run from the same starting point. Though theoretically they are given equal
opportunity to run the race, in practice the ordinary horse is not given an equal
opportunity to compete with the race horse. Indeed that is denied to it. So a
handicap may be given either in the nature of extra weight or a start from a
longer distance. By doing so, what would otherwise have been a farce of a
competition would be made a real one. The same difficulty had confronted the
makers of the Constitution at the time it was made. Centuries of calculated
oppression and habitual submission reduced a considerable section of our
community to a life of serfdom. It would be well-nigh impossible to raise their
standards if the doctrine of equal opportunity was strictly enforced in their case.
They would not have any chance if they were made to enter the open field of
competition without adventitious aids till such time when they could stand on
their own legs. That is why the makers of the Constitution introduced clause (4)
in Article 16. The expression "nothing in this article" is a legislative device to
express its intention in a most emphatic way that the power conferred thereunder
is not limited in any way by the main provision but falls outside it. It has not
really carved out an exception, but has preserved a power untrammelled by the
other provisions of the Article."
427. A majority of the seven-Judge Bench in State of Kerala V. N.M. Thomas4
(hereinafter "N.M. Thomas"), accepted this dissenting view of K. Subba Rao, J. (in T.
Devadasan . In N.M. Thomas4, a rule exempting SC candidates from qualifying in a
departmental examination for a longer duration than others, was upheld by the
Supreme Court. The Court noted that:
427.1. The basic content of Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1) constituted a code in
that Articles 15(4) and 16(4) was to enable equality of opportunity for class which
would otherwise have been excluded from appointment. Hence, any preferential rule
for backward classes, could not be unconstitutional.
427.2. Article 16(1) permits classification and Article 16(4) is not an exception to
Article 16(1).
427.3. A classification is reasonable if it includes all persons who are similarly
situated with respect to the purpose56.
427.4. Article 16(1) sets out a positive aspect of equality of opportunity in
matters of public employment and Article 16(2) negatively prohibits discrimination
on the enumerated grounds in the area covered by Article 16(1).
427.5. But for Article 16(4), Article 16(1) would have prevented preferential
treatment for reservations for backward classes of citizens.
428. It was held in N.M. Thomas4 that Article 16(4) was introduced to reconcile
Article 16(1) [representing the dynamics of "justice" conceived as "equality", in
conditions under which candidates actually competing for posts in the Government
and Articles 46 and 335 embodying the duties of the State so as to protect them
from the inequities of social injustice. These encroachments in the field of Article 16
(1) can only be permitted if they are warranted under Article 16(4).
429. The most authoritative decision on the point of reservations was the nine-
Judge Bench ruling in Indra Sawhney V. Union of India5 5 (hereinafter "Indra
Sawhney"). The Court also had the occasion to consider the validity of an office
memorandum which introduced a 27% quota in favour of Other Backward Classes in
relation to Central Government posts and services. The verdict was not a unanimous
one. There were six opinions. The broadest summary of those opinions:
429.1. The reference to backward classes of citizens within Article 16(4) refers to
social and educational backwardness.
429.2. Article 16(4) is a facet and part of Article 16(1), and not an exception to
the latter. The judgment of Jeevan Reddy, J. explains the ruling in N.M. Thomas4 on
429.3. Caste alone cannot be the determining factor to decide social and
educational backwardness and that a caste can be and can often be a social class in
India.
429.4. The economic criterion alone for determining backwardness of classes or
groups is impermissible, because the indicators are social and educational
backwardness having regard to the express terms of Articles 15(4) and 16(4).
429.5. There can be sub-classification amongst backward classes of citizens for
the purpose of ensuring that most vulnerable groups benefit.
429.6. There can be no reservations in promotions under Article 16(4).
429.7. The "creamy layer" or more affluent sections of Other Backward Classes
had to be identified by the State to ensure that the most deprived sections were not
kept out. Such categories could not claim the benefit of reservation.
430. M. Nagaraj V. Union of India9 (hereinafter "M. Nagaraj"), Ashoka Kumar
Thakur V. Union of India2 (hereinafter "Ashoka Kumar Thakur"), K. Krishna Murthy
V. Union of India52 (hereinafter "K. Krishna Murthy"), Pramati Educational & Cultural
Trust V. Union of India 3 (hereinafter "Pramati"), Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao V. State
157
of
A.P.
(hereinafter "Chebrolu Leela Prasad"), and Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil V. State
of
Maharashtra 0 (hereinafter "Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil"), are the other significant
decisions, rendered by the Constitution Benches, after Indra Sawhney 5 on this. In M.
Nagaraj9, the Court negatived a challenge to Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B)
introduced by a constitutional amendment on the ground that it violated the basic
structure principle. The Court held that though facets of equality were part of the
basic structure, the provision of Article 16(4-A) permitting reservations in promotion
for SC/STs did not violate the basic structure. The amendment in fact, restored the
situation which existed due to prior court rulings that such reservations in promotion
were permissible. The Court also held that the "catch-up rule"158 was not an rule of
equality, or a constitutional principle that could not be
overborne.
159 The Court, in M. Nagaraj2, discussed the principles underlying the
basic structure doctrine, as well as the applicable tests to determine it (which I have
referred to in the following section).
II. Dealing with the basic structure
431. I agree with the judgment of Dinesh Maheshwari, J. in its tracing of the
Doctrine of Basic Structure, and its journey, through past precedents spanning
nearly five decades. I will however, record a few additional conclusions based upon
my reading.
A. Important cases on the doctrine
The surest way legal research!"
432. The Court's polyvocal majority in Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala5
(hereinafter "Kesavananda Bharati"), did not offer unanimity on the key elements of
the Constitution, or the values underlying it, as essential features. What however,
the Judges constituting the majority were clear, was that the power of amendment
needed regulation, or control, through the basic structure doctrine. For the purpose
of brevity - and compactness, it would be sufficient to notice the analysis and
summary 160 of the majority in Kesavananda Bharati15 made by the majority opinion
of Chandrachud, C.J., in Minerva Mills Ltd. V. Union of India9 (hereinafter "Minerva
433. In Indira Nehru Gandhi V. Raj Narain3 (hereinafter "Indira Gandhi"), this
Court invalidated the provisions of the 39th Constitutional Amendment (which
resulted in taking away the Court's adjudicatory powers and vesting it in a tribunal,
which was to decide legality of elections of four specified functionaries), as violative
of the basic structure doctrine - specifically the principle of rule of law, and the
doctrine of separation of powers. Chandrachud, J. in his judgment made pertinent
observations about what constitutes the basic structure, and how equality is an
integral part of it. Speaking about the basic structure, he said : (Indira Nehru
"664. I consider it beyond the pale of reasonable controversy that if there be
any unamendable features of the Constitution on the score that they form a part
of the basic structure of the Constitution, they are that : (i) India is a sovereign
democratic republic; (ii) Equality of status and opportunity shall be secured to all
its citizens; (iii) The State shall have no religion of its own and all persons shall
be equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess,
practice and propagate religion and that (iv) the nation shall be governed by a
Government of laws, not of men. These, in my opinion, are the pillars of our
constitutional philosophy, the pillars, therefore, of the basic structure of the
Constitution.
*
*
*
691.
The theory of basic structure is woven out of the conspectus of the
Constitution and the amending power is subjected to it because it is a constituent
power. 'The power to amend the fundamental instrument cannot carry with it the
power to destroy its essential features' - this, in brief, is the arch of the theory of
basic structure. It is wholly out of place in matters relating to the validity of
ordinary laws made under the Constitution."
434. K.K. Mathew, J. made general observations with regard to the fact that the
basic structure should be rooted in some provisions of the Constitution and also
importantly, flagged the equality code as one of the basic features of the
Constitution.
435. This Court's decision in Minerva Mills19 marks a watershed moment in the
journey of the basic structure doctrine. The Court had to decide on the validity of
Sections 4 and 55 of the 42nd Amendment Act which sought to nullify the basic
structure doctrine itself, by amending Article 368162. and
amendment to Article 31-C which sought to immunise all laws which declared that
they were made to advance all or any of the provisions of Part IV of the Constitution.
The Court reiterated the basic structure doctrine, and held that the amendment to
Article 368, which sought to fetter the Court's inquiry into the validity of
constitutional amendments, violated the basic structure. By a majority decision of
4 : 1, the Court held that the amendment to Article 31-C too violated the basic
structure.
436. Judicial review was the value, which the Court held to be violated in other
48
decisions as well - such as in P. Sambamurthy V. State of A.P. (hereinafter
"P.
Sambamurthy"), Kihoto Hollohan V. Zachillhu49 (hereinafter "Kihoto Hollohan"), in L.
Chandra
Kumar
V.
Union
of
India50
(hereinafter "L. Chandra Kumar"). In the latter, it
was held that judicial review, through Articles 32 and 226 are part of the basic
structure of the Constitution. Thus, here, for the first time, specific provisions were
held to be part of the basic structure. Raghunathrao Ganpatrao V. Union of India  1
(hereinafter "Raghunathrao Ganpatrao") held that the deletion of provisions - held
to be an "integral" part of the Constitution (by the judgment of an eleven-Judge
Bench, when the basic structure doctrine was not recognised), did not violate the
basic structure, or lead to loss of its identity. The majority judgment in Kihoto
Hollohan49 49 is narrowly premised163, it severed a part of the offending portion of the
52nd Amendment, to the extent it excluded judicial review, since its deletion was
procedurally unsustainable, given the text of Article 368, which requires that such
amendments need ratification by the Legislatures of one-half of the total States
forming the Union.
437. Next, in M. Nagaraj-, this Court tersely stated that the standard to be
applied in evaluating whether an amendment has also modified the overarching
principles, that inform each and every fundamental right and link them, is to find
whether due to such change we have a completely different Constitution. In
particular, after summarising various opinions in Kesavananda Bharati15 the Court
observed that "[t]he basic structure jurisprudence is a preoccupation
with constitutional identity". The object of which is "continuity" within which
"continuity of identity, changes are admissible". The Court, however refused to strike
down Article 16(4-B) [which had sought to overrule decisions of this Court, to the
effect that when reservations are resorted to in promotions, leading to accelerated
promotions, the non-reserved category of employees, upon their promotions should
be permitted to retain or "catch up" their previous seniority].
438. The Court made certain general observations which are relevant, and are
"102.
Applying the "width test", we do not find obliteration of any of the
constitutional limitations. Applying the test of "identity", we do not find any
alteration in the existing structure of the equality code. As stated above, none of
the axioms like secularism, federalism, etc. which are overarching principles have
been violated by the impugned constitutional amendments. Equality has two
facets - "formal equality" and "proportional equality". Proportional equality is
equality "in fact" whereas formal equality is equality "in law". Formal equality
exists in the rule of law. In the case of proportional equality the State is expected
to take affirmative steps in favour of disadvantaged sections of the society within
the framework of liberal democracy. Egalitarian equality is proportional equality."
439. The other decisions in I.R. Coelho36 and Pramati33 too dealt with facets of
basic structure. I shall be discussing I.R. Coelho36 and M. Nagaraj2 later, more
elaborately, when dealing with the equality code, and its facets being intrinsic to the
basic structure of the Constitution.
B. Test for determining basic structure
"661.
The subject-matter of constitutional amendments is a question of high
policy and courts are concerned with the interpretation of laws, not with the
wisdom of the policy underlying them."
441. It is axiomatic that a constitutional provision cannot be construed in the
same manner as a legislative enactment, delegated legislation, or executive
measure. All those can be subjected to judicial review on distinct heads such as
legislative competence, constitutional limitations (such as in Part III or Part XI of
the Constitution), ultra vires the parent enactment or constitutional limitation
(delegated legislation), illegality, conflict with provisions of the Constitution,
Wednesbury164 unreasonableness, unfair procedure, proportionality, or other
grounds of administrative law review (executive action).
442. Logically, then, the applicable standard of review of constitutional
amendments should be higher - also because the procedure adopted to amend,
under Article 368, is special, and requires two-thirds majority in favour of any
proposed amendment, with the super-added provision in case of amendments
to certain enumerated provisions, of resolutions approving the amendment by a
majority of the Legislatures of all States as well. This exercise of constituent power,
therefore, cannot be subjected to the same standard of review, as in the case of
legislative or executive actions. The clearest enunciation of this was in Y.V.
"691.
Ordinary laws have to answer two tests for their validity : (1) The law
must be within the legislative competence of the legislature as defined and
specified in Chapter I, Part XI of the Constitution, and (2) it must not offend
against the provisions of Articles 13(1) and (2) of the Constitution. "Basic
structure", by the majority judgment, is not a part of the fundamental rights nor
indeed a provision of the Constitution.
'The power to amend the fundamental
instrument cannot carry with it the power to destroy its essential features'-this,
in brief, is the arch of the theory of basic structure. It is wholly out of place in
matters relating to the validity of ordinary laws made under the Constitution."
443. At another place, the same learned Judge (Chandrachud, J.) observed that :
34
"6
For determining whether a particular feature of the Constitution is a
part of its basic structure, one has perforce to examine in each individual case the
place of the particular feature in the scheme of our Constitution, its object and
purpose, and the consequences of its denial on the integrity of the Constitution as
a fundamental instrument of country's governance.
*
*
*
692.
There is no paradox, because certain limitations operate upon the
higher power for the reason that it is a higher power. A constitutional amendment
has to be passed by a special majority and certain such amendments have to be
ratified by the legislatures of not less than one-half of the States as provided by
Article 368(2). An ordinary legislation can be passed by a simple majority. The
two powers, though species of the same genus, operate in different fields and are
therefore subject to different limitations."
444. In M. Nagaraj upon review of previous authorities, this Court indicated the
methodology of determining whether a constitutional amendment violates the basic
"24. The point which is important to be noted is that principles of federalism,
secularism, reasonableness and socialism, etc. are beyond the words of a
particular provision. They are systematic and structural principles underlying and
connecting various provisions of the Constitution. They give coherence to the
Constitution. They make the
Constitution an organic whole. They are part of constitutional law even if they are
not expressly stated in the form of rules.
25. For a constitutional principle to qualify as an essential feature, it must be
established that the said principle is a part of the constitutional law binding on
the legislature. Only thereafter, is the second step to be taken, namely, whether
the principle is so fundamental as to bind even the amending power of Parliament
i.e. to form a part of the basic structure. The basic structure concept accordingly
limits the amending power of Parliament. To sum up : in order to qualify as an
essential feature, a principle is to be first established as part of the constitutional
law and as such binding on the legislature. Only then, can it be examined
whether it is so fundamental as to bind even the amending power of Parliament
i.e. to form part of the basic structure of the Constitution. This is the standard of
judicial review of constitutional amendments in the context of the Doctrine of
Basic Structure.
The surest way legal research!"
26.
secularism is the principle which is the overarching principle of several
rights and values under the Indian Constitution. Therefore, axioms like
secularism, democracy, reasonableness, social justice, etc. are overarching
principles which provide linking factor for principle of fundamental rights like
Articles 14, 19 and 21. These principles are beyond the amending power of
Parliament. They pervade all enacted laws and they stand at the pinnacle of the
hierarchy of constitutional values. For example, under the German constitutional
law, human dignity under Article 1 is inviolable. It is the duty of the State not
only to protect the human dignity but to facilitate it by taking positive steps in
that direction. No exact definition of human dignity exists. It refers to the intrinsic
value of every human being, which is to be respected. It cannot be taken away. It
cannot give (sic be given). It simply is. Every human being has dignity by virtue
of his existence. The constitutional courts in Germany, therefore, see human
dignity as a fundamental principle within the system of the basic rights. This is
how the Doctrine of Basic Structure stands evolved under the German
Constitution and by interpretation given to the concept by the constitutional
courts.
27. Under the Indian Constitution, the word "federalism" does not exist in the
Preamble. However, its principle (not in the strict sense as in USA) is delineated
over various provisions of the Constitution. In particular, one finds this concept in
separation of powers under Articles 245 and 246 read with the three lists in the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
28. To conclude, the theory of basic structure is based on the concept of
constitutional identity. The basic structure jurisprudence is a preoccupation with
constitutional identity. In Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala5 it has been
observed that "one cannot legally use the Constitution to destroy itself". It is
further observed "the personality of the Constitution must remain unchanged".
Therefore, this Court in Kesavananda Bharati 15 while propounding the theory of
basic structure, has relied upon the doctrine
of constitutional identity. The word "amendment" postulates that the old
Constitution survives without loss of its identity despite the change and it continues
even though it has been subjected to alteration. This is the constant theme of the
opinions in the majority decision in Kesavananda Bharati15 To destroy its identity is
to abrogate the basic structure of the Constitution. This is the principle of
constitutional sovereignty. Secularism in India has acted as a balance between socio
-economic reforms which limits religious options and communal developments. The
main object behind the theory of the constitutional identity is continuity and within
that continuity of identity, changes are admissible depending upon the situation and
circumstances of the day."
(emphasis supplied)
445. Thus, the test of "identity" which some of the Judges in Kesavananda
Bharati15 indicated, as of the core of the basic structure doctrine, was restated, and
elaborated upon in M. Nagaraj as the concept or doctrine of "constitutional
identity". The standard of review, it was held was that firstly, the essential feature
must be a constitutional law principle, which is binding on the legislature and
secondly, the analysis is whether such principle is so fundamental that it must
446. This Court has, in applying the test, followed the historical approach in
conducting substantive basic structure review. This method was indicated by
Chandrachud, J. in Waman Rao V. Union of India7 (hereinafter "Waman Rao"). In
this case, Articles 31-A, 31-B, and 31-C which had been introduced to advance the
land reform programmes were challenged as violations of the basic structure of the
Constitution. Chandrachud, J. observed that the "questions have a historical slant
and content : and history can furnish a safe and certain clue to their answer". After
considering the history of the newly inserted provision (by the First Amendment Act,
"24.
Looking back over the past thirty years of constitutional history of our
country, we as lawyers and Judges, must endorse the claim made that if Article
31-A were not enacted, some of the main purposes of the Constitution would
have been delayed and eventually defeated and that by the 1st Amendment, the
constitutional edifice was not impaired but strengthened."
447. An independent justification for the amendments was of implementing the
constitutional purposes as outlined in Articles 39(b) and (c) i.e. "that the ownership
and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to
subserve the common good". The historical approach was also apparent, when this
Court considered the amendments which deleted Articles 291 and 362 of the
Constitution in Raghunathrao Ganpatrao1, as well as in Kihoto Hollohan49,
448. Likewise, in R.C. Poudyal V. Union of India32 (hereinafter "R.C. Poudyal"),
where this Court, speaking through three different judgments (one of them a
dissenting judgment, by L.M. Sharma, C.J.) used history of the amendment, and
contrasted it with the history of the provisions of the Constitution. The impugned
provision, Article 371-F(f) enabled representation of members of the Buddhist
Monasteries, in the Sikkim Legislature. The dissenting view held that the provisions
for reservation in State Assembly, based upon religion, violated the basic structure
of the Constitution. The majority judgment upheld the amendment, as necessary
because of historical continuity, and the need to assimilate Sikkimese society within
the Republic. However, the majority at the same time, also stated that such a
conclusion might not have been the same, if such reservation were introduced
"128.
These adjustments and accommodations reflect political expediencies
for the maintenance of social equilibrium. The political and social maturity and of
economic development might in course of time enable the people of Sikkim to
transcend and submerge these ethnic apprehensions and imbalances and might
in future-one hopes sooner-usher in a more egalitarian dispensation. Indeed,
the impugned provisions, in their very nature, contemplate and provide for a
transitional phase in the political evolution of Sikkim and are thereby essentially
transitional in character.
129. It is true that the reservation of seats of the kind and the extent brought
about by the impugned provisions may not, if applied to the existing States of the
Union, pass the constitutional muster. But in relation to a new territory admitted
to the Union, the terms and conditions are not such as to fall outside the
permissible constitutional limits. Historical considerations and compulsions do
justify inequality and special treatment."
(emphasis supplied)
449. Judicial review of legislation on the touchstone of their validity vis--vis
fundamental rights, is an analogy closest to constitutional amendment review, on
the ground of its conformity to the basic structure. It is an entirely different kind of
review that "imposes substantive limits on the scope of constitutional amendment.
However, these limits or basic features are identified as constitutional principles
which are distinct from the constitutional provisions which embody these
principles"165 Drawing from the remarks in Minerva Mills19 and Indira Gandhi34 Dr
Krishnaswamy notes in his work that this form of basic structure review has to
account for the distinction between:
"ordinary democratic law making and higher level democratic law making, it must rightly identify
the different limits on these two forms of law making. Only an independent model of basic structure
review which ensures that constitutional amendments do not destroy core constitutional principles
can fulfil this requirement". 166
450. It also needs to be noticed that when the Court conducts a constitutional
amendment validity review, to consider if it violates the basic structure, apart from
the standard, the discussion is rooted in the lexicology of judicial review, developed
from the jurisprudence of past precedents. In other words, the difference in standard
which this Court adopts does not result in a difference in the approach, to consider if
the amendment violates the basic structure. In judicial review, of a legislation,
which violates the provisions of the Constitution, the Court considers the law, its
impact on the fundamental right, its object and its reasonableness or proportionality.
In basic structure review, likewise, the subject of scrutiny is the amendment, its
content, its impact on the overarching value or principle, which is part of the basic
structure, and whether that impact destroys or violates the identity of the
Constitution.
451. Illustratively, in Kihoto Hollohan49 the Court dealt with the constitutionality
of amendments, introducing the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution and considered
past cases, interpreting the Constitution to see if the newly added provisions
accorded with the existing Constitution. In R.C. Poudyal 132, the Court upheld
reservation in favour of Buddhist monasteries, and explained that it was for
continuity. The Court drew upon the equality jurisprudence. The minority and
dissenting views also relied heavily upon past judicial precedents to underscore the
importance of prohibition against religion-based discrimination and reservation not
necessarily dealing with the validity of constitutional amendments alone, but to
bring out the idea of judicial review. The same goes for the five-Judge Bench
decision in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. V. Union of India 53 in which
the value of an independent judiciary, and what it is expected to achieve in a
democracy was underlined, by reference to past cases which did not deal with
constitutionality of amendments.
452. Hence, even while judicial review of constitutional amendments carries with
it a standard higher than judicial review of law or executive action, and uses a
particular methodology or test to discern whether the amendment changes or
damages the basic structure, the Court at the same time, draws upon past
precedents its exercise of judicial review, and the resulting interpretation of the
Constitution, as it exists.
453. This idea - of a distinct category of judicial review, which deals with
constitutional amendment review, was also voiced in M. Nagaraj In basic structure
review parlance, the legitimate role of the court is to evaluate whether, in the given
case, the "identity" of the Constitution is affected so as to violate the basic structure
and to apply the "direct impact" test (as propounded in I.R. Coelho6.
454. It is evident that at different points in time, different values that underlie
the Constitution and are manifested - either directly in the form of express
provisions, or what can be inferred as basic "overarching" principles (Nagaraj2) or
what impacts the identity (Kesavananda Bharati15 Raghunathrao Ganpatrao1 , M.
Nagaraj, and I.R. Coelho136) or takes away the "essence" of certain core principles,
through amendment were examined. Raghunathrao Ganpatrao31 echoed the idea of
identity, and the idea of "basic form or in its character" of the Constitution. I.R.
Coelho36 went on to say that "it cannot be held that essence of the principle behind
Article 14 is not part of the basic structure" and also that "Doctrine of Basic
Structure contemplates that there are certain parts or aspects of the Constitution
including Article 15, Article 21 read with Articles 14 and 19 which constitute the core
values" - which, if allowed to be altered, would change the "nature" of the
Constitution. The Court also stated that "[i]n judging the validity of constitutional
amendment we have to be guided by the impact test".
455. It is therefore clear that the appropriate test or standard of judicial review of
constitutional amendments is not the same as in the case of ordinary laws; the test
is whether the amendment challenged destroys, abrogates, or damages the
"identity", or "nature" or "character" or "personality" of the Constitution, by directly
impacting one or some of the "overarching principles" which inform its express
provisions. Further in constitutional amendment
judicial review, the court would consider the history of the provision amended, or the
way the new provision impacts the identity, or character, or nature of the
Constitution.
456. The standard of judicial review of constitutional amendments, draws upon
distinct terminologies - identity, personality, nature and character to see if the
constitutional identity undergoes a fundamental change, as to alter the Constitution
into something it can never be. Or, differently put, the test is whether the impact of
the amendment is to change the Constitution, into something it could never be
considered to be. Each of the terms i.e. identity, nature, personality, character, and
so on, are methods of expressing the idea that some part of the Constitution, either
through its express provisions, or its general scheme, and yet transcending those
provisions, are embedded as overarching principles, which cannot be destroyed or
damaged.
457. Having laid out the test of basic structure assessment in the paragraphs
above, I will now apply this standard of review to the impugned Amendment in the
following sections.
III. Re Question 3 : Analysing the exclusionary clause "other than" and
whether it offends the basic structure
458. The insertion of clause (6) in Articles 15 and 16, introduces a new class i.e.
"economically weaker sections" which are defined to be "other than" the classes
covered in Article 15(4) [i.e. other than socially and educationally backward classes
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which coincides with "backward
class of citizens" covered in Article 16(4)]. The plain interpretation of this new
expression, read along with the Statement of Objects and Reasons brings home the
idea that this allusion to "special provision" - including reservations, is meant only
for the newly created class and excludes the classes described under Articles 15(4)
and 16(4). This is the base on which the petitioners' mount their challenge,
contending that the exclusion falls foul of the equality code and amounts to a
violation of basic structure.
459. The Union's position was that objections to the exclusion of SC/ST/OBC
communities could not be countenanced; at any rate, such exclusion did not reach
to the level of damaging the basic structure of the Constitution. It was contended
that the mechanism of reservation itself per se, carries within it the idea of
exclusion. Consequently, the "set apart" by way of reservation for SC/ST/OBC
collectively to the tune of 50% by itself, implies that others are kept apart and
cannot question such reservation for the weaker sections of society (as settled in
Indra Sawhney5). It was submitted that the exclusion of all categories except the
target groups [i.e. exclusion of SC/ST/OBC and the general category who do not
fulfil the economic criteria] was not discriminatory, let alone violative of the basic
structure of the Constitution.
460. Clearly there is no dispute, in the manner that the phrase "other than"
appearing in Articles 15(6) and 16(6), is to be read - either on the side of the
petitioners, or the respondents. That exclusion is implicit, is agreed upon - the
point of divergence is only on whether such an exclusion is permissible or not. To
examine this, it is necessary to trace the history of the provisions that constitute the
Equality Code and its content, and the cases that have interpreted them, in order to
cull out the principle(s), relevant for a basic structure assessment. For this, I will
firstly trace the history of the provisions that constitute the Equality Code, secondly
discuss the content of this Code; thirdly, how this Equality Code is in itself, a part of
the basic structure; and lastly how the impugned Amendment violates the basic
structure on the ground of exclusion.
A. Historical analysis of the Equality Code
(i) Article 15
461. The original draft Constitution contained a provision that comprehensively
encompassed the idea of non-discrimination, in draft Article 9, which later emerged
as Article 15. This Article, and more specifically Article 15(2), prohibited
discrimination in various spheres and commended that access be made available to
a range of facilities, spaces, and resources on a non-discriminatory basis.
462. The history and evolution of this Article as it stands today, is revealing. The
Motilal Nehru Report 1928 , had recommended, in the demand for self-rule a
charter of governance and basic human rights. The relevant provisions, Clauses 4
(v), (vi), (xiii) and (xiv) read as follows:
"(v) All citizens in the Commonwealth of India have the right to free
elementary education without any distinction of caste or creed in the matter of
admission into any educational institutions, maintained or aided by the State, and
such right shall be enforceable as soon as due arrangements shall have been
made by competent authority. Provided that adequate provisions shall be made
by the State for imparting public instruction in primary schools to the children of
members of minorities of considerable strength in the population through the
medium of their own language and in such script as in vogue among them.
Explanation : This provision will not prevent the State from making the
teaching of the language of the Commonwealth obligatory in the said schools.
(vi) All citizens are equal before the law and possess equal civic rights.
*
*
*
(xiii) No person shall by reason of his religion, caste or creed be prejudiced in
any way in regard to public employment, office of power or honour and the
exercise of any trade or calling.
(xiv) All citizens have an equal right of access to, and use of, public roads,
public wells and all other places of public resort."
4 Similarly, the historic Poona Pact16 contained the seeds of what are now
Articles 15 and 16:
"8. There shall be no disabilities attached to any one on the ground of his being
a member of the Depressed Classes in regard to any election to local bodies or
appointment to the public services. Every endeavour shall be made to secure a
fair representation of the Depressed Classes in these respects, subject to such
educational qualifications as may be laid down for appointment to the public
services.
9. In every province out of the educational grant an adequate sum shall be
earmarked for providing educational facilities to the members of Depressed
Classes."
464. Dr Ambedkar 169 and Sh. K.M. Munshi170 , had drafted two versions, on
similar lines. These two drafts were discussed by the Sub-Committee on
Fundamental Rights and an amended form was included in their draft report:
"5. (1) All persons within the Union shall be equal before the law. No person
shall be denied the equal protection of the laws within the
territories of the Union. There shall be no discrimination against any person on
grounds of religion, race, caste, language or sex.
In particular-
(a) There shall be no discrimination against any person on any of the
grounds aforesaid in regard to the use of wells, tanks, roads, schools and
places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of public funds or
dedicated to the use of the general public." "171
465. After discussions, the Advisory Committee recommended that the non-
discrimination provision would be an independent clause protecting a "citizen", and
the ground of "language" was dropped. Members of the Minority Sub-Committee,
then considered this clause and made further recommendations - including, that
education and schools should not be within the purview of this provision. A four-
member Sub-Committee including Dr Ambedkar was constituted and tasked to draw
a specific provision in this regard. This resulted in a general provision which reads as
follows: "the State shall make no discrimination against any citizens on grounds of
religion, race, caste or sex", but it was clarified that with regard to access to trading
establishments, restaurants, etc. "sex" would not be a prohibited ground. This too,
did not pass muster and therefore, the re-drafted clause172 had a general principle
prohibiting discrimination, with a separate articulation within the provision which
allowed for separate amenities for the benefit of women and children. With minor
changes, this was included as Clause 11 in the Draft Constitution of October 1947,
and was later accepted by the Drafting Committee without change, as Article 9. The
debates in the Constituent Assembly leading to the framing of Articles 15(1) and 15
(2) clearly point to the overarching idea of non-discrimination as one of the basic
facets of equality [which is reflected clearly in the jurisprudence of this Court;
elaborated more in Part III (A)].
466. Laws or executive action that further discrimination, directly or indirectly, on
proscribed grounds, have also been recognised as violative of the right to equality,
and consequently have been struck down, routinely by this Court173
(ii) Article 16
467. As far as Article 16 goes, the idea behind that provision was to achieve the
goal of equal opportunity (as appearing in the Preamble) in matters of public
employment. The difference between Articles 15(1) and 16(1) is that the former
applies generally and prohibits the State from discriminating on enumerated
grounds in diverse activities - including access to educational institutions,
amenities, and other public goods, which are to be made available without regard to
caste, religion, or sex, etc. Article 16(1) is a positive right declaring that all are
equal in terms of opportunity for public employment. Article 16(2) goes on to
enumerate grounds such as caste, race, religion, caste, sex, descent, place of birth
and residence [few of which are different from the proscribed ground under Article
15(1)] as grounds on which the State cannot discriminate. Article 16(3) empowers
Parliament (to the exclusion of State Legislatures) to enact law, prescribing
requirements as to residence within a State or Union Territory, for a class or classes
of employment or appointment to local or other authorities, within a State or Union
Territory. The Constitution makers did not wish to arm the State Legislature with the
power of prescribing local residential qualifications for employment within the State
or local authorities and preferred to entrust that power with Parliament which were
expected to lay down principles of general application in that regard. Article 16(4) is
the only provision in the original Constitution which enabled reservation - in favour
of any backward class of citizens that were not adequately represented in the
services under the State.
468. In this context, in that part of the debate dealing with "backward classes" in
draft Article 10(1) - in the Constituent Assembly Debates, Dr Ambedkar spoke
about the three points of view which recommended reconciliation to a workable
proposition : firstly, that every individual qualified for a particular post should be
free to apply and compete for it; secondly, that the fullest operation of the first rule
would mean that there ought to be no reservation for any class or community at all;
and the third significant point that though theoretically, equality of opportunity
should be available to all, at the same time, some provision should be made for
entry of certain community "which have so far been outside the administration"
469. Proposing Article 10(3), Dr Ambedkar stated that Article 10(1) [precursor to
Articles 16(4) and 16(1), respectively] is a "generic principle" : (CAD Vol. VII, p.
701)
"
At the same time, as I said, we had to reconcile this formula with the
demand made by certain communities that the administration which has now-for
historical reasons-been controlled by one community or a few communities, that
situation should disappear and that the others also must have an opportunity of
getting into the public services."
Dr Ambedkar then went on to say that reservation should operate ideally for a
minority of posts and that the identifying principle for positive discrimination would
be use of a "qualifying phrase such as backward"174 in whose favour an exception
could be made without which the exception could ultimately eat up the rule.
470. The idea or dominant theme behind the entire scheme of Article 16, right
through Article 16(4)-is equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. At
the same time, the Constitution framers realised that substantive equality would not
be achieved unless allowance were made through some special provision ensuring
representation of the most backward class of citizens who were hitherto, on account
of caste practices, or such constraints, barred from public employment. Therefore,
the idea of Article 16(4) essentially is to enable representation, the controlling factor
being adequacy of representation. That apart, the other control which the
Constitution envisioned was the identification of backward classes of citizens through
entrenched provisions that set up institutions which were to function in an objective
manner based on certain norms-Articles 340, 341 and 342, which relate to
identification of SC/ST/BC-and the newly added Article 342-A.
(iii) Article 17
471. The anxiety of the Constitution framers in outlawing untouchability in all
forms (without any reference to religion or community), resulted in its express
manifestation as Article 17, wherein the expression "untouchability" was left
undefined. The debates of the Assembly suggest that this was intentional. B. Shiva
Rao's treatise175 discloses that proceedings of the Sub-Committee on fundamental
rights, which undertook the task of preparing the draft provisions on fundamental
rights suggested a clause enabling for the abolition of "untouchability" - this was
Clause 4(a) of Article III of K.M. Munshi's draft of fundamental rights:
"Untouchability is abolished and the practice thereof is punishable by the law
of the Union."
And similarly, Article 1(1) of Dr Ambedkar's draft provided that:
"any privilege or disability arising out of rank, birth, person, family, religion or
religious usage and custom is abolished."
472. Considerable deliberations took place since there was unanimity among all
sections of representatives in the Constituent Assembly that the practice of
untouchability (in all its forms) had to be outlawed. The Assembly bestowed its
attention to the minutiae of what constitutes untouchability, whether its forms of
practice in the Hindu religion alone qualified for prohibition, or also inter-
communally, etc. Dr Ambedkar, K.M. Munshi, Sardar Patel, and B.N. Rau,
participated in all these deliberations. Shiva Rao observes that the Committee came
to the general conclusion that "the purpose of the clause was to abolish
untouchability in all its forms - whether it was untouchability within a community
or between various communities"175 Attempts made to amend the article were
deemed unnecessary due to the careful and extensive deliberations, and the
unanimity amongst members; there was actually no change in the draft, which
survived to become a part of the Constitution:
" "Untouchability" is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The
enforcement of any disability arising out of "untouchability" shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law."
473. The result was an all-encompassing provision which Article 17 is as it
stands, outlawing untouchability in all its forms-by the State, individuals, and other
entities. The reach and sweep of this provision-like Article 15(2) is wide; it is truly
horizontal in its application.
474. Given that the case law relating to Articles 15 and 16 has substantially been
covered in the judgment of Dinesh Maheshwari, J. I have not reiterated the same.
However, it is my considered opinion, that due weightage was not given to Article
17, which as argued by some of the petitioners, is also a part of the Equality Code; I
have included some judgments which underscore the importance of this injunction
and its continued need.
475. The social evil-of untouchability and its baleful effect of untouchability
based discrimination was recounted by this Court in State of Karnataka V. Appa Balu
"21. Thus it could be concluded that untouchability has grown as an integral
facet of socio-religious practices being observed for over centuries; keeping the
Dalits away from the mainstream of the society on diverse grounds, be it of
religious, customary, unfounded beliefs of pollution, etc. It is an attitude and way
of behaviour of the general public of the Indian social order towards Dalits.
Though it has grown as an integral part of caste system, it became an institution
by itself and it enforces disabilities, restrictions, conditions and prohibitions on
Dalits for access to and the use of places of public resort, public means, roads,
temples, water sources,
tanks, bathing ghats, etc. entry into educational institutions or pursuits of avocation
or profession which are open to all and by reason of birth they suffer from social
stigma. Untouchability and birth as a Scheduled Caste are thus intertwined root
causes. Untouchability, therefore, is founded upon prejudicial hatred towards Dalits
as an independent institution. It is an attitude to regard Dalits as pollutants,
inferiors and outcastes. It is not founded on mens rea. The practice of untouchability
in any form is, therefore, a crime against the Constitution. The Act also protects civil
rights of Dalits. The abolition of untouchability is the arch of the Constitution to
make its Preamble meaningful and to integrate the Dalits in the national
mainstream."
476. The criterion for determining communities or castes as Scheduled Castes
has been recognised as those who suffered on account of the practice of
untouchability, and its pernicious effects, in Marri Chandra Shekhar Rao V. Seth G.S.
"9. It appears that Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in some States had
to suffer the social disadvantages and did not have the facilities for development
and growth. It is, therefore, necessary in order to make them equal in those areas
where they have so suffered and are in the state of underdevelopment to have
reservations or protection in their favour so that they can compete on equal terms
with the more advantageous or developed sections of the community. Extreme
social and economic backwardness arising out of traditional practices of
untouchability is normally considered as criterion for including a community in the
list of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes."
477. That SC communities are victims of the practice of untouchability, and the
equality code was meant to provide them opportunities, and eliminate
discrimination, was narrated in the earlier decision in Valsamma Paul V. Cochin
"7.
The practice of untouchability, which had grown for centuries, denuded
social and economic status and cultural life of the Dalits and the programmes
evolved under Articles 14, 15(2), 15(4) and 16(4) aimed to bring Dalits into
national mainstream by providing equalitarian facilities and opportunities. They
are designated as "Scheduled Castes" by definition under Article 366(24) and
"Scheduled Tribes" under Article 366(25) read with Articles 341 and 342,
respectively. The constitutional philosophy, policy and goal are to remove
handicaps, disabilities, suffering restrictions or disadvantages to which
Dalits/Tribes are subjected, to bring them into the national mainstream by
providing facilities and opportunities for them."
478. In Abhiram Singh V. C.D. Commachen-Superscript(1)) this Court again revisited the
"118.
The Constitution is not oblivious to the history of discrimination
against and the deprivation inflicted upon large segments of the population based
on religion, caste and language. Religion, caste and language are as much a
symbol of social discrimination imposed on large segments of our society on the
basis of immutable characteristics as they are of a social mobilisation to answer
centuries of injustice. They are part of the central theme of the Constitution to
produce a just social order."
479. The Constitution Bench ruling in Indian Young Lawyers Assn. (Sabarimala
Temple-5J.) V. State of Kerala80 took note of the fact that the evil of untouchability,
which kept out large swathes of Indian population in the thrall of caste-based
exclusion, was sought to be dismantled, and real equality was sought to be
"386. The rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution have the
common thread of individual dignity running through them. There is a degree of
overlap in the Articles of the Constitution which recognise fundamental human
freedoms and they must be construed in the widest sense possible. To say then
that the inclusion of an Article in the Constitution restricts the wide ambit of the
rights guaranteed, cannot be sustained. Article 17 was introduced by the Framers
to incorporate a specific provision in regard to untouchability. The introduction of
Article 17 reflects the transformative role and vision of the Constitution. It brings
focus upon centuries of discrimination in the social structure and posits the role of
the Constitution to bring justice to the oppressed and marginalised. The
penumbra of a particular Article in Part III which deals with a specific facet of
freedom may exist elsewhere in Part III. That is because all freedoms share an
inseparable connect. They exist together and it is in their co-existence that the
vision of dignity, liberty and equality is realised. As noted in Puttaswamy24, 'the
Constituent Assembly thought it fit that some aspects of liberty require a more
emphatic declaration so as to restrict the authority of the State to abridge or
curtail them.
"
480. The centrality of Article 17 and the constitutional resolve to eliminate
untouchability in all forms to any debate on equality involving SC/ST communities is
undeniable. Other provisions such as Article 15(2), Articles 23 and 24 also contain
links to Article 17, because the Constitution aimed not merely at outlawing
untouchability, but ensuring access to public amenities and also guaranteeing that
the stigma of caste discrimination should not result in exploitation.
(iv) Other provisions in the Constitution
481. Apart from Article 16, the other provisions which expressly talked of
reservations are not in regard to public employment but are in respect of elective
offices - Articles 330 and 332 - both of which enabled reservation in favour of SCs
and STs in proportion to their population in the States legislative or Parliamentary
constituencies concerned.
482. The other provisions which expressly forbid and injunct the State from
practising discrimination are Article 29(2) and Article 325. Article 29(2) enacts that:
"29. (2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them."
Article 325 reads as follows:
"325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be
included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or
ex.-There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial constituency for
election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State and no person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such
roll or claim to be included in any special electoral roll for any such constituency
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them."
B. Content of Equality Code
483. The equality code (Articles 14, 15, 16, and 17), so referred to in various
previous decisions of this Court, does not merely visualise a bland statement of
equality before law and equal protection of law but also contains specific injunctions
against the State from discriminating on proscribed grounds [such as caste, race,
sex, place of birth, religion, or any of them, in Article 15; and caste, sex, religion,
place of residence, descent, place of birth, or any of them, in Article 16]. The
engraining of these specific heads - enjoining the State not to discriminate on such
specific heads, such as caste, religion or sex is therefore, as much part of equality
code, as the principle of equality enacted in general terms, in Article 14. The
inclusion of Article 17 - as an unequivocal injunction, against untouchability, of any
form, enjoins the State to forbear caste discrimination, overtly, or through
classification, and looms large as a part of the equality code and indeed the entire
framework of the Constitution.
484. Joseph Raz described this dimension as "the ideal of personal autonomy is
the vision of people controlling, to some degree, their own destiny, fashioning it
through successive decisions throughout their lives". 181 Dr Ambedkar put the issue
very poignantly, saying that systematic caste discrimination was akin to slavery,
since such subjugation "means a state of society in which some men are forced to
accept from others the purposes which control their conduct"182. In caste-based
hierarchical societies, which
discriminated against a significant segment of society, the extent of deprivation - of
choice was such that those born into those castes or communities were not part of
the community and were termed "outcastes". This exclusion was specifically
targeted against, and sought to be eliminated, by the Constitution. It is
inconceivable that the deletion of caste (as long as Indian society believes in and
practises the caste system) as a proscribed ground through a constitutional
amendment would stand scrutiny. This example is given to illustrate that the value
of proscribing caste discrimination is rooted in the express provision of the
Constitution, as a part of the equality code. Equally, one cannot visualise an
amendment which promotes or even permits discrimination on other proscribed
grounds, such as gender, descent, or religion. All this would per se violate equality-
both textually, as well as the principle of equality, which the Constitution propounds.
The rationale for enacting these as proscribed grounds either under Article 15 or 16
(or both) was that the framers of the Constitution were aware that courts could use
these markers to determine when reasonable classification is permissible. Thus, for
instance, if the proscribed ground of "gender" was absent, it could have been argued
that gender is a basis for an intelligible differentia, in a given case. To ensure that
such classifications and arguments were ruled out, these proscribed grounds were
included as specific injunctions against the State. The provisions, and the code,
therefore, are not only about the grand declaratory sweep of equality : but equally
about the absolute prohibition against exclusion from participation in specified,
enumerated activities, through entrenched provisions.
The surest way legal research!"
485. A closer look at Article 15, especially Article 15(2), would further show that
likewise most of the proscribed grounds in Article 15(1) were engrafted to ensure
that access to public resources - in some cases not even maintained by the State,
but available to the public generally, could not be barred. This provision too was
made to right a historical wrong i.e. denial of access to the most deprived sections of
society of the most basic resources, such as water, food, etc. The injunction against
untouchability under Article 17, ensuring that such practice is outlawed is
strengthened by taking away the subject-matter from State domain and placing it as
an exclusive legislative head to Parliament through Article 35. In a similar vein,
Articles 23 and 24 (although seemingly unconnected with the issue of equality),
enact very special rights-which are enforceable against both the State agencies and
others. Through these articles, the forms of discrimination i.e. exploitation,
trafficking, and forced labour (which was resorted to against the most deprived
classes of society described as SCs and STs) was sought to be outlawed.
486. The elaborate design of the Constitution makers, who went to great lengths
to carefully articulate provisions, such that all forms of discrimination were
eliminated - was to ensure that there was no scope for discrimination of the kind
that the society had caused in its most virulent form in the past, before the dawn of
the Republic. These, together with the affirmative action provisions-initially
confined to Articles 15(3) and 16(4), and later expanded to Articles 15(4) and 15(5)
-was to guarantee that not only facial discrimination was
outlawed but also that the existing inequalities were ultimately eliminated. To
ensure the latter, only one segment i.e. socially and educationally backward classes
were conceived as the target group i.e. or its beneficiaries. Therefore, in this Court's
opinion, the basic framework of the Constitution or the idea and identity of equality
was that:
486.1. There ought to be no discrimination in any form, for any reason
whatsoever on the proscribed grounds, including in matters of public employment.
486.2. That the provision for affirmative action was an intrinsic part of the
framework and value of equality i.e. to ensure that the equality of classes hitherto
discriminated and ostracised, was eventually redressed.
487. This was recognised in Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil10 as "the obligation or duty to
183
equalise those sections of the population" on the States' part. Likewise, the
observations of Sahai, J. in Indra Sawhney5 characterise Articles 15(4) and 16(4) as
"obligations".
C. Equality Code is a part of the basic structure
488. That the principle of equality is the most important indispensable feature of
the Constitution and destruction thereof will amount to changing the basic structure
of the Constitution has been held in numerous cases. That it is an inextricable part
489. In Indira Gandhi4, Y.V. Chandrachud, J. identified "equality of status and
opportunity" to all its citizens, as an unamendable basic feature of the Constitution.
In the same case, K.K. Mathew, J. identified specific provisions of the Constitution,
334)
"334. Equality is a multi-coloured concept incapable of a single definition. It is
a notion of many shades and connotations. The Preamble of the Constitution
guarantees equality of status and of opportunity. They are nebulous concepts.
And I am not sure whether they can provide a solid
foundation to rear a basic structure. I think the types of equality which our
democratic republic guarantees are all subsumed under specific articles of the
Constitution like Articles 14, 15, 16, 17, 25, etc. and there is no other principle of
equality which is an essential feature of our democratic polity."
490. In a five-Judge Bench decision, through his concurring opinion, S.B. Sinha,
"82. Article 14 of the Constitution of India prohibits discrimination in any form.
Discrimination at its worst form would be violative of the basic and essential
features of the Constitution. It is trite that even the fundamental rights of a
citizen must conform to the basic features of the Constitution. Preamble of the
Constitution in no uncertain terms lays emphasis on equality."
491. A nine-Judge Bench of this Court in S.R. Bommai V. Union of India 135
(hereinafter "S.R. Bommai"), though not dealing with a constitutional amendment,
"29.
These fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 15, 16 and 25 to 30
leave no manner of doubt that they form part of the basic structure of the
Constitution."
"33.
the principle which emerges is that "equality" is the essence of
democracy and, accordingly a basic feature of the Constitution."
492. I.R. Coelho V. State of T.N. 136 is the next important decision, of note, by
a
nine-Judge Bench decision. The Court, undoubtedly was not concerned with the
direct impact of an amendment on Article 14 or equality, but with the effect of an
overarching immunising provision such as Article 31-B. It was unanimously held,
"109.
It cannot be held that essence of the principle behind Article 14 is not
part of the basic structure. In fact, essence or principle of the right or nature of
violation is more important than the equality in the abstract or formal sense. The
majority opinion in Kesavananda Bharati case13 clearly is that the principles
behind fundamental rights are part of the basic structure of the Constitution. It is
necessary to always bear in mind that fundamental rights have been considered
to be heart and soul of the Constitution. Rather these rights have been further
defined and redefined through various trials having regard to various experiences
and some attempts to invade and nullify these rights. The fundamental rights
are deeply interconnected. Each supports and strengthens the work of the others.
The Constitution is a living document, its interpretation may change as the time and
circumstances change to keep pace with it. This is the ratio of the decision in Indira
Gandhi case36 34
*
*
*
141. The Doctrine of Basic Structure contemplates that there are certain parts
or aspects of the Constitution including Article 15, Article 21 read with Articles 14
and 19 which constitute the core values which if allowed to be abrogated would
change completely the nature of the Constitution. Exclusion of fundamental rights
would result in nullification of the basic structure doctrine, the object of which is
to protect basic features of the Constitution as indicated by the synoptic view of
the rights in Part III.
142. There is also a difference between the "rights test" and the "essence of
right" test. Both form part of application of the basic structure doctrine. When in a
controlled Constitution conferring limited power of amendment, an entire Chapter
is made inapplicable, "the essence of the right" test as applied in M. Nagaraj
case9 will have no applicability. In such a situation, to Judge the validity of the
law, it is "rights test" which is more appropriate. We may also note that in
Minerva
Mills19 and Indira Gandhi34 cases, elimination of Part III in its entirety
was not in issue. We are considering the situation where entire equality code,
freedom code and right to move court under Part III are all nullified by exercise of
power to grant immunisation at will by Parliament which, in our view, is
incompatible with the implied limitation of the power of Parliament. In such a
case, it is the rights test that is appropriate and is to be applied."
493. Observations in the cases referred to above, therefore, have outlined that
certain provisions of the equality code-rather the ideas-and principles intrinsic to
Articles 14 and 15, and the rights in Articles 19 and 21, are part of the basic
structure of the Constitution.
494. Speaking of the general right to equality, this Court in Vikas Sankhala V.
"65. Going by the scheme of the Constitution, it is more than obvious that the
Framers had kept in mind social and economic conditions of the marginalised
section of the society, and in particular, those who were backward and
discriminated against for centuries. Chapters on "Fundamental Rights" as well as
"Directive Principles of State Policies" eloquently bear out the challenges of
overcoming poverty, discrimination and inequality, promoting equal access to
group quality education, health
and housing, untouchability and exploitation of weaker section. In making such
provisions with a purpose of eradicating the aforesaid ills with which marginalised
section of Indian society was suffering (in fact, even now continue to suffer in great
measure), we, the people gave us the Constitution which is transformative in
nature."
"67.
when our Constitution envisages equal respect and concern for each
individual in the society and the attainment of the goal requires special attention
to be paid to some, that ought to be done. Giving of desired concessions to the
reserved category persons, thus, ensures equality as a levelling process. At the
jurisprudential level, whether reservation policies are defended on compensatory
principles, utilitarian principles or on the principle of distributive justice, fact
remains that the very ethos of such policies is to bring out equality, by taking
affirmative action."
496. In Samatha V. State of A.P. 186 this Court underlined the unity of directive
principles and fundamental rights, and the deep, intrinsic connection between
"72.
Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of the Constitution have
fused in them as fundamental human rights as indivisible and interdependent.
The Constitution has charged the State to provide facilities and opportunities
among the people and groups of people to remove social and economic inequality
and to improve equality of status. Article 39(b) enjoins the State to direct its
policy towards securing distribution of the ownership and control of the material
resources of the community as best to subserve the common good. The Founding
Fathers with hindsight, engrafted with prognosis, not only inalienable human
rights as part of the Constitution but also charged the State as its policy to
remove obstacles, disabilities and inequalities for human development and
positive actions to provide opportunities and facilities to develop human dignity
and equality of status and of opportunity for social and economic democracy.
Economic and social equality is a facet of liberty without which meaningful life
would be hollow and mirage."
497. In a similar manner, Indian Medical Assn. V. Union of India18 underscored
250-52, paras 165 & 168)
"165. It is now a well-settled principle of our constitutional jurisprudence that
Article 14 does not merely aspire to provide for our citizens mere formal equality,
but also equality of status and of opportunity.
The goals of the nation State are the securing for all of its citizens a fraternity
assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity of the nation. While Justice-
social, economic and political is mentioned in only Article 38, it was also recognised
that there can be no justice without equality of status and of opportunity (see M.
Nagaraj2. As recognised by Babasaheb Ambedkar, at the moment that our
Constitution just set sail, that while the first rule of the ship, in the form of formal
equality, was guaranteed, inequality in terms of access to social and economic
resources was rampant and on a massive scale, and that so long as they
individually, and the social groups they were a part of, continue to not access to
social and economic resources that affords them dignity, they would always be on
the margins of the ship, with the ever present danger of falling off that ship and
thereby never partaking of the promised goals of that ship. Babasaheb Ambedkar
with great foresight remarked that unless such more fundamental inequalities, that
foster conditions of injustice, and limit liberty of thought and of conscience, are
eradicated at the earliest, the ship itself would be torn apart.
*
*
*
168. An important and particular aspect of our Constitution that should always
be kept in mind is that various aspects of social justice, and an egalitarian social
order, were also inscribed, not as exceptions to the formal content of equality but
as intrinsic, vital and necessary components of the basic equality code itself. To
the extent there was to be a conflict, on account of scarcity, it was certainly
envisaged that the State would step in to ensure an equitable distribution in a
manner that would be conducive to common good; nevertheless, if the State was
to transgress beyond a certain limit, whereby the formal content of equality was
likely to be drastically abridged or truncated, the power of judicial review was to
curtail it."
498. Therefore, the design of the Constitution, which by the Preamble, promises
justice - social, economic, and political, liberty of thought and expression, equality,
and fraternity; and the various provisions which manifest it (Articles 14-18, 19, 20-
21, 23-24, 29, 38-39, 41 and 46) - articulate an organic and unbreakable bond
between these concepts, which are guarantees. The idea of the twin assurance of
non-discrimination and equality of opportunity, is to oblige the State to ensure that
meaningful equality is given to all. Similarly, the fraternal principle binds both the
State and the citizen, as without fraternity, liberty degenerates to individualistic
indulgence. Without dignity, equality and liberty, are rendered hollow. This inviolable
bond, therefore, is part of the core foundation of our Republic. Freedom from
Colonial Rule was with the agenda of creating a democratic republic, reflecting the
unique genesis of its nation, holding the people with diverse languages, cultures,
religions with a common bond of egalitarianism, fraternity, and liberties, assuring
dignity to all - the State and the citizens were to ensure that these were preserved,
at all times, for each individual.
499. This principle of equality - non-discrimination or non-exclusion, never had
occasion to be considered in past decisions that examined amendments to the
Constitution which dealt with different facets of equality - such as the ceiling on
land holding [Waman Rao27 Bhim Singhji V. Union of India 0 (hereinafter as "Bhim
Singhji")] or omission of princely privileges (Raghunathrao Ganpatrao1. Thus the
Court did not adjudicate upon the non-discriminatory or non-exclusionary principle.
In each case, the facet of equality alleged to have been violated by a constitutional
amendment, limited or affected property. In other words, the focus of every instance
where an amendment was struck down (barring those in L. Chandra Kumar5 50 P.
Sambamurthy48, Indira Gandhi34, and Kihoto Hollohan49) were defining of excess
property in the hands of the "haves" and the more fortunate, in possession of land
exceeding ceilings (agrarian or otherwise), and dismantling of princely privileges
deemed antithetical to republicanism and thereby promoting republicanism and
equality. The Court's caveat-be it in Kesavananda Bharati15, Waman Rao27 or Bhim
Singhji30-were only to the extent that oversight, to ensure that the contents of the
laws adhered to the directive principles and were not a mask or veneer to extinguish
liberties enshrined in Articles 14 and 19, and were to be retained.
500. The effort of the State in each of these instances, was to create new avenues
by expropriation of wealth, assets, and properties from the "haves" and ensure
distributive justice in furtherance of the objectives under Article 38 [particularly
clause (2); and also Article 39 (particularly clause (b)] - that of minimising
inequalities, and distribution of ownership and control of material resources,
respectively. Thus, 263 entries out of the total of 284 entries in the IXth Schedule to
the Constitution, are legislations relating to land reforms, land ceilings, and other
agrarian reforms Acts, of the States and Union Territories.
501. In the other class of amendments where the constitutional ethos was
promoted [introduction of Article 21-A, and Article 15(5) (to facilitate Article 21-A)],
this Court's decisions [in Pramati3 and Society for Unaided Private Schools of
Rajasthan V. Union of India 2 (hereinafter "Society for Unaided Private Schools of
Rajasthan") respectively] are telling, because these provisions did not practice
discrimination in the sharing of new benefits or rights, and were inclusive. The Court
naturally upheld them. The only challenge
dealing with equality-in M. Nagaraj2, failed because the right to "catch up rule" was
a derivative principle evolved by the Court, in the context of the larger canvas that
there was no right to promotion [Article 16(4) did not carry within it the right to
promotion - a formulation in Indra Sawhney5, which holds good even as on date, for
all classes save the SCs and STs]. This Court held that such rule did not negate the
"essence" of equality or its "egalitarian" facet.
502. In juxtaposition to all this, for the first time, the constituent power has been
invoked to practice exclusion of victims of social injustice, who are also amongst the
poorest in this country, which stands in stark contradiction of the principle of
egalitarianism and social justice for all. The earlier amendments were aimed at
ensuring egalitarianism and social justice in an inherently unequal society, where
the largest mass of people were impoverished, denied access to education, and other
basic needs.
503. In every case, which implicates the right to equality, when the Court is
asked to adjudge upon the validity of a constitutional amendment, invariably what
the Court focuses its gaze upon, is what is facet of equality. The debates which led
to the framing of the Constitution, are emphatic that the equalising principle is a
foundational tenet "an article of faith" upon which our democratic republic rests.
Equality - both as a principle, an idea, and as a provision is "so mixed" as to make
it impossible to extricate the form from the substance, the idea from its expression.
Likewise, equality-of protection before the law, of opportunity-as a right not to be
discriminated against on grounds enumerated in Articles 15(1) and 16(1) are
engrained principles, nay, entrenched entitlements. The question which this Court
therefore addresses, in every case which complains of infractions of the essential
features of the Constitution is-has that principle been undermined or the core idea
(of equality) been distorted.
504. The bedrock value which enlivens Articles 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 29(2), and
325, therefore, is the principle of non-discrimination. Alongside the generic principle
of equality, captured by Article 14, is the idea that certain segments of society which
had been historically stigmatised and discriminated on account of the caste identity
of its members, should be the beneficiaries of protective discrimination to enable
them proper access to public goods, facilities, spaces, and representation in public
employment. The idea of equality, therefore, is tethered to another inseparable facet
i.e. non-discrimination, that there cannot be any exclusion by the State in these vital
spheres of human activity. This principle of non-discrimination is what emerges from
the history of the provisions (outlined previously), and the precedents of this Court.
Further, the manner in which these provisions have been interpreted reiterate that
integral to that non-discriminatory facet, is the idea of positive discrimination in
favour of hitherto discriminated communities ("Harijans", as termed in N.M.
Thomas4 or SC/STs). Consequently, the irresistible conclusion
is that non-discrimination - especially the importance of the injunction not to
exclude or discriminate against SC/ST communities [by reason of the express
provisions in Articles 17 and 15] constitutes the essence of equality : that principle
is the core value that transcends the provisions themselves; this can be said to be
part of the basic structure.
D. Impact/effect of the phrase "other than" in the impugned Amendment
(i) Test of reasonable classification
505. At the outset, it is acknowledged that the doctrine of reasonable
classification is not per se a part of the basic structure; it is however, a method
evolved by this Court to breathe life into and provide content to the right to equality
under Article 14 - the latter being a part of the basic structure. The contention
made by those supporting the Amendment - that treating the SC, ST and OBC as a
distinct class from those who are not covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is a
reasonable classification, necessitates further scrutiny.
506. It was the submission of the learned Attorney General and Solicitor General,
that SC/ST/OBC communities who have thus far enjoyed and will continue to enjoy
special provision and reservation made in their favour [Articles 15(4) and 16(4)]
constitute a homogeneous class, the members of whose communities are
beneficiaries of existing reservation [which also includes the poorer members among
their group], whereas the beneficiaries of the new EWS reservation, were those who
did not enjoy such benefits. Consequently, there was no deprivation of opportunity
within the quota/silo set apart for the former category. That further opportunities are
being denied to them on account of the creation of the 10% quota, marginally
affects
them 188 Such adverse effect, it was argued, could not be characterised as a
shocking breach of the equality code or that it affected the identity of the
Constitution. It was submitted furthermore, that even in the existing reservation,
the SC/ST/OBC candidate belonging to such category, could compete in the quota
set apart for their caste or class and not of the quota of each other. Thus, the SC
candidates cannot compete in the quota set apart for SC or OBC. This, it was urged
is reasonable classification by which unequals are not treated equally. This
characterisation of the classification, and justification for the impugned Amendment,
found favour in the judgments by Dinesh Maheshwari, Bela Trivedi, and J.B.
Pardiwala, JJ. I respectfully disagree with this conclusion.
507. I am of the opinion that the application of the doctrine of classification
differentiating the poorest segments of the society, as one segment (i.e. the forward
classes) not being beneficiaries of reservation, and the other, the poorest, who are
subjected to additional disabilities due to caste stigmatisation or social barrier based
discrimination - the latter being justifiably kept out of the new reservation benefit,
is an exercise in deluding ourselves that those getting social and educational
backwardness based reservations are somehow more fortunate. This classification is
plainly contrary to the essence of equal opportunity. If this Constitution means
anything, it is that the Code of Articles 15(1), 15(2), 15(4), 16(1), 16(2), and 16(4)
are one indivisible whole. This Court has reiterated time and again that Articles 16
(1) and 16(4) are facets of the same equality principle. That we need Articles 15(4)
and 16(4) to achieve equality of opportunity guaranteed to all in Articles 15(1) and
16(1) cannot now be undermined, through this reasoning, to hold that the theory of
classification permits exclusion on this very basis.
508. In State of W.B. V. Anwar Ali Sarkar140 one of the earliest decisions to
"64.
The classification permissible, however, must be based on some real
and substantial distinction bearing a just and reasonable relation to the objects
sought to be attained and cannot be made arbitrarily and without any substantial
basis. Classification thus means segregation in classes which have a systematic
relation, usually found in common properties and characteristics. It postulates a
rational basis and does not mean herding together of certain persons and classes
arbitrarily. Thus the legislature may fix the age at which persons shall be deemed
competent to contract between themselves, but no one will claim that
competency to contract can be made to depend upon the stature or colour of the
hair. "Such a classification for such a purpose would be arbitrary and a piece of
legislative despotism "189
"85. It is now well established that while Article 14 is designed to prevent a
person or class of persons from being singled out from others similarly situated
for the purpose of being specially subjected to discriminating and hostile
legislation, it does not insist on an "abstract symmetry" in the sense that every
piece of legislation must have universal application. All persons are not, by
nature, attainment or circumstances, equal and the varying needs of different
classes of persons often require separate treatment and, therefore, the protecting
clause has been construed as a guarantee against discrimination amongst equals
only and not as taking away from the State the power to classify persons for the
purpose of legislation. This classification may be on different bases. It may be
geographical or according to objects or occupations or the like. Mere
classification, however, is not enough to get over the inhibition of the article. The
classification must not be arbitrary but must be rational, that is to say, it must not
only be based on some qualities or characteristics which are to be found in all the
persons grouped together and not in others who are left out but those qualities or
characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the object of the legislation."
510. This Court in State of J&K V. Triloki Nath Khosa133 observed that
"31.
is fraught with the danger that it may produce artificial inequalities and
therefore, the right to classify is hedged in with salient restraints, or else, the
guarantee of equality will be submerged in class legislation masquerading as laws
meant to govern well-marked classes characterised by different and distinct
attainments. Classification, therefore, must be truly founded on substantial
differences which distinguish persons grouped together from those left out of the
group and such differential attributes must bear a just and rational relation to the
object sought to be achieved."
(emphasis supplied)
511. Again, in Mohd. Shujat Ali V. Union of India this Court observed that :
"26.
the doctrine of classification should not be carried to a point where
instead of being a useful servant, it becomes a dangerous master.''
512. The basis of classification in the impugned Amendment, enacted in
furtherance of Article 46 - is economic deprivation. Applying that criterion, it is
either income, or landholding, or value of assets or the extent of resources
controlled, which are classifiers. The social origins, or identities of the target group
are thus irrelevant. That there is some basis for classification, whether relevant or
irrelevant, which is sufficient to differentiate between members of an otherwise
&
homogeneous group, is no justification. This was highlighted most recently by this
"96. Discrimination is the essence of classification. Equality is violated if it
rests on unreasonable basis. The concept of equality has an inherent limitation
arising from the very nature of the constitutional guarantee. Those who are
similarly circumstanced are entitled to an equal treatment. Equality is amongst
equals. Classification is, therefore, to be founded on substantial differences which
distinguish persons grouped together from those left out of the groups and such
differential attributes must bear a just and rational relation to the object sought
to be achieved.
97. Our Constitution aims at equality of status and opportunity for all citizens
including those who are socially, economically and educationally backward.
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) bring out the position of backward
classes to merit equality. Special provisions are made for the advancement of
backward classes and reservation of appointments and posts for them to secure
adequate representation. These provisions are intended to bring out the content of
equality guaranteed by Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1). However, it is to be noted that
equality under Articles 15 and 16 could not have a different content from equality
under Article 144. Differentia which is the basis of classification must be sound and
must have reasonable relation to the object of the legislation. If the object itself is
discriminatory, then explanation that classification is reasonable having rational
relation to the object sought to be achieved is immaterial191."
(emphasis supplied)
513. Krishna Iyer, J., speaking in A.S. Iyer V. V. Balasubramanyam 192 put the
"57. equality clauses in our constitutional ethic have an equalising message
and egalitarian meaning which cannot be subverted by discovering classification
between groups and perpetuating the inferior-superior complex by a neo-
doctrine."
514. Classification, it is said, is a subsidiary rule, to give practical shape to the
principle of equality. However, as emphasised by K. Subba Rao, J. in Lachhman Dass
V. State of Punjab193 : (AIR p. 240, para 50)
"50.
Overemphasis on the doctrine of classification or an anxious and
sustained attempt to discover some basis for classification may gradually and
imperceptibly deprive the article of its glorious content. That process would
inevitably end in substituting the doctrine of classification for the doctrine of
equality; the fundamental right to equality before the law and equal protection of
the laws may be replaced by the doctrine of classification."
515. The economic criteria, based on economic indicators, which distinguish
between one individual and another, would be relevant for the purpose of
classification, and grant of reservation benefit. The Union's concern that SC/ST/OBCs
are beneficiaries of other reservations, which set apart the poorest among them,
from the poorest amongst other communities which do not fall within Articles 15(4)
and 16(4), cannot be a distinguishing factor, as to either constitute an intelligible
differentia between the two, nor is there any rational nexus between that distinction
and the object of the Amendment, which is to eliminate poverty and further the goal
of equity and economic justice.
516. There is a considerable body of past judgments enunciating the principle
that any exclusionary basis, should be rational, and non-discriminatory. In National
Legal Services Authority V. Union of India 115 this
Court
frowned
upon
the
discrimination faced by transgender persons and held all practices which excluded
their participation to be discriminatory. The Court
explained how treatment of equals and unequals as equals is violative of the basic
"61. Article 14 of the Constitution of India states that the State shall not deny
to "any person" equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within
the territory of India. Equality includes the full and equal enjoyment of all rights
and freedom. Right to equality has been declared as the basic feature of the
Constitution and treatment of equals as unequals or unequals as equals will be
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution. Article 14 of the Constitution
also ensures equal protection and hence a positive obligation on the State to
ensure equal protection of laws by bringing in necessary social and economic
changes, so that everyone including TGs may enjoy equal protection of laws and
nobody is denied such protection."
517. The salience of the non-exclusionary precept as facets of non-discrimination
(equality), liberty and dignity, was ruled in Indian Young Lawyers Assn. (Sabarimala
300)
"300.
this Court will be guided by the pursuit to uphold the values of the
Constitution, based in dignity, liberty and equality. In a constitutional order of
priorities, these are values on which the edifice of the Constitution stands. They
infuse our constitutional order with a vision for the future-of a just, equal and
dignified society. Intrinsic to these values is the anti-exclusion principle.
Exclusion is destructive of dignity."
518. Similarly, in Charu Khurana V. Union of India94 this Court held that
discrimination against women artistes in the cinema industry violated equality. It
33)
"33.
Be it stated, dignity is the quintessential quality of a personality and a
human frame always desires to live in the mansion of dignity, for it is a highly
cherished value. Clause (j) has to be understood in the backdrop that India is a
welfare State and, therefore, it is the duty of the State to promote justice, to
provide equal opportunity to all citizens and see that they are not deprived of by
reasons of economic disparity."
The surest way legal research!"
519. Can the fact that SC/ST and OBC communities are covered by reservations
to promote their equality, to ensure that centuries old disadvantages and barriers
faced by them (which are still in place, and is necessary to ensure their equal
participation) be a ground for a reasonable classification? In my opinion, that cannot
be the basis of classification. None of the materials placed on the record contain any
suggestion that the SC/ST/OBC categories should be excluded from the poverty or
economic criteria-based reservation, on the justification that existing reservation
policies have yielded such significant
results, that a majority of them have risen above the circumstances which resulted
in, or exacerbate, their marginalisation and poverty. There is nothing to suggest,
how, keeping out those who qualify for the benefit of this economic-criteria
reservation, but belong to this large segment constituting 82% of the country's
population (SC, ST and OBC together), will advance the object of economically
weaker sections of society.
520. As an aside, it may also be noted that according to the figures available, 45
districts are fully declared, and 64, partially declared, as Fifth Schedule areas, out of
766 districts in the country. Majority of the population of these areas are inhabited
by members of the Scheduled Tribes. According to the Sinho Committee, 48.4% of
all Scheduled Tribes are in the BPL (below poverty line) zone. This is 4.25 crores of
the population. In this manner, the exclusion operates additionally, in a geographical
manner, too, denying the poorest tribals, living in these areas, the benefit of
reservation meant for the poor.
521. The reservations in favour of the poorest members of society, is not identity-
based, or on past discrimination of the community concerned which shackled them
within the confines of their caste (and what members of that caste could do). It is
based on persistent economic deprivation, or poverty. The identifying characteristic
is, therefore, entirely new. It has no connection with social or educational
backwardness. The social or educational backwardness of the communities to which
beneficiaries of the impugned Amendments belong, are irrelevant. Therefore, caste
or community is not the identifying criteria or classifier. In such eventuality, the wall
of separation, so to say by which the exclusion clause ("other than") keeps out the
socially and educationally backward classes, particularly SC/STs operates to
discriminate them, because overwhelming numbers of the poorest are from amongst
them.
(ii) Individual - As the beneficiary
522. Further, in the case of economic deprivation, what is to be seen is that
poverty - or its acute ill-effects are equally felt by all, irrespective of which silos
they are in. Thus, at an individual level, a tribal girl facing economic hardship, is as
equally deprived of meaningful opportunity as a non-tribal, "non-backward"/forward
class girl is. The characterisation of existing reservations to SCs/STs/OBCs, as
benefits or privileges, which disentitle them from accessing this new resource, of
reservations based on economic deprivation, though they fall within the latter
description, because "they are loaded with such benefits" (as contended by the
respondents). with respect belittles their pliaht.
523. The problem with the "silo" argument furthered by the Union, is that it not
only fails to locate the individual within a collective, reducing her visibility in the
debate and robbing her of voice, but also further ignores the potentiality of each
individual to excel, and cross the barriers of these very "silos". The polarity between
"collective" rights and entitlements and "individual" is artificial. At the end of it all,
the Constitution has to mean, and provide something, for the common
individual/person; it has to provide the
greatest good to all, not merely sections or collectives. Therefore, the view that the
collective is the constitutive element, from whose prism the individual is viewed,
diminishes the role and the focal point of inquiry, away from the individual, thereby
affording a convenient way of placing people in different "silos".
524. This Court's understanding, in the past too, has been that equality of
opportunity is individual - likewise, the benefit of reservation too is made on the
basis of the community's social and educational backwardness, or they being victims
of the practice of untouchability : yet the individuals are recipients. In M. Nagaraj-,
"43.
the concept of "equality of opportunity" in public employment concerns
an individual, whether that individual belongs to the general category or
Backward Class. The conflicting claim of individual right under Article 16(1) and
the preferential treatment given to a Backward Class has to be balanced. Both the
claims have a particular object to be achieved. The question is of optimisation of
these conflicting interests and claims."
525. The object of reservations is to benefit the individual, in the case of enabling
access to public goods such as education, whereas in the case of elective office or
even public office, though the individual is the recipient of the reservation, the
community is expected to benefit, due to its representation through her. This was
225, para 55)
"55. It must be kept in mind that there is also an inherent difference between
the nature of benefits that accrue from access to education and employment on
one hand and political representation at the grassroots level on the other hand.
While access to higher education and public employment increases the likelihood
of the socio-economic upliftment of the individual beneficiaries, participation in
local self-government is intended as a more immediate measure of empowerment
for the community that the elected representative belongs to."
This goal of empowerment through "representation", is not applicable in the case of
reservations on the basis of economic criteria - which as the petitioners laboriously
contended, is transient, temporary, and rather than a discernible "group", is an
individualistic characteristic. This distinction on the question of Article 16(6), is
elaborated on further in Part V.
526. Apart from the fact that reservations are made for or in favour of collectives,
which are the building blocks of society such as castes, they are meant to benefit
individuals. Castes are merely a convenient method of identifying the backward
communities whose members are beneficiaries. The fact remains that it is citizens
who are meant to benefit from it. The entire jurisprudence, or even the text of
Articles 15 and 16, bear out this aspect. To say, therefore, that collectively
communities identified as Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribe, are beneficiaries and that is reason enough to exclude those
castes/tribes from the benefit of new resources (created by the State through the
amendment) though undisputedly a substantial number of members of these
historically marginalised communities and castes also fulfil the eligibility criteria that
entitles one as deserving of the new resource, is nothing but discrimination at an
individual level. This undermines the very basis of the promise of equal opportunity
and equality of status which the Constitution makers so painstakingly and carefully
conceived of as a guarantee for all, particularly the members of the most
discriminated and deprived sections of the community i.e. the SC and ST
communities. In these circumstances it is cold comfort, therefore, for the person
who otherwise fulfils all the characteristics of an identifier such as poverty-which is
not based on social identity, but on deprivation-to be told that she is poor, as
desperately poor or even more so than members of other communities [who were
not entitled to the reparative reservations under Articles 15(4) and 16(4)], yet she is
being kept out because she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe.
(iii) Violation of the basic structure
527. Poverty debilitates all sections of society. In the case of members of
communities which faced continual discrimination - of the most venial form,
poverty afflicts in the most aggravated form. The exclusion of those sections of
society, for whose benefit non-discriminatory provisions were designed, is an
indefensible violation of the non-discrimination principle, a facet that is entwined in
the Equality Code, and thus reaches to the level of offending or damaging the very
identity of the Constitution. To use the terminology in I.R. Coelho36, the impact of
this Amendment on the equality code which is manifested in its non-discriminatory
or non-exclusionary form, leads it to radically damage the identity of the
Constitution. The promise of the Constitution that no one will be discriminated on
the ground of caste-based practices and untouchability (which is the basis of
identification of such backward class of citizens as Scheduled Castes), is plainly
offended. Therefore, the exclusionary clauses in Article 15(6) and Article 16(6)
damage and violate the basic structure of the Constitution.
528. The characterisation of including the poor (i.e. those who qualify for the
economic eligibility) among those covered under Articles 15(4) and 16(4), in the
new reservations under Articles 15(6) and 16(6), as bestowing "double benefit" is
incorrect. What is described as "benefits" for those covered under Articles 15(4) and
16(4) by the Union, cannot be understood to be a free pass, but as a reparative and
compensatory mechanism meant to level the field - where they are unequal due to
their social stigmatisation. This exclusion violates the non-discrimination and the
non-exclusionary facet of the equality code, which thereby violates the basic
structure of the Constitution.
529. The impugned Amendment creates paths, gateways, and opportunities to
the poorest segments of our society, enabling them multiple access points to spaces
they were unable to go to, places and positions they were unable to fill, and
opportunities they could not hope, ever to ordinarily use, due to their destitution,
economic deprivation, and penury. These : destitution, economic
deprivation, poverty, are markers, or intelligible differentia, forming the basis of the
classification on which the impugned Amendment is entirely premised. To that
extent, the Amendment is constitutionally indefeasible. However, by excluding a
large section of equally poor and destitute individuals - based on their social
backwardness and legally acknowledged caste stigmatisation - from the benefit of
the new opportunities created for the poor, the Amendment practises
constitutionally prohibited forms of discrimination. The overarching principles
underlying Articles 15(1), 15(2), and Articles 16(1), 16(2) is that caste-based or
community-based exclusion (i.e. the practice of discrimination), is impermissible.
Whichever way one would look at it, the Constitution is intolerant towards
untouchability in all its forms and manifestations which are articulated in Articles 15
(1), (2), Articles 16, 17, 23 and 24. It equally prohibits exclusion based on past
discriminatory practices. The exclusion made through the "other than" exclusionary
clause, negates those principles and strikes at the heart of the equality code
(specifically the non-discriminatory principle) which is a part of the core of the
Constitution.
IV. Re Question 1 : Permissibility of special provisions (including
reservation) based on economic criteria
530. At the outset, it is clarified that I am in agreement with the other members
of this Bench, that "economic criteria" for the purpose of Article 15 is permissible
and have provided my additional reasoning and analysis in this section; however, I
diverge with regards to Article 16 for the purpose of reservations in appointment to
public employment, which is elaborated in Part V.
A. Judicial observations on economic criteria
531. Repeated decisions of this Court have iterated that caste alone could not be
the criteria for determining social and educational backwardness. M.R. Balaji6 was
the first to articulate this proposition. This was accepted in later decisions. The Union
and other respondents in the present challenge, relied on Article 46 and certain
other provisions of Part IV of the Constitution. The text of Article 46 is extracted
again for reference:
"46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.-The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation."
532. This court, in both N.M. Thomas4 and Indra Sawhney5 propounded the idea
that preferential treatment based on classification, to further affirmative action,
could be traced to Articles 15(1) and 16(1). However, it was emphasised that on the
question of reservation for Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the field was occupied by Articles
15(4) and 16(4). At the same time, their location did not prevent the State from
making classification for other groups. The question of whether the economic
criterion alone could be the basis of such reservation was squarely addressed in
Indra Sawhney5. The Court held that such reservation based solely on the
application of the economic criterion was not justified. B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. who
authored the majority judgment on this aspect, observed that the office
memorandum in question did not recite the provision concerned, and then
para 845)
"845.
Evidently, this classification among a category outside clause (4) of
Article 16 is not and cannot be related to clause (4) of Article 16. If at all, it is
relatable to clause (1). Even so, we find it difficult to sustain. Reservation of 10%
of the vacancies among open competition candidates on the basis of
income/property-holding means exclusion of those above the demarcating line
from those 10% seats. The question is whether this is constitutionally
permissible? We think not. It may not be permissible to debar a citizen from
being considered for appointment to an office under the State solely on the basis
of his income or property-holding. Since the employment under the State is really
conceived to serve the people (that it may also be a source of livelihood is
secondary) no such bar can be created. Any such bar would be inconsistent with
the guarantee of equal opportunity held out by clause (1) of Article 16. On this
ground alone, the said clause in the Office Memorandum dated 25-5-1991 fails
and is accordingly declared as such."
533. It is quite evident that the economic criterion as the basis for reservations,
was not upheld on account of the existing structure and phraseology in Articles 15
(1) and 16(1). There is nothing in the judgment in Indra Sawhney5 suggestive of
this Court's omnibus disapproval of the idea of rooting affirmative action (including
reservation) on the basis of economic criteria. Nor did this Court comment (or could
have commented) on a possible future amendment to the Constitution, introducing
the economic criteria as the basis for reservation or special provisions.
534. One of the questions considered in Indra Sawhney5 was whether
reservations contemplated could be confined to what existed, in the form of Articles
15 and 16. This Court, having regard to the existing structure of those provisions,
"744. The aspect next to be considered is whether clause (4) is exhaustive of
the very concept of reservations? In other words, the question is whether any
reservations can be provided outside clause (4) i.e. under clause (1) of Article 16.
There are two views on this aspect. On a fuller consideration of the matter, we are
&
of the opinion that clause (4) is not, and cannot be held to be, exhaustive of the
concept of reservations; it is exhaustive of reservations in favour of backward
classes alone. Merely
because, one form of classification is stated as a specific clause, it does not follow
that the very concept and power of classification implicit in clause (1) is exhausted
thereby. To say so would not be correct in principle. But, at the same time, one
thing is clear. It is in very exceptional situations, - and not for all and sundry
reasons - that any further reservations, of whatever kind, should be provided under
clause (1). In such cases, the State has to satisfy, if called upon, that making such a
provision was necessary (in public interest) to redress a specific situation. The very
presence of clause (4) should act as a damper upon the propensity to create further
classes deserving special treatment. The reason for saying so is very simple. If
reservations are made both under clause (4) as well as under clause (1), the
vacancies available for free competition as well as reserved categories would be
correspondingly whittled down and that is not a reasonable thing to do."
535. It is apparent that the Court was considering the issue through the prism of
the provisions as they existed. The Court did not - and correctly, could not have
visualised what may be become a necessity, perhaps even a compelling one in the
future, of the need to bridge the ever-widening gap between the affluent and
comfortable on the one hand, and the desperately poor, on the other. The need to
ensure that those suffering the adverse effects of abject poverty - illiteracy,
marginal income, little or no access to basic amenities such as shelter, hygiene,
nutrition, or crucially, education (which has transformational value) - are given a
modicum of access to achieve basic goals which the Preamble assures, and Part IV
provisions direct the State to achieve, therefore, is another dimension which
Parliament thought appropriate to achieve, while introducing the economic criteria.
Therefore, the judgment in Indra Sawhney howsoever authoritative, cannot be
considered as the last word, when considering the introduction of the new criteria for
affirmative action. That judgment is authoritative, for its determination of what is
permissible, and what should be the constitutional method of implementing,
backwardness-based affirmative action. However, it cannot be considered as
exhaustive of new criteria, which may be brought about by constitutional
amendments (thus, removing the basis of the judgment itself). Therefore, to say
that Indra Sawhney5 or any other judgment does not permit reservations or
affirmative action, based on economic criteria, alone, is incorrect. That judgment
cannot restrain Parliament from introducing constitutional amendments that enact
such criteria, as the basis of reservation benefits, or other special provisions.
Further, existing criteria for reservations, cannot be the only way in which the State
is permitted to achieve social and economic justice goals : those criteria must be
followed, but cannot preclude the introduction of new criteria, or new methods,
through amendment to the Constitution.
B. State's obligations under Directive Principles to fulfil mandate of
substantive equality
536. A perusal of the directive principles of State policy, reveals the State's
obligations, as intended by the Constituent Assembly. The State, through Article 38
(1), is obligated to establish a social order to promote welfare of the people by
extending to them justice - social, economic and political. It also has the
responsibility of minimising income inequalities and the elimination of inequalities in
status, facilities and opportunities, by virtue of Article 38(2) specifically. Article 39
not only postulates the right to an adequate means of livelihood, and redistribution
of material resources for common good, it further directs the State to ensure that
there is no concentration of wealth and means of production in hands of the few, to
the common detriment. Articles 38 and 39 read with Articles 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47
and 48, holistically, contribute to economic justice.
537. Social justice implies removing all inequalities and affording equal
opportunities to citizens in social as well as in economic affairs. 195 Directive
principles of State policy, through Articles 38, 39, 41 and 43, mandate the State to
establish an "economically just" social order. The preambular aims of justice
(economic, social and political), and equality of status and opportunity, find
articulation in both Part III and Part IV of the Constitution. Till now, the State
pursued the goal of achieving equality of status and opportunity, substantively, by
employing some form of protective discrimination, to eliminate past discrimination,
which had set up barriers to the most marginalised sections of society, thereby
denying them access to resources and public employment. The structuring of
enabling provisions [Articles 15(4) and 16(4)] is such that the target group were
only those who fell within the description of classes that suffered social and
educational backwardness. These included the most disadvantaged among the
disadvantaged and oppressed i.e. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The
inclusion of any other people therefore, could not be contemplated in the context of
the Constitution, as well as its text, as it stood.
538. The aim of creating a uniform, egalitarian, casteless society is to be seen as
a paramount objective. Reservation was deemed as one of the principal means of
achieving that goal. Such measures have worked, and their retention underlines that
as a nation, we have miles to go, before we are anywhere near the promise we have
given onto ourselves. In this journey, if it is discerned that alongside these hitherto
oppressed communities, who were hostilely treated on account of their caste status,
there are also a substantial number of people, who have not progressed due to their
economic deprivation; the State is duty-bound to take remedial measures to address
their plight.
C. Flexibility of constitutional amendments to enable substantive equality
539. Constitutions being charters of governance, carry within them delineation of
powers, of various branches of Government, and numerous constituent units, at the
same time, guaranteeing liberties, assuring equality. To be vibrant and relevant,
they are to be sufficiently flexible to allow experimentation. This experimentation is
vital, to enable the assimilation of felt needs of the society - for change : in view of
developments in interpretation, efficacy of provisions of the charter, unmet or new
aspirations, etc. The need to ensure that the fruits of progress reach all, especially
the poor, who are marginalised, is an important constitutional obligation, which finds
voice in several provisions of the directive principles of State policy. The existence,
or rather, the express recognition of discrimination which prevented large segments
of the population, access to institutions, or participation in public affairs and offices
cannot, therefore, imply the preclusion of recognition of any other criteria, for
providing means to other disadvantaged groups, based on other factors. In this
case, the factor, or basis chosen, is economic deprivation.
540. In Kihoto Hollohan49 this Court noted that a Constitution "outlines only
broad and general principles meant to endure and be capable of flexible application
to changing circumstances - a distinction which differentiates a statute from a
Charter under which all statutes are made". This Court quoted from Cooley on
Constitutional Limitations196 that an amendment, to the Constitution, upon its
adoption becomes a part thereof; as much so as if it had been originally incorporated
in the Constitution and "it is to be construed accordingly".
541. Constitutions are meant to endure; they outline the broad contours of
governance of the society which creates them. Modern Constitutions typically
delineate power : legislative, executive and judicial and, depending upon the genius
of the individual society, set up systems of checks and balances to limit the zones of
operation of each branch. Where the Constitution governs a large territory,
comprising of provincial or constituent units, the delineation of legislative power is
also indicated. Furthermore, in every Constitution, limitations on State power, in the
form of a Bill of Rights (by whatever name called) are engrafted to safeguard
individual liberties and ensure that there is equality in all spheres of activity.
Constitutions also indicate the manner of their amendment : essentially regarding
the special procedures needed for the purpose, and in some instances, the limitation
upon the amending power, in regard to certain subjects, which are deemed beyond
the pale of that power.
542. The rationale for such amending power is that no matter how exhaustive a
Constitution is, how deeply its framers have deliberated, it may possibly not provide
for all situations. There may be need to re-align legislative heads, in the light of
subsequent changes dictated by social or political
consensus, or compromise. Societies are constantly, in a state of flux. In the words
of Thomas Jefferson, considered to be the Founding Father of the United States:
"I am not an advocate for frequent changes in laws and Constitutions. But laws
and institutions must go hand in hand with the progress of the human mind. As
that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as new discoveries are made,
new truths discovered and manners and opinions change, with the change of
circumstances, institutions must advance also to keep pace with the times. We
might as well require a man to wear still the coat which fitted him when a boy as
civilized society to remain ever under the regimen of their barbarous
ancestors. "197
543. The opinion of Khanna, J., too recognises this aspect, in Kesavananda
"1437.
for the framework of the different organs of the State viz. the
executive, the legislature and the judiciary. A Constitution also reflects the hopes
and aspirations of a people. Besides laying down the norms for the functioning of
different organs a Constitution encompasses within itself the broad indications as
to how the nation is to march forward in times to come."
544. Commenting that it cannot be regarded as "a mere legal document" the
1437)
"1437.
the Constitution must of necessity be the vehicle of the life of a
nation. It has also to be borne in mind that a Constitution is not a gate but a
road. Beneath the drafting of a Constitution is the awareness that things do not
stand still but move on, that life of a progressive nation, as of an individual, is not
static and stagnant but dynamic and dashful. A Constitution must therefore
contain ample provision for experiment and trial in the task of administration."
545. Such being the case, the concerns which emerge from changing time, are
usually met within the framework of a flexible constitutional document. However,
occasionally, that document needs to be re-examined, and if necessary, amended to
accommodate the challenges that are unmet and beyond the contemplation of that
foundational charter.
546. It is axiomatic that the wisdom of a legislation is not within the domain of
the courts. Speaking of constitutional amendments, Sikri, C.J., in Kesavananda
"288. It is of course for Parliament to decide whether an amendment is
necessary. The Courts will not be concerned with the wisdom of the amendment."
547. Shelat and Grover, JJ. stated the same idea, and added that it is the
consequences of the provision, having regard to the width of the power, which
para 532)
"532. It is difficult to accede to the submission on behalf of the respondents
that while considering the consequences with reference to the width of an
amending power contained in a Constitution any question of its abuse is involved.
It is not for the courts to enter into the wisdom or policy of a particular provision
in a Constitution or a statute. That is for the Constitution-makers or for Parliament
or the legislature. But that the real consequences can be taken into account while
judging the width of the power is well settled. The court cannot ignore the
consequences to which a particular construction can lead while ascertaining the
limits of the provisions granting the power."198
548. Whether the circumstances justified the move, or that some measure was
better than what was conceived and enacted is not what can be gone into by the
courts. This is even more so, in the case of constitutional amendments, where the
facts which impelled Parliament to draw upon its extraordinary power, a constituent
power, no less, and amend the Constitution, are not matters of examination or deep
consideration. Therefore, whether there is objective material to justify the economic
criteria, or the sufficiency of it, are not relevant for the Court to examine, while
considering the validity of this constitutional amendment. Equally Parliament's
motive (or of a legislative body), in enacting the legislative measure, or
constitutional amendment, is an irrelevant factor. What the Court can certainly
consider is, the purpose which the amendment seeks to achieve, which is often
discernible from the processes leading up to the passing of such an amendment, the
discussions that arise, etc.
D. Purpose that the Amendment seeks to achieve through introduction of
economic criteria
549. The above discussion is conclusive on the question of relevance of materials
to justify constitutional amendments. Nevertheless, since arguments were addressed
by the petitioners and the Union on this, it would be appropriate to deal with them.
The materials relied on, in the form of the Sinho Commission Report (2010), the
Statement of Objects of the Bill when it was introduced, together with the
parliamentary debates (brief as they are) before it fructified into the Amendment,
are indicative of what Parliament wished to achieve, through the amendment.
550. The respondent Union relied heavily upon the NITI Aayog Report on National
Multidimensional Poverty Index (published in 2021). The issue of mapping poverty
has consistently engaged the attention of the State - earlier, poverty was mapped
using the "the poverty line", which has now given way to the "multidimensional"
approach. By this latter methodology, various indicators are considered to look at a
holistic picture of deprivation. The NITI Aayog Report considered - as poor, an
individual spending less than Rs 47 a day in cities as against one spending less than
Rs 32 a day in villages. The National Multidimensional Poverty Index ("NMPI") based
itself on three facets - education, health, and standard of living - each having a
weightage of one-third, in the index. Each of these are further based on 12 sections
- nutrition, child and adolescent mortality, antenatal care, years of schooling, school
attendance, cooking fuel, sanitation, drinking water, electricity, housing, assets, and
bank accounts.
551. There were deprived people by each of these criteria though some of them
may not have been multidimensionally poor in 2015-16. The highest number of the
deprived were identified on the indicators of cooking fuel (58.5%) and sanitation
(52%). In other words, more than half the population were poor on these two facets,
in terms of the Report. Housing had a deprivation proportion of 45.6% of the
population during 2015-16, followed by nutrition (37.6%), maternal health (22.6%),
drinking water (14.6 %), assets (14%), years of schooling (13.9%), electricity
(12.2%), bank account (9.7%), school attendance (6.4%) and child and adolescent
mortality (2.7%). 199
552. The Sinho Commission was set up to examine the condition of economically
backward classes and suggested measures - including the feasibility of reservations
- to improve their lot. The Report, published in July 2010, was based on the Census
of 2001, and later surveys, wherein the Commission took note of various factors
such as employment, education, nutrition levels, housing, access to resources, etc.
The statistics (NSSO 2004-2005) which this Report is based on, disclosed that in all,
31.7 crore people were below the poverty line ("BPL"), of which the Scheduled Caste
population was 7.74 crores (i.e. 38% of total Scheduled Castes), Scheduled Tribe
population was 4.25 crores (48.4% of total Scheduled Tribes), 13.86 crores of OBC
population (which was 33.1% of total OBCs), and 5.85 crores of General Category
(18.2% of total General Category).
E. Conclusion on permissibility of economic criteria per se
553. Economic emancipation is a facet of economic justice which the Preamble,
as well as Articles 38 and 46 promise to all Indians. It is intrinsically linked with
distributive justice - ensuring a fair share of the material resources, and a share of
the progress of society as a whole, to each individual. Without economic
emancipation, liberty - indeed equality, are mere platitudes, empty promises tied
to "ropes of sand"200. The break from the past - which was rooted on elimination of
caste-based social discrimination, in affirmative action - to now include affirmative
action based on deprivation, through the impugned Amendment, therefore, does not
alter, destroy or damage the basic structure of the Constitution. It adds a new
dimension to the constitutional project of uplifting the poorest segments of society.
V. Consideration of Article 16(6)
554. It is important to note that there are crucial supplementary reasons, why
the reservation benefits introduced through Article 16(6) are to be examined from
another point of view - apart from the point of exclusion.
555. The issue of providing reservations in public employment, was debated four
times, by the Constituent Assembly, (30-11-1948, 9-12-1948, 23-8-1949 and 14-
10-1949) which considered Draft Article 10(3). Several speakers emphasised that
reservations in favour of backward classes of citizens was necessary to empower
them and give voice to them in the administration of the country. The speech, by
H.V. Kamath, on the content of what is now Article 16(4), is illustrative : (CAD Vol.
10, p. 243)
"This is not a mere directive principle of State policy; this is in Chapter III, on
Fundamental Rights. When this is guaranteed to them, no backward class of
citizens need be apprehensive. If there is no representation for them in the
services they can take the Government to task on that account. I think this would
be an adequate safeguard for them so far as their share in the services is
concerned. I hope that this Article 10 guarantees that right to them, and so they
need have no dispute or quarrel with the article before the House today."
662, para 694)
"694.
the objective behind clause (4) of Article 16 was the sharing of State
power. The State power which was almost exclusively monopolised by the upper
castes i.e. a few communities, was now sought to be made broad-based. The
backward communities who were till then kept out of apparatus of power, were
sought to be inducted thereinto and since that was not practicable in the normal
course, a special provision was made to effectuate the said objective. In short,
the objective behind Article 16(4) is empowerment of the deprived backward
communities - to give
them a share in the administrative apparatus and in the governance of the
community"
para 788)
"788.
It is a well-known fact that till Independence the administrative
apparatus was manned almost exclusively by members of the "upper" castes. The
Shudras, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and other similar
backward social groups among Muslims and Christians had practically no entry
into the administrative apparatus. It was this imbalance which was sought to be
redressed by providing for reservations in favour of such backward classes. In this
sense Dr Rajeev Dhawan may be right when he says that the object of Article 16
(4) was "empowerment" of the backward classes. The idea was to enable them to
share the State power. We are, accordingly, of the opinion that the backwardness
contemplated by Article 16(4) is mainly social backwardness. It would not be
correct to say that the backwardness under Article 16(4) should be both social
and educational."
(emphasis in original)
558. In M. Nagaraj too, the idea of reservations under Article 16(4) being
"55.
in Southern Railway V. Rangachari201 Gajendragadkar, J. giving the
majority judgment said that reservation under Article 16(4) is intended merely to
give adequate representation to backward communities. It cannot be used for
creating monopolies or for unduly or illegitimately disturbing the legitimate
interests of other employees. A reasonable balance must be struck between the
claims of Backward Classes and claims of other employees as well as the
requirement of efficiency of administration."
559. It is clear, from the above discussion, that equality of opportunity in public
employment - a specific facet of the equality code - is a guarantee to each citizen.
The equally forthright prohibition in Article 16(2), enjoining discrimination on
various grounds, including caste, is to reinforce the absoluteness of equality of
opportunity, that it cannot be denied. The only departure through Article 16(4) is to
give voice to hitherto unrepresented classes, discriminated against on the proscribed
grounds. This link - between providing equal opportunity, and representation
through reservations, was the only exception, permitted by the Constitution, to
further equality in public employment.
560. The impugned Amendment snaps the link between the idea of providing
reservation for backward classes to ensure their empowerment and representation
[who were, before the enactment of Article 16(4), absent from public employment].
The entire philosophy of Article 16 is to ensure barrier-free equal opportunity in
regard to public employment. Article 16(4) - as
stated previously enables citizens belonging to backward classes access to public
employment with the superadded condition that this is to ensure their "adequate
representation". Important decisions of this Court : Indra Sawhney5, M. Nagaraj-,
Jarnail Singh V. Lachhmi Narain Gupta02 and B.K. Pavitra V. Union of India have
time and again emphasised that reservations under Article 16 are conditioned upon
periodic adequate representation review.
561. The introduction of reservations for economically weaker sections of the
society is not premised on their lack of representation (unlike backward classes); the
absence of this condition implies that persons who benefit from the EWS
reservations can, and in all probability do belong to classes or castes, which are
"forward" and are represented in public service, adequately. This additional
reservation, by which a section of the population who are not socially backward, and
whose communities are represented in public employment - violates the equality of
opportunity which the Preamble assures, and Article 16(1) guarantees.
562. The impugned Amendment results in treating those covered by reservations
under Article 16(4) with a standard that is more exacting and stringent than those
covered by Article 16(6). For instance, if the poorest citizens among a certain
community or that entire community, are unrepresented, and the quota set apart for
the group concerned (SC) as a whole is filled, the requirement of "representation" is
deemed fulfilled i.e. notwithstanding that the specific community has not been
represented in public employment, no citizen belonging to it, would be entitled to
claim reservation. However, in the case of non-SC/ST/OBCs, whether the individual
belongs to a community which is represented or not, is entirely irrelevant. This vital
dimension of need to be represented, to be heard in the decision-making process,
has been entirely discarded by the impugned Amendment in clause (6) of Article 16.
Within the amended Article 16, therefore, lie two standards : representation as a
relevant factor [for SC, ST and OBC under Article 16(4)], and representation as an
irrelevant factor [for Article 16(6)].
5 Therefore, for the reasons already covered in Question 3, and as set out
separately above, the introduction of this reservation in public employment violates
the right to equal opportunity, in addition to the non-discriminatory facet of equality,
both of which are part of the equality code and the basic structure.
VI. Re Question 2 : Special provisions based on economic criteria, in relation
to admission to private unaided institutions
564. The eleven-Judge Bench ruling in T.M.A. Pai Foundation V. State of
Karnataka1 has recognised that Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution embraces the
right to establish private educational institutions as an avocation. The insertion of
Article 21-A, and later Article 15(5) added a new dimension. These
amendments are to be viewed as the society's resolve that all institutions-public
and private-have to join in the national endeavour to promote education at all
levels. Education in this context is to be seen as a "material resource" of the society,
meant to benefit all its segments.
565. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 by
Section 12(a) in fact introduces an all-encompassing quota which is inclusive, under
203
the broad rubric of "economically weaker sections of the society". Parliament had
this model, and was also aware that this Court had upheld it in Society for Unaided
Private Schools of Rajasthan32 and further that Article 15(5) too was upheld in
Pramati 33
566. Unaided private institutions, including those imparting professional
education, cannot be seen as standing out of the national mainstream. As held in
the aforementioned judgments, reservations in private institutions is not per se
violative of the basic structure. Thus, reservations as a concept cannot be ruled out
in private institutions where education is imparted. They may not be State or State
instrumentalities, yet the value that they add, is part of the national effort to
develop skill and disseminate knowledge. These institutions therefore also constitute
material resources of the community in which the State has vital interest, and are
not merely bodies set up to further private objective of their founders, unlike in case
of the shareholders of a company. Such institutions are seen as part of the State's
endeavour to bring educational levels of the country up, and foster fraternity, as held
"37.
The goals of fraternity, unity and integrity of the nation cannot be
achieved unless the backward classes of citizens and the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes, who for historical factors, have not advanced are integrated
into the mainstream of the nation."
187
567. Further, in Indian Medical Assn.
on reservation of seats under Article 15
paras 74-76)
"74. At this stage we wish to make a necessary and a primordially important
observation that has troubled us right throughout this case. The primordial
premise of the arguments by unaided educational institutions in claiming an
ability to choose students of their own choice, in case after case before this Court,
was on the ground that imposition of reservations by the State would impede
their right to choose the most meritorious on the basis of marks secured in an
objective test. It would appear that,
having unhorsed the right of the State to impose reservations in favour of deprived
segments of the population, even though such reservations would be necessary to
achieve the constitutionally mandated goals of social justice and an egalitarian
order, unaided institutions are now seeking to determine their own delimited
"sources" of students to the exclusion of everybody else.
75. The fine distinctions made that an allocation when made by the State
is
reservation, as opposed to allocations made by private educational institutions in
selecting a source do not relate to the fundamental issue here : when the State
delimits, and excludes some students who have secured more marks, to achieve
goals of national importance, it is sought to be projected as contrary to
constitutional values, and impermissibly reducing national welfare by allowing
those with lesser marks to be selected into professional colleges; and at the same
time, such a delimitation by a private educational institution, is supposedly
permissible under our Constitution, and we are not then to ask what happens to
that very same national interest and welfare in selecting only those students who
have secured the highest marks in a common entrance test. We are reminded of
the story of the camel that sought to protect itself from the desert cold, and just
wanted to poke its head into the tent. It appears that the camel is now ready to
fully enter the tent, in the desert, and kick the original inhabitant out altogether.
76. In any case we examine these propositions below, as we are unable to
convince ourselves that this Court would have advocated such an illogical
position, particularly given our history of exclusion of people, on various invidious
grounds, from portals of education and knowledge. Surely, inasmuch as this
Constitution has been brought into force, as a constitutive document of this
nation, on the promise of justice-social, economic and political, and equality-of
status and opportunity, for all citizens so that they could live with dignity and
fraternal relations amongst groups of them, it would be surprising that this Court
would have unhorsed the State to exclude anyone even though it would lead to
greater social good, because marks secured in an entrance test were sacrosanct,
and yet give the right to non-minority private educational institutions to do the
same. The knots of legal formalism, and abandonment of the values that the
Constitution seeks to protect, may lead to such a result. We cannot believe that
this Court would have arrived at such an interpretation of our Constitution, and in
fact below we find that it has not".
(emphasis supplied)
568. No better articulation than the aforementioned is warranted to hold the EWS
reservation equally applicable to unaided private institutions. However, given that
my analysis under Question 3 on "exclusion" holds the Amendment to be violative of
the basic structure, the question herein has been rendered moot.
VII. Addressing other related challenges to, and justifications of the
impugned Amendment
A. Possibility of reading down the exclusion
569. An argument made by some of the petitioners, was that the Amendment
could be sustained, if the phrase "other than" was read down, in such a manner so
as to read as "in addition to" or in a manner that negates the exclusionary element,
which offends the basic structure.
570. The doctrine of reading down, has been employed by this Court, in the past,
in numerous cases; however, in each instance, it has been clarified that it is to be
used sparingly, and in limited circumstances. Additionally, it is clear from the
jurisprudence of this Court that the act of reading down a provision, must be
undertaken only if doing so, can keep the operation of the statute "within the
purpose of the Act and constitutionally valid"204 In DTC V. Mazdoor Congress204
255)
"255. It is thus clear that the doctrine of reading down or of recasting the
statute can be applied in limited situations. It is essentially used, firstly, for
saving a statute from being struck down on account of its unconstitutionality. It is
an extension of the principle that when two interpretations are possible - one
rendering it constitutional and the other making it unconstitutional, the former
should be preferred. The unconstitutionality may spring from either the
incompetence of the legislature to enact the statute or from its violation of any of
the provisions of the Constitution. The second situation which summons its aid is
where the provisions of the statute are vague and ambiguous and it is possible to
gather the intentions of the legislature from the object of the statute, the context
in which the provision occurs and the purpose for which it is made. However,
when the provision is cast in a definite and unambiguous language and its
intention is clear, it is not permissible either to mend or bend it even if such
recasting is in accord with good reason and conscience. In such circumstances, it
is not possible for the court to remake the statute. Its only duty is to strike it
down and leave it to the legislature if it so desires, to amend it."
571. Therefore, when the intention is clear, and the text unambiguous, the
warning against employing this device of reading down, has been consistent. In
Minerva Mills19, this Court was faced with the possibility of reading down to uphold a
65)
"64.
The device of reading down is not to be resorted to in order to save the
susceptibilities of the lawmakers, nor indeed to imagine a law of one's liking to
have been passed. One must at least take Parliament at its word when, especially,
it undertakes a constitutional amendment.
65.
If Parliament has manifested a clear intention to exercise an unlimited
power, it is impermissible to read down the amplitude of that power so as to
make it limited. The principle of reading down cannot be invoked or applied in
opposition to the clear intention of the legislature. We suppose that in the history
of the constitutional law, no constitutional amendment has ever been read down
to mean the exact opposite of what it says and intends."
(emphasis supplied)
572. The intention of Parliament while exercising constituent power occupies a
much higher threshold or operates in a higher plane, when compared to legislative
intent of ordinary law, the latter being subject to different grounds of judicial
scrutiny. Therefore, attractive as it may be - it is my considered opinion that the
plea to read down the exclusion, is untenable because the intention of Parliament in
exercise of its constituent power is clear and unambiguous.
B. Absence of "guardrails" to deny economic criteria per se
573. The petitioners submitted that the Constitution has enacted "guardrails" to
control reservations based on social and educational backwardness in the form of :
(1) mandating institutions; (2) tasking institutions with evolving principles for
identification of backward classes, SC/STs; and (3) periodically reviewing lists of
SC/STs and OBCs. These arguments-of lack of "guardrails" to counter economic
criteria, per se, are in my opinion, insubstantial. As elaborated in Part V, I have
accepted the contention that the guardrail of "adequate representation" in Article 16,
prohibits introduction of reservation based on economic criteria for the purpose of
public employment. The other arguments on absence of guardrails, are dealt with
presently.
574. The Explanation to Article 15(6) enlists the broadest criteria of what
constitutes "economically weaker sections" ("shall be such as may be notified by the
State from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of
economic disadvantages"), upon which legislation and executive policy can be built
(and subject to subsequent challenge or scrutiny, if such a situation arises). The
indicators of economic deprivation, enacted through the Explanation are income, or
such other criteria, including other traits which may be relevant. For the purpose of
evolving economic criteria as a separate or a new basis for affirmative action, the
indication of the broadest guideline of income, and other relevant criteria, are
sufficient. The extent of income, relative to income earning capacity, having regard
to the State in question, or areas in States, or extent of assets, are matters of detail
which can be factored into the policies of the State or the Union, having regard to
the felt necessities of the time, or circumstances.
575. As far as the existence of institutional guarantees in the form of
commissions or bodies, such as National Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe
Commissions, Backward Class Commissions, etc. which specific provisions (i.e.
Articles 338, 338-A, 338-B, 340) of the Constitution provide for are concerned, it is
for the Union, or the States as the case may be, to create these permanent bodies
through appropriate legislation. In fact, the judgment
5
of
this
Court
in
Indra
Sawhney
had suggested the creation of a permanent body to
determine OBCs which led to the setting up of the National Backward Class
Commission through a separate Parliamentary enactment. Therefore, the absence of
any such provision enabling the setting up of a permanent institution per se cannot
lead this Court to conclude that the basic structure or essential features of the
Constitution are violated.
C. Basic structure doctrine as a discernible concept
576. Having perused the other opinions authored by the members of this Bench,
I am compelled to record my disagreement, and caution, relating to certain
observations on the basic structure doctrine. In the myriad challenges based on
basic structure, the ones that succeeded, have been based on violation of
constitutional principles, such as judicial review (Indira Gandhi34 Minerva Mills19 19 L.
Chandra Kumar50 and P. Sambamurthy48, independence of the judiciary (SCAORA
case53); rule of law, democracy and separation of powers (Indira Gandhi4. To say
that this Court thwarted policies, or more seriously, that it dictated policy, is parlous,
and tends to undermine the foundations of judicial functioning. 205 In each instance
when the Court intervened and held an amendment to be violative of the basic
structure, the rule of law triumphed. For instance, in Kesavananda Bharati- 15 itself,
the Court only held unconstitutional the part of a provision that upheld declaration in
a law (whether made by Parliament or the State) which stated that its objectives
were to promote Articles 38 and 39, thus excluding judicial scrutiny to discern
whether the law actually promoted any value of those directive principles. Such wide
and untrammelled power, to override Articles 14 and 19, were not left unchecked.
On the other hand, the Court upheld, in Raghunathrao Ganpatrao1 deletion of two
provisions, which an eleven-Judge Bench had previously held to be "integral" to the
formation of the nation, and the Constitution.
577. Furthermore, the basic structure is not as fluid as is made out to be; the
contours of what it constitutes have emerged, broadly speaking, through various
decisions. Can the value of democracy, be so nebulous, "amorphous" or transient,
that it can be undermined by succeeding generations, as is suggested? Can the rule
of law become rule by law, which is the essence of autocracy and authoritarianism?
Can the Orwellian concept of an oligarchic equality be ever conceived as the
essential principle of equality? Can liberty be subjected to indefinite incarceration
without trial or charges and yet remain of the same content, as to mean what it
means under Article 21 and the Preamble? The answer has to be a resounding
negative in each of the cases. The basic structure may not be a defined concept; it is
however not indecipherable. The values
which the Court set out to guard, by the framing of that doctrine, are eternal to
every democracy, every free society : liberty, equality, fraternity, social and
economic justice.
578. The members of this Bench, constituting the majority, have relied on the
test of validity of a constitutional amendment evolved in Bhim Singhji30 I find
it
pertinent to highlight that in this decision the only reference to the said test was by
Krishna Iyer, J. 30 who himself did not indicate how Section 27 of the impugned Act
(which was inserted as an enactment in the Ninth Schedule), amounted to a
"shockingly unconscionable or unscrupulous travesty of quintessence of equal
justice". Similarly, the common judgment of Chandrachud, J. and Bhagwati, J. also
was silent on this aspect. Tulzapurkar, J. judgment invalidated not only Section 27
but several other provisions of the Act also. In these circumstances, the observations
of Krishna Iyer, J. as to be the high threshold of violation of Article 14 in the context
of insertions of an enactment in the Ninth Schedule i.e. "shocking, unconscionable or
unscrupulous travesty of the quintessence of equal justice", has limited application.
579. It is noteworthy that this judgment was taken into account by the
unanimous decision of a nine-Judge Bench in I.R. Coelho6 where the appropriate
test to determine whether insertion of an enactment into the Ninth Schedule, was
finally settled. The Court not only took note of Kesavananda Bharati1 15 Minerva
Mills1 19 and Bhim Singhji30 but also Waman Rao27 and held that the appropriate test
would be the "impact" on the right and also whether the "identity of the
Constitution" is changed by way of the amendment or the enactment which is
inserted through an amendment. That aspect has been discussed in an earlier
portion of this judgment. I.R. Coelho136 is also an authority that Articles 14 and 15
principles underlying them are integral parts of the basic structure of the
Constitution. In these circumstances, the test indicated by Krishna Iyer, J. has been
altered, to a different one, by I.R. Coelho136
D. Whether an enabling provision can violate the basic structure
580. The Union and other respondents had submitted that the newly introduced
provisions, through the impugned Amendment, are merely enabling, and confer
power upon the State, to make special provisions and reservations, based on the
economic criterion - thus, cannot violate the basic structure. This view has also
been accepted in the opinion authored by J.B. Pardiwala, J. I am of the considered
opinion that the argument that the provisions are enabling and therefore, do not
violate the basic structure (of the Constitution) is not substantial.
581. Previous decisions of this Court have invalidated Constitutional
Amendments, even when containing merely enabling provisions. In L. Chandra
Kumar50, the provisions in question were, inter alia, Articles 323-A(2)(d) and 323-B
(3)(d), which read as follows:
"323-A. Administrative tribunals.- (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for
the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints
with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any
State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the
control of the Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by
the Government.
(2) A law made under clause (1) may-
*
*
*
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court under Article 136, with respect to the disputes or complaints referred to in
clause (1);
*
*
*
323-B. Tribunals for other matters.-(1) The appropriate legislature may,
by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes,
complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in clause
(2) with respect to which such legislature has power to make laws.
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:
*
*
*
(3) A law made under clause (1) may-
(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for
contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules
of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court under Article 136, with respect to all or any of the matters
falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals...' "
(emphasis supplied)
582. The Court in L. Chandra Kumar50 50 did not merely hold that the legal
provisions, which enabled exclusion of jurisdiction of courts, violated any provision of
the Constitution. It proceeded to hold that the provision which enabled the
enactment of a law, that excluded jurisdiction of courts, more particularly the High
Courts, and thus, shut out judicial review, violated and destroyed the basic structure
of the Constitution.
583. By the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, Article 371-D
was introduced, which inter alia, enabled the President to set up Administrative
Tribunals, in relation to areas in Andhra Pradesh. Article 371-D(5) was the subject-
matter of challenge before this Court in P. Sambamurthy48. Articles 371-D(3) and
(5) read as follow:
"371-D. (3) The President may, by order, provide for the constitution of an
Administrative Tribunal for the State of Andhra Pradesh to exercise such
jurisdiction, powers and authority including any jurisdiction, power and authority
which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-Second
Amendment) Act, 1973, was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme
Court) or by any tribunal or other authority as may be specified in the order with
respect to the following matters, namely:
*
*
*
(5) The order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of any case shall
become effective upon its confirmation by the State Government or on the expiry
of three months from the date on which the order is made, whichever is earlier;
Provided that the State Government may, by special order made in writing and
for reasons to be specified therein, modify or annul any order of the
Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective and in such a case, the order
of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be."
584. This Court held that the power under Article 371-D(5), per se, and not
merely the exercise of it, was shockingly subversive of the rule of law : (P.
"4.
this power of modifying or annulling an order of the Administrative
Tribunal conferred on the State Government under the proviso to clause (5) is
violative of the rule of law which is clearly a basic and essential feature of the
Constitution. It is a basic principle of the rule of law that the exercise of power by
the executive or any other authority must not only be conditioned by the
Constitution but must also be in accordance with law and the power of judicial
review is conferred by the Constitution with a view to ensuring that the law is
observed and there is compliance with the requirement of law on the part of the
executive and other authorities. It is through the power of judicial review
conferred on an independent institutional authority such as the High Court that
the rule of law is maintained and every organ of the State is kept within the limits
of the law. Now if the exercise of the power of judicial review can be set at naught
by the State Government by overriding the decision given against it, it would
sound the death-knell of the rule of law. The rule of law would cease to have any
meaning, because then it would be open to the State Government to defy the law
and yet to get away with it."
585. Likewise, in R.C. Poudyal132, the controversy was with respect to
reservations made in favour of a religious sect i.e. the Buddhist Sangha. The
provision which enabled this reservation, was in Article 371-F(f) which inter alia,
reads as follows:
"371-F. Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.-
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution-
(a) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall consist of not less
than thirty members;
The surest wayt legal research!"
*
*
*
(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting the rights and interests of
the different sections of the population of Sikkim make provision for the
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim which may
be filled by candidates belonging to such sections and for the delimitation of
the assembly constituencies from which candidates belonging to such sections
alone may stand for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Sikkim;"
586. The majority opinion upheld the Amendment, and the provision-not
because it was an enabling provision, but that it dealt with inclusion of new territory,
and ensured historical continuity, of a State, with its past traditions, and was part of
the compact through which it entered the Union. At the same time, the majority
"129. It is true that the reservation of seats of the kind and the extent brought
about by the impugned provisions may not, if applied to the existing States of the
Union, pass the constitutional muster. But in relation to a new territory admitted
to the Union, the terms and conditions are not such as to fall outside the
permissible constitutional limits. Historical considerations and compulsions do
justify inequality and special treatment."
(emphasis supplied)
L.M. Sharma, C.J. who wrote a dissenting opinion, held that the provision which
enabled reservation on the basis of religion, was violative of the basic structure of
132
the Constitution.
587. It is therefore, inaccurate to say that provisions that enable, exercise of
power, would not violate the basic structure of the Constitution. The enabling
provision in question's basic premise, its potential to overbear the constitutional
ethos, or overcome a particular value, would be in issue. The Court's inquiry
therefore, cannot stop at the threshold, when an enabling provision is enacted. Its
potential for violating the basic structure of the Constitution is precisely the power it
confers, on the legislature, or the executive. To borrow a powerful simile from a
dissenting opinion in a decision of the United States Supreme Court, that upheld
broad use of emergency power, to incarcerate thousands of
US citizens, such enabling powers, if left alone, can "lie(s) about like a loaded
weapon"206 "206 with its potential to destroy core constitutional values.
588. In S.R. Bommai135 although the validity of a Constitutional Amendment
was not in issue, the nine-Judge Bench made certain crucial observations, with
respect to use of power, under Article 356 of the Constitution. The Court stated
"96.
The Constitution is essentially a political document and provisions such
as Article 356 have a potentiality to unsettle and subvert the entire constitutional
scheme. The exercise of powers vested under such provisions needs, therefore, to
be circumscribed to maintain the fundamental constitutional balance lest the
Constitution is defaced and destroyed. This can be achieved even without bending
much less breaking the normal rules of interpretation, if the interpretation is alive
to the other equally important provisions of the Constitution and its bearing on
them. Democracy and federalism are the essential features of our Constitution
and are part of its basic structure. Any interpretation that we may place on Article
356 must, therefore help to preserve and not subvert their fabric."
589. Therefore, the fact that impugned Amendments have introduced provisions
which are merely enabling, does not protect it from basic structure scrutiny. To view
a newly added provision as only "enabling" can be an oversimplification in
constitutional parlance. The Court's concern is not with the conferment of power per
se, but with the width of it, lack of constitutional control, and the direct impact it
can have on principles constituting the basic structure.
E. Parallel with exclusion of creamy layer
590. Another assumption that the exclusion of the creamy layer can somehow be
equated to, the exclusion that the impugned Amendment perpetrates, necessitates
correction. As discussed previously, the Constituent Assembly Debates plainly show
that Article 16(4) was included with the intention of permitting representation and
diversity. The other parameter was that without such a provision, the rule of equality
of opportunity [mandated by Article 16(1)] would not admit of positive
discrimination. Therefore, the idea of positive or compensatory discrimination was
intrinsic to the idea of equal opportunity - a fact recognised and acknowledged as
late as in M. Nagaraj9 The idea that Article 16(4) really is meant to ensure
representation is also borne out textually, since the State is enjoined to ensure that
"adequate representation" is given to members of the backward classes. These
sections of society were hitherto barred access to public offices and denied
opportunity to representation in public affairs. If one keeps this in mind, the matrix
operating for reservation under Article 16(4) is one permitting diversity,
representation, and eliminating discrimination.
591. The idea of introducing creamy layer, gained momentum for the first time in
K.C. Vasanth Kumar V. State of Karnataka8 and was recognised as a compulsion
which the State had to adopt in carrying out the exercise of identifying socially and
educationally backward classes. The rationale for identification and consequent
exclusion of creamy layer amongst the backward class is that there exists a segment
or section among the backward classes who have gained reservations and have
advanced socially and educationally. The criteria adopted by the States has been the
level of advancement - reflected in the economic and social status of such
segments of society. Thus, if in the application of such criteria, it is found that
amongst the OBCs, sections have moved forward and gained affluence, they are to
be treated as advanced sections of society. In other words, moving out of the
grouping as backward classes are deemed to be "forward". Constitutionally speaking,
Indra Sawhney5 is an authority on this issue i.e. that identification of creamy layer
among the OBCs is as such a duty of the State to ensure that meaningful
opportunities are given to the really backward. The corollary is therefore, the caste
status of those who form part of creamy layer becomes irrelevant; and hence, they
are not entitled to reservation under Articles 15(4) or 16(4). Keeping all this in
mind, the fact that some amongst the OBCs (creamy layer) do not enjoy the benefit
of reservation [under Articles 15(4) and 16(4)] does not lend justification for
excluding those who are entitled to reservations under Articles 15(4) and 16(4), due
to their caste or social/educational backwardness, for benefit under Article 15(6) -
which is a reservation based on a different criterion, despite them being equally, or
even more deprived than those who belong to the forward caste.
F. Other justifications for the classification
592. I am unable to agree with the characterisation of the classification in the
impugned Amendment as accepted by Dinesh Maheshwari, Bela Trivedi, and J.B.
Pardiwala, JJ., for reasons set out in Part III (D). I shall in this section, respond to
specific conclusions arrived at by the Judges that constitute the majority.
(i) Reasonable classification to prevent double benefits
593. The allusion to overclassification and underclassification, as the bases for
exclusion in the context of the doctrine of classification governing Article 14, cannot
be denied as a matter of law. However, to say that the non-inclusion of SC/ST and
OBC communities - though the largest segments of the poor are from amongst
them, is mere reasonable under-inclusion, cannot be accepted - especially in the
context of a constitutional amendment.
594. Reliance has been placed on State of Gujarat V. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. 89
143
(hereinafter "Ambica Mills") and S. Seshachalam V. Bar Council of T.N.
(hereinafter "Seshachalam"). In Ambica Mills89 the Court upheld the legislative
measure, which excluded establishment or persons, on the ground that the State's
policies to cover establishments, having regard to the objects,
was not defeated, and the classification, not fatal, because it left out some classes of
establishments having regard to their size. In Seshachalam143 the exclusion from
payment of lump sum amount, under an Advocate's welfare scheme, of lawyers
receiving pension from their erstwhile employers, was held to not offend Article 14.
Each of these cases are not apt instances, for the purposes of this case. The use of
the term "double benefit" is discernible in the latter case. If one considers that if
pension was being introduced for professionals for the first time, who had no other
means of livelihood, when they gave up their avocation, the exclusion of those who
had their full run of employment, enjoyed pension from their erstwhile employer,
and then joined the legal profession, was justifiable, given that the State was
assuming a burden for the first time, and keeping apart resources for that purpose.
This classification was justified also on the basis of the principle in R.K. Garg V.
Union of India, that in matters concerning economic policy, the State has wider
latitude.
595. It is worth recollecting that Mathew, J. in Ambica Mills89 cautioned that one
has to look beyond the classification. Else, the mind boggles at the classification,
resulting in its justification. As recognised in some of the earliest decisions, the rule
of classification is not the right to equality (just as the rights are fundamental, not
the restrictions). I wish to highlight at this juncture, what was said in Roop Chand
Adlakha V. DDA208 "To overdo classification is to undo equality."
(ii) Scope of Article 46
596. In my considered opinion, it would be wrong to characterise that the
classification made for upliftment of SC/STs for whom special mention is made, is a
"classification" for the purpose of upliftment of economically weaker sections, under
Article 46, which permits a later classification that excludes them. If anything, the
intent of Article 46 is to ensure upliftment of all poor sections : the mention of
SC/STs is to remind the State that especially those classes should not be left out.
But ironically, that is exactly the result achieved by their exclusion.
597. There can be no debate that Article 46 is an injunction to the State to take
all steps to ameliorate the lot of economically weaker sections of the society. That
this injunction was not confined to only SCs/STs has been widely accepted. In Indra
Sawhney5 this aspect was recognised and elaborated, by P.B. Sawant, J. who stated
pp. 537-38, paras 481-82)
"481.
The concept of "weaker sections" in Article 46 has no such limitation.
In the first instance, the individuals belonging to the weaker
sections may not from a class and they may be weaker as individuals only. Secondly,
their weakness may not be the result of past social and educational backwardness or
discrimination. Thirdly, even if they belong to an identifiable class but that class is
represented in the services of the State adequately, as individuals forming weaker
section, they may be entitled to the benefits of the measures taken under Article 46,
but not to the reservations under Article 16(4). Thus, not only the concept of
"weaker sections" under Article 46 is different from that of the "backward class" of
citizens in Article 16(4), but the purpose of the two is also different. One is for the
limited purpose of the reservation and hence suffers from limitations, while the other
is for all purposes under Article 46, which purposes are other than reservation under
Article 16(4). While those entitled to benefits under Article 16(4) may also be
entitled to avail of the measures taken under Article 46, the converse is not true. If
this is borne in mind, the reasons why mere poverty or economic consideration
cannot be a criterion for identifying backward classes of citizens under Article 16(4)
would be more clear. To the consideration of that aspect we may now turn.
482. Economic backwardness is the bane of the majority of the people in this
country. There are poor sections in all the castes and communities. Poverty runs
across all barriers. The nature and degree of economic backwardness and its
causes and effects, however, vary from section to section of the populace. Even
the poor among the higher castes are socially as superior to the lower castes as
the rich among the higher castes. Their economic backwardness is not on account
of social backwardness. The educational backwardness of some individuals among
The surest way t legal research!"
them may be on account of their poverty in which case economic props alone may
enable them to gain an equal capacity to compete with others. On the other hand,
those who are socially backward such as the lower castes or occupational groups,
are also educationally backward on account of their social backwardness, their
economic backwardness being the consequence of both their social and
educational backwardness. Their educational backwardness is not on account of
their economic backwardness alone. It is mainly on account of their social
backwardness. Hence mere economic aid will not enable them to compete with
others and particularly with those who are socially advanced. Their social
backwardness is the cause and not the consequence either of their economic or
educational backwardness. It is necessary to bear this vital distinction in mind to
understand the true import of the expression "backward class of citizens" in
Article 16(4)."
598. Therefore, that Article 46 covers a wider canvas, and includes people who
are poor, and whose poverty is not the result of social backwardness, has been
recognised always. To now say that the mention of SC/STs in Article 46, and
provision of reservations for them, is sufficient to distinguish them as a separate
class, within Article 46, ignoring the rationale for continued reservations in their
favour, (i.e. due to social exclusion) is to ignore important legal realities:
598.1. That Article 46 comprehends all economically weaker sections of people,
including SC/STs and OBC.
598.2. The mention of SC/STs in Article 46 is a reminder to the State never to
ignore them from the reckoning whenever a measure towards economic
emancipation under Article 46 is introduced by the State.
598.3. Article 46 existed from the beginning, and has been resorted to for
providing all manner of measures to assist the poorest segments of society,
irrespective of whether they are SCs/STs or OBCs, such as scholarships, freeships,
amenities, and concessions.
(iii) EWS as a "compensatory" measure
599. The characterisation of reservations for economically weaker sections of the
population (EWS) as compensatory and on a par with the existing reservations under
Articles 15(4) and 16(4), in my respectful opinion, is without basis. The endeavour
of the Constitution makers was to ensure that past discriminatory practices which
had, so to say, eaten the vitals of the Indian society and distorted it to such an
extent that when the Republic was created, an equal society was merely an illusion,
which compelled them to enact special provisions such as Article 16(4) - and later
Article 15(4), to ensure equality. It was not compensatory but also reparatory. They
continue to compensate, definitionally and in reality, because even as on date, the
acknowledged position is that reservations are necessary for SCs/STs and OBCs who
are not part of the creamy layer. On the other hand, the EWS category, was
consciously not made beneficiaries of reservations at the time of the framing of the
Constitution, because perhaps the framers felt that the enacted provisions (including
&
the soon to be added Articles 31-A and 31-B) and the slew of economic reforms
which were enacted were sufficient to remove economic disparities. That hope
however, did not materialise. Economic disparities (unconnected with social and
educational backwardness) continued - and perhaps were even exacerbated to such
an extent that as of now almost 25% of the population continue to live in abject
poverty. Indra Sawhney acknowledged that measures taken for their purpose would
only result in "poverty alleviation".
600. Therefore, to conclude that reservations for EWS based upon the economic
criteria are on a par with reservations which the Constitution mandated, and
envisioned as a pledge to create an equal society, is constitutionally unsound. The
Amendment which introduces new reservations does not "compensate" : unlike the
protective and compensatory reservations for socially and educationally backward
classes (and SC/STs) who were discriminated systemically and who needed the
"push" which is sought to be addressed by reservations, the economically weaker
sections who are conceived to be the targets (i.e. forward classes) were never
consciously discriminated against. Nor is it anyone's case, that they faced social and
other barriers which made it impossible for them to advance.
601. I am also of the opinion that the observations made in Indra Sawhney5 -
to be read in the context of the observations in N.M. Thomas4 and by the majority of
the Judges in Indra Sawhney5 itself, which is that Article 16(1) permits classification
and that the category of reservations in accord with the then existing provisions of
the Constitution, favouring backward classes were stood exhausted by reason of
Article 16(4). Illustratively therefore, the reservations in favour of sections (such as
persons with disabilities, transgenders, etc.) would be covered by the affirmative
content of Article 16(1). It is in that sense that the observations made in Indra
Sawhney5 have to be understood rather than the Court foreseeing an amendment to
the Constitution which permitted an entirely new section of the persons not based
on social grouping, but on an economic criterion as a target or recipients of
reservations. Therefore, these two categories of reservations cannot be compared.
602. I cannot persuade myself to be sanguine about the fact that the poorest of
the poor do not comprise large sections of the backward classes and even larger
segments of the SCs/STs. The Sinho Commission Report itself is a testimony to this
fact, that amongst the entire population of STs, 48% are the poorest; amongst the
entire population of the Scheduled Castes 38% are the poorest and amongst the
OBCs no less than 33% are the poorest.
603. The fact that different forms of discrimination and even untouchability still
persists in society, impelled Parliament as late as 2015 to amend the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, by the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment
Act, 2015. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Amendment, inter alia
reads as follows:
"2. Despite the deterrent provisions made in the Act, atrocities against the
members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes continue at a disturbing
level. Adequate justice also remains difficult for a majority of the victims and the
witnesses, as they face hurdles virtually at every stage of the legal process. The
implementation of the Act suffers due to (a) procedural hurdles such as non-
registration of cases; (b) procedural delays in investigation, arrests and filing of
charge-sheets; and (c) delays in trial and low conviction rate.
3. It is also observed that certain forms of atrocities, known to be occurring in
recent years, are not covered by the Act. Several offences under the Indian Penal
Code, other than those already covered under Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, are also
committed frequently against the members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes on the ground that the victim was a member of a Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribe. It is also felt that the public accountability provisions
under the Act need to be outlined in greater detail and strengthened."
604. The Amendment enlarged and added the definition of certain terms, and
extended to discrimination on the grounds of economic boycott, social boycott and
even changed the provision dealing with presumption as to the offence making it
more stringent.
605. It is also worth noting that according to the National Crime Record Bureau
Report titled-"Crime in India 2021"20
605.1. The total population of the Scheduled Castes in entire country (according
to 2011 Census) - 2013.8 lakhs i.e. 20.13 crores.
605.2. Total crimes against the Scheduled Castes in 2019 were 45,961 and 2020
it was 50,291 and in 2021, 50,900. Of this about 20% constituted crimes against
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
605.3. As per same Report, the total population of the Scheduled Tribes in the
entire country (based on 2011 Census Report) is 1042.8 lakhs i.e. 10.42 crores.
605.4. The total crime reported and registered against the Scheduled Tribes in
2019 was 7570; increased to 8272 in 2020, and 8802 in 2021.
605.5. Bulk of the crimes reported against the Scheduled Tribes were offences
under the Penal Code, 1860 with a much smaller proportion of offences under the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
606. This data is demonstrative, that crimes against those marginalised and
stigmatised by caste, continue till this date. These legal developments and statistics
belie the perception that such classes which can benefit from compensatory
discrimination can be rightfully excluded from the benefit of reservations for the
poor. That view, in my opinion is indefensible, and ignores stark realities.
607. If such explanations for the differentiations, or exclusions are to be
accepted, then this Court will be paving the way for future discriminations, through
constitutional amendments, based on constitutionally proscribed grounds. Even
through the present amendments, especially Article 15(6)(a), it is possible to create
corporations, and policies (not merely reservations) which can result in benefits to
specific target groups and communities in forward castes, which may far exceed the
allocations for those covered by Articles 15(4) and 16(4). When challenged,
excessive budgetary allocations can successfully be justified on the ground of
classification i.e. that those who receive reservation and benefits under Articles 15
(4) and 16(4) are different. Likewise preferential treatment, of communities, based
on descent may well be sanctioned through later constitutional amendments, that
may also be justified as a different basis, a class apart from others. These
possibilities cannot be ruled out, because what begins as a seemingly innocuous
alteration, may result in the "emasculation" and ultimate annihilation of the grand
principle of equality.
G. The breach of the 50% cap - A note of caution
608. In view of my conclusions as recorded in this opinion - that the impugned
Amendment is violative of the basic structure of the Constitution, I find that there is
no need for a specific finding on the 50% cap, or its breach of the basic structure;
however I deem it necessary to sound a note of caution, on the consequence of
upholding the reservation, thereby, breaching the 50% limit.
609. It is pertinent to note that the breach of the 50% limit is the principal
ground of attack, of the 76th Constitutional Amendment, 1994 which inserted as
Entry 257-A - the Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of Appointments or Posts
in the Services under the State) Act, 1993 in the Ninth Schedule. The validity of that
enactment - and whether the inclusion by the constitutional amendment, violates
basic structure, is directly in issue in a batch of cases pending before this Court. The
view of the members of this Bench constituting the majority - that creation of
another class which can be a recipient of up to 10% of the reservation, over and
above 50%, which is permitted under Articles 15(4) or 16(4), in my considered
opinion, therefore, has a direct bearing on the likely outcome in the challenge in that
proceeding. I would therefore sound this cautionary note since this judgment may
well seal the fate of the pending litigation - without the benefit of hearing in those
proceedings.
610. The last reason why I find myself unpersuaded to agree with the opinion
that the impugned Amendments by creating a different kind of criteria, have to be
viewed separately and that Indra Sawhney5 was confined to reservations in Articles
15(4) and 16 (4) is because permitting the breach of the 50% rule as it were
through this reasoning, becomes a gateway for further infractions whereby which in
fact would result in compartmentalisation; the rule of reservation could dealt well
become rule of equality or the right to equality, could then easily be reduced to right
to reservation - leading us back to the days of Champakam Dorairajan. In this
regard, the observations of Dr Ambedkar have to be kept in mind that the
reservations are to be seen temporary and exceptional or else they would "eat up the
rule of equality"174.
611. In view of the above discussion, and given my conclusion on the validity of
the impugned Amendment, I would respectfully prefer to keep the question of
violation of 50% rule open.
VIII. Conclusion
612. In the light of the above discussion, it is held that the principles of non-
discrimination, non-exclusion and equality of opportunity to all are manifested in the
Constitution through the equality code, which is part of its basic structure. Their link
with fraternity, which the Preamble assures is intrinsic to "dignity of the individual
and unity and integrity of the nation", is inseparable. The framers
of our Constitution recognised that there can be no justice without equality of status,
and that bereft of fraternity, even equality would be an illusion as existing divisions
and "narrow domestic walls"210 would fragment society.
A. The principles of non-discrimination and fraternity in the constitutional
ethos
613. The fraternal principle is deeply embedded to this nation's ethos and
culture. The specific provisions which form part of the Equality Code, are inextricably
intertwined with fraternity as well. It is fraternity - and no other idea, which
acknowledges that ultimately, all individuals are human beings, born through the
same natural process, subjected to the same physical limitations, and finally leave
this world at an unknown time, but are sure to leave. Fraternity as a concept
awakens humans to the reality that despite our apparent or superficial differences -
ethnic, religion, caste, gender, origin or economic status - the institutions we create
need our collective cooperation and individual commitment. Every social order
invariably contains individuals with differences - be it grounded in ethnicity, wealth,
talent, or realisation of one's abilities; the diversities abound. The idea of fraternity
is to awaken the consciousness of each member of society that the human
institutions which they create, the ideas they seek to develop, and the progress they
wish to achieve, cannot be in isolation - by separation - but with cooperation and
harmony.
614. Ours is a nation of multidimensional diversity. The Constitution forges unity,
and instructs people of this country about its social goals, and the means to achieve
it. By it, We the People, "solemnly resolve to secure to all its citizens
Justice,
Liberty and Equality, and to promote Fraternity". It reinforces national unity re-
emphasising the idea of oneness as People of India, first and foremost, regardless of
our regional, linguistic, religious, ethnic, economic, etc. diversities. In this context,
fraternity is brotherhood. It focuses on concern for others, and respect for and
acceptance of differences of caste, gender, ethnicity, economic status, religion, etc.
People cannot be assured of Justice, Liberty or Equality, unless Fraternity in one
form or another, to some degree, is felt by individuals at each level of our social
order, and economic system.
615. It is essential that for the unity of this great nation, that we all recognise
that fraternity is the integrator, and unifier, which needs active propagation and
practise, in tune with our preambular resolve to preserve our Republic. Therefore,
divisiveness of any form : in the polity, social hierarchy, religion, origin, or regional
destroys fraternity and undermines unity. Divisiveness tends to polarise people and
is likely to foster distrust. Weakening fraternity therefore undermines justice, liberty,
and equality.
616. On this, I want to highlight the words of two social reformers, which
demonstrate that the principle of fraternity and the ideas and values connected to it,
are not new, but in fact, transcend time. Swami Vivekananda's message,
in his address at the World Parliament of Religions, in Chicago, on 11-9-1893 had
the theme of universal brotherhood of all, and that differences in religion, the
exclusion of one of another, would fade. He evocatively said that:
"If anybody dreams of the exclusive survival of his own religion and the
destruction of others, I pity him from the bottom of my heart, and point out to
him that upon the banner of every religion will soon be written, in spite of
resistance, "Help and not fight", "Assimilation and not Destruction", "Harmony
and Peace and not dissension"."
617. Sri Aurobindo too, was conscious of the need for fraternity. In a speech
delivered in Howrah, on 27-6-1909, he presciently said:
"Again, there is fraternity. It is the last term of the gospel. It is the most
difficult to achieve, still it is a thing towards which all religions call and human
aspirations rise. There is discord in life, but mankind yearns for peace and love.
This the reason why the gospels which preach brotherhood spread quickly and
excite passionate attachment. This was the reason of the rapid spread of
Christianity. This was the reason of Buddhism's spread in this country and
throughout Asia. This is the essence of humanitarianism, the modern gospel of
love for mankind. None of us have achieved our ideals, but human society has
always attempted an imperfect and limited fulfilment of them. It is the nature,
the dharma of humanity that it should be unwilling to stand alone. Every man
seeks the brotherhood of his fellow and we can only live by fraternity with others.
Through all its differences and discords humanity is striving to become one."
618. Thus, one-ness, inclusiveness, humanism and the idea that not only are all
equal, and should have equal opportunities, and the content of each one's rights be
no different from the other, but also that all stand together, and for each other, is a
powerful precept. This precept suffuses every provision of Part III of the
Constitution, especially Articles 14-18, 38-39 and 46.
619. This intrinsic value of fraternity, its intricate connection with justice, liberty,
and equality, assuring the dignity of the individual are steeped in the constitutional
jurisprudence of this nation. The Constitution does not merely bind the institutions it
creates and regulate their action, confer rights on individuals, but it is also a "pact
between people" and is a charter given on to themselves defining their conduct with
each other. 7 In my opinion, this value of fraternity is as much a part of the equality
code, and its facets - equality of opportunity, the principle of non-discrimination
and the non-exclusionary principle, as it inextricably binds them with the concepts
of liberty and freedom. Building upon the simile used by Chandrachud, J. of the
basic structure of the Constitution being "woven out of the conspectus of the
Constitution" - equality and justice are the warp and weft of the constitutional
fabric : with liberty, fraternity, and dignity, lending it richness in colour.
620. The exclusionary clause (in the impugned Amendment) that keeps out from
the benefits of economic reservation, backward classes and SC/STs therefore, strikes
a death knell to the equality and fraternal principle which permeates the equality
code and non-discrimination principle.
621. The concepts which our Constitution fosters, and the principles it engenders
- equality, fraternity, egalitarianism, dignity, and justice (at individual and social
levels) are all inclusive, all encompassing. The equality code in its majestic
formulation (Articles 14, 15, 16 and 17) promotes inclusiveness. Even provisions
enabling reservations foster social justice and equality, to ensure inclusiveness and
participation of all sections of society. These provisions assure representation,
diversity, and empowerment. Conversely, exclusion, with all its negative connotation
- is not a constitutional principle and finds no place in our constitutional ethos.
Therefore, to admit now, that exclusion of people based on their backwardness,
rooted in social practice, is permissible, destroys the constitutional ethos of
fraternity, non-discrimination, and non-exclusion.
B. Summary of findings on Questions 1 to 3
622. On Question 1, it is held that the States' compelling interest to fulfil the
objectives set out in the directive principles, through special provisions on the basis
of economic criteria, is legitimate. That reservation or special provisions have so far
been provided in favour of historically disadvantaged communities, cannot be the
basis for contending that other disadvantaged groups who have not been able to
progress due to the ill-effects of abject poverty, should remain so and the special
provisions should not be made by way of affirmative action or even reservation on
their behalf. Therefore, special provisions based on objective economic criteria (for
the purpose of Article 15), are per se not violative of the basic structure.
623. However, in answer to Question 3, I have highlighted that the framework in
which it has been introduced by the impugned Amendment-by excluding backward
classes-is violative of the basic structure. The identifier for the new criteria-is
based on deprivation faced by individuals. Therefore, which community the
individual belongs to is irrelevant. An individual who is a target of the new 10%
reservation may be a member of any community or class. The State does not-and
perhaps justly so-will not look into her background. Yet in the same breath, the
State is saying that members of certain communities who may be equally or
desperately poor (for the purposes of classification identification) but will otherwise
be beneficiaries of reservation of a different kind, would not be able to access this
new benefit, since they belong to those communities. This dichotomy of on the one
hand, using a neutral identifier entirely based on economic status and at the same
time, for the purpose of exclusion, using social status i.e. the castes or socially
deprived members, on
the ground that they are beneficiaries of reservations [under Articles 15(4) and 16
(4)] is entirely offensive to the Equality Code.
624. A universally acknowledged truth is that reservations have been conceived
and quotas created, through provision in the Constitution, only to offset
fundamental, deep-rooted generations of wrongs perpetrated on entire communities
and castes. Reservation is designed as a powerful tool to enable equal access and
equal opportunity. Introducing the economic basis for reservation - as a new
criterion, is permissible. Yet, the "othering" of socially and educationally
disadvantaged classes - including SCs/STs/OBCs by excluding them from this new
reservation on the ground that they enjoy pre-existing benefits, is to heap fresh
injustice based on past disability. The exclusionary clause operates in an utterly
arbitrary manner. Firstly, it "others" those subjected to socially questionable, and
outlawed practices - though they are amongst the poorest sections of the society.
Secondly, for the purpose of the new reservations, the exclusion operates against
the socially disadvantaged classes and castes, absolutely, by confining them within
their allocated reservation quotas (15% for SCs, 7.5% for STs, etc.). Thirdly, it
denies the chance of mobility from the reserved quota (based on past
discrimination) to a reservation benefit based only on economic deprivation. The net
effect of the entire exclusionary principle is Orwellian, (so to say)211
which
is
that
all
the poorest are entitled to be considered, regardless of their caste or class, yet only
those who belong to forward classes or castes, would be considered, and those from
socially disadvantaged classes for SC/STs would be ineligible. Within the narrative of
the classification jurisprudence, the differentia (or marker) distinguishing one person
from another is deprivation alone. The exclusion, however, is not based on
deprivation but social origin or identity. This strikes at the essence of the non-
discriminatory rule. Therefore, the total and absolute exclusion of constitutionally
recognised backward classes of citizens - and more acutely, SC and ST
communities, is nothing but discrimination which reaches to the level of
undermining, and destroying the equality code, and particularly the principle of non-
discrimination.
625. Therefore, on Question 3, it is clear that the impugned Amendment and the
classification it creates, is arbitrary, and results in hostile discrimination of the
poorest sections of the society that are socially and educationally backward, and/or
subjected to caste discrimination. For these reasons, the insertion of Articles 15(6)
and 16(6) is struck down, is held to be violative of the equality code, particularly the
principle of non-discrimination and non-exclusion which forms an inextricable part of
the basic structure of the Constitution.
626. While this reasoning is sufficient to conclude that Article 16(6) is liable to be
struck down, there are additional reasons (elaborated in Part V), due to which this
Court is compelled to clarify that while the "economic criteria"
per se is permissible in relation to access of public goods (under Article 15), the
same is not true for Article 16, the goal of which is empowerment, through
representation of the community.
627. On the point of Question 2, this Court is in agreement that unaided private
educational institutions would be bound under Article 15(6) to provide for EWS
reservations. However, given that the analysis under Question 3 on "exclusion" leads
to the conclusion that the Amendment is violative of the basic structure, the
question herein has been rendered moot.
628. For the above reasons, it is hereby declared that Sections 2 and 3 of the
Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 which inserted clause
(6) in Article 15 and clause (6) in Article 16, respectively, are unconstitutional and
void on the ground that they are violative of the basic structure of the Constitution.
629. The writ petitions and other proceedings are consequently, disposed of, in
the above terms. There shall be no order as to costs.
630. It would be in order to place my gratitude and appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered by all counsel who appeared and made submissions during the
course of the hearings i.e. K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General for India, Tushar Mehta,
Solicitor General of India, Ms Meenakshi Arora, Mr Sanjay Parikh, Prof. Ravi Verma
Kumar, Mr Salman Khurshid, Mr P. Wilson, Dr K.S. Chauhan, Mr Gopal
Sankaranarayanan, Mr Mahesh Jethmalani, Mr Niranjan Reddy, Ms Vibha Makhija,
Senior Advocates; and Prof. (Dr) G. Mohan Gopal, Mr Yadav Narender Singh, Mr
Shadan Farasat, Ms Diya Kapur, Dr M.P. Raju, Mr Kaleeswaram Raj, Mr Pratik R.
Bombarde, Mr Akash Kakade, Mr Kanu Agrawal, Mr V.K. Biju, Advocates; and all the
other counsel that assisted them.
ORDER OF THE COURT-
631. These matters have been disposed of today by pronouncement of four
separate judgments rendered by Hon'ble Dinesh Maheshwari, J. Hon'ble S. Ravindra
Bhat, J. for himself and on behalf of the Hon'ble the Chief Justice; Hon'ble Bela M.
Trivedi, J. and, Hon'ble J.B. Pardiwala, J.
632. In view of the decision rendered by the majority consisting of Hon'ble
Dinesh Maheshwari, Hon'ble Bela M. Trivedi and Hon'ble J.B. Pardiwala, JJ. the
challenge raised to the 103rd Amendment to the Constitution fails and the decision
rendered by Hon'ble S. Ravindra Bhat, J. remains in minority.
633. Consequently, the writ petitions and other proceedings stand disposed of.
634. In view of the above, pending applications, including applications for
impleadment/intervention, if any, also stand disposed of
+
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India [Dismissed]
#
Arising from the Final Judgment and Order in State of Rajasthan V. Karmendra Singh Kushwaha (Rajasthan
High Court, Jaipur Bench, Special Appeals Writ Nos. 398 of 2020, dt. 17-7-2020) sub nom State of Rajasthan
V. Yogesh Kumar Saini (Rajasthan High Court, Jaipur Bench, Special Appeal Writ No. 396 of 2020, dt. 17-7-
Ed. : The Judgment of the Court was delivered by Dinesh Maheshwari, J. Bela M. Trivedi, J. and J.B.
Pardiwala, J. delivered separate concurring opinions (paras 189 et seq. and 222 et seq., respectively). S.
Ravindra Bhat, J. delivered a dissenting opinion for U.U. Lalit, C.J. and himself (paras 419 et seq.).
2
3 T. Devadasan V. Union of India, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179
5
6
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649
7
9
11
16
17
18
21
22
V.V. Giri V. D. Suri Dora, (1960) 1 SCR 426 : AIR 1959 SC 1318
23 A Theory of Discrimination Law by Tarunabh Khaitan (Oxford University Press, 2015).
24
26 R. Chitralekha V. State of Mysore, (1964) 6 SCR 368 : AIR 1964 SC 1823
27
28
29
147
33
35
Clauses (4) and (5) inserted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 were declared
under:
"368. (4) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have
been made under this article whether before or after the commencement of Section 55 of the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 shall be called in question in any court on any ground.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the
constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this
Constitution under this article."
36
As noticed, the provisions in question have been inserted to Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India
by way of the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019. This amendment was made after
passing of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Amendment) Bill, 2019 by Parliament. The
Statement of Objects and Reasons for introduction of the said Bill read as under:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
At present, the economically weaker sections of citizens have largely remained excluded from attending the
higher educational institutions and public employment on account of their financial incapacity to compete with
the persons who are economically more privileged. The benefits of existing reservations under clauses (4) and
(5) of Article 15 and clause (4) of Article 16 are generally unavailable to them unless they meet the specific
criteria of social and educational backwardness.
2. The directive principles of State policy contained in Article 46 of the Constitution enjoin that the State
shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people,
and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social
injustice and all forms of exploitation.
3. Vide the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, clause (5) was inserted in Article 15 of the
Constitution which enables the State to make special provision for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens, or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to
their
admission in higher educational institutions. Similarly, clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution enables the
State to make special provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of anv backward class
of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
4. However, economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the benefit of reservation. With a
view to fulfil the mandate of Article 46, and to ensure that economically weaker sections of citizens to get a
fair chance of receiving higher education and participation in employment in the services of the State, it has
been decided to amend the Constitution of India.
5. Accordingly, the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Amendment) Bill, 2019 provides for
reservation for the economically weaker sections of society in higher educational institutions, including private
institutions whether aided or unaided by the State other than the minority educational institutions referred to
in Article 30 of the Constitution and also provides for reservation for them in posts in initial appointment in
services under the State.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects."
37
38
Sajjan Singh V. State of Rajasthan, (1965) 1 SCR 933 : AIR 1965 SC 845
39
The learned Judge referred to the facts that the Constituent Assembly, consciously enacted a written
Constitution; created three organs of State; enacted a federal structure; recognised certain rights as
fundamental and provided for their enforcement; and prescribed forms of oath of office which would require
the members of the Union Judiciary and of the higher judiciary in the State, to uphold the Constitution; and
above all, formulated a solemn and dignified Preamble which, "appears to be an epitome of the basic features
of the Constitution". The learned Judge, thereafter, posed the points to ponder over thus : (Sajjan Singh
case, AIR p. 864, paras 57-58)
"57.
Can it not be said that these are indicia of the intention of the Constituent Assembly to give a
permanency to the basic features of the Constitution?
58. It is also a matter for consideration whether making a change in a basic feature of the Constitution can be
regarded merely as an amendment or would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the Constitution; and if the
latter, would it be within the purview of Article 368?"
40
Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643
41
The contribution of Prof. Conrad in origination and development of doctrine of basic structure has been
pertinently underscored in A.G. Noorani's, Constitutional Questions and Citizens' Rights, (Oxford University
Press, 2006) in the first chapter titled as "Sanctity of the Constitution : Dieter Conrad - The man behind the
"basic structure" doctrine", inter alia, in the following words:
"There is, sadly, little acknowledgment in India of that debt we owe to a distinguished German jurist and
scholar steeped in other disciplines beyond the confines of law - Professor Dietrich Conrad, formerly Head of
the Law Department, South Asia Institute of the University of Heidelberg, Germany.
In Golak Nath case [Golak Nath V. State of Punjab, (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643], the doctrine of any
implied limitations on Parliament's power to amend the Constitution was not accepted. The majority felt that
"there is considerable force in this argument" but thought it unnecessary to pronounce on it. "This question
may arise for consideration only if Parliament seeks to destroy the structure of the Constitution embodied in
provisions other than in Part III of the Constitution."
The argument of implied limitations had been advanced at the Bar by M.K. Nambyar, one of India's leading
constitutional lawyers. Few people knew then that he owed the argument to Professor Conrad. In February
1965, while on a visit to India, Conrad delivered a lecture on "Implied Limitations of the Amending Power" to
the Law Faculty of the Banaras Hindu University. A paper based on the subject was sent to Professor T.S.
Rama Rao in Madras for his comments. Nambyar's attention was drawn to this paper which he read before the
Supreme Court, though with little result.
Professor Conrad's lecture, delivered in February 1965, showed remarkable perceptiveness besides deep
learning. He observed:
"Perhaps the position of the Supreme Court is influenced by the fact that it has not so far been confronted
with any extreme type of constitutional amendments. It is the duty of the jurist, though, to anticipate
extreme cases of conflict, and sometimes only extreme tests reveal the true nature of a legal concept. So, if
for the purpose of legal discussion I may propose some fictive amendment laws to you, could it still be
considered a valid exercise of the amendment power conferred by Article 368 if a two-thirds majority changed
Article 1 by dividing India into two States of Tamilnad and Hindustan proper?
Could a constitutional amendment abolish Article 21, to the effect that forthwith a person could be deprived
of his life or personal liberty without authorization by law? Could the ruling party, if it sees its majority
shrinking, amend Article 368 to the effect that the amending power rests with the President acting on the
advice of the Prime Minister? Could the amending power be used to abolish the Constitution and reintroduce,
let us say, the rule of a Moghul emperor or of the Crown of England? I do not want, by posing such questions,
to provoke easy answers. But I should like to acquaint you with the discussion which took place on such
questions among constitutional lawyers in Germany in the Weimar period-discussion, seeming academic at
first, but suddenly illustrated by history in a drastic and terrible manner."
A more detailed exposition of Professor Conrad's views appeared after the judgment in Golak Nath case [Golak
Nath V. State of Punjab, (1967) 2 SCR 762 : AIR 1967 SC 1643] ("Limitation of Amendment Procedures and the
Constituent Power", Indian Year Book of International Affairs, 1966-7, Madras, pp. 375-430)."
42 The Indian Year Book of International Affairs, 1966-7, at p. 420.
44
The acclaimed and honourable jurist O. Chinnappa Reddy would define this journey in these words:"Since
there are no signposts signalling basic features of the Constitution, every attempt to discover a basic
feature becomes a "voyage of discovery"." [The Court and the Constitution of India : Summits and Shallows;
Oxford University Press, 2008 - at p. 54].
45 The extractions hereinbelow are of the relevant passages/paragraphs, which may not be in continuity but
the disjoining signs after end of the passage/paragraph have been generally avoided to maintain the continuity
of discussion.
46 Providence Bank V. Alpheus Billings, 7 L Ed 939 : 29 US 514 (1830)
47
48
50
51
52
53
54
the Constitution, though relating to the matter of exclusion of judicial review but was struck down essentially
for the view of the majority about want of ratification in accordance with the proviso to clause (2) of Article
368.
55
H.M. Seervai, "Constitutional Law of India, A Critical Commentary", 4th Edn., (1991-reprinted 1999) at p.
435.
56
The echoing words of Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, as reproduced by H.M. Seervai read as
follows:"Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation conceived
in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. We are engaged in a great civil
war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure."
57
In fact, total equality has been fundamental to the concept of Dharma, leaving no scope for discrimination
on any ground. These aspects have been succinctly explained by the acclaimed jurist M. Rama Jois in his
classic work Legal and Constitutional History of India (N.M. Tripathi Pvt. Ltd. 1984 - Vol. I, at p. 582) in the
following amongst other expressions while reproducing from Rig Veda:
"
The very expression Dharma is opposed to and inconsistent with any such social inequality. The relevant
provisions of the Shruti (Vedas) leave no room for doubt that discrimination on the ground of birth or
otherwise had no Vedic sanction; on the other hand such discrimination was plainly opposed to Vedic
injunction. Discrimination of any kind is, therefore, contrary to Dharma. It is really Adharma.
Charter of equality (Samanata) is found incorporated in the Rigveda, the most ancient of the Vedas, and also
in the Atharvaveda.
Rigveda - Mandala 5, Sukta 60, Mantra 5:
*
*
*
Ajyestaso akanishtasa ete
Sam bhrataro va vridhuhu sowbhagaya.
No one is superior (ajyestasaha) or inferior (akanishtasaha). All are brothers (ete bhrataraha). All should strive
for the interest of all and should progress collectively (sowbhagaya sam va vridhuhu)."
58 "From the fact that people are very different, it follows that, if we treat them equally, the result must be
inequality in their actual position, and that the only way to place them in an equal position would be to treat
them differently said an Austrian economist Friedrich A. Hayek (1899-1992) in The Constitution of Liberty,
1960, the University of Chicago, p. 87.
59 Dr Alladi Krishnaswami Aiyar, The Constitution and Fundamental Rights, The Srinivasa Sastri Institute of
Politics, Mylapore, Madras (1955), at p. 28.
60
61
"Moments in a History of Reservations" by Bhagwan Das in Economic and Political Weekly, 28-10-2000
62
He is also credited to have presided over the first All India Conference of the Depressed Classes at Nagpur
in the year 1920 where Dr B.R. Ambedkar was among the main speakers and where it was resolved, among
other things, to have true representatives of the depressed classes in the legislature. [Vide : Dr Sanjay
Paswan, Dr Pramanshi Jaideva, Encyclopaedia of Dalits in India, Kalpaz Publications, New Delhi (2003)].
63
355.
64 Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, pp. 494-95.
65 H.M. Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, A Critical Commentary, 4th Edn., (1991-reprinted 1999) at p.
280.
67
V.N. Shukla's Constitution of India, Eastern Book Company, Lucknow, 13th Edn. (2017), pp. 4-5.
68
71
72 It is pertinent to quote what an American Judge of Seventh Circuit, Court of Appeals, said about
amendments to the American Constitution:"The takings clause of the Fifth Amendment also seems founded on
economic considerations - and so indeed does the Fourth Amendment (and not just the exclusionary rule that
has been grafted onto it by the courts)"- - Richard A. Posner, "The Constitution as an Economic Document",
56 George Washington Law Review 4 (1987)
73
The United Nations General Assembly, "Final draft of the guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights, submitted by the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, Magdalena Sepulveda
Carmona", A/HRC/21/39, 18-7-2012
74
National Multidimensional Poverty Index, Baseline Report, NITI Aayog (2021)
75
76 See "Developments in the Law of Equal Protection", 82 Harv LR 1065 (1969).
*
Ed. : The words between two asterisks have been emphasised in original as well.
Ed. : The word between asterisks has been emphasised in original as well.
77
*
Ed. : The words between two asterisks have been emphasised in original as well.
Ed. : The word between asterisks has been emphasised in original as well.
79 Benjamin N. Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process, Yale University Press (1921), p. 17
80
82
83 Law, Liberty and Social Justice, Asia Publishing House, Bombay (1965), p. 120
84
*
Ed. : The words between two asterisks have been emphasised in original.
85
Corocraft Ltd. V. Pan American Airways Inc., (1969) 1 QB 616 : (1968) 3 WLR 1273 (CA)
86
87
Benjamin N. Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process, Yale University Press (1921), p. 94
88
T.M. Cooley, A Treatise on the Constitutional Limitations, Hindustan Law Book Company (2005), p 168
15
89
90
See, Joseph Tussman and Jacobusten Brook, "The Equal Protection of the Law", 37 California Rev 341
91
Published in book form - Edited by Micheel Zander - BBC, 1970 - quoted in Mod Law Rev, Vol 33, Sept
1970, pp. 579, 580.
92
Ibid, p. 580.
93 CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 272, 25-5-1949.
95
97
98
99
100
101
US 594 (1890)
102 "The Equal Protection of the Laws", 37 California Law Review 341.
104 State of Mysore V. P. Narasinga Rao, (1968) 1 SCR 407 : AIR 1968 SC 349
105 All India Station Masters' & Asstt. Station Masters' Assn. V. Central Railway, (1960) 2 SCR 311 : AIR 1960
SC 384
Ed. : The word between two asterisks has been emphasised in original.
111
112
113
117
Contract Social ii, 11.
122 McCulloch V. Maryland, 4 L Ed 579 : 4 Wheat 316 : 17 US 316 (1819)
123 James V. Commonwealth of Australia, 1936 AC 578 (PC)
124 Central Provinces & Berar Sales of Motor Spirit & Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938, (XIV of 1938), In re,
125
126 Davidson V. New Orleans. 24 L Ed 616 : 96 US 97 (1877)
127
128
129
M.P.V. Sundararamien & Co. V. State of A.P., 1958 SCR 1422 : AIR 1958 SC 468
131 Ram Krishna Dalmia V. S.R. Tendolkar, 1959 SCR 279 : AIR 1958 SC 538
132
134
Burke, Recollections on the Revolution in France and other Writings (Oxford University Press, 1958
Reprint), p. 23.
135
139
US 267 at p. 269 (1904)
144
145
146
Shamoon V. Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, 2003 UKHL 11 : 2003 ICR 337 (HL)
147
Hewage V. Grampian Health Board, 2012 UKSC 37 : 2013 SC (UKSC) 54
148 R (Carson) V. Secy. of State for Work & Pensions, (2006) 1 AC 173 : (2005) 2 WLR 1369 : 2005 UKHL 37
(HL)
149 R (RJM) V. Secy. of State for Work & Pensions, 2009 AC 311 : (2008) 3 WLR 1023 : 2008 UKHL 63 (HL)
150
Bah V. United Kingdom, (2011) 31 BHRC 609
151
Berubari Union (1), In re, (1960) 3 SCR 250 : AIR 1960 SC 845
*
153
C.A. Rajendran V. Union of India, (1968) 1 SCR 721 : AIR 1968 SC 507
155 Government of India (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1936.
:https://socialjustice.gov.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/GOI-SC-ORDER-1936.pdf>
6
M.R. Balaji V. State of Mysore, 1963 Supp (1) SCR 439, para 21 : AIR 1963 SC 649
156
Ibid, para 83 per Mathew, J.
158
So described, in view of the previous decisions of the Court, which had declared that senior employees in
a cadre, overlooked for promotion on account of quotas in promotion in favour of SC/STs were entitled to
"catch up" their seniority in the lower cadre, when they were promoted. This was to balance their equities, or
off-set the disadvantage they were placed in due to reservations in promotions, which enabled junior officials
in a cadre to steal a march and secure promotions earlier.
159
"102.
As stated hereinabove, the concept of the "catch-up" rule and "consequential seniority" are not
constitutional requirements. They are not implicit in clauses (1) and (4) of Article 16. They are not
constitutional limitations. They are concepts derived from service jurisprudence. They are not constitutional
principles."
160 Salient aspects are that : Sikri, C.J. stated that the "fundamental importance of the freedom of the
individual has to be preserved for all times to come and that it could not be amended out of existence" and
enumerated some of the essential features - supremacy of the Constitution, republican and democratic form
of government, secular character of the Constitution; separation of powers between the legislature, the
executive and the judiciary, and the federal character of the Constitution. Shelat and Grover, JJ. too indicated
that the Preamble contained the key to the basic structure, which rested on a harmony between Parts III and
IV and that the amendments could not result in "changing the identity of the Constitution". Hegde and
Mukherjea, JJ. stated similarly that the basic structure was "delineated in the Preamble and Parliament has no
power to abrogate or emasculate those basic elements or fundamental features". Reddy, J. draws analogy
from the Preamble to say that the features "are justice, freedom of expression and equality of status and
opportunity". Khanna, J. emphasises survival of the Constitution "without loss of its identity".
161 Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976.
162 Introducing two clauses (4) and (5), which read as follows:
"368. (4) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have
been made under this article whether before or after the commencement of Section 55 of the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 shall be called in question in any court on any ground.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the
constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this
Constitution under this article."
163
violated the rule of law, which is a basic feature of the Constitution. The majority judgment, by
Venkatachaliah, J. also struck down the offending provision, but for different reasons (procedural lapses).
164
Associated Provincial Picture Houses V. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA)
165 Dr Sudhir Krishnaswamy, "Applying Basic Structure Review : The Limits of State Action and the Standard
of Review", Democracy and Constitutionalism in India - A Study of the Basic Structure Doctrine, Oxford
University Press (2009).
166
Ibid, p. 88.
9
Kapadia, J.-
"103. The criterion for determining the validity of a law is the competence of the law-making authority. The
competence of the law-making authority would depend on the ambit of the legislative power, and the
limitations imposed thereon as also the limitations on the mode of exercise of the power. Though the amending
power in the Constitution is in the nature of a constituent power and differs in content from the legislative
power, the limitations imposed on the constituent power may be substantive as well as procedural.
Substantive limitations are those which restrict the field of the exercise of the amending power. Procedural
limitations on the other hand are those which impose restrictions with regard to the mode of exercise of the
amending power. Both these limitations touch and affect the constituent power itself, disregard of which
167 Motilal Nehru Report, 1928.
<https://www.constitutionofindia.net/historical_constitutions/nehru_report__motilal_nehru_1928__1st%20Janug
ary%201928>
168 Poona Pact, Agreed to by Leaders of Caste-Hindus and of Dalits, at Poona on 24-1932
<https://www.constitutionofindia.net/historical_constitutions/poona_pact_1932__b_
dhi__24th%20September%201932>.
Article II(1)(4) in Dr B.R. Ambedkar's draft, available in B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of India's Constitution :
Select Documents, Vol. II, 4(ii)(d), p. 86:
"4. Whoever denies to any person, except for reasons by law applicable to persons of all classes and
regardless of their social status, the full enjoyment of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities,
privileges of inns, educational institutions, roads, paths, streets, tanks, wells, and other watering places,
public conveyances on land, air or water, theatres, or other places of public amusement, resort or
convenience, where they are dedicated to or maintained or licensed for the use of the public, shall be guilty of
an offence."
170 Articles III (1), (3), (4)(b) in K.M. Munshi's draft available in B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of India's
Constitution : Select Documents, Vol. II, 4(ii)(b), pp. 74-75.
"(1) All persons irrespective of religion, race, colour, caste, language, or sex are equal before the law and are
entitled to the same rights, and are subject to the same duties.
*
*
*
(3) Women citizens are the equal of men citizens in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life
and are entitled to the same civil rights and are subject to the same civil duties unless where exception is
made in such rights or duties by the law of the Union on account of sex.
*
*
(4)(b) All persons shall have the right to the enjoyment of equal facilities in public places subject only to such
laws as impose limitations on all persons, irrespective of religion, race, colour, caste or language."
171
Draft Report, Annexure, Clause 4 available in B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of India's Constitution : Select
Documents, Vol. II, 4(iv), p. 138.
172
" '4. (1) The State shall make no discrimination against any citizen on the grounds of religion, race, caste
or sex.
(2) There shall be no discrimination against any citizen on any ground of religion, race, caste, or sex in regard
to-
(a) access to trading establishments including public restaurants and hotels;
(b) the use of wells, tanks, roads, and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of public funds or
dedicated to the use of the general public:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall prevent separate provision being made for women and
children.' " (CAD Vol. III, p. 426)
Advisory Committee Proceedings, April 21-22, 1947; and Interim Report of the Advisory Committee, Annexure.
Select Documents, Vol. II, 6(iv) and 7(i), pp. 221, 253, 254-4, 296.
173
174
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, p. 701, 30-11-1948, 7.205.
175 B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of India's Constitution : A Study, Indian Institution of Public Administration
(1968), at p. 202.
176
178
181 Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (OUP, 1986), p. 369.
182 Dr B.R. Ambedkar, Annihilation of Caste (1939).
183
a
Ed. : See Shortnote U in M. Nagaraj, and para 37 thereof.
185
186
188 By way of example, it was submitted that in Central universities and Central services so far, the OBC
communities could compete in 27% of the seats reserved for them and in addition also participated as open
category candidates. The total available for them is 77% and with the introduction of the EWS category along
with the exclusion class, the number has been reduced to 67% - which was argued as only marginally
affecting them, at best.
(1897)
190
191
192
193 Lachhman Dass V. State of Punjab, (1963) 2 SCR 353 : AIR 1963 SC 222
195 Gokulesh Sharma, Human rights and Social Justice Fundamental Rights vis--vis Directive Principles, Deep
and Deep Publication Ltd. (1997).
196
8th Edn. Vol. 1 p. 129
197 In a letter to Samuel Kerceval on 12-7-1816
parliamentary wisdom, which results in an amendment, that cannot be questioned in by the Court.
199 The NMPI assists in estimation of poverty at the level of the States and all the over 700 districts across
the 12 indicators, capturing multitude of deprivations and indicator-wise contribution to poverty. Thus, in
terms of NMPI, 51.91% population of Bihar is poor, followed by 42.16% in Jharkhand, 37.79% in Uttar Pradesh,
with Madhya Pradesh (36.65%) as fourth in the index, and Meghalaya (32.67%) is at fifth place. Kerala, Goa,
and Sikkim have the lowest percentage of population who are multidimensionally poor at 0.71%, 3.76% and
3.82%, respectively. Amongst Union Territories (UTs), Dadra and Nagar Haveli (27.36%), Jammu and Kashmir,
and Ladakh (12.58%), Daman and Diu (6.82%) and Chandigarh (5.97%), are emerged as the poorest UTs. The
proportion of poor in Puducherry at 1.72% is the Towest among the UTs, followed by Lakshadweep at 1.82%,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands at 4.30% and Delhi at 4.79%
201 Southern Railway V. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36
202
203
"12. Extent of school's responsibility for free and compulsory education.-(1) For the purposes of
this Act, a school:
(a) specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (n) of Section 2 shall provide free and compulsory elementary
education to all children admitted therein."
204
204
205 J.B. Pardiwala, J. cites with approval certain academic material in paras 354 et seq. of his opinion.
206
135
209 Source:<https://ncrb.gov.in/en/node/3721>
210
Rabindranath Tagore, "Where the Mind is Without Fear", Gitanjali (1910).
211
George Orwell, Animal Farm where idea of equality is explained allegorically, through the example of a
society comprising of animals who have seized control, by one of them saying that the rule "All animals are
equal" reads that "All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others".
*
Ed. : The Order of the Court has been signed by all five Hon'ble Judges.