(2022) 9 Supreme Court Cases 457 : (2023) 1 Supreme Court
In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, SURYA KANT AND BELA M. TRIVEDI, JJ.)
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA
Appellant;
Versus
63
MOONS
TECHNOLOGIES
LIMITED
Respondent.
Civil Appeals Nos. 2748-49 of 2022 with Nos. 2750-51 of
decided on April 22, 2022
A. Debt, Financial and Monetary Laws - Maharashtra Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (16 of
2000) - Ss. 2(c) & (d) and S. 4 - Exchange for spot trading in
commodities - Consideration of, as a financial establishment within the
purview of the MPID Act, 1999 - Term "financial establishment", defined
under S. 2(d) as any person accepting a "deposit" - Scope and ambit of
-
Meaning of the expression "deposits" - Explained
- Receipt of money/commodities - When can be regarded as "deposits"
within the meaning of S. 2(c) of the MPID Act, 1999 - Test of "return" i.e.
return in cash, kind or service without the necessity of it being with the
benefit of interest, bonus or profit, for determining if receipts are deposits -
Satisfaction of
- Referring to the definition of "deposit" in S. 2(c) of the MPID Act,
1999, held:
- (i) the expression "deposit" is conspicuously broad in its width and ambit
for it includes, not only any receipt of money but also the acceptance of any
valuable commodity by a financial establishment under any scheme or
arrangement
(para 50)
- (ii) Money or commodity must be liable to be returned, however, such
return need not necessarily be in the form of cash or kind but also in the form of
a service, with or without any benefit such as interest
(para 54)
- (iii) It is not necessary that the return should be with the benefit of
interest, bonus or profit - Therefore, if the financial establishment is obligated to
return the deposit without any increments, it shall still fall within the purview of
S. 2(c) of the MPID Act, 1999, provided that the deposit does not fall within any
of the exceptions
(para 55)
- (iv) The phrase "valuable commodity" cannot be restricted to only mean
precious metals and agricultural commodities will fall within the purview of the
term
(para 64)
- (v) The definition is broadly worded to include even the possession of the
commodities for a limited purpose
(para 97)
- NSEL operated as an exchange for spot trading in commodities and
launched contracts for buying and selling of commodities on its trading
platform with different settlement periods - Bye-laws of NSEL elucidated
that it received both money and commodities from trading members - High
Court, held that NSEL was an electronic trading platform which only
facilitated transactions between buyers and sellers and in this context,
observed that NSEL did not receive the pay-in in its own right but only for
the purpose of passing it on to the selling trading member on the same day
- High Court inter alia also observed that since transaction charges were
charged by NSEL and the amount paid by the buyer used to be paid by NSEL
by the settlement date, it is not a financial establishment
- Held, High Court lost sight of the fact that S. 2(c) of the MPID Act,
1999 defines "deposit" in broad terms - Further, Bye-law 10.8 indicated
that NSEL was not merely an intermediary and the bye-law states that the
buyer shall pay the clearing house the value of the delivery allocation,
however, till the completion of the delivery process, the money will be
retained by the clearing house of NSEL - Held, High Court formed an
erroneous opinion that firstly, only if the return includes interest, bonus or
any other added benefit, it would be a deposit for the purpose of the MPID
Act and secondly, that for the purpose of S. 2(c) of the MPID Act, 1999, the
receipt of the commodity or money "must be retained by itself" - Held, the
definition does not provide any such embargo and rather, the definition is
broadly worded to include even the possession of the commodities for a
limited purpose
- In the present case, whilst allowing the appeals and setting aside the
impugned judgment, the impugned notifications issued under S. 4 of the
MPID Act, 1999, attaching the properties of the respondent, held, valid
- Securities, Markets and Exchanges - Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1952 - S. 27 - General Clauses Act, 1897, S. 3(42)
(Paras 44 to 102)
B. Debt, Financial and Monetary Laws - Maharashtra Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (16 of
2000) - S. 2(c)( - Exception to receipts being considered as deposits,
namely, where amount is received in the ordinary course of business by way
of security deposit - Whether established
- NSEL maintained a Settlement Guarantee Fund (SGF) and Regn. 4.12
referred to SGF as a "security deposit" - Features of SGF indicated that the
fund was used to cover those expenses, which were beyond the utilisation
made out of a regular security fund - Held, though SGF was termed as a
"security deposit" in nomenclature, its features did not represent a security
deposit - Since NSEL receives "money" in the form of SGF that is returned
in money and services, and is not covered by the exceptions, it would fall
within the expression "deposit" as defined in S. 2(c) of the MPID Act, 1999
(Paras 56 and 59)
C. Debt, Financial and Monetary Laws - Maharashtra Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (16 of
2000) - S. 2(c) - Transfer of title to the commodity - Non-requirement
of, for accepted commodity to fall within the purview of the term "deposit"
- Held, there is nothing in the definition of the term "deposit" to mean
that the acceptance of the commodity should be accompanied by a transfer
of title to the commodity - Even if the financial establishment is only in
"custody" of the commodity, it would still fall within the purview of the
phrase "acceptance of commodity" - In the present case, held, NSEL
offered a multitude of "services" in return for receiving the commodity -
Held, the receipt of the commodities and holding the commodities (when the
members are put in constructive possession) in the accredited warehouses
is a "deposit" under S. 2(c) of the MPID Act, 1999
(Paras 61 and 62)
D. Debt, Financial and Monetary Laws - Maharashtra Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (16 of
2000) - S. 2(c) - Meaning of the expression "valuable commodity" -
Interpretation of
- A valuable commodity is a commodity which has significant value,
however, this does not refer only to the intrinsic value of the commodity -
Whether or not a commodity is valuable has to be determined bearing in
mind the salutary object and purpose of the Act which is to protect the
interest of depositors - It is in this context that it becomes necessary to
adopt a purposive construction which would give effect to the meaning and
content of the law - Held, any attempt to read the definition in a restrictive
sense would be contrary to legislative intent and the intent of the legislature
is to define the expression "deposit" as well as the expression "financial
establishment" in a comprehensive and all-encompassing manner -
Therefore, the phrase "valuable commodity" cannot be restricted to only
mean precious metals and agricultural commodities which NSEL trades in
will fall within the purview of the term
-
Interpretation of Statutes - Basic Rules Purposive
construction/interpretation/Mischief rule/Heydon's rule - Words and
Phrases - "Valuable commodity"
(Para 64)
E. Interpretation of Statutes - Internal Aids - Definition clause - Use of
the phrase "includes and shall be deemed to have always included" Effect
of, explained
- Held, the import thereof is to create a legal fiction by which actions
which though not included within the natural meaning of the expression are
intended to be included - The combined use of "includes" and "deemed to
have always included" while defining the term "deposit" in S. 2(c) of the
MPID Act, 1999 makes the term inclusive and not restrictive - Debt,
Financial and Monetary Laws - Non-Scheduled Banks/NBFCs/Chit
Funds/Saving Schemes/Financial leasing - Maharashtra Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (16 of 2000), S. 2
(c)
(Para 49)
F. Debt, Financial and Monetary Laws - Maharashtra Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (16 of
2000) - Generally - Constitutional validity of - Held, already stands
affirmed by the Supreme Court
(Para 91)
NSEL is a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956, and is a
wholly owned subsidiary of Financial Technologies (India) Ltd., which is now known
as 63 Moons Technologies Ltd. ("FCIL" or "63 Moons"). On 5-6-2007, the Union of
India issued a Notification under Section 27 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1952 ("the FCRA Act") exempting forward contracts of one-day duration for
sale and purchase of commodities traded on NSEL from the application of the
provisions of the enactment. NSEL started operating as an exchange for spot
trading in commodities. NSEL launched contracts for buying and selling of
commodities on its trading platform with different settlement periods, ranging from
T+0 to T+36 days. 'T' indicates the trade date, that is the date on which the trade
took place and +0 or +36, indicates the number of business days after the trading
day when the delivery of the commodity and the payment of price is made.
NSEL offered "paired" contracts. Such contracts enabled traders either by
themselves or through their brokers, to simultaneously enter into paired contracts,
such as of T+2 and T+25 duration. The seller through his broker puts the
commodities on sale and the buyer through his broker looks to purchase
commodities of specific requirements. NSEL then pairs the buyer and the seller if
there is a match between the requirement of the buyer and the available
commodities with the seller. The buyer and the seller simultaneously enter into T+2
and T+25 contracts.
A detailed step-wise trading process of the paired contracts is indicated below:
(1) A trading member of NSEL who wishes to trade in the platform is
required to place a specific quantity of the commodity in a warehouse accredited
to NSEL. The warehouse would then generate a warehouse receipt.
(2) The registered trading member or his broker who had placed his
commodity in the warehouse could on the basis of the standard pro forma
contracts offered by NSEL place offers for sale of the commodity on the
platform, stipulating the price and quantity offered.
(3) The buying trading member or his broker would input buy orders of a
particular commodity and quantity on the NSEL trading platform.
(4) When a sale offer and a buy offer coincide, the exchange would be
matched by NSEL, stipulating the commodity, the price, and the quantity.
(5) The Exchange would communicate all the trades effected at the end of
the day.
(6) On the next day, an obligation report recording the pay-in and delivery
obligations would be forwarded to the trading members.
(7) On the day after (that is, settlement date), NSEL would debit the trading
member's designated settlement account for the amount of the buying
member's pay-in obligations and it would be credited to NSEL's exchange
settlement account. NSEL's Operations Department would inform NSEL's
Delivery Department of the selling member's delivery obligations. Based on the
intimation, NSEL's Delivery Department would confirm to the Operations
Department if the requisite quantity of the particular commodity is available
according to the warehouse receipts. After such confirmation, the Operations
Department would release the purchase price to the selling broker's designated
bank account. Simultaneously, a delivery allocation report would be issued to
the buver's broker or the buver informing him that the commodity purchased
was allotted to him.
(8) NSEL would then send the buyer's details to the selling trading member
and the selling trading member would arrange for the non-member client/seller
to generate a VAT paid sale invoice of the commodity. On the basis of the
delivery allocation report and the VAT paid invoice, NSEL would issue a delivery
note authorising the buyer to take delivery from the designated warehouse. If
the buyer chooses to not take delivery, he would be put in constructive
possession of the commodity where he would be entitled to take possession at
any time.
By a Notification dated 19-9-2014, the Central Government withdrew the
exemption granted on 23-7-2008. The Forward Markets Commission ("FMC")
recommended to DCA that steps be taken to ascertain the quantity and quality of
commodities at accredited warehouses, the financial status of buyers and trading
members, and that liability be fixed on the promoters of NSEL i.e. 63 Moons. On 27
-8-2013, FMC directed a forensic audit of NSEL by Grant Thornton LLP. The Union
of India ordered an inspection of accounts of NSEL and 63 Moons under Section
209-A of the Companies Act. The Economic Offences Wing registered cases against
the directors and key management personnel of the NSEL and 63 Moons and
against trading members and brokers of NSEL under the provisions of the Penal
Code, 1860 and the Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial
Establishments) Act, 1999 ("the MPID Act").
The State of Maharashtra issued a Notification on 21-9-2016 under Section 4 of
the MPID Act by which the properties of the respondent were attached.
The appellants filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the
Notification dated 21-9-2016 issued under Section 4 of the MPID Act attaching the
properties of the respondent. The validity of Sections 4 and 5 of the MPID Act was
challenged on the ground that they are violative of Articles 14, 19 and 300-A of the
Constitution.
The State of Maharashtra issued further Notifications dated 4-4-2018, 7-4-
2018, 11-4-2018, 19-4-2018, 15-5-2018 and 19-10-2018 under Sections 4 and
5 of the MPID Act, attaching the properties of the respondent to recover the
defaulted money. The writ petitions were heard together and disposed of by a
Division Bench of the High Court by a judgment dated 22-8-2019. The petition was
allowed.
Section 2(d) of the MPID Act reads as follows:
"2. (d) "Financial establishment" means any person accepting deposit
under any scheme or arrangement or in any other manner but does not include
a corporation or a co-operative society owned or controlled by any State
Government or the Central Government or a banking company as defined under
clause (c) of Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;"
Section 2(c) of the MPID Act reads as follows:
"2. (c) "deposit" includes and shall be deemed always to have included any
receipt of money or acceptance of any valuable commodity by any financial
establishment to be returned after a specified period or otherwise, either in cash
or in kind or in the form of a specified service with or without any benefit in the
form of interest, bonus, profit or in any other form, but does not include-
*
*
*
(v) amounts received in the ordinary course of business by way of-
(a) security deposit,
(b) dealership deposit,
(c) earnest money,
(d) advance against order for goods or services;
The primary issue involved in this appeal was whether NSEL was a "financial
establishment" within the meaning of Section 2(d) of the MPID Act?
Held :
The MPID Act was enacted by the legislature in Maharashtra and received the
assent of the President on 21-1-2000. The Statement of Objects and Reasons
accompanying the introduction of the Bill states that the statute is enacted to
protect the public from the increasing menace of financial establishments grabbing
money from the public in the form of deposits.
(Para 18)
Since NSEL did not have sufficient money or property for attachment under
Section 4 on default of payment of the outstanding amounts, the State of
Maharashtra attached the properties of the respondent which owns 99.9% of the
shares of NSEL.
(Para 22)
The notifications attaching the properties of the respondent were issued under
Section 4 of the MPID Act. Section 4 covers only those situations where a "financial
establishment" is a defaulting entity.
(Para 44)
"Financial establishment" under the MPID Act, 1999 is defined as any person
accepting a "deposit". The definition excludes from its purview : (a) a corporation
or cooperative society controlled or owned either by the State or the Central
Government; and (b) a "banking company" as defined under Section 5(c) of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Since NSEL does not fall within any of the
exceptions, it would be a "financial establishment" for the purposes of the Act if it is
a "person accepting deposit". Section 3(42) of the General Clauses Act, 1897
provides an inclusive definition of "person" to include both incorporated and
unincorporated companies as:
The surest way t legal research!"
"3. (42) "person" shall include any company or association or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not."
(para 46)
The expression "deposit" is defined in Section 2(c) of the MPID Act. The
statutory definition of the expression "deposit" comprises of the following
ingredients:
(i) Any receipt of money or the acceptance of a valuable commodity by a
financial establishment;
(ii) Such acceptance ought to be subject to the money or commodity being
required to be returned after a specified period or otherwise; and
(iii) The return of the money or commodity may be in cash, kind or in the
form of a specified service, with or without any benefit in the form of interest,
bonus, profit or in any other form.
These elements of the definition of the expression "deposit" in Section 2(c) of the
MPID Act, 1999 are followed by specific exclusions contemplated in clauses (i) to
(vii). Clause (i) of the exceptions covers an amount which is raised by way of share
capital or by debenture, bond or other instrument governed by the guidelines and
regulations of SEBI. Clause (v) states that money received in the ordinary course of
business by way of security deposit, dealership deposit, earnest money or advance
against an order of goods or services shall be excluded. The exclusions in clauses (i)
to (vii) indicate that transactions which would otherwise fall within the broad sweep
of the definition are excluded.
(para 48)
The Supreme Court has taken a consistent view that where the definition of a
word is inclusive, as presaged by the adoption of the expression "includes", it is
prima facie extensive. The definition of "deposit" uses the phrase "includes and shall
be deemed to have always included". The import of this is to create a legal fiction
by which actions which though not included within the natural meaning of the
expression are intended to be included. The combined use of "includes" and
"deemed to have always included" while defining the term "deposit" makes the
term inclusive and not restrictive.
(Para 49)
The expression "deposit" is conspicuously broad in its width and ambit for it
includes, not only any receipt of money but also the acceptance of any valuable
commodity by a financial establishment under any scheme or arrangement. The
expression "any" is used in the substantive part of the definition of the expression
"deposit" on five occasions, namely:
(i) Any receipt of money;
(ii) Any valuable commodities;
(iii) By any financial establishment;
(iv) With or without any benefit; and
(v) In any other form.
(para 50)
Likewise, the definition of "financial establishment" refers to the acceptance of
deposits:
(i) Under any scheme or arrangement; or
(ii) In any other manner.
(para 51)
The repeated use of the expression "any" by the statute while defining both the
above expressions is a clear reflection of the legislative intent to cast the net of the
regulatory provisions of the law in a broad and comprehensive manner. Unlike
many other State enactments which govern the field, clause (c) of Section 2 of the
MPID Act comprehends within the meaning of a deposit not only the receipt of
money but of any valuable commodity as well.
(Para 52)
According to the second ingredient of Section 2(c) of the MPID Act, the money
or commodity must be liable to be returned. However, such return need not
necessarily be in the form of cash or kind but also in the form of a service, with or
without any benefit such as interest.
(Para 54)
The bye-laws elucidate that NSEL receives both money and commodities from
trading members. In order to decide if these receipts by NSEL could be regarded as
"deposits", the test of "return" will have to be satisfied. The test is that the return
be in cash, kind or service. It is not necessary that the return should be with the
benefit of interest, bonus or profit. Therefore, if the financial establishment is
obligated to return the deposit without any increments, it shall still fall within the
purview of Section 2(c) of the MPID Act, provided that the deposit does not fall
within any of the exceptions. The exception of relevance to our case is clause (v)
which states that amounts received in the ordinary course of business by way of
(a) security deposit; (b) dealership deposit; (c) earnest money; and (d) advance
against order for goods or services shall be excluded from the purview of the term
"deposit".
(Para 55)
Settlement Guarantee Fund : Deposit under Section 2(c) of the MPID Act
The trading members pay NSEL a margin deposit and NSEL maintains a
Settlement Guarantee Fund. Regulation 4.12 states that only transactions of those
members who have paid the margin deposit and security deposit shall be
considered as valid. Therefore, the payment of margin deposit and security deposit
is "mandatory" for a person to trade on NSEL's platform. Regulation 4.12 refers to
SGF as a "security deposit". Similarly, Bye-law 12.2.1 stipulates that each member
shall contribute a "minimum security deposit". However, merely because SGF is
referred to as a "security deposit", the exception would not automatically be
applicable.
(Para 56)
The features of SGF indicate that the fund is used to cover those expenses,
which are beyond the utilisation which is made out of a regular security fund. Unlike
a security deposit between a landlord and a tenant where the fund is used to meet
the "essential obligations" of the landlord such as repair work and deductions
are made when the tenant has outstanding payments, NSEL uses the deposit to
cover the payment obligations of the trading member (buyer) to another trading
member (seller) since NSEL is a counter party to the transactions. However, NSEL
uses the fund to cover functions beyond its role as a counter-party. For example,
the fund is used to cover losses faced by the NSEL in the settlement operations,
investments are made in securities, and the fund is allotted in various segments of
trading, where the funds are also utilised to cover losses, if any, in the segment.
Therefore, these three features of SGF indicate that though SGF is termed as a
"security deposit" in nomenclature, its features do not represent a security deposit.
Since NSEL receives "money" in the form of SGF that is returned in money and
services, and is not covered by the exceptions, it would fall within the expression
"deposit" as defined in Section 2(c) of the MPID Act.
(Para 59)
Bryan A Garner, Black's Law Dictionary (11 Edn., Thomson Reuters), referred to
Receipt of commodities Deposit under Section 2(c) of the MPID Act
There is nothing in the definition of the term "deposit" to mean that the
acceptance of the commodity should be accompanied by a transfer of title to the
commodity. Even if the financial establishment is only in "custody" of the
commodity, it would still fall within the purview of the phrase "acceptance of
commodity". On the acceptance of custody of the commodity, NSEL has to provide
various services such as an obligation to keep the commodity safe and without any
damages. Additionally, the Operations Department and the Delivery Department will
have to coordinate while matching the contracts.
(Para 61)
NSEL offers a multitude of "services" in return for receiving the commodity. The
receipt of the commodities and holding the commodities (when the members are
put in constructive possession) in the accredited warehouses is a "deposit" under
Section 2(c) of the MPID Act.
(Para 62)
The expression "valuable commodity" is not defined by the statute. There is no
valid basis to accept the submission of the respondent that the expression should
only comprehend within it precious metals such as gold and silver. If the legislature
intended to so restrict the definition of the expression valuable commodity, it could
have used an explanation importing an artificial meaning to the expression.
However, the legislature has desisted from doing so.
(Para 63)
A valuable commodity is a commodity which has significant value. This does not
refer only to the intrinsic value of the commodity. Whether or not a commodity is
valuable has to be determined bearing in mind the salutary object and purpose of
the Act which is to protect the interest of depositors. It is in this context that it
becomes necessary to adopt a purposive construction which would give effect to
the meaning and content of the law. Any attempt to read the definition in a
restrictive sense would be contrary to legislative intent. The intent of the legislature
is to define the expression "deposit" as well as the expression "financial
establishment" in a comprehensive and all-encompassing manner. Therefore, the
phrase "valuable commodity" cannot be restricted to only mean precious metals.
Agricultural commodities which NSEL trades in will fall within the purview of the
term.
(Para 64)
Paired contracts were designed as a unique trading opportunity by NSEL under
which a trader would, for instance, purchase a T+2 contract (with a pay-in
obligation on T+2) and would simultaneously sell a T+25 contract (with a pay-out
of funds on T+25). The price differential between the two settlement dates was
represented to offer an annualised return of about 16%. NSEL categorically
represented that all trades were backed by collaterals in the form of stocks and its
management activities included selection, accreditation, quality testing, fumigation
and insurance. Therefore, NSEL represented that on receiving money and
commodities, the members would receive "assured returns" and a "service".
Though NSEL has been receiving "deposits", it has failed to provide services as
promised against the deposits and has failed to return the deposits on demand.
Therefore, the State of Maharashtra was justified in issuing the attachment
notifications under Section 4 of the MPID Act.
(Para 72)
Uncovering the conspiracy
The Grant Thornton report
FMC engaged Grant Thornton LLP to conduct a forensic audit of the practices
and records of NSEL. The report found several instances where NSEL had
repeatedly contravened the rules.
(Para 73)
63 Moons judgment
note of the modus operandi by which the defaults came about, specifically
highlighting the role of NSEL in not complying with the rules. It set aside the
amalgamation order on the narrow ground that the preconditions for the exercise
of power under Section 396 had not been fulfilled. One of the reasons which
persuaded the Supreme Court to set aside the order of amalgamation was that the
EOW and the Enforcement Directorate had already taken steps to realise the
amounts in default. The judgment in 63 Moons case has after a detailed analysis of
the Grant Thornton report and the FMC's order held that the defaulters and NSEL
conspired to dupe the members of their money.
(Para 83)
referred to
Constitutional validity of the MPID Act
The validity of the MPID Act was specifically dealt with in two decisions of the
validity of the MPID Act in view of the earlier decision in K.K. Baskaran, (2011) 3
(Para 91)
V. State of T.N., WP No. 26108 of
2005, order dated 2-3-2007 (Mad); Soma Suresh Kumar V. State of A.P., (2013)
The High Court's judgment
Referring to the bye-laws and rules of NSEL, the High Court held that NSEL is an
electronic trading platform which only facilitated transactions between buyers and
sellers. In this context, it observed that NSEL did not receive the pay-in in its own
right but only for the purpose of passing it on to the selling trading member on the
same day.
(Para 93)
The High Court has lost sight of the fact that Section 2(c) of the MPID Act
defines "deposit" in broad terms. Further, according to the definition, the return
may be either in money, commodity or service, and it is not necessary that the
commodity or the money must be returned in the same form. The definition
includes the receipt of money and the return of a commodity, or even the receipt of
a commodity and a return in the form of a service. Further, Bye-law 10.8 indicates
that NSEL was not merely an intermediary. The bye-law states that the buyer shall
pay the clearing house the value of the delivery allocation. However, till the
completion of the delivery process, the money will be retained by the clearing house
of NSEL.
(Para 94)
The High Court has formed an erroneous opinion that firstly, only if the return
includes interest, bonus or any other added benefit, it would be a deposit for the
purpose of the MPID Act. However, Section 2(c) states that the return may be
"with or without any benefit in the form of interest, bonus, profit or in any other
form". The definition does not stipulate that there must be an added benefit, rather
that the "added benefit" is irrelevant for the purpose of the definition; secondly, that
for the purpose of Section 2(c), the receipt of the commodity or money "must be
retained by itself". The definition does not provide any such embargo. Rather, the
definition is broadly worded to include even the possession of the commodities for
a limited purpose. The High Court has read the definition of "deposit" narrowly
without any reference to the salutary purpose of the MPID Act.
(Para 97)
The High Court also made observations on the merits of the criminal
proceedings. Referring to the role of NSEL in the default in payments, it observed
that at the highest, the actions of NSEL would constitute offences under Sections
465 and 467 IPC. The EOW filed a charge-sheet under Section 173 CrPC before the
Sessions Judge, Special Court under the MPID Act for the offences punishable under
Sections 409, 465, 467, 468, 471, 474 and 477(4) read with Section 120-B. The
High Court ought not to have made observations on the merits of the criminal
proceedings when the writ petition was restricted to the issue of whether NSEL is a
financial establishment for the purpose of the MPID Act.
(Para 98)
reversed
OnLine Bom 12623; NSEL Investors Action Group V. 63 Moons Technologies Ltd.,
cited
VN-D/68908/CVR
Advocates who appeared in this case :
Vikramjit Banerjee, Additional Solicitor General, Jayant Mehta, Senior
Advocate [Ms Sanjana Saddy, Sanyat Lodha (Advocate-on-Record),
Rahul Chitnis, Sachin Patil (Advocate-on-Record), Aaditya Pandey, Geo
Joseph, Ms Shwetal Shepal, Siddhartha Sinha, Tathagat, Abhishek
Mahajan, Nring Chamwibo Zeliang and Prashant Rawat, Advocates], for
the Appellant;
Dr A.M. Singhvi and Mukul Rohatgi, Senior Advocates [Ms Sanjana
Saddy, Ms Anindita Mitra (Advocate-on-Record), Arvind Lakhawat,
Mahesh Agarwal, Rishi Agrawala, Ankur Saigal, Ms Mansi Taneja, E.C.
Agrawala (Advocate-on-Record), Akhil Sachar, Ms Sunanda Tulsyer,
Sangram Singh, Ms Vaishali Sharma, Ms Jasmine Damkewala (Advocate
-on-Record) and M/s Legal Options (Advocate-on-Record), Advocates],
for the Respondent.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
477f-g, 479e-f, 502a-b,
Union of India
502e-f, 502f-g, 503f,
504b, 504f, 507b, 508a
-b, 508f, 509b, 509c,
515a-b
Action Group V. 63 Moons Technologies Ltd.
478c
Technologies Ltd. V. State of Maharashtra d, 514a, 514b-c, 514c-
(reversed)
d, 515b-c, 515d, 515f
Technologies Ltd. V. State of Maharashtra
478b
Palanichamy
479d-e
Technologies Ltd. V. Union of India
502e-f
Exchange Ltd. (NSEL) V. State of Maharashtra
475f-g
Ltd. V. Union of India
479d-e
Exchange Ltd. V. State of Maharashtra
474f-g, 475g, 515c-d
:
Sarma
494d-e
State of A.P.
512f-g
478a-b, 512c-d, 512f-g,
State of Maharashtra
515b
Vijay C. Puljal
512c-d, 512f, 515b
:
479d, 492g-h, 511f-g,
Ltd. V. State of Pondicherry
512a, 513a, 515b
Baskaran V. State
509d-e, 509e-f, 509g,
510d, 510f, 510g, 511f,
511f-g, 512a, 512e-f,
512f-g, 513a, 515b,
515b-c
Karnataka Power Transmission Corpn. V. Ashok
Iron Works (P) Ltd.
494e
State of Gujarat
494e
Mills Ltd. V. Union of India
512d-e
19. WP No. 26108 of 2005, order dated 2-3-2007
(Mad), K.K. Baskaran V. State of T.N.
509e-f
509e, 510c-d, 510d-e,
Vijay C. Puljal V. State of Maharashtra
510e, 510c
Co. Ltd. V. Union of India
510c
Election Commr.
480f
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
DR D.Y. CHANDRACHUD, J.-
CONTENT
SI.
Headings
Page
Nos.
Nos.
A.
Facts
470
B.
Submissions
478
C.
Analysis
482
C.1.
Framework of the MPID Act
482
C.2.
Framework of NSE
484
C.3.
Definitions of "Deposit" and "Financial
492
Establishment" : Interpretation of Sections
2(c) and 2(d) of the MPID Act
C.3.1.
Settlement Guarantee Fund
:
496
Deposit under Section 2(c) of the
MPID Act
C.3.2.
Receipt of commodities : Deposit
498
under Section 2(c) of the MPID Act
C.4.
Uncovering the conspiracy
502
C.4.1.
The Grant Thornton Report
502
C.4.2.
63 Moons judgment
503
C.5.
Constitutional validity of the MPID Act
510
C.6.
The High Court's judgment
514
1. The appeal arises from a judgment dated 22-8-2019 of the
Bombay High Court, by which certain notifications attaching the
property of the respondent under Section 4 of the Maharashtra
Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act,
1999 ("the MPID Act") have been quashed. The respondent holds
99.99% of the shareholding of National Spot Exchange Ltd. ("NSEL").
At the core of the dispute is whether NSEL is a "financial
establishment" within the meaning of Section 2(d) of the MPID Act.
A. Facts
2. NSEL is a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956,
and is a wholly owned subsidiary of Financial Technologies (India) Ltd.,
which is now known as 63 Moons Technologies Ltd. ("FCIL" or "63
Moons"). On 5-6-2007, the Union of India issued a Notification under
Section 27 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 ("the FCRA
Act") exempting forward contracts of one-day duration for sale and
purchase of commodities traded on NSEL from the application of the
provisions of the enactment. NSEL started operating as an exchange for
spot trading in commodities. NSEL launched contracts for buying and
selling of commodities on its trading platform with different settlement
periods, ranging from T+0 to T+36 days. 'T' indicates the trade date,
that is the date on which the trade took place and +0 or +36, indicates
the number of business days after the trading day when the delivery of
the commodity and the payment of price is made.
3. NSEL offered "paired" contracts. Such contracts enabled traders
either by themselves or through their brokers, to simultaneously enter
into paired contracts, such as of T+2 and T+25 duration. The seller
through his broker puts the commodities on sale and the buyer through
his broker looks to purchase commodities of specific requirements.
NSEL then pairs the buyer and the seller if there is a match between
the requirement of the buyer and the available commodities with the
seller. The buyer and the seller simultaneously enter into T+2 and T+25
contracts. For example, if 'A' (the buyer) wants to buy one ton of
basmati rice, he would trade on NSEL's platform through his broker.
The platform would identify that 'B' (the seller) has an offer to sell the
quantified commodity. NSEL would then match both the contracts. The
date of matching of the contracts is termed as the trade date or 'T'. 'A'
must then pay the price of the commodity to NSEL, which checks if 'B'
has deposited the stock in a warehouse accredited to NSEL for delivery
within two days. Once NSEL has confirmed that 'B' has deposited the
stock in the warehouse, it transfers the money to 'B'. Simultaneously,
the same parties enter into a T+25 contract by which 'A' (who was the
buyer in the T+2 contract) would sell the same quantity of commodity
purchased to 'B' (who was the seller in the T+2 contract). The
difference between the purchasing cost and the selling cost is the profit
that the trading member acquires through the trade.
4. A flow chart indicating a representation of the transaction is set
out below:
T+2
Commodity Seller
Money is transferred from
Deposits commodity in
NSEL's settlement account to
NSEL accredited warehouse
seller's settlement account
NSEL
Money is transferred from
Issues warehouse receipt and
broker's settlement account
displays it on exchange
to NSEL's settlement account
terminal
Broker
Pay money to brokers
Places order on behalf of
investor for purchasing of
commodity
T+25
Investor
Sells back the same
commodity purchased on
T+2
Commodity Seller
NSEL pays the commodity
seller
NSEL
The seller's broken pays
NSEL for the sale of
commodity
5. A detailed step-wise trading process of the paired contracts is
indicated below:
5.1. A trading member of NSEL who wishes to trade in the platform
is required to place a specific quantity of the commodity in a warehouse
accredited to NSEL. The warehouse would then generate a warehouse
receipt.
5.2. The registered trading member or his broker who had placed his
commodity in the warehouse could on the basis of the standard pro
forma contracts offered by NSEL place offers for sale of the commodity
on the platform, stipulating the price and quantity offered.
5.3. The buying trading member or his broker would input buy
orders of a particular commodity and quantity on the NSEL trading
platform.
5.4. When a sale offer and a buy offer coincide, the exchange would
be matched by NSEL, stipulating the commodity, the price, and the
quantity.
5.5. The Exchange would communicate all the trades effected at the
end of the day.
5.6. On the next day, an obligation report recording the pay-in and
delivery obligations would be forwarded to the trading members.
5.7. On the day after (that is, settlement date), NSEL would debit
the trading member's designated settlement account for the amount of
the buying member's pay-in obligations and it would be credited to
NSEL's exchange settlement account. NSEL's Operations Department
would inform NSEL's Delivery Department of the selling member's
delivery obligations. Based on the intimation, NSEL's Delivery
Department would confirm to the Operations Department if the
requisite quantity of the particular commodity is available according to
the warehouse receipts. After such confirmation, the Operations
Department would release the purchase price to the selling broker's
designated bank account. Simultaneously, a delivery allocation report
would be issued to the buyer's broker or the buyer informing him that
the commodity purchased was allotted to him.
5.8. NSEL would then send the buyer's details to the selling trading
member and the selling trading member would arrange for the non-
member client/seller to generate a VAT paid sale invoice of the
commodity. On the basis of the delivery allocation report and the VAT
paid invoice, NSEL would issue a delivery note authorising the buyer to
take delivery from the designated warehouse. If the buyer chooses to
not take delivery, he would be put in constructive possession of the
commodity where he would be entitled to take possession at any time.
6. On 27-4-2012, the Department of Consumer Affairs ("DCA")
issued a show-cause notice to NSEL on why action should not be taken
against it for permitting transactions in violation of the exemption
notification. On 12-7-2012, the DCA directed NSEL to give an
undertaking that no contracts shall be launched until further
instructions, and that all existing contracts must be settled on the due
dates. In July 2013, about 13,000 persons who traded on the platform
of NSEL claimed that other trading members had defaulted in the
payment of approximately Rs 5600 crores. NSEL issued a Circular on 31
-7-2013 suspending its spot exchange operations. It stated that the
delivery and settlement of all pending contracts would be merged and
the contracts would be settled after the expiry of 15 days. NSEL
published a statement on
6-8-2013 representing that it had sufficient stocks valued at Rs 6032
crores in its warehouses.
7. A new pay-in schedule was announced by NSEL on 14-8-2013 by
which the Exchange commenced the pay-in schedule from 16-8-2013
and pay-out schedule from 20-8-2013, in the same manner every
week. It was also represented that the members would be entitled to
get simple interest on their outstanding dues with effect from 16-8-
2013 on a reducing balance at 8% p.a. till the end of the settlement
calendar. The notification is extracted below:
"National Spot Exchange Ltd.
Circular
14-8-2013
Settlement Schedule
In terms of the provisions of the rules, bye-laws and business
rules of the Exchange and further to Circular No.
INSEL/TRD/2013/065/dated 31-7-2013, the Members of the
Exchange are hereby notified that the Exchange has finalised the
following revised schedule for settlement of outstanding dues
payable to the members. This schedule has been prepared taking
into account the exigencies emerging from sudden closure of trading
operation, liquidity problem accentuated by withdrawal of buyers
credit limits by the banks from the members, who are in pay-in and
the extensive discussion done by the members who have to
complete pay-in and members who have to receive the payments.
Considering the challenges, the revised schedule of settlement has
been prepared to ensure reduction in payment risk and meet the
settlement obligation:
1. The Exchange will commence the pay-in schedule from Friday,
16-8-2013 and pay-out from Tuesday, 20-8-2013 and thereafter in
the same manner every week.
2. The Exchange shall effect pay out on a pro rata basis every
week based on the money recovered as per the settlement calendar
attached herewith. These payments are subject to realisation of
cheques of the members, who have to complete pay-in. In case any
payment is not realised, then the Exchange shall take measures as
per its Rules and bye-laws.
3. All funds realised up to Friday every week starting from 16-8-
2013 shall be disbursed on Tuesday of the subsequent week.
4. The schedule has taken into account all promised or expected
payment from the members, who have given post-dated cheques or
letters of commitment.
5. Members/clients shall be entitled to get interest on their
outstanding dues w.e.f. 16-8-2013 on reducing balance method,
based on simple interest rate of 8% p.a. till end of settlement
calendar. Interest amount shall be paid at end of the settlement.
6. A detailed settlement Calendar is being enclosed herewith.
For and on behalf of
National Spot Exchange Ltd.
Santhosh Mansingh
Assistant Vice President"
8. By a Notification dated 19-9-2014, the Central Government
withdrew the exemption granted on 23-7-2008. The Forward Markets
Commission ("FMC") recommended to DCA that steps be taken to
ascertain the quantity and quality of commodities at accredited
warehouses, the financial status of buyers and trading members, and
that liability be fixed on the promoters of NSEL i.e 63 Moons. On 27-8-
2013, FMC directed a forensic audit of NSEL by Grant Thornton LLP. The
Union of India ordered an inspection of accounts of NSEL and 63 Moons
under Section 209-A of the Companies Act. The Economic Offences
Wing registered cases against the Directors and key management
personnel of the NSEL and 63 Moons and against trading members and
brokers of NSEL under the provisions of the Penal Code, 1860 and the
MPID Act.
9. Pankaj Ramnaresh Saraf, a Director of Vostak Far East Securities
Pvt. Ltd., a company involved in the business of investment, trading,
and financing filed a complaint² on 30-9-2013 against the Directors and
persons holding key management posts in NSEL, 25 borrowers/trading
members and some brokers of NSEL for the offences under Sections
120-B, 409, 465, 468, 471, 474 and 477-A IPC. The complainant
stated that he had primarily been transacting in T+2 and T+25
contracts. He further stated that since NSEL suspended trading and
deferred settlement of all one-day forward contracts by fifteen days, he
had not received payment of Rs 202 lakhs that was due to him under
various contracts. On 14-8-2013, he was informed by his broker that
NSEL had issued a settlement schedule for the payment of outstanding
dues after seven months. He alleged that the commodities were traded
by providing "false" warehouse receipts of "non-existent commodities".
It was also alleged in the complaint that NSEL held the commodities in
warehouses accredited to it as a "trustee" on behalf of the depositors
(buyers) and that the misappropriation is a criminal breach of trust. In
addition to the above, he also alleged that the Settlement Guarantee
Fund ("SGF") had been misused by NSEL.
10. The FIR was later transferred to the Economic Offences Wing
("EOW") of Mumbai Police. The case was registered and Sections 3 and
4 of the MPID Act were added to the FIR. The case was transferred to
the Special Court constituted under the MPID Act³³. NSEL filed a writ
petition challenging the invocation of the MPID Act on the ground that
the exchange is not a "financial establishment" under the provisions of
the Act. By an order dated 1-10-20154, the petition was dismissed by a
Division Bench of the High Court on the following grounds:
10.1. The material collected by EOW during the course of the
investigation revealed that NSEL did not carry out its exchange
operations according to the bye-laws. It was prima facie evident that
NSEL represented to the traders that
they would be provided security free loans and that they would receive
fixed returns of 14% to 16% p.a.
10.2. The record indicates that the transactions were not
accompanied by physical delivery of goods. In many cases, the
accounts of NSEL and the suppliers of the goods did not tally. The
record also indicates that there were multiple accommodation entries
due to collusion between NSEL and the trading members.
10.3. Section 2(d) of the MPID Act defines "financial establishment"
as any person accepting any deposit under a scheme. Section 2(c) of
the MPID Act provides an inclusive definition of the term "deposit".
Since NSEL assured the traders that their investments in paired
contracts would secure them a return of 14% to 16% p.a., the receipt
of the returns would prima facie fall within the definition of "deposit".
10.4. A charge-sheet and supplementary charge-sheets have been
filed. NSEL has an alternative remedy of applying for discharge before
the trial court.
11. The State of Maharashtra issued a Notification on 21-9-2016
under Section 4 of the MPID Act by which the properties of the
respondent were attached. The relevant extract of the notification is
reproduced below:
"No. MPI 2016/C.R.541/B/Pol II : Whereas complaints have been
received from number of depositors against M/s La-Fin Financial
Services Pvt. Ltd. and M/s La-Financial Services Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter
referred to as "the said financial establishment") complaining that
they had collected the Fund and have defaulted to return the said
deposits made by the depositors, on demand;
And whereas, the State Government is satisfied that the said
financial establishment and its Chairman/Directors are not likely to
return the deposits to the depositors and hence the Government has
to protect the interests of the depositors;
And whereas the properties in the schedule appended hereto are
alleged to have been acquired by the said financial establishment
and its Chairman/Directors from and out of the deposits collected by
the financial establishment;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section
(1) of Section 4, Section 5 and Section 8 of the Maharashtra
Protection of Interest of Deposits (in Financial Establishment) Act,
1000 (Mah. XVI of 2000) (hereinafter referred to as "the said Act")
the Government of Maharashtra hereby attaches the properties of the
said financial establishment and in the name of its
Chairman/Directors as specified in the schedule."
12. The Supreme Court on 26-10-2016 5 dismissed as withdrawn,
the special leave petition filed against the order4 of the Bombay High
Court. The appellants filed a writ petition before the Bombay High Court
challenging the Notification dated 21-9-2016 issued under Section 4 of
the MPID Act attaching the properties of the respondent. The validity of
Sections 4 and 5 of the MPID Act was challenged on the ground that
they are violative of Articles 14, 19 and 300-A of the Constitution. The
reliefs sought in the writ petition are extracted below:
"(a) The Hon'ble Court may declare that Sections 4 and 5 of the
MPID Act are violative of Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution and
Article 300-A of the Constitution and consequently issue a writ of
mandamus and/or any other appropriate writ, order or direction
restraining the respondent, its servants and/or agents from acting in
pursuance of those provisions;
(b) In view of prayer (a) above, issue a writ, order or direction
under Article 226 of the Constitution quashing and setting aside the
impugned Notification dated 21-9-2016 (being Ext. S herein) issued
by the respondent exercising the power under Section 4 of the MPID
Act;
(c) In the alternative, issue a writ, order or direction in the nature
of certiorari or any other appropriate writ, order or direction under
Article 226 of the Constitution quashing and setting aside the
Notification dated 21-9-2016 as being ultra vires Sections 4 and 5 of
the MPID Act."
13. The State of Maharashtra issued further Notifications dated 4-4-
2018 7-4-2018-, 11-4-2018 S, 19-4-2018°, 15-5-2018 10 and 19-10-
2018 under Sections 4 and 5 of the MPID Act, attaching the
11
properties of the respondent to recover the defaulted money. The writ
petitions were heard together and disposed of by a Division Bench of
the Bombay High Court by a judgment dated 22-8-2019 The petition
was allowed on the following grounds:
13.1. The pay-in amount received from the buyer was only for the
purpose of passing it over to the seller on the same date. This amount
would not fall within the purview of Section 2(c) of the MPID Act in
terms of which a "deposit" must be the receipt or acceptance of a
valuable commodity which would be "repaid" by the financial
establishment after a specified period.
13.2. NSEL only performed the role of a facilitator, in a manner
similar to the Bombay Stock Exchange. NSEL did not receive money
with the obligation to return it on maturity. The fact that VAT is
collected by the selling members from the buying members and that
TDS is not deducted by NSEL indicates that NSEL is a mere pass
through platform.
13.3. The contract notes do not disclose that NSEL received any
money or commodity with an assured return. Rather, the difference
between the buy contract and the sell contract is the profit that the
member receives. The profit from the transaction is determined by
totalling the two amounts by taking into consideration the number of
days when the commodity was sold and the pay-out was scheduled. It
varies with different products based on the period when the sell
contract (that is the second contract) is scheduled.
13.4. The entries in the ledger of the traders reflect the delivery
obligation and record the credit/debit pursuant to the trade. The entries
of NSEL's settlement bank account show the amount received from a
particular trader.
The entries of pay-in and pay-out match with the ledger accounts of
individual traders.
13.5. Mr Pankaj Saraf in his FIR has not stated that he has
deposited money with NSEL. He has stated that trading on the platform
was successful until the cessation of further trades.
13.6. The transactions had gone wrong since as depicted in the
show-cause notice to NSEL, the outstanding positions of trade did not
result in delivery by the end of the day. After 31-7-2013, 24 sellers
failed to honour their part of the agreement by purchasing back the
commodities on T+25 days. This was noted as a violation of the
exemption granted. However, this does not change the fact that NSEL
did not receive any "deposits" within the meaning of Section 2(c) of the
MPID Act since NSEL did not receive the commodities or money to be
retained. NSEL only received transaction and warehouse charges which
cannot be considered as a "deposit".
13.7. EOW filed a charge-sheet on 4-8-2014 in which it was stated
that the important feature of the exchange is that it guarantees that
both the parties would comply with their contractual obligations and if
the trading member is unable to pay, the Exchange would sell the
goods and recover the money. The charge-sheet also notes that NSEL
encouraged the investors to enter into contracts without depositing
commodities in the warehouses. However, the charge-sheet makes it
evident that even the EOW was of the opinion that the Exchange was
only acting as a transaction agent. Further by a letter dated 16-8-2013
from FMC, information on defaulters was sought by NSEL.
13.8. Merely because one of the brochures refers to an assured yield
of 14 to 16% p.a., it cannot be held that a "deposit" was made.
13.9. In the event that accounts of NSEL and the suppliers do not
tally and delivery of commodities has not been provided, this may
constitute an offence under Sections 465 and 467 IPC. NSEL is not
absolved of any of these liabilities.
13.10. At the highest, since the members had to pay back the
amounts due on T+25, they could be construed as a "financial
establishment".
13.11. The warehouse receipts do not establish the nature of the
transaction nor can it be held that the deposit of commodities would fall
within the purview of the definition of "deposit" since the commodity
that was to be deposited in a warehouse was to be sold by the seller.
13.12. The judgment of the Supreme Court in 63 Moons
Technologies Ltd. V. Union of India¹2 does not have any bearing on
whether the attachment of properties initiated under Section 4 of the
MPID Act is valid.
13.13. The forensic report of the 17 defaulter companies reveals that
the defaulters have utilised the funds and have transferred them to
their sister companies.
13.14. In another case of one of the defaulting trading members
that is pending before the Gujarat High Court, the Deputy Secretary,
Home Department, Government of Maharashtra had referred to the
trading member
as a "defaulter" who had committed offences under Sections 409, 465,
467, 468, 471 and 474 IPC.
13.15. The contention that Section 4 of the MPID Act must be read
down in view of the "wide ambit" of the provisions which could be
misused is left open since the Supreme Court in K.K. Baskaran V.
State13 and Sonal Hemant Joshi V. State of Maharashtra¹4 has upheld
the constitutional validity of the Depositors Acts in Tamil Nadu and
Pondicherry, specifically noting that the decision would also apply to
the MPID Act since the provisions are pari materia.
13.16. By an interim order on 24-10-2018 the impugned
notifications attaching the properties were stayed on the ground that
the attachment was in excess of the defaulted amount. It was noted in
the interim order that the defaulted amount is Rs 4822.53 crores
whereas the authorities have attached properties worth Rs 8547 crores,
including Rs 2200 crores from NSEL. This order was challenged before
the Supreme Court and it has refused1 16 to interfere.
13.17. The audit report submitted US Gandhi and Co. has traced
trade obligations of the trading members who are defaulters. NSEL has
also instituted recovery suits against the defaulters.
B. Submissions
14. Mr Jayant Mehta, Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant
submitted:
14.1. The definition of "deposit" in Section 2(c) of the MPID Act is
broad and inclusive. The provision must be interpreted widely keeping
in view the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the enactment of the
law.
14.2. NSEL received money from the seller and returned it in kind
(through commodities). NSEL received commodities from the seller and
returned an equivalent amount after a specified period in cash.
Therefore, NSEL accepted deposits from both the seller and the buyer.
14.3. Through a paired contract, the buying member would buy a
purchasing contract and simultaneously sell a sale contract paired by
NSEL. The sale price was pre-designated by NSEL to offer an annualised
return of 14-16% to the buying member.
14.4. NSEL is both the bailee of cash (at the buyer's end) and of
valuable commodities (at the seller's end).
14.5. The writ petition filed by the respondent before the High Court
was not maintainable since there was an alternative remedy of raising
an objection against the attachment of property before the Designated
Court under Section 7 of the MPID Act. Further, any person who is
aggrieved by the order of the Designated Court under Section 10 can
appeal to the High Court within 60 days from the date of the order in
terms of Section 11 of the MPID Act.
14.6. The settlement cycle broke because:
(a) NSEL, contrary to its bye-laws and rules, did not warehouse
the commodities. The buying member did not have knowledge of
whether the commodities were warehoused; and
(b) The buying member was lured into a paired contract on the
assurance that the commodity in the warehouse would constitute a
security and NSEL would be the counter-guarantor. However, NSEL
colluded with the selling members and facilitated trades without
ensuring that the commodities were deposited in the warehouses.
15. Mr Vikramjit Banerjee, ASG appearing for the State of
Maharashtra made the following submissions:
15.1. NSEL is a financial establishment under Section 2(d) of the
MPID Act since it has accepted deposits as defined under Section 2(c).
NSEL has been trading in different types of commodities through
"farmer" contracts, paired contracts, e-series contracts, among others.
NSEL guaranteed assured returns to investors.
15.2. The provision of warehouse receipts along with the assurance
of returns indicates that NSEL was accepting deposits.
15.3. This Court in New Horizon Sugar Mills Ltd. V. State of
Pondicherry17 has held that the State Legislature is competent to
legislate upon financial establishments with an object to protect
investors. The Court also held that the expression "financial
establishment" includes a natural and a juristic person such as a
company incorporated under the Companies Act. This Court has held in
K.K. Baskaran V. State13 State V. K.S. Palanichamy18, and PGF Ltd. V.
Union of India¹9 that the object of a law regulating financial
establishments is to protect the investors. Therefore, the provisions of
the statute must be interpreted keeping this salient purpose in mind.
15.4. This Court in 63 Moons Technologies12 held that NSEL carried
out trade in paired contracts in commodities and this created financial
transactions distinct from sale and purchase transactions.
15.5. The respondent has an alternate statutory remedy available to
it under Section 10 of the MPID Act.
16. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Senior Counsel appearing for the
respondent submitted that:
16.1. The commodity sellers received money from the buyers on
T+2 with an obligation to repay the money on T+25. NSEL obtained
decrees against the defaulters. Therefore, at the highest, the appellants
can only argue that the defaulting trade members (not NSEL) are
"financial establishments".
16.2. The State has characterised the member defaulters of the
exchange as "defaulter companies" and as "financial establishment" in
Notifications issued
by the Home Department on 31-3-2017 and 24-3-2018 which indicates
that NSEL is not a defaulter.
16.3. According to the forensic report submitted by the EOW, the
full money trail has been traced to the defaulting members. NSEL did
not receive any money as "deposit".
16.4. The State of Maharashtra in a case which is pending before the
Gujarat High Court relating to one of the members (buyers) submitted
on affidavit that the defaulting members have defrauded the investors.
16.5. Even if the impugned judgment is upheld, NSEL will not be
absolved of its criminal liability under the IPC but no criminal liability
arises under the MPID Act. NSEL and 63 Moons are being prosecuted in
various other criminal proceedings. They will face civil suits as well.
16.6. As against the current outstanding claim of Rs 4676 crores,
properties in excess of Rs 6000 crores are attached.
16.7. NSEL is only obligated to recover the money from the
defaulters. It has secured decrees/arbitral awards to the tune of Rs
3397 crores from the members. The Bombay High Court has accepted
the determination of liability of Rs 136.98 crores against defaulters by
the Committee appointed by it. The Committee has crystallised a
further liability of Rs 760 crores from the defaulters which is pending
acceptance by the Bombay High Court.
16.8. NSEL has filed proceedings for execution of the decrees and
awards against the defaulters across five States. Since the process is
taking time, NSEL instituted a petition20 20 before this Court under Article
32 seeking a consolidation of all execution proceedings.
16.9. NSEL did not receive any "deposit", as defined under Section 2
(c) of the MPID Act since:
(a) The impugned notifications by which the property of the
respondent was attached under Section 4 of the MPID Act proceed
only on the basis that NSEL accepted money which it failed to return
and there is no reference to a deposit founded on the acceptance of
commodities.
(b) The Government cannot improve on the reasons by
a
subsequent affidavit (relied on Mohinder Singh Gill V. Chief Election
Commr.²²; and
(c) According to the definition of "deposit" under Section 2(c) of
the MPID Act, only the deposit of "valuable" commodity is covered.
In common parlance, valuable commodities would be restricted to
gold, silver, or other precious metals. NSEL only traded in
agricultural commodities and steel. Agricultural commodities are not
covered by the definition.
16.10. The traders who participated on NSEL's platform are
corporate traders. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the MPID
Act states that the Act is for the protection of "small" depositors.
16.11. The proceeding under the MPID Act would short-circuit the
trials in the pending civil suits against both NSEL and 63 Moons. 63
Moons is a public listed company with more than 50,000 shareholders,
800 employees and 2 million users. If the property of 63 Moons is
attached, the interest of stakeholders will be prejudiced.
16.12. NSEL did not have control over any monies received from the
traders. NSEL is a pass through platform, where the money was sent to
the counter party brokers on the same day.
17. Mr Mukul Rohatgi, Senior Counsel, appearing for the respondent
made the following submissions:
17.1. NSEL runs a commodity exchange, similar to a stock
exchange. NSEL is only a transacting medium and neither collects
"deposits" nor does it assure returns.
17.2. NSEL receives a commission of Rs 100 per one lakh of the
trade value (0.1%) from the traders.
17.3. In Baskaran13 this Court held that the Tamil Nadu Protection of
Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1997 ("the
judgment, the Court observed that though the Tamil Nadu Act and
MPID have minor differences, the view taken in the judgment would
equally apply to the validity of the MPID Act. This Court rejected the
challenge on the ground of Articles 14, 19 and 21 without examining
the provisions of the statute. Therefore, the Court in the present case is
not precluded from examining the constitutional validity of the
provisions of the MPID Act.
17.4. Section 4 of the MPID Act is arbitrary and constitutionally
invalid and it suffers from overbreadth since:
(a) Sub-section (1) of Section 4 mandates the attachment of
property of the "promoter, director, partner, manager or member of
the said financial establishment";
(b) Sub-section (2) of Section 4 divests the title of the attached
properties without due process of law; and
(c) Section 7 states that the Designated Court shall issue a notice
to the financial establishment or any other person whose property is
attached. An objection shall be raised by all persons who are likely to
have a claim. The objection shall be decided by a summary
procedure under Order 37 CPC, 1908. The divestment of title of a
property by a summary procedure is arbitrary.
17.5. Though the transaction by NSEL in its platform seems to be an
exchange of commodities on paper, it was an agreement between a
lender and borrower. A borrower who has defaulted in paying the loan
can be held liable to repay it.
17.6. The forensic audit traces back the money trail to the borrowing
-traders and not to NSEL.
17.7. Five of the six attachment notifications were "omnibus
notifications" issued by an incompetent authority.
17.8. NSEL did not make a blanket assurance of 16% returns. The
representations only meant that investors making "wise investments"
would get an annualised return of 16%.
C. Analysis
C.1. Framework of the MPID Act
18. The MPID Act was enacted by the legislature in Maharashtra and
received the assent of the President on 21-1-2000. The Statement of
Objects and Reasons accompanying the introduction of the Bill states
that the statute is enacted to protect the public from the increasing
menace of financial establishments grabbing money from the public in
the form of deposits:
"There is a mushroom growth of financial establishments in the
State of Maharashtra in the recent past. The sole object of these
establishments is of grabbing money received as deposits from
public, mostly middle class and poor on the promises of
unprecedented high attractive interest rates of interest or rewards
and without any obligation to refund the deposit to the investors on
maturity or without any provision for ensuring rendering of the
services in kind in return, as assured. Many of these financial
establishments have defaulted to return the deposits to public. As
such deposits run into crores of rupees, it has resulted in great
public resentment and uproar, creating law and order problem in the
State of Maharashtra, especially in the city like Mumbai which is
treated as the financial capital of India. It is, therefore, expedient to
a make a suitable legislation in the public interest to curb the
unscrupulous activities of such financial establishments in the State
of Maharashtra."
19. Section 3 of the MPID Act envisages punishment upon conviction
of every person including a promotor, partner, director, manager or
employee responsible for the management of or the conduct of the
business or affairs of the financial establishment which has fraudulently
defaulted in the repayment of deposits on maturity. Section 3 is in the
following terms:
"3. Fraudulent default by financial establishment.- -Any
financial establishment, which fraudulently defaults any repayment
of deposit on maturity along with any benefit in the form of interest,
bonus, profit or in any other form as promised or fraudulently fails to
render service as assured against the deposit, every person including
the promoter, partner, director, manager or any other person or an
employee responsible for the management of or conducting of the
business or affairs of such financial establishment shall, on
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six years and with fine which may extend to one lakh of
rupees and such financial establishment also shall be liable for a fine
which may extend to one lakh of rupees.
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, a financial
establishment, which commits default in repayment of such deposit
with such benefits in the form of interest, bonus, profit or in any
other form as promised or fails to render any specified service
promised against such deposit, or fails to render any specific service
agreed against the deposit with an intention of causing wrongful
gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person or commits
such default due to its inability arising out of impracticable or
commercially not viable promises made while accepting such deposit
or arising out of deployment of money or assets acquired out of the
deposits in such a manner as it involves inherent risk in recovering
the same when needed shall, be deemed to have committed a
default or failed to render the specific service, fraudulently."
20. Section 4 contemplates the levy of attachment on properties of a
financial establishment on default of return of payment. Section 4
provides that if on a complaint received from the depositors or
otherwise, the Government is satisfied that any financial establishment
has failed to return the deposit on maturity or demand, or to pay
interest or an assured benefit, or has failed to provide a service that
was assured against the deposit, or if the Government has reason to
believe that any financial establishment is acting in a manner
detrimental to the interest of the depositors with the intention to
defraud them, it may attach the money or property acquired by the
financial establishment out of the deposit. The provision states that if
such money or property is not available to be attached, the property of
the financial establishment or the promoter, director, partner, manager
or member may be attached.
21. Section 5 provides for the appointment of a competent authority
while Section 6 contains a provision for a Designated Court. Section 7
enunciates the powers of the Designated Court regarding attachment.
Under Section 7, upon receipt of an application under Section 5, the
Designated Court shall issue a show-cause notice to the financial
establishment or any person whose property is attached on why the
order of attachment should not be made. A notice shall also be issued
to all persons who are likely to have an interest in the property, calling
them to submit objections to the attachment of the property on the
ground that they have an interest in the property or a portion of it. If
no cause is shown, then the attachment shall be made absolute and
directions can be issued for the realisation and equitable distribution of
assets. If cause is shown, the Designated Court shall investigate into it
by following a summary procedure as contemplated under Order 37 of
the Civil Procedure Code, 1908. An appeal against an order of the
Designated Court is envisaged by the provisions of Section 11.
22. Since NSEL did not have sufficient money or property for
attachment under Section 4 on default of payment of the outstanding
amounts, the State of Maharashtra attached the properties of the
respondent which owns 99.9% of the shares of NSEL.
C.2. Framework of NSE
23. It is necessary to refer to the bye-laws of NSEL to ascertain the
structure of NSEL's operation and functioning. Bye-law 2.17 defines
"certified warehouse receipt" in the following terms:
"2.17. Certified warehouse receipt means a receipt issued
under the authority of the Exchange or any agency approved by the
exchange as a certified warehouse, evidencing proof of ownership of
a standard quantity of commodities of a stated grade and quality by
the beneficial owner or the holder of the certified warehouse receipt.
Certified warehouse receipt may either be in physical form or in
dematerialised/electronic form as may be permitted by law."
24. The expression "certified warehouse" is defined in Bye-law 2.18
as a
"warehouse approved and designated by the Exchange for making deliveries to
and taking deliveries for fulfilling contractual obligations resulting from transaction
in commodities".
25. Bye-law 2.51 defines "margin" as follows:
"2.51. Margin means a deposit or payment of cash/other
specified assets/documents to establish or maintain a position in a
commodity and includes initial margin, special margin, ordinary
margin, delivery period margin, additional margin and variation
margin or any other type of margin as may be determined by the
Exchange from time-to-time."
(emphasis supplied)
26. The expression "warehouse receipt" is defined in Bye-law 2.96 to
mean a document evidencing that a commodity is being held in the
approved warehouse. Bye-law 3.7 provides for limitation of liability:
"3.7. Limitation of liability.-The Exchange shall not be liable
for any activities of its members or of any other person, authorised
or unauthorised, acting in the name of any member, and any act of
commission or omission by any one of them, either singly or jointly,
at any time shall not be in any way construed to be an act of
commission or omission by any one of them, as an agent of the
Exchange. Save as otherwise specifically provided in these bye-laws
and in the Business Rules and Regulations of the Exchange, the
Exchange shall not incur or shall not be deemed to have incurred any
liability and accordingly, no claim or recourse shall lie against the
Exchange, any member of the Board of Directors/or committee duly
appointed by it or any other authorised person acting for and on
behalf of the Exchange, in respect of or in relation to any transaction
entered into through the exchange made by its members and any
other matters connected therewith or related thereto, which are
undertaken for promoting, facilitating, assisting, regulating, or
otherwise managing the affairs of the Exchange to achieve its
objects as defined in the Memorandum and Articles of Association of
the Exchange."
27. Bye-law 4.20(a) states that all outstanding transactions in
commodities shall be compulsorily delivered at one or more delivery
points or in warehouses accredited to the Exchange. Clause (b) of the
bye-law states that if the outstanding transactions have not been
settled by giving or receiving deliveries, then it shall be auctioned by
buying-in or selling-out as per the Business Rules of the Exchange:
"4.20. (a) All outstanding transactions in commodities shall in
general be for compulsory delivery at any one or more delivery
points and/or warehouses approved, certified and designated by the
Exchange.
(b) All outstanding positions not settled by giving or receiving
deliveries shall be auctioned by way of buying-in or selling-out as
per the Business Rules of the Exchange, together with a penalty as
prescribed by the Managing Director or such committee for those
failing to give or receive delivery."
28. Bye-law 7.10.2 states that the Exchange shall be responsible for
its commitments to each clearing member unless the cause for default
was under improper trades not covered by the Settlement Guarantee
Fund:
"7.10.2. The Exchange shall be responsible for its commitments
to each clearing member whether the remaining clearing members
with whom it has dealings have defaulted except under
circumstances where improper trades not covered under the
Settlement Guarantee Fund (SGF) are the cause for default."
29. Bye-law 7.11 states that the clearing house of the Exchange
shall, among other things, have the responsibility of receiving margin
payments, certification of warehouse receipts, and transmission of
documents. Bye-law 7.11 reads as follows:
"7.11. The clearing house of the Exchange shall, in the manner
specified by the Relevant Committee or the relevant authority, have
the responsibility of receiving and maintaining margin payments,
monitoring open positions and margins, and transmission of
documents, payments and certified warehouse receipts amongst the
trading-cum-clearing members and institutional clearing members of
the Exchange."
(emphasis supplied)
30. Bye-law 9 provides for clearing and settlement. Bye-laws 9.5,
9.6 and 9.7 provide as follows:
"9.5. An order to buy or sell will become a matched transaction
only when it is matched in the Trading system and the clearing
house does not find the order to be invalid on any other
consideration and further after verifying that the following are in
agreement and/or in order:
(i) Commodity,
(ii) price indices,
(iii) Quantity,
(iv) Transaction quote.
9.6. Once a trade is matched and marked to market by the
clearing house, the Exchange shall be substituted as counter party
for all net financial liabilities of the clearing members in specified
commodities in which the Exchange has decided to accept the
responsibility of guaranteeing the financial obligations.
9.7. All outstanding transactions shall be binding upon the
original contracting parties, that is, the members of the Exchange
until issue of delivery notice or delivery order or payment for
delivery, as the case may be."
(emphasis supplied)
31. Bye-law 10 contains provisions with regard to delivery:
"10.1. For the fulfilment of outstanding position, commodity shall
be tendered by Delivery Orders through the respective Clearing
Members to the clearing house in such manner as may be prescribed
in the Business Rules or Regulations.
10.2. The Exchange shall prescribe tender days and delivery
period for each commodity during which sellers having outstanding
sale position must issue Delivery Orders through their respective
Clearing Members to the clearing house.
10.3. The clearing house shall allocate the delivery orders
received by it amongst one or more buyers having outstanding long
open positions in a manner as considered appropriate by the relevant
authority.
10.4. The relevant authority may specify in advance before
commencement of trading in a commodity various grades of a
commodity that may be tendered and the discounts and premiums
for such grades.
10.5. All positions outstanding at the end of the day shall result
into compulsory delivery obligation at the closing rate of the date of
transaction as fixed by the relevant authority. The differences arising
out of the actual transaction price and closing price shall be received
from and disbursed to amongst the members on the next day of
trading, pending actual delivery.
The relevant authority may prescribe penalty on sellers with
outstanding positions who fail to issue delivery orders and the
Exchange may conduct auction to ensure delivery to the buyers who
hold outstanding buy positions and intended to lift delivery and
could not receive Delivery Orders against such positions due to
failure on the part of the seller. In case of non-availability of
commodities during the auction process, close-out process as
defined in the business rule shall be applicable.
The relevant authority may prescribe penalty on buyers with
outstanding positions who fail to pay against his purchase obligation
and the Exchange may conduct sale out auction to ensure that the
sellers get the price for the commodities delivered against their sale
obligation and could not receive payment due to failure on the part
of the buyers. In case of non-availability of suitable buyers during
the auction process, close-out process as defined in the business rule
shall be applicable.
Failure to pay the dues and penalties relating to such closing out
within the stipulated period shall cause the member to be declared
as defaulter and render him liable for disciplinary action."
32. Bye-law 10.7 envisages that a seller issuing the delivery order
shall receive from the clearing house the full price of the commodity
delivered as per the delivery order rate, subject to additions or
deductions on account of premium or discounts prescribed under the
bye-laws. Under Bye-law 10.8, a buyer has to pay to the clearing
house, the value of delivery allocated on his account by the Exchange
within the time specified. However, the money will be passed by the
clearing house to the seller only on the completion of the delivery
process to the satisfaction of the Exchange. The bye-law reads as
follows:
"10.8. A buyer shall pay to the clearing house the value of
delivery allocated on his account by the Exchange within such time
as may be specified,
by the Exchange. After getting full price of delivery from the buyer as
per delivery order allocated to him, the Exchange will endorse the
delivery order to him. Thereafter, till completion of the delivery process,
the money will be retained by the clearing house and will be passed on
to the seller only on completion of the delivery process to the
satisfaction of the Exchange. The clearing house will pass on the
proceeds to the seller after making adjustments relating to quality,
quantity and freight factors, as the case may be. The balance amount,
if any, remaining after such adjustments, will be passed on to or
recovered from the buyer by the clearing house."
(emphasis supplied)
33. Bye-law 10.11 provides that at the time of issuing the delivery
order, the seller of the commodity must satisfy the clearing member
that he owns and holds in his possession or his agent's possession
adequate stocks of the required quantity and quality of the commodity.
Bye-law 10.12 prescribes that:
"10.12. A seller member is entitled to offer delivery only at the
delivery centres specified by the Exchange in advance for the
respective commodity. Delivery can be tendered at such specified
centres strictly as per the delivery procedure specified by the
Exchange. Before tendering delivery, the seller is also required to
obtain a certificate from a surveyor empanelled by the Exchange and
such certificate shall be accompanied with the delivery order being
tendered by him to the clearing house. The surveyor's certificate
shall clearly specify the quality of the goods tendered and shall also
confirm that such quality is tenderable as per the contract
specification of the Exchange. In case of non-compliance of any of
these conditions, the delivery order is rejected ab initio."
(emphasis supplied)
34. Thus, under the above bye-law, the selling member is entitled to
offer delivery only at the delivery centre which is specified in the
Exchange strictly in accordance with the delivery procedure provided
before tendering delivery. The seller has to obtain a surveyor's
certificate which is to be accompanied with the delivery order being
tendered by him to the clearing house. Bye-laws 10.14, 10.15 and
10.16 contain the following stipulations:
"10.14. Members of the Exchange and the clients/constituents
dealing through them shall strictly abide by the delivery procedure,
methods of sampling, survey, transportation, storage, packing,
weighing and final settlement procedures, as may be specified by
the relevant authority from time-to-time. Any violation of such
method will be dealt with by the relevant authority in the manner, as
may be specified from time-to-time.
10.15. A seller of commodity shall deliver the quantity as per his
net sale position in the commodity during the period specified in the
Rules, Business Rules and Regulations of the Exchange and notices
and orders issued thereunder from time-to-time for the specified
commodity, which should conform to the quality specified by the
Exchange in the contract specification. In case of any failure to do
so, such net sale position shall be closed out by buying in auction
and the seller shall be required to pay the difference, as determined
by the clearing house and penalty in addition thereto.
10.16. A buyer shall be required to lift delivery from the specified
warehouse within the period prescribed by the relevant authority, as
per the delivery order assigned to him. In case of his failure to do so,
he shall be required to pay the warehouse charges, insurance
charges and other expenses relating to storage for the incremental
period and also a penalty in addition thereto."
35. Bye-law 12 contains provisions for a Settlement Guarantee Fund.
The Settlement Guarantee Fund is constituted by deposits made by the
members of the Exchange and is utilised for paying in the event of a
default in payments by the trading members, paying insurance covers
and covering the losses of the Exchange, among other uses. Bye-law
12.1.1 is in the following terms:
"12.1. The Exchange to maintain Settlement Guarantee Fund
12.1.1. The Exchange shall maintain Settlement Guarantee Fund
in respect of different commodity segments of the Exchange for such
purposes, as may be prescribed by the relevant authority from time-
to-time."
36. Bye-law 12.1.2 states that the relevant authority may prescribe
from time-to-time, the norms and conditions governing settlement
guarantee which may among other things specify the amount of deposit
or contribution to be made by each trading member to the Settlement
Guarantee Fund. The bye-law also states that rules are to be made on
contributions, conditions of repayment and withdrawal of contribution
from the fund among other stipulations. Bye-law 12.1.3 states that the
minimum amount in the fund before starting the trading must be Rs 1
crore, which can be suitably increased.
37. Bye-law 12.2 stipulates the contribution and deposit with the
Settlement Guarantee Fund:
"12.2. Contribution to and Deposits with Settlement
Guarantee Fund
12.2.1. Each member shall be required to contribute to and
provide a minimum security deposit, as may be determined by the
relevant authority from time-to-time, to the relevant Settlement
Guarantee Fund. The Settlement Guarantee Fund shall be held by
the Exchange. The money in the Settlement Guarantee Fund shall be
applied in the manner, as may be provided in these bye-laws, Rules,
Business Rules and Regulations of the Exchange and notices and
orders issued thereunder from time-to-time.
12.2.2. The relevant authority may specify the amount of
additional contribution or deposit to be made by each member
and/or category of clearing members, which may, inter alia, include
the minimum amount to be provided by each clearing member.
12.2.3. The Exchange shall, as a result of multi-lateral netting
followed by it in respect of settlement of transactions, guarantee
financial settlement of such transactions to the extent it has acted as
a legal counter party, as may be provided in the relevant bye-laws
from time-to-time.
12.2.4. The total amount of security deposit and additional
deposit, maintained by a clearing member with the clearing house of
the exchange, in any form as specified herein, shall form part of the
Settlement Guarantee Fund.
12.2.5. The amount deposited by a clearing member towards the
security deposit shall be refundable, subject to such terms and
conditions as may be
specified by the relevant authority from time-to-time. Any amount
deposited or paid by the clearing member may be refunded provided
further that such amount is in surplus and there is no
actual/crystallised or contingent liability or a claim from any client or
clearing bank to be discharged by the clearing member."
(emphasis supplied)
38. Bye-law 12.3 stipulates that a member may provide a deposit in
the form of cash, fixed deposit receipts, bank guarantees or in such
other form.
"12.3. Form of Contribution or Deposit
The relevant authority may, in its discretion, permit a member to
contribute to or provide the deposit to be maintained with the
Settlement Guarantee Fund, in the form of either cash, fixed deposit
receipts, bank guarantees or in such other form or method and
subject to such terms and conditions, as may be specified by the
relevant Authority from time-to-time."
39. Bye-law 12.4 states that the deposit may be replaced by fresh
deposits. Bye-law 12.5 states that the Settlement Guarantee Fund may
be invested in securities or other avenues of investment:
"12.4. Replacement of Deposit
By giving a suitable notice to the Exchange and subject to such
conditions, as may be specified by the relevant authority from time-
to-time, a member may withdraw fixed deposit receipts or bank
guarantees given to the Exchange, representing the member's
contribution or deposit towards the Settlement Guarantee Fund,
provided that the member has, simultaneously with such withdrawal,
deposited cash, fixed deposit receipts, or bank guarantees with the
clearing house or the Exchange or made contribution through such
other mode, as may be approved by the clearing house or the
Exchange from time-to-time. to meet his required contribution or
deposit, except as provided in these bye-laws.
12.5. Investment of Settlement Guarantee Fund
Funds in the Settlement Guarantee Fund may be invested in such
approved *securities* and/or other avenues of investments, as may
be provided for by the Board in the relevant Business Rules and
Regulations in force from time-to-time."
(emphasis supplied)
40. Bye-law 12.6 states that the Settlement Guarantee Fund may be
used for the purpose of
(i) maintenance of the fund;
(ii) using the fund temporarily to fulfil the shortfalls and
deficiencies arising from clearing and settlement obligations;
(iii) payment of insurance cover;
(iv) covering the loss arising from clearing and settlement
obligations; and
(v) repaying to the members, the balance amount available after
utilisation.
"12.6. Administration and Utilisation of Settlement
Guarantee Fund
12.6.1. The Settlement Guarantee Fund may be utilised for such
purposes, as may be provided in these bye-laws and Regulations and
subject to such conditions as the relevant Authority may prescribe
from time-to-time, which may include:
(a) defraying the expenses of creation and maintenance of
Settlement Guarantee Fund;
(b) temporary application of Settlement Guarantee Fund to
meet shortfalls and deficiencies arising out of the clearing and
settlement obligations of clearing members in respect of such
transactions, as may be provided in these bye-laws, Rules,
Business Rules and Regulations of the Exchange in force from
time-to-time;
(c) payment of premium on insurance cover(s) which the
relevant authority may take from time-to-time, and/or for creating
a Default Reserve Fund by transferring a specified amount every
year, as may be decided by the relevant authority from time-to-
time;
(d) meeting any loss or liability of the Exchange arising out of
clearing and settlement operations of such transactions, as may
be provided in these bye-laws, Rules, Business Rules and
Regulations of the Exchange in force from time-to-time;
(e) repayment of the balance amount to the member pursuant
to the provisions regarding the repayment of deposit after
meeting all obligations under the bye-laws, Rules, Business Rules
and Regulations of the Exchange, when such member ceases to
be a member, and
(f) any other purpose, as may be specified by the relevant
authority, from time-to-time."
41. Bye-laws 12.7 and 12.8 specifically provide for utilisation of the
fund for the failure of the trading member to meet his settlement
obligations or when he is declared as a defaulter:
"12.7. Utilisation for failure to Meet Obligations
Whenever a member fails to meet his settlement obligations to
the Exchange arising out of his clearing and settlement operations in
respect of his transaction, as may be provided in these bye-laws,
Rules and Regulations of the Exchange, the relevant authority may
utilise the Settlement Guarantee fund and other moneys lying to the
credit of the said member to the extent necessary to fulfil his
obligations under such terms and conditions, as the relevant
authority may specify from time-to-time;
12.8. Utilisation in Case of Failure to Meet Settlement
Obligations or on Declaration of Defaulter
Whenever a member fails to meet his settlement obligation to the
Exchange arising out of the transactions, as may be provided in
these bye-laws, Rules, Business Rules and Regulations of the
Exchange in force from time-to-time, or whenever a member is
declared a defaulter, the relevant authority may utilise the
Settlement Guarantee Fund and other moneys of the member to the
extent necessary to fulfil his obligations in the following order:
*
*
*
12.9.2. If the cumulative amount under all the above heads is not
sufficient, the balance obligations shall be assessed against all the
clearing members in the same proportion as their total contribution
and deposit towards security deposit, and the clearing members
shall be required to contribute or deposit the deficient amount in the
Settlement Guarantee Fund within such time, as the relevant
authority may specify in this behalf from time-to-time."
42. Bye-law 12.11 states that the deposit shall be allocated by the
Exchange among various segments of trading:
"12.11. Allocation of the Contribution or Deposit
Each clearing member's contribution and deposit towards the
Settlement Guarantee Fund shall be allocated by the Exchange
among the various segments of trading, which are designated as
such by the exchange and in which the member may participate, in
such proportion as the Exchange may decide from time-to-time. The
Exchange shall retain the rights to utilise the fund allocated to a
particular segment of trading to match the losses or liabilities of the
Exchange, incidental to the operation for that segment or for any
other segment, as may be decided by the Exchange at its
discretion."
(emphasis supplied)
43. Bye-law 12.12 states that the clearing member shall be repaid
his deposit after making deductions:
"12.12. Repayment to the Clearing Member on His Cessation
12.12.1. A member shall be entitled to repayment of the actual
amount of deposit, if any, made by him to the Settlement Guarantee
Fund provided it is not part of the admission fee after-
(a) the member ceases to be an exchange member on account
of any reason whatsoever,
(b) all pending transactions at the time the member ceases to
be an exchange member, which may result in a charge to the
Settlement Guarantee Fund, have been closed and settled,
(c) all obligations to the Exchange for which the member was
responsible while he was an exchange member have been
satisfied, or at the discretion of the relevant authority, have been
deducted by the Exchange from the member's actual deposit;
provided, the member has presented to the Exchange such
indemnities or guarantees as the relevant authority may deem
necessary or another clearing member has been substituted
owning liability for all the transaction and obligations of the
clearing member, who had ceased to be a member,
(d) a suitable amount, as may be determined by the relevant
authority at its discretion, has been set aside for taking care of
any loss/liability/obligation arising out of his past transactions,
and
(e) a suitable amount, as may be determined by the relevant
authority at its discretion, has been set aside by the Exchange
towards such other obligations, as may be perceived by the
Exchange to exist or be perceived by the Exchange to arise in
future.
12.12.2. The relevant authority may specify norms for repayment
of deposit including the manner, amount and period within which it
may be paid. The repayment amount, at no point of time, will exceed
the actual deposit available to the credit of the clearing member
after deducting the necessary dues or charges payable by such
clearing member from time-to-time, including the initial deposit."
C.3. Definitions of "Deposit" and "Financial Establishment" :
Interpretation of Sections 2(c) and 2(d) of the MPID Act
44. The notifications attaching the properties of the respondent were
issued under Section 4 of the MPID Act. Section 4 covers only those
situations where a "financial establishment" is a defaulting entity.
Section 4 is reproduced below:
"4. Attachment of properties on default of return of
deposits.-(1 Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force-
(i) where upon complaints received from the depositors or
otherwise, the Government is satisfied that any financial
establishment has failed-
(a) to return the deposit after maturity or on demand by the
depositor; or
(b) to pay interest or other assured benefit; or
(c) to provide the service promised against such deposit; or
(ii) where the Government has reason to believe that any
financial establishment is acting in a calculated manner
detrimental to the interest of the depositors with an intention to
defraud them;"
(emphasis supplied)
45. The primary issue is whether NSEL is a "financial establishment"
within the meaning of Section 2(d). Section 2(d) reads as follows:
"2.(d) "Financial Establishment" means any person accepting
deposit under any scheme or arrangement or in any other manner
but does not include a corporation or a co-operative society owned or
controlled by any State Government or the Central Government or a
banking company as defined under clause (c) of Section 5 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949;"
(emphasis supplied)
46. "Financial establishment" is defined as any person accepting a
"deposit". The definition excludes from its purview (a) a corporation or
cooperative society controlled or owned either by the State or the
Central Government; and (b) a "banking company" as defined under
Section 5(c) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Since NSEL does not
fall within any of the exceptions, it would be a "financial establishment"
for the purposes of the Act if it is a "person accepting deposit". Section
3(42) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 provides an inclusive definition
of "person" to include both incorporated and unincorporated
companies¹ as:
"3. (42) "person" shall include any company or association or
body of individuals, whether incorporated or not."
47. The expression "deposit" is defined in Section 2(c) of the MPID
Act in the following terms:
"2. (c) "deposit" includes and shall be deemed always to have
included any receipt of money or acceptance of any valuable
commodity by any financial establishment to be returned after a
specified period or otherwise, either in cash or in kind or in the form
of a specified service with or without any benefit in the form of
interest, bonus, profit or in any other form, but does not include-
(i) amount raised by way of share capital or by way of
debenture, bond or any other instrument covered under the
guidelines given, and regulations made, by the SEBI, established
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992;
(ii) amounts contributed as capital by partners of a firm;
(iii) amounts received from a scheduled bank or a cooperative
bank or any other banking company as defined in clause (c) of
Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(iv) any amount received from
(a) the Industrial Development Bank of India,
(b) a State Financial Corporation,
(c) any financial institution specified in or under Section 6-A
of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, or
(d) any other institution that may be specified by the
Government in this behalf;
The surest way't to legal research!"
(v) amounts received in the ordinary course of business by way
of-
(a) security deposit,
(b) dealership deposit,
(c) earnest money,
(d) advance against order for goods or services;
(vi) any amount received from an individual or a firm or an
association of individuals not being a body corporate, registered
under any enactment relating to money lending which is for the
time being in force in the State; and
(vii) any amount received by way of subscriptions in respect of
a Chit.
Explanation I. - "Chit" has the meaning as assigned to it in clause
(b) of Section 2 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982;
Explanation -Any credit given by a seller to a buyer on the sale
of any property (whether movable or immovable) shall not be
deemed to be deposit for the purposes of this clause;"
48. The statutory definition of the expression "deposit" comprises of
the following ingredients:
(i) Any receipt of money or the acceptance of a valuable
commodity by a financial establishment;
(ii) Such acceptance ought to be subject to the money or
commodity being required to be returned after a specified period or
otherwise; and
(iii) The return of the money or commodity may be in cash, kind
or in the form of a specified service, with or without any benefit in
the form of interest, bonus, profit or in any other form.
These elements of the definition are followed by specific exclusions
contemplated in clauses (i) to (vii). Clause (i) of the exceptions covers
an amount which is raised by way of share capital or by debenture,
bond or other instrument governed by the guidelines and regulations of
SEBI. Clause (v) states that money received in the ordinary course of
business by way of security deposit, dealership deposit, earnest money
or advance against an order of goods or services shall be excluded. The
exclusions in clauses (i) to (vii) indicate that transactions which would
otherwise fall within the broad sweep of the definition are excluded.
49. The legislature may define a word artificially by restricting or
expanding its natural meaning. When the legislature employs the
phrase "means", the definition is intended to be exhaustive. In Indra
Sarma V. V.K.V. Sarma²2, this Court observed that the definition of the
expression "domestic relationship" in Section 2(f) of the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 is restrictive since it is
defined by the use of the term "means". On the other hand, the Court
has taken a consistent view that where the definition of a word is
inclusive, as presaged by the adoption of the expression "includes," it is
prima facie extensive23. The definition of "deposit" uses the phrase
"includes and shall be deemed to have always included". The import of
this is to create a legal fiction by which actions which though not
included within the natural meaning of the expression are intended to
be included. The combined use of "includes" and "deemed to have
always included" while defining the term "deposit" makes the term
inclusive and not restrictive.
50. The expression "deposit" is conspicuously broad in its width and
ambit for it includes, not only any receipt of money but also the
acceptance of any valuable commodity by a financial establishment
under any scheme or arrangement. As a matter of interest, we may
note at this stage that the expression "any" is used in the substantive
part of the definition of the expression "deposit" on five occasions,
namely:
(i) Any receipt of money;
(ii) Any valuable commodities;
(iii) By any financial establishment;
(iv) With or without any benefit; and
(v) In any other form.
51. Likewise, the definition of financial establishment refers to the
acceptance of deposits:
(i) Under any scheme or arrangement; or
(ii) In any other manner.
52. The repeated use of the expression "any" by the statute while
defining both the above expressions is a clear reflection of the
legislative intent to cast the net of the regulatory provisions of the law
in a broad and comprehensive manner. Unlike many other State
enactments which govern the field, clause (c) of Section 2 of the MPID
Act comprehends within the meaning of a deposit not only the receipt
of money but of any valuable commodity as well. For example, in
contrast, Section 2(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act defines "deposit" only in
terms of money and not commodity. Section 2(2) reads as follows:
"2. (2) "deposit" means the deposit of money either in one lump
sum or by instalments made with the financial establishments for a
fixed period, for interest or for return in any kind or for any service;"
53. Similarly, statutes protecting the interest of depositors in
Orissa24 24 Kerala²5 Himachal Pradesh 26 , Goa , Telangana²8 Andhra
Pradesh29 and Sikkim30 30 define the phrase "deposit" only in terms of
money and not the acceptance of a commodity.
54. According to the second ingredient of Section 2(c), the money or
commodity must be liable to be returned. However, such return need
not necessarily be in the form of cash or kind but also in the form of a
service, with or without any benefit such as interest. It needs to be
recalled that clause (v) of Section 2(c) states that a deposit of money
or commodity made as a security deposit, dealership deposit or an
advance amount is excluded from the definition of the phrase "deposit".
To illustrate, if a member of a financial establishment deposits Rs
25,000, and that money is returned on cessation of membership by
making deductions, the issue of whether the deposit is a security
deposit or of the nature covered under Section 2(c) should be
determined with reference to the structure of operation and functioning
of the financial establishment. It is to be noted that the definition also
states that the return may be with or without interest or any benefit.
Therefore, the submissions made by both the sides on whether NSEL
had through its representations assured a 16% return on trading in the
platform is immaterial for the purpose of determining if NSEL accepted
deposits.
55. Having referred to the relevant bye-laws, we shall determine if
NSEL receives "deposits" as defined by Section 2(c) of the MPID Act.
The bye-laws elucidate that NSEL receives both money and
commodities from trading members. In order to decide if these receipts
by NSEL could be regarded as "deposits", the test of "return" will have
to be satisfied. The test is that the return be in cash, kind or service. It
is not necessary that the return should be with the benefit of interest,
bonus or profit. Therefore, if the financial establishment is obligated to
return the deposit without any increments, it shall still fall within the
purview of Section 2(c) of the MPID Act, provided that the deposit does
not fall within any of the exceptions. The exception of relevance to our
case is clause (v) which states that amounts received in the ordinary
course of business by way of (a) security deposit; (b) dealership
deposit; (c) earnest money; and (d) advance against order for goods or
services shall be excluded from the purview of the term "deposit".
C.3.1. Settlement Guarantee Fund : Deposit under Section 2(c) of
the MPID Act
56. The trading members pay NSEL a margin deposit and NSEL
maintains a Settlement Guarantee Fund. Regulation 4.12 states that
only transactions of those members who have paid the margin deposit
and security deposit shall be considered as valid. Therefore, the
payment of margin deposit and security deposit is "mandatory" for a
person to trade on NSEL's platform. Regulation 4.12 refers to SGF as a
"security deposit". Similarly, Bye-law 12.2.1 stipulates that each
member shall contribute a "minimum security deposit". However,
merely because SGF is referred to as a "security deposit", the exception
would not automatically be applicable. The meaning of the phrase
"security deposit" takes colour from the surrounding phrases. Sub-
clause (v) to Section 2(c) excludes security deposit, dealership deposit,
earnest money, and an advance against an order for goods and services
from the ambit of the phrase "deposit". The concepts used in Section 2
(c)(v) fall in two categories:
(i) token amounts paid to indicate the earnest to purchase
(earnest money and advance money), and
(ii) payments required to meet exigent situations of default by a
party (dealership deposit and security deposit).
57. Black's Law Dictionary31 defines security deposit as "money
deposited by a tenant with a landlord as security for full and faithful
performance by the tenant of terms of leases, including damages to
premises. It is refundable unless the tenant has caused damage or
injury to the property or has breached the terms of tenancy or the laws
governing the tenancy. Certain States also require the landlord to make
a security deposit to cover essential repairs required on rental
property". A similar phrase, "Client Security Fund" is defined as a fund
set up by many State Bar Associations to cover losses incurred by
persons as a result of dishonest conduct of member-attorneys. The
meanings of both these phrases suggest the necessary ingredients of a
security deposit, which are:
(i) An advance to ensure faithful performance of the contract;
(ii) A payment to cover essential "functions" for performance; and
(iii) The entitlement to refund being dependent upon whether
damage, injury and default are occasioned.
58. Chapter 12 of the bye-laws provides the features of SGF:
58.1. SGF is utilised for:
(a) defraying the expenses for its creation and maintenance;
(b) temporary use of the fund to meet efficiencies arising out of
the performance of obligations;
(c) payment of premia on insurance covers;
(d) payments for the loss or liability of the Exchange arising out of
"clearing and settlement operations";
(e) repayment of the balance deposit to a member;
(f) payment towards the member's obligations where the member
fails to meet his settlement obligations; and
(g) payment of the member's obligation on being declared as a
defaulter.
58.2. The members' contribution is allocated among various
segments of trading, in which they can participate. The Exchange also
retains the right to utilise the fund allotted to a particular segment of
trading to match the losses or the liabilities of the Exchange.
58.3. The settlement fund may be invested in approved securities or
other avenues of investments.
59. The features of SGF indicate that the fund is used to cover those
expenses, which are beyond the utilisation which is made out of a
regular security fund. Unlike a security deposit between a landlord and
a tenant where the fund is used to meet the "essential obligations" of
the landlord such as repair work and deductions are made when the
tenant has outstanding payments, NSEL uses the deposit to cover the
payment obligations of the trading member (buyer) to another trading
member (seller) since NSEL is a counter party to the transactions.
However, NSEL uses the fund to cover functions beyond its role as a
counter-party. For example, the fund is used to cover losses faced by
the NSEL in the settlement operations, investments are made in
securities, and the fund is allotted in various segments of trading,
where the funds are also utilised to cover losses, if any, in the segment.
Therefore, these three features of SGF indicate that though SGF is
termed as a "security deposit" in nomenclature, its features do not
represent a security deposit. Since NSEL receives "money" in the form
of SGF that is returned in money and services, and is not covered by
the exceptions, it would fall within the expression "deposit" as defined
in Section 2(c) of the Act.
C.3.2. Receipt of commodities : Deposit under Section 2(c) of the
MPID Act
60. A person who wishes to trade in the platform of NSEL is required
to place the commodities in the accredited warehouse of NSEL. NSEL
would then provide the trader with a warehouse receipt. When the
buyer's offer and the seller's offer is matched, NSEL would debit the
amount from the
buyer member's pay-in obligations and it would be credited to NSEL's
exchange settlement account. The Operations Department would
confirm with the Delivery Department if the requisite quantity of a
particular commodity of the seller is available. After such confirmation,
the Operations Department would release the purchase price to the
selling broker's designated bank account.
61. Simultaneously, a delivery allocation report would be issued to
the buyer's broker or the buyer. Once the VAT invoice is paid, NSEL
would issue a delivery note authorising the buyer to take delivery from
the designated warehouse or if the buyer chooses, he can take
constructive possession of the commodity. There is nothing in the
definition of the term "deposit" to mean that the acceptance of the
commodity should be accompanied by a transfer of title to the
commodity. Even if the financial establishment is only in "custody" of
the commodity, it would still fall within the purview of the phrase
"acceptance of commodity". On the acceptance of custody of the
commodity, NSEL has to provide various services such as an obligation
to keep the commodity safe and without any damages. Additionally, the
Operations Department and the Delivery Department will have to
coordinate while matching the contracts.
62. Similarly, after the delivery note is sent to the buyer, the
commodity is either delivered to the buyer or the buyer is put in
constructive possession of the commodity. The phrase "warehouse
receipt" is defined in Bye-law 2.96 as a document evidencing that the
commodity is being held by NSEL in the approved warehouse. Clause
(b) to Bye-law 4.20 states that if the outstanding transactions have not
been settled by giving or receiving deliveries, then it (the commodity)
shall be auctioned by buying-in or selling-out as per the Business Rules
of the Exchange. Bye-law 10.11 states that the commodities shall be
delivered to and delivery taken from only the designated warehouses.
Therefore, NSEL offers a multitude of "services" in return for receiving
the commodity. The receipt of the commodities and holding the
commodities (when the members are put in constructive possession) in
the accredited warehouses is a "deposit" under Section 2(c) of the Act.
The counsel for the respondent argued that the expression
"valuable commodity" used in Section 2(c) would only include precious
metals such as gold and silver. The expression "valuable commodity" is
not defined by the statute. There is no valid basis to accept the
submission of the respondent that the expression should only
comprehend within it precious metals such as gold and silver. If the
legislature intended to so restrict the definition of the expression
valuable commodity, it could have used an explanation importing an
artificial meaning to the expression. However, the legislature has
desisted from doing so.
64. A valuable commodity is a commodity which has significant
value. This does not refer only to the intrinsic value of the commodity.
Whether or not a commodity is valuable has to be determined bearing
in mind the salutary object and purpose of the Act which is to protect
the interest of depositors. It is in this context that it becomes
necessary to adopt a purposive construction which would give effect to
the meaning and content of the law. Any attempt to read the definition
in a restrictive sense would be contrary to legislative intent. The intent
of the legislature is to define the expression "deposit" as well as the
expression "financial establishment" in a comprehensive and all-
encompassing
manner. Therefore, the phrase "valuable commodity" cannot be
restricted to only mean precious metals. Agricultural commodities
which NSEL trades in will fall within the purview of the term.
65. Though it has been observed earlier that it is not necessary that
there must be interest or an assured benefit from the deposit for the
purposes of Section 2(c) of the MPID Act, it is still necessary that we
refer to the representations made by NSEL. NSEL in the course of its
brochures has held out representations about the trading and
investment opportunities available for:
(a) corporate clients;
(b) high net worth individuals; and
(c) retail investors.
66. Under the head of "contract specifications", the following
representation has been held out:
Commodity
Duration
Investment
Yield
(lakhs)
Castor seed
T+3 and T+36
7.5-9 lakhs
16%
Castor oil
T+5 and T+30
7-9
16%
Cotton wash oil
T+2 and T+25
10
16%
Paddy
T+2 and T+25
3.5-4.5
16%
Steel
T+2 and T+25
4.5-5
16%
Raw wool
T+2 and T+25
3.5-4
16%
Wool top
T+2 and T+25
1.8-2
16%
Crude soybean
T+2 and T+25
3.3.-3.5
16%
oil
Soya DOC
T+2 and T+25
1.7-2.0
16%
Refined
T+2 and T+25
6.5
16%
mustard oil
Refined
T+2 and T+25
6.5
16%
soybean oil
Refined
T+2 and T+25
6.5
16%
sunflower oil
RBD palmolein
T+2 and T+25
6.5
16%
oil
Sugar
T+2 and T+25
3.0
16%
Maize
T+2 and T+25
3.0
16%
67. The above representation specifies:
(i) Commodities;
(ii) Duration of trades;
(iii) Investment; and
(iv) Yield.
68. For example, in the case of castor seeds, NSEL held out a buy
contract (T+3) and sale contract (T+36), in which the yield is stated to
be 16%. Moreover, NSEL represented that:
"Opportunities
(i) Traders can trade and lock their return.
(ii) Trader has to buy in near settlement contract and sell in far
settlement contract simultaneously.
(iii) Price for both settlement available.
(iv) Exchange provides counterparty guarantee risk.
(v) No basis risk, no link with future contracts."
69. While describing the features of "trading opportunity", NSEL
represented that:
"Features of trading opportunity
(i) T+2 and T+25 contract offers unique trading opportunity to
traders.
(ii) Trader purchases T+2 contract and simultaneously sells
T+25 contract.
(iii) Pay-in obligation is on T+2 while pay-out of the funds will
be on T+25. Entire settlement cycle is of 35-37 days.
(iv) Price differential between the two settlement dates i.e.
premium if annualised offers interest rate of about 16%.
(v) Income arising out of such trades are treated as business
income."
70. While comparing the investment opportunities of bank fixed
deposits with trading opportunities at NSEL, NSEL represented that:
"Comparison
(i) Bank FD 9.25% for 390 days; NSEL Trading Opportunity
16%;
(ii) Bank FD minimum duration 390 days; NSEL Trade duration
35-55 days, depending on the contract;
(iii) Traders have an option of rolling over their position as per
their convenience."
71. Under the caption of "risk management", the following
representation has been held out by NSEL:
"Risk management
(i) Trades are backed by collaterals in the form of stock.
(ii) Cash margin of 10-15% is levied on the open position of
seller in T+2/T+3 contracts.
(iii) In case of adverse price movement, Exchange collects
additional margin from the seller in T+2/T+3 contracts.
(iv) The exchange has defined guidelines for auction/closeout
(Circular : 029/2008).
(v) Warehouse management includes selection, accreditation,
quality testing, fumigation and insurance."
72. The above representation indicates that paired contracts were
designed as a unique trading opportunity by NSEL under which a trader
would, for instance, purchase a T+2 contract (with a pay-in obligation
on T+2) and would simultaneously sell a T+25 contract (with a pay-out
of funds on T+25). The
price differential between the two settlement dates was represented to
offer an annualised return of about 16%. NSEL categorically
represented that all trades were backed by collaterals in the form of
stocks and its management activities included selection, accreditation,
quality testing, fumigation and insurance. Therefore, NSEL represented
that on receiving money and commodities, the members would receive
"assured returns" and a "service". Though NSEL has been receiving
"deposits", it has failed to provide services as promised against the
deposits and has failed to return the deposits on demand. Therefore,
the State of Maharashtra was justified in issuing the attachment
notifications under Section 4 of the MPID Act.
C.4. Uncovering the conspiracy
C.4.1. The Grant Thornton report
73. FMC engaged Grant Thornton LLP to conduct a forensic audit of
the practices and records of NSEL. The report found several instances
where NSEL had repeatedly contravened the rules:
73.1. NSEL allowed members who had repeatedly defaulted to
continue trading though under NSEL's exchange rules, a member who
does not have sufficient collateral to discharge his obligations would not
be allowed to trade further.
73.2. Members who were in default or those who had exhausted
their margin limits, were granted an exemption from margin
requirements.
73.3. There was an insufficient collateral of commodities in the
warehouses and NSEL did not diligently conduct the exercise.
73.4. The bye-laws and rules of the Exchange mandate the
formation of various committees for the effective management of
operations. However, the Board failed to constitute nine out of ten such
committees. There is also no documentary evidence to demonstrate
whether any committee formed was ever convened.
73.5. Client margin deposits and the settlement fund were used for
fulfilling the obligations of the defaulting members. NSEL also used the
deposits made by the members for its own business purposes on a
regular basis. For example, on 28-3-2013, Rs 236.5 crores was
withdrawn from the settlement fund to fund NSEL's business overdraft
account. There is a running deficit in the client settlement fund balance
from 2012 to June 2013. The financial team had raised the issue on
multiple occasions.
73.6. Mr Jignesh Shah, in his presentation dated 10-7-2013 to FMA
had stated that 120 NSEL accredited warehouses held commodities
valued at Rs 6000 crores. However, there was no documentation
relating to warehouse activities for long-term trades indicating that the
contracts were not secured by stocks. The collateral of the members
was not in custody and NSEL did not have any control over it.
73.7. Though the Warehouse Development and Regulatory Authority
had rejected NSEL's application for registration of its warehouse in May
2011, the website of the establishment still represented that the
warehouses were registered with the authority.
73.8. Though the warehouse receipts are to evidence that a
commodity is held in an approved warehouse, receipts were issued
without deposit of the commodities. NSEL did not insist on commodities
being deposited in the warehouses prior to executing the sale
transactions. NSEL issued delivery allocation reports misrepresenting
that every transaction was delivery based and backed with
commodities.
C.4.2. 63 Moons 12 judgment
74. NSEL filed third-party representations in a suit filed by the
allegedly duped traders for the recovery of Rs 5600 crores from the 24
defaulters. Arbitration proceedings were also initiated for the recovery
of dues. An amount of Rs 3365 crores out of Rs 5000 crores has been
covered through court decrees and arbitral awards. On 6-1-2014, the
EOW, Mumbai filed a charge-sheet against the Managing Director and
CEO of NSEL, the head of warehousing, and two other defaulters. It was
mentioned in the charge-sheet that these employees of NSEL had
colluded with the defaulters to enable them to trade on the platform
without depositing the goods in the accredited warehouses. FMC wrote
to the Union of India on 18-8-2014 that NSEL and 63 Moons be
merged. In the representative suit which was instituted, the Bombay
High Court appointed a three-member committee consisting of Mr
Justice V.C. Daga, Mr J. Solomon, and Mr Yogesh Thar for determining
the liability of the defaulters and assisting in the process of recovery. In
addition to Rs 3365 crores covered through court decrees and arbitral
awards, the High Level Committee had crystallised a further sum of Rs
835.88 to be recovered from the defaulters.
75. On 15-10-2014, the Additional Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs wrote a letter to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
stating that 63 Moons and NSEL are maintaining separate identities to
deprive the investors of money. It was stated that the corporate veil
ought to be lifted and both the companies must be amalgamated to
recover the pending dues. On 12-2-2016, an amalgamation order under
Section 396(3) was passed, merging the assets and liabilities of 63
Moons and NSEL. A writ petition filed under Article 226 for challenging
the amalgamation was dismissed32 by the Bombay High Court. A
special leave petition before this Court challenged the judgment of the
Bombay High Court. The two-Judge Bench12 in the course of
determining the validity of the amalgamation order, referred to the
Grant Thornton Report, where the features and representations made
regarding the twin contracts (short term and long term), and the role of
NSEL in the default of payments were discussed : (63 Moons
"91.1. `1.3. These long-term contracts (e.g. T+25) were first
traded on the NSEL exchange in September 2009. The Board of NSEL
ratified the circulars introducing such long-term contracts over a
period beginning November 2009.
1.4. Further evidence was obtained with regard to the existence of
a financing business, such as presentations which stated that a fixed
rate of return was guaranteed on investing in certain products on the
NSEL exchange.
Several internal (NSEL) presentations were found, upon a review
of email databases, setting out a yield (e.g. 16%) as an opportunity
for investors for trading in certain products on the NSEL exchange.
An external presentation was also obtained which had been made
by a brokerage house (Geojit Comtrade Ltd.) for their clients
claiming a fixed return on investments made on the NSEL exchange.
Further, this presentation, declared that actual delivery of stocks in
such transactions would not be required.
1.5. Grant Thornton also obtained evidence of repeated
contraventions of NSEL exchange rules and bye-laws which
facilitated such financing transactions to continue and grow in size
as below:
Repeated defaults : As per the NSEL exchange rules a member
who does not have sufficient collateral/monies, etc. to discharge
his obligations would not be allowed to trade further. This rule
was overridden on a recurring basis. Further despite repeated
defaults members were allowed to trade and increase their
expenses. For example, Lotus Refineries had defaulted, as per the
Rules of the Exchange, on 198 days between the fifteen-month
period of 1-4-2012 and 30-7-2013.
Exemptions from margin requirements : Members who were in
a default position or who had exhausted their margin limits on
trading were granted an exemption from margin requirements
and thus allowed them to increase their exposure by engaging in
new trades. More than 1800 margin limit exemptions were
granted between 2009 through to 2013.
Inadequate monitoring of member collateral : NSEL did not
carry out any diligence to establish the existence of stock at
member managed warehouses, upon which trades were being
executed. Grant Thornton carried out a stock verification exercise
and found significant shortages vis-à-vis expected collateral.'
(emphasis supplied)
76. The judgment referred to the findings of misutilisation of client
monies/settlement fund in the Grant Thornton Report : (63 Moons
"91.1. 1.12. Misutilisation of client monies/settlement fund :
As per the rules and bye-laws of the NSEL exchange "Margin
deposits received by clearing members from their constituent
members and clients in any forms shall be accounted for and
maintained separately in segregated accounts and shall be used
solely for the benefit of the respective constituent members' and
client position.'
Grant Thornton found evidence (including emails) that client
monies/settlement fund, was used regularly for fulfilling the
obligations of defaulting members.
Further, NSEL utilised client monies/settlement fund for its own
business purposes on a regular basis. For example, on 28-3-2013,
Rs 236.5 crores was withdrawn from the Settlement Fund in order to
fund NSEL's own business overdraft account.
There was a running deficit in the client monies/settlement fund
balance from April 2012 to June 2013. The finance team of FTIL had
raised this as an area of concern on several occasions."
(emphasis supplied)
77. The report's finding on the lack of documentation of the
warehousing activities were discussed in the judgment : (63 Moons
"91.1.
The report then goes on to say that there was no
documentation in relation to warehouse activities for long-term
trades indicating that such contracts were not secured by warehouse
stocks. The warehouses were customer managed warehouses and
the underlying collateral were not in custody of NSEL. NSEL did not
have control over these warehouses and Grant Thornton was denied
access to a number of warehouses. The Warehouse Development and
Regulatory Authority had in fact rejected NSEL's application for
registration of its warehouses way back on 16-5-2011.
Notwithstanding such rejection, NSEL's website represented that its
warehouses were registered with the Authority. No verification or due
diligence was ever undertaken by NSEL to ensure compliance by its
members of the conditions outlined in its rules and bye-laws even
though in terms of NSEL bye-laws, warehouse receipt issued by
NSEL were meant to evidence a commodity being held in an
approved warehouse. NSEL did not insist upon deposit of
commodities in the warehouses prior to executing sale transactions.
Instead NSEL resorted to issuing delivery allocation reports (DAR)
representing to genuine investors that each transaction was delivery
based and backed at the time of sale by the required quantity of
commodities in its warehouses."
78. The conclusion in the FMC order dated 17-12-2013 which
revealed the conspiracy unfolded by 63 Moons and NSEL was also
referred to in the following extract : (63 Moons Technologies case12
"91.2. .15.1. Noticee 1 : Financial Technologies (India) Ltd.
(FTIL) : We have discussed the equity structure of NSEL, which is
wholly owned by FTIL. We have also pointed out that Shri Jignesh
Shah, Chairman-cum-Managing Director of FTIL has been a Director
on the Board and also functioning as Vice-Chairman and a key
management person of NSEL since its inception. Similarly, Shri
Joseph Massey and Shri Shreekant Javalgekar have been Directors of
the said company from its very beginning till the settlement crisis at
NSEL first came to light in July 2013. The facts establishing the
fraud involving a settlement default over Rs 5500 crores at NSEL
have been discussed at length in the SCNs issued to the noticees as
well as reiterated, albeit illustratively by us at para 14.7 of this Order.
The responsibility of FTIL as the holding company possessing absolute
control over the governance of NSEL has also been highlighted. The
control of FTIL over NSEL becomes further crystallised from the
responses given by M/s Grant Thornton before the Commission on 3-12
-2013 stating that Shri Jignesh Shah, Mr Joseph Massey and a host of
other officials of FTIL reviewed the forensic audit report and it was only
after obtaining their clearance, the forensic auditor finalised its report.
15.1.1. The violation of conditions prescribed in the exemption
notification, trading in paired contracts to generate assured
financial returns under the garb of commodity trading, admission
of members who were thinly capitalised having poor net worth
and giving margin exemptions to those who were repeatedly
defaulting in settling their dues, poor warehousing facilities with
no or inadequate stocks, no risk management practices followed,
non-provision of funds in SGF, consciously appointing Shri Mukesh
P. Shah as statutory auditors for FY 2012-2013 who was related to
Shri Jignesh Shah, and apparent complicity with the defaulters to
defraud the investors, etc. lead to an inescapable conclusion that
a huge fraud was perpetrated by NSEL while having the presence
of two Board members of FTIL on the Board of NSEL, one of whom
was the Vice-Chairman of the company.
15.1.2. The facts of the case and the manner in which the
business affairs of NSEL were conducted leaves no doubt in our
minds that FTIL, notwithstanding its contentions that it was
ignorant of the affairs and conduct of NSEL, exerted a dominant
influence on the management, and directed, controlled and
supervised the governance of NSEL. In the face of a fraud of such
a magnitude involving settlement crises of Rs 5500 crores owed
to over 13,000 sellers/investors on the trading platform of NSEL,
FTIL, cannot seek to take refuge behind the corporate veil so as to
unjustifiably isolate itself from the fraudulent actions that took
place at NSEL resulting in such a huge payment crisis.
15.1.3. FTIL has its principal business of development of
software which has become the technology platform for almost
the entire industry engaged in broking in shares and securities,
commodities, foreign exchange, etc. As has been demonstrated
by FTIL in their written submission, FTIL has floated a number of
regulated exchanges-both for securities and commodities
derivatives-in India as well as abroad. NSEL was incorporated to
provide a trading platform of commodity spot exchange on a pan-
India basis for the purpose of which apparently it sought and was
granted exemption from the operation of the FCRA, 1952. Since
the objective of the NSEL was promoting spot trading in
commodities on an electronic platform, its business model did not
contemplate venturing into trading in forward
contracts. FTIL had already promoted MCX, a regulated exchange under
FCRA, 1952, for the purpose of trading in forward contracts. Therefore,
having secured an exemption from the purview of FCRA, 1952 on the
ground that it was intended to promote spot trading, NSEL was not
authorised to allow trading in forward contracts through the scheme of
paired contracts, thereby defying conditions stipulated in the
exemption notification granted to it. The motive behind allowing trading
in forward contracts on the NSEL platform in a circuitous manner on
NSEL which was neither recognised nor registered under FCRA, 1952
indicates mala fide intention on the part of the promoter of FTIL to use
the trading platform of its subsidiary company for illicit gains away
from the eyes of Regulator. The fact that FTIL promoted NSEL sought
exemption from FCRA, 1952 provisions even before they had started
any trading or operation, points to their intention from the outset. In
this manner, it misinterpreted the conditions stipulated in the
exemption notification in collusion with a handful of members, which
ultimately culminated in a massive fraud involving Rs 5500 crores,
which has the potential effect of eroding trust and confidence in
exchanges and financial markets.
15.1.4. Keeping in view the foregoing observations and the
facts which reveal misconduct, lack of integrity and unfair
practices on the part of FTIL in planning, directing and controlling
the activities of its subsidiary company, NSEL, we conclude that
FTIL, as the anchor investor in the Multi-Commodity Exchange
Ltd. (MCX) does not carry a good reputation and character, record
of fairness, integrity or honesty to continue to be a shareholder of
the aforesaid regulated exchange. *Therefore, in the public
interest and in the interest of the Commodities Derivatives Market
which is regulated under FCRA, 1952, the Commission holds that
Financial Technologies (India) Ltd. (FTIL) is not a "fit and proper
person" to continue to be a shareholder of 2% or more of the paid
-up equity capital of MCX as prescribed under the guidelines
issued by the Government of India for capital structure of
commodity exchanges post 5 years of operation.* It is further
ordered that neither FTIL, nor any company/entity controlled by
it, either directly or indirectly, shall hold any shares in any
association/Exchange recognised by the Government or registered
by the FMC in excess of the threshold limit of the total paid-up
equity capital of such Association/Exchange as prescribed under
the commodity exchange guidelines and post 5-year guidelines."
(emphasis supplied)
79. The two-Judge Bench of this Court took note of the modus
operandi through which the trading members were duped by a
conspiracy hatched by a few trading members along with NSEL.
However, this Court held that the order amalgamating NSEL and 63
Moons did not fulfil the requirements of Section 396 of the Companies
Act, 1956 as the "essentiality" aspect
in Section 396 was not satisfied since the "emergency situation"
requiring amalgamation was short-lived. Further, it was observed that
the rationale for the amalgamation was the financial incapability of
NSEL to effect recoveries from the defaulting members. The Court
noted that the final order of amalgamation dated 12-2-2016 referred to
the actions taken for recovery by the EOW and the Enforcement
Directorate which indicated methods other than amalgamation through
which the monies could be recovered.
80. The action taken by the EOW and the Enforcement Directorate is
referred to in the following extract : (63 Moons Technologies case¹2 ,
"92.1. What is important to note is that by the time the final order
of amalgamation was passed i.e. on 12-2-2016, the final order itself
records:
'8.1. Economic Offences Wing, Mumbai
(i) Total amount due and recoverable from 24 defaulters is Rs
5689.95 crores.
(ii) Injunctions against assets of defaulters worth Rs 4400.10
crores have been obtained.
(iii) Decrees worth Rs 1233.02 crores have been obtained
against 5 defaulters.
(iv) Assets worth Rs 5444.31 crores belonging to the defaulters
have been attached of which assets worth Rs 4654.62 crores have
been published in Gazette under the MPID Act for liquidation
under the supervision of MPID Court and balance assets worth Rs
789.69 crores have been attached/secured for attachment by the
EOW.
(v) Assets worth Rs 885.32 crores belonging to the Directors
and employees of NSEL have been attached out of which assets
worth Rs 882.32 crores have already been published in Gazette
under the MPID Act for liquidation under the supervision of the
MPID Court and balance assets worth Rs 3 crores have been
attached/secured for attachment by the EOW.
(vi) MPID Court has already issued notices under Sections 4 &
5 of the MPID Act to the persons whose assets have been
attached as above. Thus, the process of liquidation of the attached
assets has started.
(vii) The Bombay High Court has appointed a 3-member
committee headed by Mr Justice (Retd.) V.C. Daga and 2 experts
in finance and law to recover and monetise the assets of the
defaulters.
(viii) Rs 558.83 crores have been recovered so far, out of which
Rs 379.83 crores have been received/recovered from the
defaulters and Rs 179 crores were disbursed by NSEL to small
traders/investors.
8.2. Enforcement Directorate
(i) ED has traced proceeds of crime amounting to Rs 3973.83
crores to the 25 defaulters;
(ii) ED has attached assets worth Rs 837.01 crores belonging to
12 defaulters;
(iii) As per the recent amendment in the PMLA, the assets
attached by ED can be used for restitution to the victims.
8.3. The above status indicates that the said enforcement
agencies are working as per their mandate " "
(emphasis supplied)
81. This Court noted that the "essentiality" requirement in Section
396 of the Companies Act was not fulfilled : (63 Moons Technologies
"92.2. What concerned the FMC in August 2014 has, by the date
of the final amalgamation order, been largely redressed without
amalgamation. The "emergency situation" of 2013 which, even
according to the Central Government, required the emergent step of
compulsory amalgamation has, by the time of the passing of the
Central Government order, disappeared. Thus, the raison d'être for
applying Section 396 of the Companies Act has, by the passage of
time, itself disappeared. In fact, as on today, decrees/awards worth
INR 3365 crores have been obtained against the defaulters, with INR
835.88 crores crystallised by the committee set up by the High
Court, pending acceptance by the High Court, even without using
the financial resources of FTIL as an amalgamated company. What
is, therefore, important to note is that what was emergent, and
therefore, essential, even according to the FMC and the Government
in 2013-2014, has been largely redressed in 2016, by the time the
amalgamation order was made. Also, the Central Government order
does not apply its mind to the essentiality aspect of Section 396 at
all. In fact, in several places, it refers to "essential public interest" as
if "essential" goes with "public interest" instead of being a separate
and distinct condition precedent to the exercise of power under
Section 396. On facts, therefore, it is clear that the essentiality test,
which is the condition precedent to the applicability of Section 396,
cannot be said to have been satisfied."
82. The judgment held that NSEL had falsely represented that it had
full stock as collateral and that the stock was valued at Rs 6000 crores :
"91.3. We have seen that neither FTIL nor NSEL has denied the
fact that paired contracts in commodities were going on, and by April
to July 2013, 99% (and excluding e-series contracts), at least 46%
of the turnover of NSEL was made up of such paired contracts. There
is no doubt that such paired contracts were, in fact, financing
transactions which were distinct from sale and purchase transactions
in commodities and were, thus, in breach of both the exemptions
granted to NSEL, and the FCRA. We have also seen that NSEL
throughout kept representing that it was, in fact, a commodity
exchange dealing with spot deliveries. Apart from the Grant Thornton
Report and the FMC order, we have also seen that Shri Jignesh Shah,
on 10-7-2013, made representations to the DCA and the FMC, in
which he stated that NSEL had full stock as collateral; 10-20% of
open
position as margin money; and that the stock currently held in NSEL's
120 warehouses was valued at INR 6000 crores, all of which turned out
to be incorrect. Further, there is no doubt whatsoever that in July 2013,
as a result of NSEL stopping trading on its exchange, a payment crisis
of approximately INR 5600 crores arose. The further question that
remains is whether, given these facts, the conditions precedent for the
applicability of Section 396 were followed."
83. This Court in its decision in 63 Moons12 took note of the modus
operandi by which the defaults came about, specifically highlighting the
role of NSEL in not complying with the rules. It set aside the
amalgamation order on the narrow ground that the preconditions for
the exercise of power under Section 396 had not been fulfilled. One of
the reasons which persuaded this Court to set aside the order of
amalgamation was that the EOW and the Enforcement Directorate had
already taken steps to realise the amounts in default. The judgment in
63 Moons12 has after a detailed analysis of the Grant Thornton Report
and the FMC's order held that the defaulters and NSEL conspired to
dupe the members of their money.
C.5. Constitutional validity of the MPID Act
84. The respondents challenged the constitutional validity of the
provisions of the MPID Act before the High Court on the ground that it
is arbitrary. The High Court in the impugned judgment did not deal
with the constitutional validity of the provisions and left the question
open. The respondents contended before this Court that the judgment
in Baskaran13 while holding the Tamil Nadu Act to be constitutionally
valid only made a passing reference to the MPID Act. Thus, it was
argued that this Bench is not bound by the judgment in Baskaran13
while deciding on the validity of the provisions of the MPID Act.
85. A Full Bench of the Bombay High Court had held3 that the State
Legislature did not possess the legislative competence to enact the
MPID Act. On the other hand, a Full Bench³4 of the Madras High Court
had upheld the constitutional validity of the Tamil Nadu Act. The
correctness of the judgment of the Madras High Court was assailed
before this Court in Baskaran13. The judgment of the Full Bench of the
Bombay High Court was cited and considered by the two-Judge Bench
which heard the appeal against the judgment of the Madras High Court.
This Court held that the State Legislature does possess legislative
competence to enact the law in question and that the legislation was
not for the transaction of banking or the acceptance of deposits but for
the protection of the depositors who are deceived by fraudulent
financial establishments.
27)
"26. The Tamil Nadu Act was enacted to ameliorate the conditions
of thousands of depositors who had fallen into the clutches of
fraudulent
financial establishments who had raised hopes of high rate of interest
and thus duped the depositors. Thus the Tamil Nadu Act is not focused
on the transaction of banking or the acceptance of deposit, but is
focused on remedying the situation of the depositors who were
deceived by the fraudulent financial establishments. The impugned
Tamil Nadu Act was intended to deal with neither the banks which do
the business or banking and are governed by the Reserve Bank of India
Act and the Banking Regulation Act, nor the non-banking financial
companies enacted under the Companies Act, 1956.
27. The Reserve Bank of India Act, the Banking Regulation Act
and the Companies Act do not occupy the field which the impugned
Tamil Nadu Act occupies, though the latter may incidentally trench
upon the former. The main object of the Tamil Nadu Act is to provide
a solution to wipe out the tears of several lakhs of depositors to
realise their dues effectively and speedily from the fraudulent
financial establishments which duped them or their vendees, without
dragging them in a legal battle from pillar to post. Hence, the
decision of this Court in Delhi Cloth Mills3 has no bearing on the
constitutional validity of the Tamil Nadu Act."
87. The judgment of the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Vijay C. Puljal V. State of Maharashtra³3 was specifically disapproved in
the decision of this Court in Baskaran13, where the Court held
:
"14. The learned counsel for the appellant relied on the Full Bench
33
decision of the Bombay High Court in Vijay C. Puljal case in
support of his contention that the Tamil Nadu Act, like the
Maharashtra Act, was unconstitutional being beyond the legislative
competence of the State Legislature. We do not agree.
15. We have carefully perused the judgment of the Full Bench of
the Bombay High Court in Vijay case33 and we respectfully disagree
with the view taken by the Bombay High Court. It may be noted that
though there are some differences between the Tamil Nadu Act and
the Maharashtra Act, they are minor differences, and hence the view
we are taking herein will also apply in relation to the Maharashtra
Act."
(emphasis supplied)
88. Besides holding that the State Legislature did not lack legislative
competence to enact the law, the judgment in Baskaran13 also
concluded that the Tamil Nadu enactment did not violate the provisions
of Articles 14, 19(1)(g) or 21 of the Constitution. In that context, while
dismissing the constitutional challenge against the legislation enacted
paras 31-33)
"31. We fail to see how there is any violation of Articles 14, 19(1)
(g) or 21 of the Constitution. The Act is a salutary measure to
remedy a great social evil. A systematic conspiracy was effected by
certain fraudulent financial establishments which not only committed
fraud on the depositors, but also siphoned off or diverted the
depositor's funds mala fide. We are
of the opinion that the act of the financers in exploiting the depositors
is a notorious abuse of faith of the depositors who innocently deposited
their money with the former for higher rate of interest. These depositors
were often given a small pass book as a token of acknowledgment of
their deposit, which they considered as a passport of their children for
higher education or wedding of their daughters or as a policy of medical
insurance in the case of most of the aged depositors, but in reality in all
cases it was an unsecured promise executed on a waste paper. The
senior citizens above 80 years, senior citizens between 60 and 80
years, widows, handicapped, driven out by wards, retired government
servants and pensioners and persons living below the poverty line
constituted the bulk of the depositors. Without the aid of the impugned
Act, it would have been impossible to recover their deposits and
interest thereon.
32. The conventional legal proceedings incurring huge expenses of
court fees, advocates' fees, apart from other inconveniences involved
and the long delay in disposal of cases due to docket explosion in
courts, would not have made it possible for the depositors to recover
their money, leave alone the interest thereon. Hence, in our opinion
the impugned Act has rightly been enacted to enable the depositors
to recover their money speedily by taking strong steps in this
connection.
33. The State being the custodian of the welfare of the citizens as
parens patriae cannot be a silent spectator without finding a solution
for this malady. The financial swindlers, who are nothing but cheats
and charlatans having no social responsibility, but only a lust for
easy money by making false promise of attractive returns for the
gullible investors, had to be dealt with strongly. The small amounts
collected from a substantial number of individual depositors
culminated into huge amounts of money. These collections were
diverted in the name of third parties and finally one day the
fraudulent financers closed their financial establishments leaving the
innocent depositors in the lurch."
89. The judgment held that the Tamil Nadu Act is constitutionally
valid and constitutes a salutary measure which was long overdue to
deal with these matters. Significantly, the above extracts from the
decision in Baskaran13 indicate that the differences between the
enactment in Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra "are minor" and the view of
the court on the validity of the former will govern the validity of the
latter enactment as well.
90. The judgment in Baskaran13 was followed by another two-Judge
Bench of this Court in New Horizon Sugar Mills Ltd. V. State of
Pondicherry1 17 The case arose from the action of the Government of
Pondicherry of attaching the properties acquired by a company. The
validity of the Pondicherry Protection of Interests of Depositors in
Financial Establishments Act, 2004 was also in question. A two-Judge
Bench of this Court considered whether the pith and substance of the
enactment is traceable to the entries in the Union List or the State List
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. After adverting to
the earlier decision in Baskaran13 which upheld the Tamil Nadu
enactment while disapproving the Full Bench decision of the Bombay
High Court on the legislative competence of the State Legislature to
enact the MPID Act, this Court held : (New Horizon Sugar Mills case17,
"50. In addition to the above, it has also to be noticed that the
objects for which the Tamil Nadu Act, the Maharashtra Act and the
Pondicherry Act were enacted, are identical, namely, to protect the
interests of small depositors from fraud perpetrated on unsuspecting
investors, who entrusted their life savings to unscrupulous and
fraudulent persons and who ultimately betrayed their trust.
51. However, coming back to the constitutional conundrum that
has been presented on account of the two views expressed, by the
Madras High Court and the Bombay High Court, it has to be
considered as to which of the two views would be more consistent
with the constitutional provisions. The task has been simplified to
some extent by the fact that subsequently the decision of the
Bombay High Court³3 declaring the Maharashtra Act to be ultra vires,
has been set aside by this Court1 14, 36 , so that there is now a parity
between the judgments relating to the Maharashtra Act and the
Tamil Nadu Act.
*
*
59.
The objects of the Tamil Nadu Act, the Maharashtra Act and
the Pondicherry Act being the same and/or similar in nature, and
since the validity of the Tamil Nadu and the Maharashtra Act have
been upheld, the decision of the Madras High Court³ in upholding
the validity of the Pondicherry Act must be affirmed. We have to
keep in mind, the beneficial nature of the three legislations which is
to protect the interests of small depositors, who invest their life's
earnings and savings in schemes for making profit floated by
unscrupulous individuals and companies, both incorporated and
unincorporated."
Following the decision in Baskaran13, the challenge to the Pondicherry
enactment on the ground of legislative competence was repelled.
91. The validity of the MPID Act was specifically dealt with in two
decisions of this Court in State of Maharashtra V. Vijay C. Puljal and
Sonal Hemant Joshi V. State of Maharashtra¹4. In both the decisions,
this Court upheld the constitutional validity of the MPID Act in view of
the earlier decision in Baskaran¹3. In Soma Suresh Kumar V. State of
A.P. 38 , a two-Judge
Bench of this Court upheld the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh
Protection of Depositors of Financial Establishments Act, 1999 following
the earlier decisions in Baskaran13 and New Horizon Sugar Mills17
92. Having discussed the judgments of this Court on the
constitutional validity of the State legislations governing financial
establishments offering deposit schemes, including the MPID Act, there
is no reason for us to reopen the question. This Court has held that the
MPID Act is constitutionally valid on the grounds of legislative
competence and when tested against the provisions of Part III of the
Constitution.
C.6. The High Court's judgment
93. Referring to the bye-laws and rules of NSEL, the High Court held
that NSEL is an electronic trading platform which only facilitated
transactions between buyers and sellers. In this context, it observed
that NSEL did not receive the pay-in in its own right but only for the
purpose of passing it on to the selling trading member on the same
OnLine Bom para 49)
"49.
The nature of transaction to be carried out on the NSEL
platform was also therefore, in public domain since the trading on
this electronic platform commenced. The business/transaction which
operated through NSEL, do not disclose any pay-in amount received
by NSEL in its own right but it was only received in the process of
settlement of the commodity trade and only for the purpose of
passing it on the selling trading member on the same day. This
amount cannot be said to be received as a deposit within the
meaning of Section 2(c) of the MPID Act which contemplates
"deposit" to be a receipt of money or acceptance of a valuable
commodity on the promise that such money or valuable commodity
would be returned/repaid by the financial establishment after a
specified period or otherwise."
94. The High Court has lost sight of the fact that Section 2(c) of the
MPID Act defines "deposit" in broad terms. Further, according to the
definition, the return may be either in money, commodity or service,
and it is not necessary that the commodity or the money must be
returned in the same form. The definition includes the receipt of money
and the return of a commodity, or even the receipt of a commodity and
a return in the form of a service. Further, Bye-law 10.8 indicates that
NSEL was not merely an intermediary. The bye-law states that the
buyer shall pay the clearing house the value of the delivery allocation.
However, till the completion of the delivery process, the money will be
retained by the clearing house of NSEL.
95. Referring to the contract notes and the confirmation receipts
generated on the electronic platform, the High Court observed that
NSEL was only a "medium". However, the High Court subsequently
noted that "something has gone wrong somewhere in these
transactions". Further, the High Court referred
to the first information report filed by Mr Pankaj Saraf observing that
even the complainant had not stated that he had deposited any amount
with NSEL. The Court goes on to note : (63 Moons Technologies case1,
"59.
In no way, the complainant in the FIR allege a promised
return in the form of any interest, bonus, profit, but yield-the
difference in the price of a commodity between the two trading dates
i.e. T+2 and T+30/33/25 was calculated as a yield but this, in our
view, would not fall within the purview of deposit since neither the
NSEL received the commodities to be retained by itself nor did it
receive any amount to be deposited in its account."
judgment1 that at the most, only the sellers in T+2 (and buyers in
T+25) could be referred to as a "financial establishment". This finding
was made without analysing the functioning of the exchange vis-à-vis
Sections 2(c) and 2(d) of the Act. The Court also held that the
"warehouse receipts" do not establish the nature of the transaction that
took place in the platform. In this regard it observed : (63 Moons
"68.
this receipt do not provide an answer to the nature of
transaction that took place on the platform of NSEL and though it is
no doubt that the commodity came to be accepted as a deposit, but
it should be accepted with an assured return and in the present
case, the commodity which was accepted was because it was to be
sold to a purchaser and it is not the case of the State that it was a
pure transaction where commodities are accepted as deposit."
The High Court observed that since transaction charges were charged
by NSEL and the amount paid by the buyer used to be paid by NSEL by
the settlement date, it is not a financial establishment.
97. The High Court has formed an erroneous opinion that firstly, only
if the return includes interest, bonus or any other added benefit, it
would be a deposit for the purpose of the MPID Act. However, Section 2
(c) states that the return may be "with or without any benefit in the
form of interest, bonus, profit or in any other form". The definition does
not stipulate that there must be an added benefit, rather that the
"added benefit" is irrelevant for the purpose of the definition; secondly,
that for the purpose of Section 2(c), the receipt of the commodity or
money "must be retained by itself". The definition does not provide any
such embargo. Rather, the definition is broadly worded to include even
the possession of the commodities for a limited purpose. The High
Court has read the definition of "deposit" narrowly without any
reference to the salutary purpose of the MPID Act.
98. The High Court also made observations on the merits of the
criminal proceedings. Referring to the role of NSEL in the default in
payments, it observed that at the highest, the actions of NSEL would
constitute offences under Sections 465 and 467 IPC. The EOW filed a
charge-sheet under Section 173 CrPC before the Sessions Judge,
Special Court under the MPID Act for the offences punishable under
Sections 409, 465, 467, 468, 471, 474
and 477(4) read with Section 120-B. The High Court ought not to have
made observations on the merits of the criminal proceedings when the
writ petition was restricted to the issue of whether NSEL is a financial
establishment for the purpose of the MPID Act.
99. The High Court observed that the decision of this Court in 63
Moons12 does not have "any serious effect on the present proceeding",
though this Court has discussed at length the modus operandi of NSEL
in duping the trading members by throwing light on the structure of
the exchange. Though it was observed that the question of
constitutional validity was settled in Baskaran13, New Horizon1 17 Sonal
Hemant Joshi14 and Vijay C. Puljal 36, the challenge of the respondent to
the constitutional validity of the MPID Act was still kept open by the
OnLine Bom para 80 of the judgment1 that this Court in Baskaran
had
observed that the MPID Act and the Tamil Nadu Act have minor
differences and that the statute did not violate Articles 14, 19(1)(g) or
21 of the Constitution.
100. Further, while referring to the earlier order of the Division
Bench dated 1-10-20154, wherein was prima facie recorded that NSEL
is a "financial establishment" for the purpose of the MPID Act, the High
Court observed that it was not bound by the prima facie view. The
primary ground for the Division Bench for arriving at a prima facie view
was the representations made assuring a 14% to 16% yield. However,
the High Court in its impugned judgment dispelled the argument on
the ground that only a "faint reference" was made to assured returns.
Such an observation misrepresents the factual instances which are
backed by documentary material.
101. The appellant also contended that the writ petition filed by the
respondent is not maintainable since there was an alternative remedy
of raising an objection before the Designated Court under Section 7 of
the MPID Act. Though there is merit in the argument of the appellant,
since the High Court decided on the validity of the impugned
attachment notifications on merits, and arguments have been
addressed in the present proceedings, we have proceeded to decide the
matter on merits.
102. For the reasons recorded in this judgment, we allow the
appeals and set aside the impugned judgment of the Bombay High
Court dated 22-8-2019 The impugned notifications issued under
Section 4 of the MPID Act attaching the properties of the respondent
are valid.
103. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in 63 Moons Technologies Ltd. V. State of
8-2019) [Reversed]
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in 63 Moons Technologies Ltd. V. State of
8-2019)
1
2
FIR No. 216 of 2013
3
The case was registered as MPID Case No. 1 of 2014.
4
5
6
Notification No. MPI/1118/C.R-394/Pol-11
7
Notification No. MPI-1118/C.R. 329/Pol-11
8
Notification No. MPI-1118/C.R. 434/Pol 11 read with corrigendum bearing MPI No. 1118/C.R.
-434/Pol 11 dated 19-4-2018.
9
Notification No. MPI 1118/C.R. 4999 Pol 11
10 Notification No. MPI-1118/C.R. 597/Pol 11
11
Notification No. MPI 1118/CR 1040/Pol 11
12
13
14
15
16
18
(Cri) 166
20 WP (C) No. 995 of 2019
*
Ed. : The word between two asterisks has been emphasised in original as well.
23
:
24
The Odisha Protection of Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 2011.
25
The Kerala Protection of Interests of Depositors in Financial Establishments Act, 2013.
26 The Himachal Pradesh [Protection of Interests of depositors (in Financial Establishments)]
Act, 1999.
27 The Goa Protection of Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 1999.
28 The Telangana Protection of Depositors of Financial Establishments Act, 1999.
29 The Andhra Pradesh Protection of Depositors of Financial Establishments Act, 1999.
30
The Sikkim Protection of Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishments) Act, 2000.
31
Bryan A Garner, Black's Law Dictionary (11 Edn., Thomson Reuters).
32
*
Ed. : The matter between two asterisks has been emphasised in original.
33
34
K.K. Baskaran V. State of T.N., WP No. 26108 of 2005, order dated 2-3-2007 (Mad)
35
36
37
38