In the Supreme Court of India
(BEFORE INDIRA BANERJEE AND J.K. MAHESHWARI, JJ.)
AXIS BANK LIMITED
Petitioner;
Versus
VIDARBHA INDUSTRIES POWER LIMITED
Respondent.
Review Petition (C) No. 1043 of 2022 in Civil Appeal No. 4633 of
2021 , decided on September 22, 2022
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Laws - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 - S. 7 - Discretionary nature of power of NCLT to admit or not admit
vis-à-vis the plea that NCLT must either admit the application under S. 7(5)
(a), or, it must reject the application under S. 7(5)(b) - Clarified and
distinguished
- Held, the question, whether S. 7(5) is mandatory or discretionary was not in
issue in any of the judgments cited on behalf of the review applicant - What was in
issue in E.S. Krishnamurthy case was whether NCLT could foist a settlement on
unwilling parties and that issue was answered in the negative
- Further, dealing with the plea that certain observations made in the judgment
and order under review could be interpreted in a manner that might be contrary to
the aims and objects of IBC and render the law infructuous, held, judgments and
observations in judgments are not to be read as provisions of statute and judicial
utterances and/or pronouncements are to be understood and construed in the
setting of the facts of a particular case - Further, the words of Judges interpreting
statutes are not to be interpreted as statutes
- In the present case, held, there were no grounds for review of the judgment
and order - Precedents - Interpretation of Judgments - Constitution of India, Art.
141
(Paras 1 to 8)
VN-D/70066/CV
Advocates who appeared in this case:
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, Ms Madhavi Divan, Additional
Solicitor General, K.V. Viswanathan and Jaideep Gupta, Senior
Advocates [Sanjay Kapur (Advocate-on-Record), Ms Megha Karnwal,
Arjun Bhatia, Rahul Sangwan, Ms Akhila Nambiar, Ms Akshata Joshi, Ms
Shubhra Kapur, Vikas Mehta, Ms Apoorv Khator, Venkatesh, Ms Kanika
Chugh, Nitin Saluja (Advocate-on-Record), Suhael Buttan, Vikas Maini,
Abhishek Nangia, Kartikaj Trivedi, Prateek Sakseria and Ms Simran
Saluja, Advocates], for the appearing parties.
Chronological list of cases cited
on page(s)
Vidarbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd.
323a-b, 323b-c
Krishnamurthy V. Bharath Hi-Tecch Builders (P)
Ltd.
322b, 323a
ORDER
1. This petition for review was listed for open court hearing, since it
was mentioned and submitted that this Court had overlooked the
judgment of this Court in E.S. Krishnamurthy V. Bharath Hi-Tecch
Builders (P) Ltd.¹, to which the attention of this Court had not been
drawn. Our attention has been drawn to two paragraphs of the said
judgment, which paragraphs are extracted hereinbelow for
"31. On a bare reading of the provision, it is clear that both,
clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (5) of Section 7, use the
expression "it may, by order" while referring to the power of the
adjudicating authority. In clause (a) of sub-section (5), the
adjudicating authority may, by order, admit the application or in
clause (b) it may, by order, reject such an application. Thus, two
courses of action are available to the adjudicating authority in a
petition under Section 7. The adjudicating authority must either
admit the application under clause (a) of sub-section (5) or it must
reject the application under clause (b) of sub-section (5). The
statute does not provide for the adjudicating authority to undertake
any other action, but for the two choices available.
*
*
*
34. The adjudicating authority has clearly acted outside the terms
of its jurisdiction under Section 7(5) IBC. The adjudicating authority
is empowered only to verify whether a default has occurred or if a
default has not occurred. Based upon its decision, the adjudicating
authority must then either admit or reject an application,
respectively. These are the only two courses of action which are open
to the adjudicating authority in accordance with Section 7(5). The
adjudicating authority cannot compel a party to the proceedings
before it to settle a dispute."
2. The learned Solicitor General has specifically emphasised on para
34 which reads "Based upon its decision, the adjudicating authority
must then either admit or reject an application, respectively. These are
the only two courses of action which are open to the adjudicating
authority in accordance with Section 7(5). The adjudicating authority
cannot compel a party to the proceedings before it to settle a dispute."
3. In para 31, extracted hereinabove, to which reference has been
made by the learned Solicitor General of India, this Court observed that
two courses of action are available to the adjudicating authority in a
petition under Section 7. The adjudicating authority must either admit
the application under clause (a) sub-section (5) or it must reject the
application under clause (b) of sub-section (5). The statute does not
provide for the adjudicating authority to undertake any other action,
but for the two choices available.
4. The question of whether Section 7 sub-section (5) was mandatory
or discretionary was not in issue in any of the judgments cited on
behalf of the review applicant. What was in issue in Krishnamurthy
case 1 was whether the adjudicating authority could foist a settlement
on unwilling parties. That issue was answered in the negative.
5. The learned Solicitor General of India submits that certain
observations made by us in the judgment and order2 under review
could be interpreted in a manner that might be contrary to the aims
and objects of IBC and render the law infructuous. The apprehension
appears to be misconceived.
6. The elucidation in para 90 and other paragraphs [of the judgment
under review]² were made in the context of the case at hand. It is well
settled that judgments and observations in judgments are not to be
read as provisions of statute. Judicial utterances and/or
pronouncements are in the setting of the facts of a particular case.
7. To interpret words and provisions of a statute, it may become
necessary for the Judges to embark upon lengthy discussions. The
words of Judges interpreting statutes are not to be interpreted as
statutes.
8. There are no grounds for review of the judgment and order. The
review petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
9. Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.
+
Arising from the Judgment and Order in Vidarbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd.,
dt. 12-7-2022) [Affirmed]
# Arising from the Judgment and Order in Vidarbha Industries Power Ltd. V. Axis Bank Ltd.,
(Insolvency) No. 117 of 2021, dt. 2-3-2021]
1
(Civ) 129
2
329